---
title: "Text of a speech to be given by the Hon. Malcolm Fraser, M.P., at a Sydney University symposium entitled "Vietnam - justified or crucified?""
date: "1968-02-26"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "MINISTER FOR THE ARMY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211170091
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/762732%22
---

 T

 MINISTER FOR THE ARMY

 TEXT OF A SPEECH TO BE GIVEN BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P.,

 AT A SYDNEY UNIVERSITY SYMPOSIUM ENTITLED

 "VIETNAM — JUSTIFIED OR CRUCIFIED? "

 2.00 p.m., MONDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 1968

 (This is the full text of the speech as originally prepared. However,'tine speech will not be read but delivered from notes and much of the detail in this text will be omitted.)

 ilk ^e UaW,h1evae"a^.^

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA. A.C.T. /

 TEL. 72U57

 !!8 C%GC/!!. .i2 A,X-v V 1,7.1e-& M.r. 72668

 TEXT OF A SPEECH 

 TO BE GIVEN BY THE HON. MALCOLM FRASER, M.P

 AT A SYDNEY UNIVERSITY SYMPOSIUM ENTITLED

 "VIETNAM JUSTIFIED OR CRUCIFIED"

 2,00 .m, MONDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 1968

 This symposium is taking place at a time when the full effects of the nation -wide Viet Cong offensive in South Vietnam cannot be properly and reliably assessed. The initial reaction to it may well have been surprise and concern, that despite the tremendous efforts made by the Free World Forces the Viet Cong have still been able to mount an attack of this nature with such strength. There has been much evidence of public concern, but we should not allow these most recent events to undermine our determination to achieve the purpose to which we are committed.

 I therefore want to talk about two things:

 A. I want to restate briefly our reasons for being in Vietnam and the purpose towards which we are working, and

 Bo I want to outline the progress that has been made in achieving this purpose and the methods we have been using to do this.

 I will approach it this way because if, as I believe it to be, the original involvement is justified, and if our basic objectives are accepted as sound, then the question that remains most properly for debate is whether or not we have been working towards those objectives by the best possible means.

 In the latter context, I will be saying something about the latest Communist Offensiyes during the Tet Truce period and their effects on the general situation in the South.

 A. THE GENEVA AGREEMENTS - THEIR OBSERVANCE AND BREACH

 The Geneva Agreements on Vietnam were arrived at in 1954, They comprised a cease-fire agreement signed by the French and Viet Minh and a final declaration that was issued in the name of nine Governments, which included the V iet Minh Govqrnment of the North, the State of Vietnam

 (representing the South) and the United States, The Agreements were meant to achieve an end of hostilities, the complete withdrawal of the French, the return of the Viet Minh north of the 17th Parallel and the peaceful development of free institutions.

 In fact, the Agreements resulted in a division of a part of the former French empire into 'two countries, North and South Vietnam. They also envisaged the holding of elections in 1956 and the possibility of re-unit±ng what, as a result of these events, became two countries,

 At the very outset the North Vietnamese broke the Agreements. Some thousands of hard core Communist cadres were left behind in South Vietnam ready to rise when they were given the word by the North.

 Furthermore, the Agreements had envisaged that there would be free passage for an initial period between North and South Vietnam, so that those who wished to live under Communist rule could do so and the movement of those who wished to travel to the South would not be restricted. In the event, about l00,1000 people went from the South to the North; nearly 1,000,000 went from the North to South before the Communists shut the gates

 -.2

 to prevent the massive exodus that was following immediately on the Viet Minhts full assumption of power in Hanoi.

 This, of course, is similar to the situation that existed between East and West Germany before the East German Communist regime built the Berlin Wall,

 As a result of the Agreements, North and South Vietnam became separate countries, just as much as East and West Germany and North and South Korea are separate Countries. Attacks by North Korea against the South were judged by the United Nations to be acts of aggression; attacks by East Germany against the West would be judged in a similar manner, and

 therefore attacks by North Vietnam against the South must be considered in the same light,.

 It is true that the elections envisaged by the Agreements were never held, and this was for one basic reason, There had never been free elections in a Communist country and it was a foregone conclusion that the vote in the North would be completely regimented. The population in the

 South is smaller than that of the North, so this would have meant that even if every possible voter in the South had voted against Communist candidates, complete Communist domination of a re-unified Vietnam would have been assured.

 It would have been absurd to expect the South Vietnamese Government to accept this situation when all its members had had the opportunity to accept the Communist regime by travelling to the North if they had wished to do so, and when nearly a million refugees from the North had shown they wanted to avoid

 Communism,

 General Giap has himself estimated that 50,000 North Vietnamese peasants were killed shortly after the Communist takeover. If he admits to that figure, how much higher is it likely to be? One could well envisage how many more people would probably have been killed in the South, where vast numbers of them had indicated a resistance to Communism.

 In 1959/60 the North Vietnamese clearly came to the conclusion that South Vietnam was not going to fall like a ripe plum into its hands and therefore, following decisions made in Hanoi, they resurrected the Communist guerilla movement in the South. For some time the seriousness of this problem was not fully recognised by the countries that might have given more support at the earlier stages. In 1961, at a time when there were only

 700 United States advisers in South Vietnam, there were already many thousands of Viet Cong there - Communits who had been directed by Hanoi to cross the border and gain the support of the South Vietnamese people by whatever means they thought fit.

 Surely this was aggression,but it was aggression in a new form. It did not represent the mass movement of armies over boundaries at one stroke, but it was the movement of forces by stealth which in the long term was designed to have precisely the same effect.

 RESISTANCE TO THE AGGRESSION - OUR PURPOSE

 In the following years the pressure from North Vietnam was increased and in response, the South Vietnamese Government appealed to the United States for greater and greater help. President Kennedy began the gradual increase in the number of United States personnel. Late in 1961, the number grew to 3,300; by 1962, President Kennedy had moved about 11,300 Americans to South

 -3

 Vietnam,. At this time they were operating as advisers to combat battalions and to this extent they had already assumed a combat role. It was not until early in 1965, however, that the massive buildup of United States forces began. Our own Commitment began in 1962, with 30 advisers. This was increased to 83 in June 1964 and to 100 in April 1965. In 1964 a

 Caribou Transport Squadron was placed in South Vietnam and in May/June 1965 the first battalion group was sent to Bien Hoa.

 Our aims and those of those of the United States and all the Free World Forces have, from the outset, been clearly defined. We are in Vietnam in a defensive capacity, to get the enemy out and keep him out so that the South Vietnamese can get on with the business of running their country the way they want it run. As areas are made secure and free from the fear of Viet Cong terror and aggression, we seek to raise the living standards of

 the people in South Vietnam. We have no wish to conquer or invade the North. We offer no threat to the Government of the North and thus the objective differs from that against Germany or Japan in World War II. We have pursued

 our objectives, hoping to succeed with the minimum force possible. We are determined that South Vietnam will receive all necessary support while she herself shows a will to resist aggression and to achieve her own independent future.

 It needs to be.emphasised that what the United States and we have been doing has been done in response to pressure from North Vietnam; pressure begun by deliberate decisions to resurrect the Communist guerilla movement in the South in 1959. As early as 1962, the International Control Commission unanimously found that North Vietnam had violated the cease—fire Agreement including Articles 19 and 24, and had infiltrated men, arms and equipment into the South,

 We moved to assist South Vietnam because we believed at the outset that there was not going to be any security for any of the small countries in South East Asia unless there was security for them all. North Vietnam was committing aggression against the South and if she succeeded there, all

 the lessons of the past lead us to believe she would increase the aggression and extend it to the surrounding countries, as she is even now doing in Laos and Thailand. In fact, this is yet another breach of the Geneva Agreements. The 1962 Agreements on Laos stipulated the withdrawal of Communist troops from Laos. Far from observing this, the North Vietnamese Communist forces, mingled with the Pathet Lao, have continued to use L aotian territory as a base for infiltration into South Vietnam and as a military position to threaten, on a permanent basis, the independence of Laos.

 The significant point is that what we are resisting is aggression --not that it is Communist aggression. Whether it comes from the right or the left of politics, aggression cannot be allowed to succeed and Australia has a long history in this century of opposing such acts, from whatever source they may come. I hope nobody will suggest that we should forgo our opposition to aggression this time because it is Communist inspired.

 I think at this particular time it is pertinent to remember this background to our involvement and we should not be blinded to its significance by the events of recent days,

 B. PROGRESS.

 This brings me to my second point. Let me now look at the progress that has been made in South Vietnam and at the manner in which we have been

 -4-

 carrying out the obligation which we and others have assumed.

 After Diem was overthrown South Vietnamese politics were cast into turmoil, but out of that turmoil has grown a system of representative institutions established by five nation-wide elections over the last 18 months. In all but one of these, over 83% of the people on the rolls voted. If they had wished to support the Viet Cong it would have been very easy for them to have abstained from voting. This was not done and there was every indication that the people of South Vietnam were taking an interest in the elections, an opportunity they certainly would not have had if N orth Vietnam had been allowed to control their future. Too often we hear criticism of the Government in the South while we forget that there is no political freedom in the North.

 There are those who say that it is a vain waste of time to try to establish representative Government in South Vietnam at a time when the country is labouring under a state of war, I think the people's response to the opportunity to take part in free elections has proven these views wrong. It is worth remembering that the United Kingdom, despite its long

 experience of democratic processes, suspended democracy during the last World War by agreement of all political parties. There was not to be an election until the War was over. In. contrast, the South Vietnamese, fighting desperately within their own borders, are attempting to introduce and make effective the normal institutions of a peace-time democracy.

 Throughout last year progress was made on several fronts. The return to representative Government was probably the most significant event of the period, but progress was also made on the military front and in the field of rec'onsJruction and redevelopment. South Vietnamese forces fought well, some of their units extraordinarily well. It has been said that the

 South Vietnamese army is not fighting hard enough in its own country's defence. This is an extremely unjust accusation and one which is not borne out by the facts. Since 1960, the South Vietnamese army has lost more than

 three times as many men as the United States. Her casualties are still rising in greater numbers than those of the allies. In 1967, much of the damage that was done to ARVN morale and operational capacity, at the time when.they were fighting alone, had in large measure been made good and their

 record last year was one of which they can be justifiably proud.

 Also, by the end of last year the Free World Forces were, in the main, at the stage where they felt they were making continuous progress in much the same pattern as the Australians were making progress in Phuoc Tuy province.

 Broadly speaking, the war was being fought on the two fronts originally envisaged - military activities were designed to push the enemy away from the centres of population and to make his position in South Vietnam increasingly difficult, At the same time the rural construction or pacifica-tion program was being conducted in the secure areas. Over the year, more than 30,000 Revolutionary Development members were trained to work with the villagers to improve their standard of life. Up to the end of last year the progress made in some areas was quite significant, although admittedly the progress was not uniform and not as great as we might have wished. The five Revolutionary Development teams working in Phuoc Tuy province were operating well and our Civil Affairs Unit was actively co-operating with them.

 -5-

 THE TET OFFENSIVES - WHAT DID THEY SEEK TO ACHIEVE?

 During the last weeks of 1967 and the early weeks of 1968 there were suggestions from some quarters that the North Vietnamese were moving closer to the point where they might accept negotiations for peace. However, at the same time there were indications of troop concentration in

 areas such as Ke Sanh. And then came the offensives which began at the end of January, in the middle of the Tet Truce period.

 In retrospect, there is one aspect of these attacks which is now becoming obvious. Their timing to co-incide with the opening of the Tet, or Lunar New Year, holidays was a deliberate and long-premeditated decision by the enemy. Tet is a sacred period of festivities for the Vietnamese people, a time when families gather together from all parts of the country

 for reunions and traditional celebrations. It is a period during which much of the population is moving from one place to another and under these circumstances it was the perfect time for the Viet Cong to infiltrate the

 cities and areas where supplies of arms and equipment had been collected in what would be regarded as safe houses for their purpose.

 Whilst there had been breaches of the Tet cease-fire in previous years, they were mainly breaches in spirit - that is, by the movement of supplies and equipment unimpeded to the South, together with minor attacks by the Viet Cong. This year's offensive, however, went far beyond anything

 experienced in the past.

 The reasons for this decision by the North would seem to be related to the progress I was talking about earlier. The success of the elections represented a major setback in the enemy's propaganda war and the progress made in raising te standards of living by the Revolutionary Development Teams and Civil Affairs Units was apparently a source of some concern to the Viet Cong. In fact, on the 20th January it is known that the Viet Cong renewed an earlier directive which called for concentration on the destruction of the Revolutionary Development Teams and their work.

 An order of the day was issued to all members of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam just before the Tet period. This ordered all enemy forces in the South to-'move forward to final victory. The Tet greeting of Chairman Ho is actually a combat order for our entire population". From information subsequently received and confirmed by prisoners it now seems that the enemy had certain definite objectives, which would appear to be!

 1. to capture cities or major parts of some cities;

 2. to cause a general uprising of the South Vietnamese people;

 3. to attract large-scale defections from the South Vietnamese army;

 4. to shake the foundations of the representative Government in South Vietnam;

 5. and then, from a position of strength, to move to a negotiation which, in their terms, would provide nothing more than a vehicle for demanding complete American and allied withdrawal, leaving South Vietnam to her fate at the hands of the North,

 -6-

 HOW PAR HAVE THEY SUCCEEDED:

 It is not yet possible to s3.y clearly and precisely how this offensive has affected the balance of military power and the work of the reconstruction and redevelopment teams over large areas of South Vietnam. While the N orth Vietnamese and Viet Cong have not inflicted major military defeats on South Vietnamese, American, Australian or allied forces, they have clearly demonstrated a considerable capacity and have caused a great deal of disruption and damage to major cities and to some of the rural areas, although the Revolutionary Development teams have probably not suffered as much as was first thought.

 Whilst our intelligence sources knew that the Viet Cong had planned something over the Tet period, they had little indication of the scope of the nature of the offensive as it finally appeared. The position of the South Vietnamese was further embarrassed because it had been the practice for very large numbers of the ARVN forces to be given leave during the truce which accompanied this period, Large numbers of these troops returned to

 their units as soon as the emergency was evident, without direction from their commanders. By and large, ARVN units fought well and courageously. Their own losses and the losses inflicted on the enemy testify to this. The ratio of enemy to allied losses was about 10:1 and the ratio of ARVN to allied losses was about 2:1. In Saigon, where there were many ARVN soldiers on leave and isolated from their parent units, a special battalion was raised because of the large number of these soldiers who returned immediately to duty. Also, at least two ARVN units requested an extention of their tactical area of responsibility so that they could pursue the enemy. In Hue, the people went out into the streets to take food to both the South Vietnamese and American soldiers while they ere fighting. At Baria, Australian forces supporting the ARVN had Viet Cong pointed out to them by local inhabitants. Reports from Saigon have also indicated that the police force's phones ran hot with calls from local residents reporting the whereabouts of Viet Cong cadres.

 I do not suggest that this happened everywhere, but we know it did happen in Saigon, Hue and Baria and also in scattered areas throughout the country.

 Casualty figures which have been released indicate that over 37,000 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong have been killed during these offensives and nearly 7,000 weretaken prisoner, The number of ARVN forces killed in action for the same period was over 2,500 -and the allies lost more than 1,500 men. The enemy also lost over 8,000 weapons. While a considerable part of its force was not committed to these latest attacks, it is clear that the part that was involved has, in many instances, been badly mauled. Many of the enemy's units were not given withdrawal orders and this is another reason why the casualties were very heavy.

 It is clear that the enemy expected to be supported by a massive uprising of the people. This certainly did not happen. If any support was given to the Viet Cong it was the support of silence - the people did not always tell us of the Viet Cong's presence and plans when they could have done so - but the Viet Cong got little or no active co-operation or support from the local villagers. With the Viet Cong record of atrocities and with the terrorist activities that are known to have taken place over this offensive period, the silence of the villagers is not surprising.

 -7-

 Furthermore, we have reason to believe that the South Vietnamese are now angry with the Viet Cong because they broke the cease-fire so violently at a time that the Vietnamese consider sacred and during which they have come to look forward to a brief respite from the horrors of war. The future may therefore well prove that their plan to rally widespread

 support has more than backfired.

 From information we have received from Phuoc Tuy province it would appear that the major administrative machinery is working reasonably well, that relief measures have been organised and that the Revolutionary Development Teams, whose job it is to improve the living standards of the people in the villages, have been largely untouched. Only one of the 300 or so members of the Revolutionary Development Teams in Phuoc Tuy has been killed. However, 20 Government officials or police were also killed

 throughout the province, as well as 47 civilians. It must be rememberd that the heaviest fighting took place in two towns, Baria and Long Dien, and this is one of the reasons at least why the civilian casualties were heavy, although compared to other areas of South Vietnam I have no doubt that Phuoc Tuy got off reasonably lightly. The local ARVN forces in the area fought well against guerilla attacks, as did major ARVN units in and around Saigon.

 There is no doubt that civil aid work has been put back by at least two months in the province and priority is now being given to restoring living quarters and providing facilities for those whose homes have been destroyed. Later evidence might show that the programme has been put back even further than this. Over the whole of South Vietnam I believe it has been put back much further. Relief work is being pursued vigorously though not uniformly over the whole country.

 The Viet Cong have achieved disruption, destruction and dismay but they have not yet achieved permanent military successes. It may be a military success to get into the basement of the American Embassy but when everyone who was involved in the enterprise is killed what lasting effect does it have? We cannot yet estimate the full extent of the damage to Viet -Cong morale following their own assessment of their losses, which have been

 very heavy indeed. It may be that the losses they have suffered and the lack of support they were given by the people of South Vietnam will cause them to reassess their position quite extensively. On the other hand, I would not deny that all their troops were not committed to this... first

 offensive and that renewed attacks could be made. The very large numbers of North Vietnamese around Khe Sanh have not yet moved to a major attack which they could do at any time, as could their forces in other areas.

 However, the enemy has so far fallen along way short of what we believe to have been his five major objectives.

 The main elements of South Vietnamese forces and of other Free World Forces are intact and they are in good fighting shape. This applies in particular to the Australians in Phuoc Tuy. But there is no point in denying that the enemy has regained an iniative for the time being that we thought he had lost, although the price of this effort may inhibit his actions in the future.

 However, I do not want to make any predictions about the future because the situation at the moment is much too fluid.

 - g

 EFFORTS FOR PEACE

 It would appear that this offensive must have put negotiations further into the background. Basically, the North Vietnamese stick to the original four points of their peace program which involve settling the problem of South Vietnam in accordance with the program laid down by the National Liberation Front, which, of course, is a Communist program. They

 also involve the withdrawal of all supporting forces in South Vietnam and the cessation of bombing of the North. Before they will even talk about peace they have demanded the unconditional cessation of the bombing of the North. Unless some reciprocal move were made by the North, cessation of the bombing would give them a permanent military advantage which, I believe, mades this pre-condition completely unrealistic, particularly in view of the

 fact that there is still no guarantee that cessation of the bombing will lead to peace talks.

 The United States position which we support is, I believe, a reasonable and sensible approach to the problems of negotiation. Quoting from President Johnson's San Antonio address last September, he has said: "Our desire to negotiate peace - through the United Nations or outside -has been made very clear to Hanoi directly and through third parties. As we have told Hanoi time and time again, the heart of the matter is this -the United States is willing immediately to stop aerial and naval bombardment of North Vietnam when this will lead promptly to productive discussion. We would assume that while discussions proceed, North Vietnam would not take

 advantage of t_.e bombing cessation or limitation."

 The Government has been chided by the Leader of the Opposition for not attempting to do more to encourage negotiations for peace. Over the years there have been efforts by representatives from India, Yugoslavia, U Thant, by uncommitted nations and by Commonwealth countries to achieve negotiations. Most of these approaches have been coldly rebuffed by Hanoi

 and by Peking.

 We have consistently supported all American and other attempts to get negotiations underway and we have used our diplomatic resources to this effect. Mr. Whitlam would.a .,pear to want a greater public display of these efforts. This might be good for politics but I do not believe it would necessarily be good for achieving any positive result. We are not a major party in this dispute, although I believe we are a significant one. The United States is the major ally. She has shown her readiness and willingness

 to de-escalate the war and to establish negotiations. We have supported these efforts and will continue to support them and I hope that Australians will do their Government the justice of believing that it is consistently working towards the achievement of a reasonable and just eace. But I hope they would also ask that that peace be one which would guarantee the independence of a country which has demonstrated that it wants to work out its own destiny.

 JUSTIFIED OR CRUCIFIED?

 The second question I asked, and about which I have been talking, is whether or not we have been prosecuting the war in the best possible manner, whether there was an alternative that would be reasonable and acceptable. The alternative of defeat and surrender I hope you will dismiss. But if we are to continue to work towards our stated objects what else could be done than what is being done? While the war has increased in intensity

 -9

 and while it is true that casualties have mounted, it has still been kept within bounds, The war is being fought over the whole of South Vietnam. While the greater part of the North's resources are being poured into the prosecution of the war in the South, the relative haven of the North is being attacked only by aerial and naval bombardment; it has not been

 attacked by ground forces. Our original objects have been maintained. It is still a defensive war, aimed at getting the enemy out, and keeping him out of South Vietnam, at making the price too great by demonstrating that he is just not going to succeed. You could end the bombing, as some wish, but this would be to give additional advantage to the enemy. Their

 haven in the North would then be completely secure. They could resupply and re—equip their forces unhindered and on more than one occasion I have been given conclusive evidence that bombing pauses have been used to resupply in such quantity that it has resulted in greatly increased casualties in the South.

 There may be those who would wish to hurt North Vietnam more. Those who advocate this sometimes forget that our policy is rightly committed to trying to use the minimum amount of force possible to achieve the security and independence of South Vietnam. While the people of South Vietnam are themselves prepared to work and fight for that purpose, as the record of their troops shows they are and as their striving towards representative government demonstrates, then they should have our support. We should not be deterred from our accepted obligations by a change in the course of the war. Further, we should not be unreasonably pushed into an-escalation that the future may well prove to be unwise.

 Let me try and sum up the argument. I believe we were right to make the original commitment. South Vietnam was under attack from outside and sought help. In recent times, she has indicated quite clearly in five representative elections that she wants to be able to work out her own future and her forces have indicated that they are prepared to fight to preserve independence. Over the years this has clearly involved great cost in human suffering, but can you put a price on the loss of freedom and individual liberty, Furthermore, those who suggest that the present cost is too great should make some attempt to measure the effect of North Vietnamese conquest in the South. How many people would be killed? Certainly the number would be great because there is no reason to assume that a Communist

 assumption of power in the South would follow a different path from that which has been taken in every other country where a Communist takeover has occurred, Despite the present price of resistance to aggression, despite the human- suffering, while South Vietnam indicates a will and a determination to pursue an independent course. then she should be given support. This is justification,

 There is no evidence of crucifixion. It would be crucifixion if an alien regime were being forced onto a country against the wishes of its people. This may have been the position when the Russians put down the Hungarian revolution, or when the Chinese attacked Tibet. It would also be the position if the North Vietnamese won,

 This is a matter of the utmost importance for Australia. When our forces are committed to a conflict overseas, no issue is more important for your consideration and decision.

 We know that they Labor Party policy, as laid down by its 27th Commonwealth Conference in Adelaide last year, states that immediately upon assuming office the Labor Party would be committed to demand that the US

 - 10 -

 should:

 1. cease bombing North Vietnam;

 2. recognise the National Liberation Front as a principal party to negotiations;

 3. transform operations in the South into holding operations, and stop the use of napalm and certain other materials of war.

 The Conference, which is the principal policy-making body of the Labor Party, stated that if all these conditions were not met by the allies, Australia would immediately withdraw all its troops from Vietnam. Quite unequivocally, this presents an ultimatum to the United States. All ALP members are theoretically bound by Conference decisions. During his

 trip to Vietnam in January, the Leader of the Opposition is reported to have declared himself aligned to more moderate policies. Mr. Whitlam said that if the Labor Party was in office, "before continuing Australian military

 support", they would want to be given more evidence that the South Vietnamese were trying harder to eliminate corruption and to win the support of the people. Thus, a condition of continued Australian military support is greater insistence on social reform and economic progress in South Vietnam.

 It is hard to deny that these are a completely different set of conditions to those put forward by the Conference. In a TV interview on 18 February, Mr.'Whitlam said : "I would only withdraw Australia's troops if I believed that America was taking no notice of us at all." This seems to mean that

 the United States would not have to act on our views, but just take notice of them. This appears to be much nearer to the Government's position, and if I make a correct inference from this is looks as though Mr. Whitlam supports the maintenance of our force in Vietnam. If this is correct, Australians could be nearer to a bi-partisan policy than they have ever been. On the other hand, while these would appear to be Mr. Whitlam's views, we do not yet know whether his Parliamentary colleagues would support him in them, or whether the Federal Conference decisions would be imposed

 on the party and on Mr. Whitlam. I think we should be given a clear indication of whose views, in fact, prevail.

