---
title: "The supply of cholera vaccine to East Pakistan refugees in India"
date: "1971-06-08"
creators:
  - "Bury, Leslie"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213774707
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10017984%22
---

 DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 >.^V3p NEWS RELEASE N O Y  M/397 8th June, 1971. STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, MR. LESLIE BURY, ON 

 THE SUPPLY OF CHOLERA VACCINE TO EAST PAKISTAN REFUGEES IN INDIA

 On 2?th May, the day of the announcement of the Government's  decision to provide relief aid for the Pakistan refugees in India, the  Government confirmed charter arrangements for a 707 aircraft and ordered  virtually all the cholera vaccine that the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories  production centre in Melbourne said it could release» The Commonwealth  Serum Laboratories confirmed the order in a letter dated 28th May» We in 

 fact ordered the cholera vaccine before we began to receive reports of the  cholera epidemic»

 The first reports of the epidemic appeared in the following  days and we considered the possibility of air-freighting the vaccine last  week» At that stage however, the Indian and West Bengal authorities had  available and were using' their own stocks of vaccine and we were seeking 

 confirmation from Calcutta that proper refrigerated storage facilities would  be available because the vaccine has a very short life if not properly  stored» This could still be a problem.

 In addition we were informed by' the West Bengal Minister of  Health through the Deputy High Commission in Calcutta on 3rd June that the  cholera now in West Bengal was of a type found only in East Pakistan. In  the light of this telegram we had no alternative but to check this out, not 

 only with medical authorities in Australia but also with the Indian authorities  to ensure that the Australian vaccines being supplied were appropriate. We did not want to take risks with people's live? by supplying vaccines if  there was doubt that they would meet the situation.

 On the evening of 6th June we received positive advice about  the type of vaccine required, and on 7th June we confirmed that there was  no doubt that the vaccines we could provide were appropriate.

 In consultation with the Indian and West Bengal health authorities  a close watch has been kept on vaccine supplies available to the Indians. The West Bengai Health authorities have positively confirmed that they have  never run out of vaccine although a few days ago supplies were running low.  This was rectified, and considerable stocks were in hand on 7th June. About 

 the same time the Australian supplies arrive it is expected that other large  consignments from West Germany and Great Britain will also reach the area.

