---
title: "Timor"
date: "1975-08-28"
creators:
  - "Anthony, Doug"
source: "NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213717504
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06000765%22
---

 TIMOR

 Transcript of a Radio Interview by the Leader of the  National Country Party, Mr Anthony

 Q. Mr Anthony, this morning the Government and the Prime

 Minister said there was no hope that Australia would take 

 the initiative with an approach to the United Nations.

 What would you like to see happen?

 A. I think the Government’s response is disappointing. I

 am also doubtful that if the United Nations were approached 

 at this stage, it could act quickly enough to bring about  a peaceful solution to the fighting that’s going on between  the rival political parties in Portuguese Timor. I believe  a diplomatic approach should be undertaken between 

 Portugal, Indonesia and Australia to enable a peace-keeping  force to go into Portuguese Timor immediately to stop the 

 fighting. This could be a preliminary to United Nations  forces going there and holding the situation until the  people of Portuguese Timor were able to exercise self- -   determination.  ,

 Q. This would presumably involve then the minimum of Australian  military involvement?

 A. Well I would hope it’s not military involvement.  It may require a joint police force going in there to immediately 

 stabilise the situation. But it is quite frightening to  me to imagine that Portuguese Timor could become another  communist country. It would unsettle the political 

 situation in this region. It would be of great concern  to Indonesia, as it would be to Australia, and with  Papua New Guinea now about to become independent, I would  not like to see the possibility of yet another Soviet  Naval Base being established in the Indian Ocean area.

 Q. How much of a real threat would that be to Australia?

 A. I couldn’t say what real threat it is, but it's not

 something I would like and I don't think any Australian 

 would like to have, just off our coast, a Soviet Naval Base.

 - 2-

 Î¯ "

 Q. What sort of prospect do you think there is that 

 Portugal will come to the party on this sort of 

 intervention by Australia, Indonesia and themselves?

 A. I think it’s a hopeless situation to imagine that

 Portugal can.do very much at the moment. They’re in 

 great trouble at home and there are enormous troubles  in Angola, so I think that they would be willing to 

 talk about the matter and maybe invite Indonesia and 

 Australia to act as I ’ve suggested. There have been  soundings already that they would like this course of 

 action to be followed, but the Australian Government 

 doesn't seem willing to get involved in any way  whatsoever. It's quite happy to take any solutions that  are reached. That’s not a very satisfactory solution  for me.

 Q. Although you are criticising the Australian Government,  they have done quite a bit.

 A. They’ve done a good job in helping get refugees out of Timor, and this is a humanitarian act which I would hope 

 any country would involve itself in. I'd be disappointed 

 if the Australian Government didn't. But the reports 

 coming out of Timor, especially from these refugees, 

 tell of a real bloodbath that’s going on there. It was  interesting to hear that the wharfies in Darwin, who 

 have been pro-Fretilin - that’s the pro-Communist group -  

 last night held a meeting, and after hearing of the 

 shocking stories of what is going on in Portuguese Timor, 

 decided hot to align themselves with the Fretilin Party  and to become completely apolitical.

 Canberra

 28th August 1975

