---
title: "Evacuation of Australian mission from Saigon"
date: "1975-04-28"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213709084
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10023600%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E

 NQ D A T E

 28 April 1975

 EVACUATION OF AUSTRALIAN MISSION FROM SAIGON

 The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Mr Bill  Morrison,  announced tonight that the staff of the Australian  Mission in Saigon had been temporarily withdrawn late today.

 Mr Morrison said the situation in South Vietnam  had reached the stage where there were unacceptable risks to  the safety of the Embassy staff and the crews of the RAAF  aircraft responsible for evacuating them. Evacuation would 

 take place via Bangkok.

 "Most other embassies,  including Britain,  Canada and  New Zealand, withdiew from Saigon earlier this week," Mr  Morrison said. "The decision to evacuate Australian staff  late today was taken after close consultation with our  Ambassador in Saigon.

 Mr Morrison said that the facilities of the RAAF  aircraft carrying out the evacuation had been offered to  non-official Australian nationals, Vietnamese nationals  approved for entry into Australia, and staff members of  other missions and of the United Nations in Saigon. Australian  nationals had been issued with third and final notices on  April 23 warning them to leave.

 The Acting Minister said he wished to pay high  tribute to the Ambassador,  Mr G.J. Price,  the staff of the  Australian Embassy,  and to the crews of the RAAF Hercules  aircraft, for their untiring efforts in a particularly 

 difficult situation.

 SAIGON EVACUATION EFFORTS OUTLINED  x . A

 28.4.75 — The following are extracts from a statement by the Acting Minister  for Foreign Affairs, Mr Bill Morrison:

 A great many false statements have been made in the past few days about  Australia’s evacuation of refugees and Embassy staff from Saigon. Some of the  statements have been the result of ignorance or emotionalism. It is an issue  over which people have become understandably and justifiably emotional—  and I do not blame them for it . . .

 The facts of the present situation are as follows. Australia has brought more refugees out of Vietnam than any other govcrn-  ment except the United States. Only one other country has taken any refugees.  New Zealand, and it was able to evacuate only about thirty. No Asian govern­ ment has agreed to take any refugees . . .

 Australia was one of the last Governments to withdraw its embassy from  Saigon. Only three Governments, France, Japan, and the U.S., still maintain  fully functioning diplomatic missions in South Vietnam, and the American  withdrawal is imminent. '

 There have been some passionate statements about Australia deserting our  locally-engaged Embassy staff. The fact is that I received requests from only  two of the staff to come to Australia; one of those was considered to be  potentially in danger as a result of his association with the Australian presence, 

 and he and his family were evacuated. We did not bring out as many refugees as I and my colleagues would have  liked. The only Vietnamese who could board our aircraft were those with exit  permits from the Saigon Government, and regrettably, the Saigon Government  has made it difficult for people to obtain travel documents.

 The U.S. has evacuated many more. The Americans have their own troops  at the airport, they have a vast air capability, and they have methods of dealing  with the Saigon authorities which we are not able, or prepared, to emulate. The Australian Government is not ashamed of its efforts in relieving suffering 

 in Vietnam; we have brought seventy-six refugees and nearly 300 orphans to  Australia—more than any other country has brought by legal methods;  Australia has contributed S3.4m to United Nations relief funds for use in 

 Indo-China— more than any other government including the U.S. . . .

 (Later in the day the Minister’s office released the following figures:

 1. Number of applications on behalf of Vietnamese wishing to come to  Australia, including parents, wives, children, siblings, cousins and friends, — 3,667, . . . .  . 

 2. Number approved as coming within guidelines set out by the Prime Minister— 342.)

