---
title: "Australia must continue to give aid to Vietnam"
date: "1975-04-22"
creators:
  - "Sinclair, Ian"
source: "NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213706534
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR06000632%22
---

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A

 H O U S E O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S

 D E P U T Y  LEADER  OF TH E 

 A U S T R A L I A N  C O U N T R Y  PA RTY

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE  CANBERRA. A.C.T. 2600 

 TEL. 72 1211

 HEV6 RELEASE 

 April 22, 1975

 AUSTRALIA MUST CONTINUE TO GIVE AID TO VIETNAM ,

 "The present situation in South Vietnam in no way diminishes 

 Australia's responsibility to bring positive assistance 

 to the people of South Vietnam.

 The Deputy Leader of the Australian Country Party Mr. Ian 

 Sinclair said this, today.

 "Australia, despite the fact that the future of the Australian 

 Embassy in Saigon is in doubt, can still render meaningful 

 assistance to the refugees displaced from their homes in the 

 current Communist offensive.

 "This can be done by flying food and medical supplies to 

 areas where refugees from the central highlands and the %

 northern coastal areas of South Vietnam have been relocated.

 '  Most of the refugees are being relocated on phu Q u a e I s l a n d , which 

 is under no direct threat of attack.

 'At present aid agencies have on hand in Sydney and elsewhere 

 emergency survival kits and needed medical supplies which 

 could be distributed to the refugees on the island. Getting 

 the supplies to South Vietnam requires Government financed 

 air transport assistance. "As well, Australia should seek from 

 the North Vietnameses Government and the Provisional Revolutionary 

 Government, assurances that Australian supplies for refugees, 

 wherever they may be, will get through and Australian aircraft 

 delivering these supplies will not be molested.

 "Australia'should immediately make contact with both North Vietnam 

 and PRG requesting them to allow Australian planes carrying

 necessary goods for- humanitarian purposes to enter any area of 

 South Vietnam where there are refugees in distress and 

 allow them to deli-ver the supplies which will relieve suffering. 

 ,f Australia's failure to act quickly, positively, helpfully, and

 adequately will forever blot opr reputation in Asia as a country 

 concerned with the problems of the region in which we live.

 At the same time, I sincerely believe that Australia should 

 bring out South Vietnamese citizens who have approval to

 enter Australia and also South Vietnamese, particularly . / / ' 

 mixed blood children whose lives are under threat."

