---
title: "Vietnam: evidence indicts Whitlam"
date: "1975-04-29"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213709677
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10023782%22
---

 '  75/127

 THE LIBERAL PART v OF AUSTRALIA MEDIA RELEASE FEDERAL SECRETARIAT

 STATEMENT BY THE H O N .  MALCOLM FRASER, M P , LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION'  "

 VIETNAM: EVIDENCE INDICTS WHITLAM

 Evidence published this morning exposes the deceit and dishonesty of  the Whitlam Government and shows that the Federal Labor Government  has been giving tactical advice to the Communist regime in Hanoi  and to the Communist controlled PRG in South Vietnam.

 The publication in a Melbourne newspaper this morning of the texts  of Australian telegrams to Hanoi and Saigon make it abundantly clear  that the Whitlam Government was sympathetic to the Communist side  in the curfent situation in Indo-China.  This explains a great deal  about the .Whitlam Government's reluctant and heartless approach to the  humanitarian problem in South Vietnam.

 Furthermore and most seriously, the Prime Minister himself is indicted by today's evidence.

 The Prime Minister stands indicted ori three counts::

 1. He has mislead the Australian Parliament and people. He said on  April 9 that the communications he sent to Hanoi and Saigon  were substantially the same.

 2. He has taken sides with the Communist North Vietnamese regime  in its agression against South Vietnam.

 3. The meanness and despicable nature of the Government's assistance  to South Vietnamese refugees - the reason for this half-hearted  assistance is revealed by today's evidence.

 It was not only that he wished to avoid giving offence to Hanoi but also that he sought actively to assist them.

 On the evidence published this morning, fully supporting the charges  made by the Shadow Minister.for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Andrew Peacock,   the Whitlam Government stands condemned of giving encouragement to the  Communist forces and misleading the Parliament and people.

 Until all aspects of this deplorable episode are fully aired,' there  can be no further trust or confidence in the Whitlam Government.

 Today's evidence confirms the accuracy of· the Opposition's charges  that the Whitlam Government has been more concerned with humouring  arid aiding its new-found friends in Hanoi than with providing  humanitarian assistance to refugees in South Vietnam.

 ,  I have already discussed these developments with Mr. Anthony and Mr.  Lynch, as a result of which the Shadow Cabinet will meet in Melbourne  tomorrow afternoon to discuss what actions the Opposition might .   consider appropriate.  .

 I regard this as a matter of the utmost seriousness;  On all· the  evidence available it appears that a great tradition of Parliament  has been breached by an Australian Prime Minister. This is not a  matter that Parliament or rhe people can take lightly.

 * * * * * * * * *

