---
title: "Mr Fraser's phony economies"
date: "1976-02-03"
creators:
  - "Whitlam, Gough"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213826339
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10020910%22
---

 Leader of the Opposition A ' ! /1

 Press Statement No 

 3 February 1976

 MR FRASER’S PHONY ECONOMIES

 Mr Fraser's review of Government commissions and  inquiries is largely window-dressing. The economies entailed  will be negligible. .

 Most of the inquiries mentioned had completed  their work and the reports were at the printers. Others  would have reported in any case by the dates Mr Fraser has  now set for them.

 This window-dressing is meant to obscure the  abolition of certain statutory bodies which have a continuing  significance for the Australian people. All of them were .   set u p ,with the support of the Liberals in 1974 and 1975. The Liberals could have blocked them in the Senate but did  not do so.

 1. '  -  The Australian Housing Corporation was set up to  give the benefits of defence service homes finance to all  persons within the Australian .Government's area of responsibility.  It was also empowered to help other home buyers bridge the  deposit gap by means of low-interest loans. Mr Fraser's 

 statement that the Corporation merely administered the defence service homes scheme is untrue. The Corporation was  never a burden on the taxpayer; its operations would have been  self-supporting. Mr Fraser does not tell us what will happen  to the $20 million allocated in the Hayden Budget for bridging  deposit gaps and subsidiary interest payments in the first  years of a loan. .  .

 2. The Road Safety and Standards Authority was set 

 up to promote road safety, control noise and car pollution  and protect the interests of motorists.  Does Mr Fraser no  longer see a need for Government initiatives to reduce the road  toll? The best way to save money on road accidents is to study  their causes.

 3. The decision to incorporate the Australian Development Assistance Agency in the Department of Foreign Affairs  will.save the taxpayer nothing, but will make the administration 

 of Australia's foreign policy and overseas aid programs more  difficult. The agency was set up to enable the Department of  Foreign Affairs to concentrate on foreign policy administration.  The best way to ensure that our aid money is well spent is to  place it in the hands of an expert body.

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600

 The hard-hearted decision to abolish the study of  Vietnamese refugees in Australia is a short-sighted move with  negligible cost-saving potential. Australia has taken thousands  of refugees from many countries since the war and no proper 

 survey has ever been made of their needs.  Those from Vietnam  were the first refugees from our own region. Australia may well  be caring for other refugees in future. Can Mr Fraser be sure 

 that there will be no other refugee problems in our region? The paltry sum saved in this operation may well jeopardise the  happiness of thousands of people seeking comfort and security  in our country.

 CANBERRA. A.C.T.

