---
title: "Vietnamese Refugees"
date: "1976-11-10"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213828883
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09000193%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  FRO M  THE M IN ISTER  FOR 

 Innigntiin «I [lie AffairsTH E  H O N . M . J . R .  M A C K E L L A R M .P . IEA 53/76

 VIETNAMESE REFUGEES

 A decision on the future of 50 Vietnamese who 

 reached Darwin in a small wooden fishing boat today  would be made as soon as all the facts were known,   the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the 

 Hon.  M.J.R. MacKellar said today. .

 .  Information to hand indicated that not all the Vietnamese wanted to stay in Australia, he added. In  the meantime,  they had all boon granted temporary entry 

 permits.

 "The people have been allowed ashore at the  Darwin quarantine station where they can be fed,  clothed and provided with necessary facilities,

 Mr MacKellar said. .

 "Departmental officers in Darwin will interview 

 the refugees tomorrow.

 "They have been asked to report.to me as a 

 matter of urgency.'·

 Mr MacKellar said that preliminary information 

 indicated that some of the Vietnamese might want to  join relatives who had reached the United States.

 First reports from Darwin indicated that the 

 majority of the Vietnamese were in good health and 

 had been cleared through quarantine.

 Mr MacKellar said the reports indicated that 

 the craft in which the Vietnamese reached Darwin was 

 a wooden fishing boat about 35 feet long...

 The 50 people aboard comprised 18 men, 13 women arid 19 children including some small babies.

 .  "As far as we are aware at this stage, the  vessel left Vung Tau, in Vietnam on 17. September this  year" Mr MacKellar said.

 "It called at Singapore, where customs  authorities vaccinated those aboard and provided charts  and provisions.  We do not know if they made any other  landfall on their way here although there is a suggestion  that they may have called at Koepang (Timor).

 .  2 .

 CANBERRA 

 10 November 1976

