---
title: "Lebanese refugees: Australian office in Damascus"
date: "1977-01-23"
creators:
  - "Whitlam, Gough"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213718376
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10021028%22
---

 PRESS STATEMENT NO.

 /

 Leader of the Opposition

 STATEMENT BY THE HON. E.G. WHITEAM, Q.C. , M.P.

 Lebanese Refugees: Australian Office in Damascus

 Mr Peacock has announced that Australia will establish an office  in Damascus almost eight months after the Australian immigration  officer was withdrawn from Damascus a.t the height of the war in  Lebanon.

 On 1 April 1976 the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr MacKellar, had told the House of Representatives that special  arrangements were being made to post an immigration officer to  Damascus. This officer was withdrawn on 25 J u n e . His withdrawal 

 was announced in a statement by Mr MacKellar from Athens the  following day, a Saturday. Not surprisingly the statement was  not published in any Australian capital city newspaper.

 Since that time the only special arrangements established by  the Fraser Government for interview and medical examination of  Lebanese sponsored for entry into Australia were at Cyprus. Only a fraction of the .Lebanese who wished to come to Australia 

 could afford to travel to Cyprus and maintain themselves there. The practical effects of that decision were therefore to restrict  severely rather than facilitate the processing of Lebanese  applicants. This caused extreme distress to their relatives in  Australia.

 In December 1976 the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign  Affairs and Defence stated: "We cannot conscientiously claim that Australia has been particularly generous towards genuine  refugees from Lebanon".  It concluded: "Australia can ease the

 suffering of the Lebanese people by being more generous in  accepting Lebanese displaced persons and thereby set an example  to other countries in the world".

 Given the number of Lebanese in Australia the plight of refugees  from Lebanon affects Australians most directly and cruelly. There  are 600,000 refugees in Syria alone, and in spite of this fact,  the Fraser Government refused repeatedly throughout the second  half of 1976 to respond to questions and complaints in Parliament  about the need for the establishment of an Australian office in  Damascus.

 Mr Peacock1s announcement, made from Singapore, is a step towards  the acceptance of Australia's clear responsibility. The Fraser  Government's delay in establishing an office in Damascus has been  unconscionable. It constituted a callous rejection of Australia's 

 responsibilities to its citizens of Lebanese origins and has  severely shaken their respect for the Australian political system.

 The decision to open an office in Damascus must be reinforced by a  decision from Mr MacKellar to send there an immigration team of  adequate size and quality.

 Par l i ament  H o u s e .  Canberra.  A C T  2600  CANBERRA  23 January 1977

