---
title: "Whitlam and ASEAN - "the threat form the south""
date: "1977-12-07"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213721923
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10018684%22
---

 On Tuesday Mr Whitlam gave a clear indication of how  Australia's relations with her neighbours would suffer if they were  ever again in his hands. .

 Gratuitously, without any provocation or rational purpose,  he  characterised the Government of Thailand as "one of the most obnoxious  regimes in the world".

 Thailand is a key - some would say the key-country in the  future of South East Asia. It is one of the five members of ASEAN,  the regional organisation which is most important to Australia  and around which the hopes of a stable and prosperous South East Asia 

 largely centre.  It is the country which borders on to the communist  countries of Indo-China. It is a major recipient of Australian aid.  Hundreds of Thai students have attended Australian schools and  universities - and have returned voluntarily to their own .country. .

 Mr Whitlam talks of refugees who cannot leave Thailand - he :   makes no reference to the 9.5,000 or so refugees who have fled to  Thailand in the last two years, and who are being accommodated by  that country.  It accepted Vietnamese refugees when the Whitlam 

 Government was callously turning them away.

 .  By this attack on a friendly neighbour, Mr Whitlam has  established beyond doubt that he is incompetent to preside over  Australia's foreign policy. In the past, he has shown that insulting  our friends and neighbours is his speciality. He has rarely criticised 

 other countries, but friendly countries like the United States,  Singapore,  France have always been fair game. He now shows that  nothing has changed - that selective moralising at the expense of  friendly countries is still the only substitute he can offer for a  foreign policy. .

 One does not have to idealise or whitewash Thailand - like  every other country it has its deficiencies. But it is also a country  under tremendous pressure and a country which has managed to achieve  impressive economic progress while under that pressure. Most 

 important, it is a country with which Australia must conduct  business - both bilaterally and in the context of ASEAN.

 By these incredibly stupid and irresponsible remarks, Mr Whitlam has rendered himself ineligible to conduct such business.  From the point of view of the ASEAN countries he could only be seen  as "the threat from the south".

 V G C G . '  ! "o n c i b  L Ir-

 ?!i7

