---
title: "Warning to boat refugees"
date: "1977-06-10"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213719678
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003118%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  FRO M  THE M INISTER FOR 

 Innigratioi anl Ethiic AffairsTH E  H O N . M . J . R .  M A C K E L L A R M .P .10 June 1977 IEA 37/77WARNING TC BOAT REFUGEESThe Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon.M.J.R. MacKellar, said today that information had been received that further groups of refugees were planning to sail to Australia in small boats from South East Asian waters."I must stress, as I did in January this year, that any refugee landing in Australia will initially be permitted only to stay temporarily. They may not be allowed to stay here permanently," Mr MacKellar said.Mr MacKellar pointed out the difficulties and dangers faced by those in small boats. " Anyone who encourages people to set out in these small,  often unseaworthy boats, which are inadequately prepared and equipped for a long and hazardous journey must understand the responsibility associated with their actions#" he said."Wo one knows for certain how many of these boats have set out for Australia. Consequently no one knows how many, if any, have failed to survive the long voyage."I should add that even if some of these boats succeed in reaching Australia they could land on a remote part of the coast in inhospitable country where food.and water may not be available and provision of adequate assistance could take some time."Mr MacKellar said that in making public such warnings he was concerned for the safety of the people who set out inadequately prepared. "Australia is and always has been, prepared to play its part in the resettlement of refugees,#" he stressed.Mr MacKellar said that Australia has already resettled more than 2,800 refugees from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia."As I pointed out in my statement on refugee policy on 24 May, more will be allowed to come"." The Government believes, however, that intakes should be controlled to give due weight to the claims of individuals and to factors such as family reunion and Australia's capacity to absorb people. "- 0 -

