---
title: "Immigration Minister to visit Italy, Cyprus"
date: "1977-01-31"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213718422
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003152%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  F R O M  T H E  M IN IS T E R  FOR 

 lim ig ra tiii and W a it AffairsT H E  H O N . M . J . R .  M A C K E L L A R M . P .31 January 1977 IEA 3/77IMMIGRATION MINISTER TO VISIT ITALY, CYPRUSThe Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, will leave Australia tomorrow for official visits to Italy and Cyprus.Mr MacKellar said he would be in Italy at the invitation of the Italian Government for the third meeting of the Joint Commission established under the Australia-Italy Migration and Settlement Agreement.The Commission would be discussing important aspects of migration to Australia from Italy. It would pay particular attention to means of assisting in the integration of Italian migrants in the Australian community.As well, he would be having talks with Italian Government Ministers.Mr MacKellar said that he also would visit Cyprus at the invitation of the Cypriot Government for discussions with Ministers and Parliamentary officials."The visit will enable me to see at first hand the operation being carried out in Cyprus to assist Lebanese wanting to come to Australia,"Mr MacKellar added. _"The Cyprus operation is coping with the bulk of applications. Late in September the Government authorised a special task force of experienced officers to go to Cyprus to help process the flood of applications being received there from Lebanese who already had relatives settled in Australia."Mr MacKellar said that in the period from July 1 last year to January 21 this year, the Cyprus office had issued visas to 5,663 Lebanese for entry to Australia.A total of 1,331 visas had been issued by other offices."Immigration officers will remain in Cyprus to process applications from Lebanese as well as Cypriots seeking to migrate to Australia,"Mr MacKellar said."Many Lebanese are expected to lodge their applications with Immigration officers at the new Australian Embassy which will open in Damascus within the next two weeks."On his way from Australia, Mr MacKellar will stop-over in Bangkok to look personally at the refugee situation in Thailand.An Australian selection team is already in Thailand interviewing Indo-Chinese refugees in camps there for resettlement in Australia.The Minister will return to Australia on 13 February, 1977...-0 -..

