---
title: "Australian contribution to UNHCR special appeal"
date: "1977-07-14"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213720020
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10018609%22
---

 M41 Datei July 1977 THE HON. ANDREW PEACOCK M.P.

 AUSTRALIAN CONTRIBUTION TO UNHCR SPECIAL APPEAL

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Mr Andrew Peacock,  announced today that Australia would contribute $A1,000,000  to a special appeal by the United Nations High Commissioner  for Refugees to assist refugees from Laos,  Kampuchea and  Vietnam in Thailand and other countries in Asia, including  people currently living on boats.

 Mr Peacock said that the grant was in line with the  Government's:recently announced policy on refugees and  demonstrated once again the determination of the Government  to respond in a humanitarian fashion to the current refugee  problem in South East Asia.

 "I am well aware of the concern felt in the  countries of the region and internationally for the plight  of these refugees", the Minister said. 1

 The High Commissioner for Refugees is seeking  $US14.4 million to meet the urgent needs of some 80,000 of  these displaced persons and has drawn up, in collaboration  with the Governments concerned,a comprehensive program involving  material assistance and resettlement which can be put into 

 effect quickly.

 Mr Peacock said the new program for Thailand in 1977  differs from earlier ones in including provision for the  beginnings of self-sufficiency for the persons who cannot  be suitably resettled outside the area. Previous programs 

 concentrated on providing food, clothing, shelter and medical  care. The total of $US14.4 million includes $US2.1 million  for self-reliance projects and educational assistance.

 The United States, Japan, the Fdderal Republic of  Germany"and Switzerland have already contributed to the appeal  and Australia's contribution will rank second only to that  of the U.S. This will be additional to Australia's contribution  to the regular budget of UNHCR which will be announced in 

 the 1977/78 Budget.

 .  In addition to the contribution to the UNHCR program Australia has accepted 2,980 Indo-Chinese refugees including  989 from boats. 1  .  .

