---
title: "Australia in sea rescue operation"
date: "1977-06-15"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213719712
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003117%22
---

 N E W S  R E L E A S E  FRO M  THE M INISTER FOR 

 Irniiiratiin ani Ithaic AffairsTH E  H O N . M . J . R .  M A C K E L L A R M .P . 15 June 1977 IEA 38/77

 AUSTRALIA IN SEA RESCUE OPERATION

 Australia is taking part in an operation to rescue 251 people 

 aboard a sinking ship in Malaysian waters.

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon.

 M.J.R. MacKellar, said today the people were on an old coastal tanker,  

 the Leapdal, about 35 miles from Singapore.

 The Leapdal was chartered by the World Conference on Religion and 

 Peace last year to pick up refugees from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.

 Mr. MacKellar said Australia had joined.with other countries 

 including France, Austria, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom 

 and Switzerland to mount the international rescue operation.

 They were answering a call from the United Nations High 

 Commissioner for Refugees.

 Reports said the tanker was slowly sinking.

 "In the circumstances, the Australian Government has agreed to 

 accept up to 50 people from the ship," Mr. MacKellar said.

 "An officer from my Department in Canberra will arrive in 

 Singapore tonight· Priority in selection will be given to those people on 

 board with near-relatives in Australia.

 It was expected the refugees would leave Singapore on Monday evening 

 and arrive in Sydney at 6.30 am the next day, Mr. MacKellar said.

 "The deteriorating condition of the Leapdal and other reports of 

 the sinking of vessels carrying refugees underlines the warning I gave on 

 Friday about the dangers facing refugees at sea," Mr. MacKellar said.

 "In the case of small unseaworthy vessels, the hazards are even 

 greater. Anyone who encourages inadequately prepared and equipped vessels to make 

 the long and hazardous voyage to Australia should realise the consequences 

 which could follow their actions."

