---
title: "Re-opening of Wiltona Hostel"
date: "1978-10-12"
creators:
  - "Street, Anthony"
source: "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213725784
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10017769%22
---

 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE HON. A.A. STREET, M.P.,  MINISTER  FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS - 12 OCTOBER 1978

 RE-OPENING OF WILTONA HOSTEL

 1. On 9 June 1978, the Senate Standing Committee on Finance 

 and Government Operations tabled its Report on its investigations 

 into the Establishment,  Operation and Disposal of Wiltona Hostel,   Williamstown,  Victoria, which at that time was not in use.

 2. The Senate Committee concluded that the hostel site was 

 unsuitable for such purposes because of its location and recommended  that action be taken to dispose of the property together with the 

 Williamstown Rifle Range. However, the Committee accepted the 

 possible need for the hostel to be used and, in that event,  

 recommended a number of fire safety measures be taken. It also  indicated that its use be for a specific interim period.

 3. The need for the hostel to be used results from the Government's

 decision-to accept 9,000 Indo-Chinese refugees in 1978/79 in addition 

 to other assisted passage migrants which will require additional 

 hostel accommodation to that already in use.  The only suitable .

 accommodation is the Wiltona Hostel and the first intake into the·  hostel is scheduled for 16 October 1978.

 4. 1  All of the fire safety measures recommended by the Senate

 Committee have been met and these were:  .

 .  provision of an audible alarm system interconnected  with the refinery's watch room;

 .  establishment of suitable evacuation procedures which 

 have been cleared with the Metropolitan Fire Brigade  and Victoria Police;

 . a n  assurance from the Refinery that only crude oil or 

 heavy fuel oil will be stored in tanks adjacent to  the hostel;

 .  adequate patrolling service at the Tank Farm.

 2 .

 5. No action has as yet been commenced towards the eventual 

 disposal of the hostel property. There are a number of factors 

 which will need to be determined before such action can take 

 place, including:

 .  determination of the interim period for which the 

 hostel will be needed. This will depend upon 

 later Government decisions regarding future refugee 

 intakes in the light of Australia's international 

 obligations in this regard; ---------

 .  determination of the future zoning of the area by  the State Planning Authority;  .

 .  the economics of relocating the Williamstown Rifle  Range;

 .  .  determination of the Commonwealth1s future relation­ ship with civilian Rifle Clubs.

 6. The Government will be seeking advice from the Victorian 

 Government on future planning for the area and will review the  situation when these matters are determined. -

