---
title: "Minister arrives in Kuala Lumpur"
date: "1978-07-23"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213724525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003700%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 23 JULY  1978 72/78

 MINISTER AHH1VE3 IN KUALA LUMTUK

 Australia's Minister for Immigration anrl Ethnic Affairs, the Hon»

 M*J. It.MacKellar, arrived in Kuala Lumpur today(Sunday) as an official guest 

 of the Malaysian Government for talks on Indo-Chinese refugees#

 His three-week mission to South-East Asia has taken him to Jakarta, 

 Singapore, Manila and Bangkok, as well as Kuala Mumpur.

 Mr MacICellar said he would-be seeing the refugee situation at first 

 hand and discussing with the Malaysian Government ways in which Australia 

 could co-operate with ASSAM Governments in developing a more effective 

 international response to the growing problem of Indo-Chinese refugees·

 "In all the ASEAN countries I have visited I have been impressed 

 by the action token to provide temporary santuary for refugees," Mr MacKellar

 "My discussions in Malaysia will be of special importance. Malaysia 

 is bearing the main impact of the outflow of boat people from Vietnam".

 Mr MacKellar said that Australia would continue to do its utmost 

 to help solve the problem within the limits of its resettlement capacity.

 "Australia has already accepted more than 11,000 refugees from the 

 countries of Inde-China®

 "A year from now we will have brought in a further 9000 Indo-Chinese 

 refugees bringing the total to 20,000."

 Mr MacKellar said he would be explaining Australia's new immigration 

 policy he had announced on 7 June this year.

 "It makes provision for a humanitarian response to the needs of 

 refugees," Mr MacKellar said.

 "It also renews Australia's commitment to a policy applied universally 

 without discrimination on grounds of race, colour, nationality, descent, 

 national or ethnic origin, religion or sex".

 said.

