---
title: "Australian refugees initiative adopted by UNHCR"
date: "1978-10-18"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213725872
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08003678%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 Press Release No. 78/93

 AUSTRALIAN REFUGEES INITIATIVE ADOPTED BY UNHCR

 "The rapidly growing numbers of refugees in Malaysian  waters and in Thailand are causing immense problems," Mr MacKellar,  the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs said today. 'The  number of boat refugees in holding camps on small islands have been 

 growing at an alarming rate. Sanitation' and health services in  some camps are close to breaking down. The problems emphasise  further the need to internationalise action on the Indo-Chinese  refugee situation." '

 Mr MacKellar said that on Australia's initiative the  Executive Committee of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees had decided in favour of international consultations  before the end of the year.

 "I welcome that decision. World attention has to be  focussed on the worsening situation and the burden this is placing  on the few present countries of first asylum and final settlement.  If the Vietnam outflow cannot be more efficiently handled, there  must be little prospect of international success "in dealing with 

 likely future refugee crises around the world.

 "The Government has been pressing for international _   attention to the Indo-Chinese problem since early this year before  the visit of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to  Canberra in March," Mr MacKellar said.

 "This will be the second round of major talks held by UNHCR  on Australia's initiative in a period of 4 months.

 "The first meeting, held in Kuala Lumpur on 20-21 September,  enabled interested Governments to express the nature of the problems  to other Governments and to begin some consideration to the  contributions being made by all.

 "The consultations which the High Commissioner has now  agreed to call before the end of the year hopefully will encourage  an even greater number of countries to become involved.

 "Australia has agreed to support UNHCR in arranging the  consultations and, as the Committee decision (see below) indicates,  will try to persuade more countries to acknowledge by way of  positive action the international nature of the humanitarian 

 response now urgently needed."

 .  .  ./2

 The Relevant Decision

 '  "The Exeuctive Committee, having recorded its concern  about the growing number of refugees in South East Asia, and  recognising the difficulties encountered by countries for first  refuge', particularly since current resettlement programmes do  not provide sufficient places for the numbers involved:

 (a) undertook to continue to support the High Commissioner's  efforts to draw the attention of the international  community to the increasing magnitude of the problem,  the human suffering involved and- the burden on countries  of first refuge;

 (b) urged all concerned to give full consideration to means of resolving this problem by giving appropriate assistance  for programmes of assistance in countries of first refuge  .and by intensifying action to promote resettlement of the 

 refugees in a wider range of countries;

 (c) welcomed the intention of the High Commissioner to call  well-organized and substantive consultations on the above  matters with all interested Governments, and noted that he proposed to call the first such consultation before the 

 end of 1978."

 * * * * * *

 18 October 1978  CANBERRA

