---
title: "Migrant Settlement Council for South Australia"
date: "1979-02-12"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727586
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004528%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 12 February 1979

 MIGRANT SETTLEMENT COUNCIL FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  

 the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, today announced the composition of 

 an eight-member Migrant Settlement Council for South Australia.

 The Council is one of eight to be established - one 

 for each State and Territory - to supervise development of an 

 initial settlement programme for newly-arrived migrants.

 Its formation is a further step in implementing 

 the $50 million package recommended by the Galbally Report for 

 upgrading migrant services and programmes over the next three 

 years.

 Mr MacKellar said Councils had now been set up in 

 four States and he expected to be able to announce the 

 composition of the Councils in other States and Territories 

 soon.

 "The composition of the South Australian Council 

 reflects the many facets of community concern with migrant 

 welfare:  Federal and State Governments, non-government

 organisations and ethnic communities," Mr MacKellar said.

 "The Settlement Councils will be concerned with 

 implementing programmes that meet local needs and it is 

 essential, therefore, that members have the support of the 

 wider Australian community.

 2 .

 "I am certain that the calibre of the people who 

 have been chosen to serve on the South Australian Council 

 will attract and justify that support."

 Mr MacKellar said an important aspect of the work 

 of the Councils would be to engage the voluntary sector which 

 played such an important role in Australian welfare services.

 As the Galbally Report points out, it is most 

 important that the voluntary sector, including ethnic groups,  

 should establish links with incoming migrants as soon as 

 possible.

 The membership of the South Australian Council is:

 Mr John Kiosoglous (Chairman),  a Stipendiary Magistrate; 

 President of the Good Neighbour Council of South Australia 

 and Chairman of the National Conference of the Good 

 Neighbour Movement;  member of the Australian Population and 

 Immigration Council;

 Mrs Karobi Muhkerjoe,  a Sociologist, past-President of the 

 Asian/Australian Families Association who has occupied 

 various offices in the Indian-Australian Association.

 Mr Joe Baldino, a lawyer, chairman of the Italian Choral 

 and Arts Committee.  >

 -i . ·

 Father Jefferies Foale C.P., A Jesuit priest who is National 

 President of the Indo-China Refugee Association.·

 Mr Jack Stafford, Regional Director of the Commonwealth 

 Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs;

 Mr Juri Ratas,  Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering 

 Services Ltd;

 Mr Alex Gardini, Ethnic Affairs Adviser, 

 Department;

 Premier's

 Miss Rae Blesing, Head of Migrant Language Education '  c 

 Centre,  Department of Further Education.

