---
title: "Kampucheans in Thailand"
date: "1979-06-12"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213730420
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004449%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 12 June 1979 91/79

 KAMPUCHEANS IN THAILAND

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the 

 Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, today said that Thailand had to make 

 its own decisions about the treatment of people being pushed 

 across its borders by warring factions. No other nation 

 could fairly reproach Thailand which by now had taken in about 

 150,000 refugees.

 The attention of the world should be focussed on the 

 real cause of the present disaster. ,

 .The people of Kampuchea faced misfortunes of an 

 unparalleled kind since they had been the victims of savagery 

 first .by the Pol Pot regime and subsequently by Vietnamese 

 aggression. .  .  '  .

 ^ Problems of the kind now being experienced need not

 occur if those responsible for government in Indo-China put 

 common humanity above elusive ideology. Other countries could 

 not play along endlessly with the Vietnamese experiments in 

 mass emigration. .

 It is quite unreasonable to expect that Thailand, Malaysia, 

 Indonesia, Hong Kong and countries of final settlement like .  

 America and Australia, could pick up all the human problems 

 growing out of the present barbarities, Mr MacKellar said.

 Australia's intake of refugees is now averaging over 

 900 per month. This commitment places a strain on the Australian 

 people and the Australian economy when they were themselves 

 going through difficult times. The question of a further 

 increase is always in the Government's mind, but no decisions

 had been taken to lift the level next year from Indo­

 china above 10,500. .

 Mr MacKellar said the facts as indicated by Thai 

 authorities were that no-one already in a UNHCR camp was 

 liable to be returned as an illegal immigrant.

