---
title: "Address to Pacific-Asian Congress of Municipalities"
date: "1979-09-17"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213732086
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10030689%22
---

 â 

 FOR MEDIA 17 SEPTEMBER 1979

 ADDRESS TO PACIFIC-ASIAN CONGRESS OF MUNICIPALITIES

 This is the Sixth Pacific-Asian Congress of Municipalities   and Australia is honoured, Adelaide is honoured, that it is   being held in this city. I am delighted to be here with you.

 The region from which you all come is, of course, a vastly   important region for Australia, as it is to you. It is the   region in which we live. It is the region in which we all   need to work out our own futures, working as far as possible  

 in harmony with policies that can advance our common cause to   the greatest extent.

 I believe this meeting does affect the sense of interdependence   between cities, between nations, between.people.  The Asia-Pacific   economy is comparable in many areas with the Atlantic community   and the Atlantic economy - comparable in population, comparable  

 in resources and Gross National Product, and comparable in.   trade and industry.

 In some respects, it is one of the fastest growing areas in .   the world. Within the region of course there is some honest   diversity - participants of this conference come from countries   that are very far from Australia, others that are just next door.   They come from two hemispheres; from large and from small   countries, and from countries in all stages of development. But within that diversity I believe we should seek, the-.goals   of moderation, and of tolerance and understanding, especially   where there are differences. Diversity is one of the significant ·  

 characteristics of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting   when about 40 Heads of government meet every second year. .

 At the last Heads of Government Meeting, at Lusaka, for example   they worked together to help solve intractable problems and   difficulties. They were able to do that only because people   were able to be moderate - passionate in support of moderation  

 if you like - with a spirit of compromise and with a spirit   of good sense and well-being. Very much the same values are   needed in our own region, where there are also problems. There   are problems in Indochina, problems with refugees, and the  

 challenges of inadequate standards of living in a number of   countries.

 2

 A number of newly industrialising countries - Singapore, Hong Kong, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan - have shown  remarkable progress over recent years,  and in some ways, have  led the way in the newly industrialising process. These four  countries produce almost half the exports of industrial goods 

 among the world’s developing countries. That indicates on the  one hand, the progress that these four nations have made,  but  it also emphasises the fact that greater progress is needed  in a number of other countries.

 That is not always the fault of the countries concerned. Unequal trading opportunities sometimes hold back development  which could otherwise occur. There are many countries where  prospects are more limited than for these four, unless there 

 are adequate aid programmes and adequate trading arrangements  made in the wider world community. .

 There is also a difference within the region in the extent  to which countries have an acceptance of global economic  interdependence.  There are a number of countries that are  very open in their trading practices: Singapore and Hong Kong 

 are two which depend almost totally on trade and on open  markets for world goods.  There are many others, in Indo-China,  for example, where there is little interaction with neighbours  and with economies that are nowhere near so open.

 There is this great diversity, not only in politics and approach, '  but also in need, between the countries of the region. There is  however,  a growing interdependence and a growing understanding  of the need of the importance of interdependence between peoples  .and .countr-ies .  Despite a great diversity of cultures, and 

 in economies, that interdependence is becoming more and more  evident.

 There is now a network of economic relationships:  40% of  the United States' exports, for example, go to countries of  the Asia Pacific region while 47% of the United States' imports  come from the western Pacific or from Canada. For Japan,

 50% of their exports go to the Asian Pacific region and 43% : of their imports come from the region. 60% of the total trade ‘ in most western Pacific countries .libs::; within the region itself .None  of this would be possible if there were not a close and a  growing network of economic and commerical relationships  between the countries and cities of the region.

 Over recent times there has been significant change in  the direction of trade, in many cases, and a significant  transfer of technology. All of these again point to a  growing interdependence between nations.

 Sometimes that interdependence can carry some dangers with it. We need to understand the possible dangers and to do what we  can to avoid them. The development of ASEAN for example has  been quite remarkable. It is now a cohesive and strong group 

 of nations advancing its own region and making a greater  contribution therefore to the general stability of South East Asia  and the western Pacific. But a number of the industries  which have emerged in ASEAN countries are competing with the  same goods and the same commodities for the same markets, and 

 therefore a competitive environment grows within the region. That's not just competition between industries in the region

 .  .  ,  / 3

 and other outside.  The competitive situation also arises within the region. It is important to do what we can to see that that does not lead to tensions within the region,

 as economic rivalry has sometimes in the past led to tension between other nations. Certainly we need to avoid in the Asia Pacific area any signs of the sort of economic nationalism that did so much damage in Europe and North America in the

 1930s. I don't believe there are signs of that kind of economic nationalism in our theatre. Nevertheless, it is " very important indeed to be aware of the dangers that can come in inflationary circumstances, where the growth of trade

 is perhaps not as great as we would like to see, and the pressure: for greater protectionism can therefore also be greater than we would like to see. It is to the credit of the region -the Asian Pacific theatre - that these dangers have largely

 been averted up to the present time.

 A short while ago, William Miller, Secretary to the United States  Treasury said: "Inflation is a clear and present danger. It has  struck at our nation's vitality. If it is not checked, then  it will threaten our democratic system itself... We must  attack the root causes and totally eradicate the basic sources  of the malady... What is needed is a comprehensive sustained  and total war against inflation".. I found that view to  be accepted, not only amongst the industrialised countries,  but in most international forums - at a meeting called by '

 Jamaica at--the turn of the New Year, developed and developing  countries alike at UNCTAD 5 in Manila, and also at the Commonwealth  Heads of Government Meeting at Lusaka. Because, with rising inflation  confidence is reduced, profitability is reduced, uncertainty amongst  businesses and peoples is increased and then market growth is slow, 

 leading to unemployment and then to more unemployment. In these  circumstances, there can be great pressures for government  intervention, and sometimes pressures for intervention at the time  won't help cure the ills. It might sometimes make the ills more 

 serious and more difficult ultimately to eradicate.

 One of the consequences of inflation is that it offers a threat  to developing countries and newly independent States. That can  come because inflation can lead to protection in advanced countries  and therefore to the denial of markets to newly developing countries,  and to the industrialising countries.

 Governments of the region need as much as we possibly can to  co-operate and to avoid the friction which can come from pressures  for a very rapid change. I believe we can assist each other, and  to some extent we can adopt common strategies to combat inflation,  to minimise the evils of undue protectionism. We can do more  actively to press major industrialised nations outside the region .   to adopt like policies - to combat inflation and to reduce  protection. This was a very strong thread at UNCTAD 5 in Manila - 

 in a most magnificent conference center, in a city which housed  some 5,000 delegates in a most hospitable and friendly manner. The evil of inflation and of increased protectionism is one which all  countries expressed great concern about at that conference, only 

 a few months ago. .

 4

 Why is it so important to be concerned about these things? To understand it we need to look at the historical background. Let me explain, against that background what I have in mind. In the late 1940's to about 1970 there was unprecedented growth 

 in world capital in the economies of developed and developing  countries alike.

 There are particular reasons for that. Before the World War  there had been a depression, after the War there was pent-up . consumer demand which provided markets for the products of  factories of Europe and North America. There was the imaginative  Marshall Plan which assisted greatly in the rebuilding of war- .  

 damaged Europe.  There was the introduction of new technology  which produced new goods which in the industrialised countries  were going to become commonplace in nearly every household.

 As a result of that, there was a sustained up-surge in growth  of trade and of income in many countries. Many developing  countries also experienced lack of growth during the same  period. But by the 1970s,  that consumer boom was running down. At the same time, there were increased impediments to enterprise, 

 to investment and to development. There were increased impediments  to jobs and to the creation of enterprises that would provide  more work for more people.

 There were a number of reasons for this. The view had come about,  as a result of a certain view of economics, that government's  could provide all things. If they did riot have enough funds they cou]  just print more. Inflation became entrenched in the 1970s in  many, many countries around the world - in North America and in 

 Europe. As a result of that, world trade has grown at only half  the rate of the previous 20 years, as one of the direct causes  of high world unemployment. There was an expectation that  governments could provide all the things that their people  expected, hoped for and wanted.  Maybe aspirations were too high,  but as the result of these pressures,  inflation has become 

 entrenched as a grave and serious evil in many countries in  North America and Europe and in a number of others. .  But then  again, because in many of the years since the War growth has  been so great that people forgot the circumstances that might  have occurred before the Second World War. They took growth 

 for granted. They thought this was the natural state of what  would occur in the modern economies of developed or developing  countries. Governments again led people to place unrealistic  demands upon governments and upon their own economies. Growth can .   not be taken for granted. If you really want growth you have 

 to have policies that promote it.

 The conditions which generated the great international growth  from about 1949 to 1970 have largely disappeared. I am concerned  that reducing inflation alone, and reducing protection alone,  may not in themselves achieve the resurgence in growth that 

 is needed if the problems of the world and world poverty are  to be overcome. Do w@ need statutory road blocks for development, and  do we need statutory road blocks for investment? Many .

 investments that would have been possible 30 years ago, 20  years ago,  maybe even 15, today would not be. There are all the  environmental requirements that new laws now place upon enterprise.

 .  .  ./5

 5

 There are foreign investment provisions which oil companies  have,* there are national investment policies,* there are  restrictive trade practices legislation. Corporations and  enterprises have to find their way through all these things.

 I am advised that in California, for example, it could take  two to three years to get through the environmental restrictions  just to place some L.P.G. gas tanks on the Californian coast. That is just one example of the difficulties that occur and  the various developments that were not in existence 20 years.ago.

 Against that background, these concerns were mentioned at UNCTAD 5  in Manila. .  They were mentioned again at the Commonwealth Heads  of Government Meeting in Lusaka. As a result of the general .   concern that getting inflation down alone might not be enough 

 to establish a ;f£surgence of the world growth and of world  trade. The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting adopted an  Australian proposal for a study on the constraints to growth.  What are the constraints to growth within an economy and between  nations? Can a study by the Commonwealth throw some greater 

 light upon that and point the way to national or international  policies and might enable us to look forward toamore prosperous,  world economic future than might otherwise be the case.

 Australia will be providing a representative for the study  group and it will be reporting in time to assist governments  in their preparation for a special session of the United Nations  General Assemb-ly in 1980. So that is not all that far.off. It  has been emphasised at UNCTAD and at other forums that the system  does not always work as well as we would like or work as fairly 

 as we would like. The Common Fund is designed to make sure that  developing countries in particular are given a better opportunity  to market their commodities in the markets of the world within  a proper framework and in a way which does not grow too serious 

 to upset our own development or plans. The need for the Common  Fund has been accepted both by the advanced, developed countries  and by the developing countries, although much work needs to be  done on its implementation.

 I hope very much that work flowing out of UNCTAD 5 and out of  the study group which I have spoken about concerning the  Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting will enable-us to take  the debate further. I hope that it will point to policies which  governments can actively and sensibly pursue. .

 There is a great deal of co-operation within this region which  you are representing here - ASEAN is a tremendous example of  mutual support and co-operation amongst five significant  countries. There is the Pacific Forum. There are .  

 the countries of the Pacific dealing with New Zealand and  Australia which discuss many matters of mutual co-operation in  the Pacific and the South Pacific in particular, matters such  as fisheries, transport and trade relations and a forum which  brings together the Pacific nations enables them to pool their 

 ideas, their hopes and their resources. There is the South .   Pacific Bureau for Economic co-operation which links Australia

 .  .  .  / 6

 6

 and New Zealand with small independent State of the South  Pacific and of Papua-New Guinda.

 Australia has participated in regional meetings, for example the 1978 Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting which involved a smaller number of States in the Pacific together with India as the largest member of the Commonwealth.  .

 That group identified fields of co-operation which can be  actively pursued amongst the member States.

 As a result of that regional meeting, working groups have .

 been established on trade, energy,  terrorism and illicit  drugs and trading in drugs.  A further meeting of that  regional group will be held and hosted in India in 1980. .  '

 The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting - the full meeting -  held every two years with about 40 States present,  quite clearly  and obviously at most times is going to be related to the highly  difficult and sensitive major national and international issues, 

 such as the last conference,  Southern African issues, the  problems of Zimbabwe-Rhodesia and also the major problems of .   economic relationships and the North South economic relationship. At that major meeting,  some of the smaller States felt that their  particular needs and concerns were not always met.  There is not - 

 always an adequate response. There is not always adequate time  to enable their problems to be discussed and understood.  The  regional meeting provides a greater opportunity for that and  for that reason alone,  is something of particular merit.

 Interdependence amongst States is obviously promoted by a number  of the important institutions that are present in the area -  the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia in  the Pacific, the Asian Development Bank.  There have been other  '  suggestions which help co-operation within the Pacific community. .  

 There have been proposals for greater co-operation in relation  to Pacific trade,  aid and development. The Prime Minister of  Japan has broadly suggested that a Pacific Basin community  should be established. There is much merit in these ideas, but 

 they need a great deal of work,  a great deal of examination.

 People have an idea that the Pacific countries should be co-operating  more closely but they do not at the moment know in what form or .   in what way; how it can be consumated. Therefore there needs to  be substance given to the idea, so that the countries of the. .  .

 Pacific can pursue common objectives more vigorously.

 I believe that this conference itself is a very good example in  the way which communities can come together to discuss their  common hopes, their common concerns.

 Very briefly, could I say something about Australia in the region. I pointed to the changing directions of trade a few moments ago. .   Nowhere is that more evident than in the changed directions of  Australia's trade. In 1960, 331 of our trade was with Asia and  . -  Asean 28% was with the United Kingdom. Now, over 50% of our

 trade is with Asian and Pacific countries and only 7% with the  United Kingdom. Over the period from 1960 to the present trade

 .  .  ./7

 7

 has grown at an annual average rate in the Pacific Asian  area of about 14%. With the United Kingdom it has grown  by only 31 which means there has been a very real reduction  in real terms of trade with the United Kingdom. Then again, 

 if we look at ASEAN exports to Australia, to take an example,  they have grown from about $107 million worth in 1972 to .   nearly $650 million worth in this last year.

 Developing countries exports to Australia has grown from $600  million to nearly $3,000 million over the same period. Their  share of Australia's imports has very nearly doubled. It is  worth noting, that over recent years Australia's average 

 annual rate of growth and import from ASEAN countries to take  a group of developing countries has been more than 30%, where  total imports have grown at a very much lesser rate than that.  Developing countries' share of Australia's total imports has 

 also grown very significantly over the period. In other words,  there has been a major reorientation of Australia's trade and  trading direction. We still have important trade with Europe,  with the United Kingdom. But now the Pacific Asian theatre 

 is becoming increasingly important to us.

 That I think is taking Australia's example to emphasise the  countries of the Pacific Asian theatre are much more dependent  upon each other than they once were, and I believe that that  trend will certainly continue for all of us in the years ahead.

 In development assistance, we have special responsibilities  for obvious and historical reasons with Papua-New Guinea,  and a large part of our development assistance goes to Papua-  New Guinea. But,  beyond that, the bulk of our bilateral aid  goes to ASEAN and South Pacific countries where projects  varying from $1 to $50 million are being supported by Australia 

 and significant programmes also in the South Pacific. The  aid programmes themselves establish valuable contact on  national, provincial and local government levels and. also  enlarge the reality of understanding between people. One of 

 the programmes of particular value is the student programme  where "overseas students come to study in our universities and  colleges and schools. Since the Second World War, more than  26,000 students from nearly 90 developing countries, have had 

 training in Australia under some form of official sponsorship  from our government or from another government. 12,000 of  these have come from ASEAN countries, and then on top, there  have been 16,000 private overseas students over the last 9 or  10 years from about 90 countries.and about.9,000 of those have  come from ASEAN countries. .

 This was one of the best kinds of contact and communcation,  because it means that young men and women in our institutions  come to learn and make friends with students from overseas. In  that environment, they are gaining greater knowledge and  understanding of other countries and of other peoples. It is 

 certainly our belief and our hope that students who study here .   and who return to their homeland carry a feeling of affection  for Australia. These bonds between people may well ultimately  be the strongest bonds between nations. We have recently adopted  policies which I hope will enable us to expand the number of 

 cases in our education institutions for students from other  countries.

 .  .  ./8

 8

 The contacts between Australians and the people of the countries of  Asia, the Pacific,  on a business, personal and commercial  level, are quite important to the relationship as an addition  to the relationship between governments. That is particularly 

 so when the historic and cultural backgrounds are so different.  We have quite actively sought to promote that kind of cultural  exchange between people, between Australia and a very wide  range of countries.  That is another reason why there is so  much worth . . .  in this conference being held here in Adelaide.

 Local government interdependence is also very important.  That  we have got this conference being held here is a recognition  that local government is very important to good government. . In many senses it is the level of government that is closest 

 to the aspirations and hopes of people, I am quite sure that  the participants in this conference will welcome the opportunity  to exchange ideas and acknowledge the way in which your plans 

 are undertaken,  the advancement of your own cities and of your  own peoples. It will be important for Australian members of this  conference to understand how mayors and municipal leaders from  cities overseas translate their hopes into actions that will  advance the importance of their own people. I am sure there 

 is much to learn in this particular direction. .

 The conference must surely lead us to have an enlarged  appreciation of other communities, of their needs, and enlarged  appreciation of how we can identify problems and resolve  difficulties. Nations are no longer self contained. They  can no longer in a selfish way pursue their own future without  some care, without some concern for their actions in other  nations, in other places. The economic, social and political  progress which we are all part of depends upon an ability to 

 enlarge contacts between people and between nations.

 Therefore there is a benefit with the wider opportunities . thus created. Now,.these objectives at this conference will  make .  an important contribution. I hope you will go back to  your own communities with an appreciation of what we are trying 

 to do in Australia,  and hope you will leave behind you a much  better understanding amongst a large number of Australians of  what you are doing to advance the cause of your cities and of  your own people.

 If the conference achieves nothing more than that, it will  have advanced the cause of relationships between a very large  number of countries, between a large number of cities and.  peoples.

 --- 0 O 0 ----

