---
title: "Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Ministers meet in Sydney"
date: "1979-10-19"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213732520
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004593%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.  the H o n,  M.J.R, Ma cKe l l a r , M.P.

 150/79 19 October 1979

 IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS MINISTERS MEET IN SYDNEY

 Commonwealth,  New Zealand, State and Territory Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs Ministers reviewed today the settlement problems 

 of Indo-Chinese refugees in Australia and New Zealand. They noted 

 that although the outflow of boat people from Vietnam had 

 declined since the Geneva Refugees Conference in July, there was 

 still an outflow of over 10,000 a month. More than 150,000 of 

 these people still had to be resettled out of the camps.

 Countries of resettlement would be faced with the need to 

 maintain refugee programs for some time even if the outflow from 

 Indo-Chinese countries did not again increase.

 The Ministers emphasised the value of community involvement 

 in resettlement programs.  ·

 The Kampuchean situation must be of great concern to the 

 Australian community on both refugee and humanitarian grounds.

 The Ministers (list of participants attached) held their 

 biannual Conference in Sydney today.

 The conference held a first discussion on citizenship. It 

 agree that it would be timely to consider ways of promoting the 

 significance and value of Australian citizenship.

 Citizenship was seen as the natural culmination of the 

 migration and settlement process. It acted as a bond in maintaining 

 cohesion' and unity in a multicultural Australia.

 The Ministers again reviewed the free-flow'movement for 

 eligible people between Australia and New Zealand. They saw 

 continuation of the free-flow agreement as an important element 

 in the growing co-operation between the two countries,  but  recommended continuing monitoring of problem areas.

 2 /...

 2

 Ministers stressed that the forecast growth in demand for 

 skilled workers in the near future would exceed the local availability 

 of labour. While preference would be given to filling vacancies 

 from within Australia, and from apprenticeship and re-training 

 schemes,  there would still be a major shortfall which would have 

 to be met by recruiting significant numbers of skilled migrants 

 from overseas.  They agreed that immigration procedures should be 

 streamlined so that vacancies that cannot be filled within 

 Australia can be filled from overseas with least possible delay.'  

 Recruitment of skilled migrants from overseas in the short-term 

 .  would be especially important to the progress of large-scale 

 projects which would provide many jobs for semi-skilled and 

 unskilled Australians who are now unemployed.

 Ministers endorsed the migration program for 1979/*80,  which 

 involves a net population gain of 79,000 persons.  They emphasised 

 the continuation of a planned approach to migration on a triennial 

 basis.  .  '

 Ministers noted a report that,  on preliminary .indications,  

 the migration policies and selection systems operating since 

 1 January this year appeared to be achieving a fair and consistent 

 selection of migrants to meet Australia's needs.

 Ministers also agreed on:

 .  a joint research program,;

 .  principles for Commonwealth financial assistance to the 

 States for care of unattached refugee children;

 .  the importance of migrant education programs which were 

 notable examples of Commonwealth/State co-operation;

 .  the continuing need for post-arrival services for migrants;

 .  the desirability of flexibility in adapting the Migrant

 Resource Centre system to varying conditions and needs '  

 of particular localities.

 Other matters discussed included:

 .  eligibility for electoral enrolment and voting;

 3 /...

