---
title: "No amnesty for migration law breaches"
date: "1979-01-23"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727311
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004536%22
---

 < i  s Jiff, Sissyey r-j

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 23 January 1979 .  18/79

 "NO AMNESTY FOR MIGRATION LAW BREACHERS"

 "Calls by Opposition spokesmen for an amnesty 

 for those who violate Australia's migration laws are ill informed", 

 the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr MacKellar, said 

 today.

 "What Mr Bowen and other Opposition spokesmen are 

 saying will simply encourage more people to break Australia's 

 migration laws and policies in the vague and forlorn hope that a 

 change of government will enable them to remain permanently in 

 Australia."

 "Most of these illegal entrants or overstayed 

 visitors are unskilled and take employment which could be held by 

 people already in Australia legally. Others seek social security 

 benefits which have to be paid for by Australian taxpayers. These 

 people have not been interviewed by Australian Immigration officers 

 They do not meet the selection standards for permanent residence in 

 Australia." r

 Mr MacKellar said that the Fraser Government had

 declared an amnesty in 1976 to clear up the mess resulting from the  1.  ‘  '  

 easy-visa system introduced by the Whitlam Government in 1973. The

 easy-visa system led to a huge increase in the number of overstayed

 visitors in Australia. The present Government was determined that

 the overstayed visitor problem would be contained and reduced, and

 that illegal entrants and overstayed visitors would be dealt with

 according to the law and prevailing policies.

 .../2 .

 2

 In this respect, Mr MacKellar emphasised he 

 applied policies consistently,..and even-handedly. He,_would be -sympathetic to persons reaching Australia who were assessed by “

 the Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) Committee as being .....

 refugees. Decisions were taken on the merits of the case and 

 without, regard to whether or not it attracted publicity. Australia 

 had international Convention obligations to such people who clearly 

 were in a different situation from people who were not refugees and 

 who breached Australia's migration laws and entry policies.

 The Fraser Government supported continuing 

 immigration. It had increased migration to Australia and broadened 

 the family reunion and other eligible categories for migrant entry.

 The Opposition seemed to have no conception of 

 the interest overseas in migrating to Australia. In the financial 

 year ending 30 June 1978, over one million persons enquired about 

 migration to Australia. Around 400,000 actually applied to migrate. 

 Most applications had to be rejected because they did not meet our 

 entry requirements. .

 Mr MacKellar said that experience had shown very 

 clearly that if Australia announced a relaxation of its entry and 

 residence controls, tens of thousands of people, mostly unskilled, 

 would seek to come here. The Opposition did not seem to realise 

 that, in effect, its support for an amnesty was equivalent to 

 proposing an escalating increase in the migrant intake of tens of 

 thousands of unskilled people mostly with no connections with 

 Australia. .

 ---ooOoo---

