---
title: "English courses for migrant professionals"
date: "1979-03-12"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213729071
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004506%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 12 March 1979 47/79

 ENGLISH COURSES FOR MIGRANT PROFESSIONALS

 Not so long ago migrant doctors and nurses with inadequate  English were forced to work in unskilled jobs and highly  qualified engineers had to find work as labourers,  the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr M.J.R. MacKellar said today.

 Now a new intensive English language course about to begin  in Sydney would be the start of a drive to overcome the  problems of migrants with overseas professional qualifications  but inadequate English.

 Mr MacKellar said the first group of 24 professionally  qualified migrants -- almost all of whom had arrived in  the past year -- had been chosen for an intensive course  at the University of New South Wales.

 He said that through the efforts of the Committee on Overseas  Professional Qualifications (COPQ) great strides had been  made in the recognition in Australia of overseas professional  qualifications.

 But there remained the problem of many people with'much to  contribute whose knowledge of English was inadequaterfor :tbejn  to practise their professions.

 Mr MacKellar said that recent refugee arrivals,  especially  from Indo-China,  had added a new dimension to this problem.

 "As a result of the Galbally Report on Migrant Services and  Programs, funds are being provided for pilot courses to be  held for professionally qualified migrants who are paid  living allowances while they learn English full time", he said.

 Mr MacKellar said the first group of 24 comprised 13 men  and 11 women whose ages ranged from 27 to 46. They included:

 .  a systems analyst,  a dietician and a computer programmer  from Argentina;

 .  a psychologist and a nurse from Peru;

 .  two economist from Laos;

 .  two dental surgeons from Poland;

 2 / ...

 -2 -

 .  a paediatrician and a dermatologist from the USSR;

 .  four doctors,  three pharmacists and an electrical  engineer from Vietnam;

 .  a doctor from Cambodia, a paediatrician from the Ukraine,  a nurse from Hong Kong,  a social worker from  Finland, a geophysicist from the Federal Republic of.  Germany.

 "About 400 people applied for the Sydney course scheduled to  begin in mid-April",  Mr MacKellar said. "About the same  number have applied for a similar pilot course which is  expected to begin in Melbourne in June.

 "We have had to be highly selective in filling the limited  number of places available in the pilot program.

 "But the strong interest in the pilot courses has already  indicated a considerable need and results of the pilot program  will enable us to decide how best to meet the demand.

 "What is most significant is that we are developing ways of  allowing people to use the skills they bring with them to  Australia to the benefit of all Australians.

 "If individuals are encouraged and enabled to use their skills  and experience,  not only they,  but the whole Australian  community,  benefits".

 ###

