---
title: "Vietnamese aboard the Tung An"
date: "1979-02-13"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727636
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004526%22
---

 From, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P. .

 13.February 1979 28/79

 VIETNAMESE ABOARD THE TUNG AN

 -  -  Australia remains firm in its position on persons on

 the Tung A n , currently in Philippine waters, the Minister for "  

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, MP, 

 said today.

 Mr MacKellar was commenting on a nevs report from Manila 

 stating that Australia had agreed to take some 200 people 

 from that vessel.

 Australia sympathises with the burdens placed on 

 countries such as the Philippines providing first asylum for 

 refugees.  Some thousands of genuine refugees have been .  : :

 received by that country over ther past few years-. Mr MacKeliar - 

 said that-AuBhralia”irad in December agreed that' this financial 

 year it would accept 200 persons from, refugee camps in the .

 Philippines. .  This group would definitely not include any 

 of the persons on the Tung A n .

 -  :  Aus-tralia has clear evidence that the Tung An is one

 of several large vessels carrying people whose departure had 

 been officially supported -by Vietnamese authorities. As .

 with the other vessels it is being claimed that the people .  v: 

 involved should receive the same level of international 

 acceptance as refugees who have genuinely escaped from Vietnam.

 Mr MacKellar said it was most regrettable that the 

 unscrupulous organisers of this type of movement were continuing 

 their operations. He said that it would be most unfortunate 

 if such stratagems were to damage properly established programmes 

 for the resettlement of the 200,000 refugees in camps in South 

 East Asia.

