---
title: "Minister explains migrant intake"
date: "1979-02-26"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213728898
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004511%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 26 February 1979 42/79

 MINISTER EXPLAINS MIGRANT INTAKE

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  

 the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M . P ., today described statements by 

 an A.L.P. member of the N.S.W. Legislative Council, Mr Jim Kaldis,  

 as utter nonsence.

 Mr Kaldis was reported as claiming that the NUMAS 

 migrant selection system was intended to favour applicants from 

 South Africa and Rhodesia and to exclude migration from Southern 

 Europe. Mr Kaldis apparently based his totally wrong assertion 

 on statistics in the Annual Review published by the Department of 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

 Mr MacKellar said that the statistics in the Review 

 were for the financial year 1977/78. NUMAS began operating on 

 1 January 1979.

 Mr MacKellar said that it was too early to know 

 what effects NUMAS would have on migration from particular 

 countries. The figures for visas issued in the first month of 

 the operation of NUMAS showed an increase in South Africa and 

 Italy over the previous month and minor reductions in Rhodesia, 

 Greece and Turkey. Over the past seven months to the end of 

 January 1979, the proportion of applications approved in South 

 Africa was 54 percent; in Greece it was 51 percent; in Italy 

 46 percent; in Rhodesia 28 percent, and in Turkey 28 percent.

 The numbers of persons approved for migration 

 depended primarily on the numbers of persons applying.

 Applications in South Africa from South African residents and 

 residents of Rhodesia had averaged 500 a month and 250 a month

 respectively up to the end of 1978 though there has been a decline 

 in December and January. It should be noted that there is no 

 Government representative in Rhodesia. Residents of Rhodesia 

 are required to apply to the Australian Embassy in Pretoria.

 .. . / 2 .

 2

 The number of applications in Greece has been 

 decreasing to the stage where only 103 applications were 

 received in January 1979. Mr MacKellar said it was pleasing 

 that there had been an increase in applications received in 

 Italy in January this year.

 Migrants to Australia come within the following 

 broad categories - family reunion, refugees and independent 

 applicants. Of these 77 percent of Greek migrants were approved 

 on family reunion grounds compared with 31.6 percent in Italy,

 15 percent from South Africa, 24 percent from Rhodesia and 

 64 percent from Turkey. At present, assisted passages were 

 provided only to skilled tradesmen and to refugees. The same 

 principles were applied in all countries. The exception was 

 Greece where no assisted passages were provided because the 

 Greek Government had not agreed to provision of assisted 

 passages.

 Mr MacKellar said that if Mr Kaldis knew of any 

 instances involving delays, he should bring them to attention.

 It was ridiculous to make broad statements about Australian 

 citizens of Greek descent who have married in Greece having 

 serious difficulties in bringing their wives to Australia. The 

 only circumstances where difficulties could arise would be if 

 there were serious health or character problems.

