---
title: "Mr Cass to visit Darwin to discuss A.L.P policy on immigration and ethnic affairs"
date: "1979-02-01"
creators:
  - "Cass, Moss"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727443
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004985%22
---

 NEWS RELEASE BY DR MOSS CASS, OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN ON IMMIGRATION 

 AND ETHNIC. AFFAIRS. .................|.....................

 Dr Moss Cass the Opposition Spokesman on Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs visits Darwin today .  (February 1) on a policy formulation, 

 consultation and fact finding mission.

 In Darwin he will discuss ALP policy on Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs with Darwin's ethnic community and members of the ALP.

 Dr Cass said Darwin was of special significance for Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs policy formulation.

 'In Darwin there is enormous diversity in the ethnic community  consisting of over 47 groups representing every country in Asia.'

 'These Ethnic communities also suffer the general isolation and  severe neglect that has characterised government policy of the 

 North.'

 'As Darwin is Australia's first port of call, particular attention  will be given to the Vietnamese refugee situation which Dr Cass 

 said is one of the serious problems facing Australia today.*

 Dr Cass will visit and inspect labour, quarantine and other facilities  for the handling of refugees. He will also be having extensive  talks with the Darwin community and if possible the refugees them­

 selves to ascertain local opinion.

 Dr Cass said that the present Government has failed to seriously  address itself to the enormity of the problem which he warned  threatened to become critical.

 He described as petty and harmful the recent cutting off of aid to 

 Vietnam which he said will only cause more economic hardship 

 thereby creating more refugees.

 Dr Cass said that the granting of refugees entry was creating 

 antagonism among ethnic Communities who have had considerable  waiting periods before being able to bring members of their  families to Australia.

 Canberra _

 1 February 1979

 For further information contact;  Peter Hansen 089/854666 

 Mark Plunkett 062/727444

