---
title: "Greater control over unauthorised arrivals"
date: "1979-01-23"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727236
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08004537%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon. M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P.

 23 January 1979 17/79

 GREATER CONTROL OVER UNAUTHORISED ARRIVALS ,  '  V ·  ·  '

 "The Government will continue its responsible approach 

 to the re-settlement of refugees. However, determined 

 action aimed at controlling attempts by people to come 

 to Australia without prior authority will be taken," the 

 Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon.

 M.J.R. MacKellar, M.P., said today.

 Mr MacKellar said this after the Government had 

 reviewed the Indo-Chinese refugee situation.

 Urgent action will be taken with a view to 

 legislating to introduce severe penalties for people 

 profiteering by bringing people to Australia without 

 prior authority.

 Mr MacKellar said that the Government fully 

 appreciated the mounting problems of ASEAN countries 

 resulting from the continuing outflow of refugees which 

 was at least partly officially inspired.

 "The Government will continue to make further 

 approaches aimed at achieving greater efforts by other 

 Governments in offering first refuge and re-settlement 

 to refugees."

 Mr MacKellar emphasised that Australia was committed 

 to an on-going Indo-Chinese refugee programme under which 

 32,000 people would arrive in Australia by June 1980. This 

 re-settlement programme has been set at a level which 

 reflects Australia's ability to absorb refugees.

 2 .

 This placed Australia well ahead of other 

 re-settlement countries in terms of its pro rata 

 performance based on population and third only to the 

 United States and France in actual numbers.

 The new measures wer0 designed to ensure that 

 the full value of this comprehensive re-settlement 

 programme was not lost through efforts by others inter­

 fering with well-organised and co-ordinated arrangements.

 "I am convinced that all responsible Governments 

 recognise the real value of Australia's programme and 

 support these moves to ensure its continuing success,"

 Mr MacKellar said.

 >

