---
title: "Prime Minister's address to the Indian Parliament"
date: "1979-01-27"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213727362
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10030147%22
---

 < 3&

 -^AUSTRALIA,,/*-

 PRIME MINISTER

 FOR PRESS 27 JANUARY, 1979

 PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE INDIAN PARLIAMENT

 As the leader of a Parliamentary democracy, and as someone  with 23 years personal experience as a Parliamentarian I  am delighted to have this opportunity to address you, the  representatives of the largest democracy in the world.

 No invitation has been more welcome to me and I would like  to express at the outset, and in the clearest terms, my  admiration for India's commitment to the democratic principle.  It has been sustained in circumstances which have never been  easy and have sometimes been dauntingly difficult.

 Future historians will surely record as one of the most  remarkable facts of the. second half of the Twentieth  Century that as democracy faltered and failed in dozens  of countries, countries whose problems, while serious enough,   could not be mentioned in the same breath as those of 

 India, democracy remained alive and vital here. It is a tribute to you as leaders, to your institutions, but  most of all the people of India. For as a truly great .   Indian, Mahatma Gandhi, wrote over 50 years ago, \

 "Parliaments have no power or even existence independently  of the people".

 This visit gives me the opportunity to deepen my understanding  of this remarkable and fascinating country.  But it does  more than that. I believe that over the last 30 years neither  of our countries, neither Australia nor India, has done  enough to fulfil the potential of our relationship. Do  not misunderstand me. That relationship has been amicable  and cordial. But for a variety of reasons, legitimate  reasons in the context of the time, our principle energies  have been otherwise engaged.

 You have been largely preoccupied with the affairs of the  sub-continent and with playing a leading role in creating  and developing the non-aligned movement. Our attention has  been centred mainly on South East Asia: we have not adequately

 turned our attention towards strengthening and deepening  the relationship, towards exploring its possibilities.

 When your Prime Minister, Mr. Desai,  and I met at the  Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in London in  1977, we both came to the conclusion that the time had come  to strengthen the relationship.

 .  .  ./2

 2

 When we met again at the Commonwealth Regional Meeting  in Sydney a year ago, a meeting which gained much of its  weight and authority from Mr. Desai's presence, this  conviction was greatly strengthened and we took some  preliminary steps to develop the relationship between  our two countries.

 I trust that my visit will contribute further to the  process. Our relationship should be further developed not only  because it is .in our direct bilateral interest to do so,  but because at this time in history there is a crucial role 

 to be played by countries like ours, countries which have  learnt the art of compromise through their own institutions,  which are not at the extreme end of any spectrum in  international affairs and which are committed to moderation 

 and reconciliation.

 It is now more important than ever that nations like ours  should do our utmost to inject this experience into the conduct  of international affairs, to the extent that we understand  and can lend support to each other that role will be  performed more effectively. '

 I trust that by the time I have finished speaking it will  be clear why I believe this and what I see that role as .   being. I appreciate that there are many differences between  Australia and India. These differences are real enough 

 and there is no need to gloss over them. Yours is one of  the great and ancient civilisations of the world.

 No country on earth has such a long cultural continuity as  India. By comparison Australia is. a very young country,  one which has created a distinctive cultural identity foY  itself during the course of this century.

 The contrast between us in terms of population is striking. You have a population which is more than twice that of the  whole of Africa and which constitutes nearly a third of  all the people living in the Third World.

 The fact that every year your population increases by a number  about equivalent to Australia's total population indicates  just how striking that contrast is. The diversity and  complexity of your society is staggering. Australian society 

 is also growing in diversity. What began as purely Anglo-  Saxon has been enriched by European and Asian influences,  and  by an increasing awareness of what our continent's 

 pre-European civilization has to contribute.

 But we recognise that few if any of the world's societies  can compare with you in this respect. '

 Given these social and cultural differences, it naturally  follows that the domestic problems which engross our two  countries, our political priorities, must also be different.

 .  .  ./3

 3 -

 One could easily extend the list of differences, but  instead let me simply concede it and go on to make  two crucial qualifying points.

 First, while the differences are real enough, their  effect has to some extent been compounded by lack of ,   first-hand familiarity.  The widely held Western view of  India as the archetypal "under-developed" country has  tended to obscure the fact that you have one of the  world's largest scientific and intellectual communities, 

 that, indeed, while still a developing country, in many  respects you are one of the world's most highly  developed and sophisticated countries, and that this is  disguised only by the fact that you have to cope with 

 an almost overwhelming population burden.

 Similarly, in the past your policy of non-alignment has  not always been understood and there has been insufficient  appreciation of the needs from which it springs or the  purposes it was meant to serve.

 Differences of means have sometimes been confused with  differences of ends, thus obscuring the fact of a  common interest in peace and stability.

 In Australia's case, we are sometimes thought of as a  typically Western country which happens to be eccentrically located  at the bottom right-hand corner of Asia. I believe that  this is a quite inadequate concept of contemporary Australia.

 It is true that many of our central values and institutions  are Western, in the sense that they were first  articulated and shaped in the West, not that the West  has patent rights over them. We are fundamentally  Western in that sense.  But we are Western with a s

 difference: a country which originated as a colony, whose  own physical geography and environment are so distinctive,  whose outlook and perspectives are profoundly affected  by its location in the South East Asian region; whose 

 export earnings derive principally from commodities;  which is a net importer of capital, cannot be regarded  as typically Western. Australia is Australia, not an  appendage of Europe. .

 The second and even more important qualification I wish  to make is that while the differences between Australia and  India are real, there are also very important similarities  between us, similarities which are of fundamental  political relevance at the present time.

 As I began by acknowledging,  we are two. countries committed  to democracy, situated on the rim of the same ocean,  and in a world where functioning democracies are the exception  rather than the rule. .

 .  .  ./4

 4

 Neither India nor Australia lays claims on any other country.  Both believe in moderation and conciliation rather than  confrontation, as a means to resolve differences between  countries. Both have a stake in peace and stability, in a part  of the world where neither can be taken for granted. If one  considers the Indian Ocean, for example, it is apparent that  different as they are, both our approaches are concerned 

 to prevent that ocean from becoming a region of  instability and great power rivalry. Your approach seeks  to do this by creating a zone of peace, ours by  maintaining a balance at the lowest possible level.

 Perhaps one could sum up the difference by saying that your  approach would be the one more certain to bring about the  desired result if it succeeded, while ours is the one more  likely to be achievable in the short or medium term.

 In any case, what I wish to stress is that we share the  same basic objective. We are both working towards reducing  tension and devising means for controlling conflict situations  more effectively. We both strive to achieve an effective  means of global arms control and disarmament.

 We know that the arms race threatens the survival of humanity  and that it is a crippling handicap on economic development  everywhere. We both recognise that disarmament cannot  be left to the superpowers, that it requires a concerted  effort by the nations of the world. We both want the  nuclear weapons states to stop testing nuclear weapons in 

 all environments, and Australia looks forward to working with  India on the Committee for Disarmament.

 I submit that in the world in which we are living, the  importance of the similarities between us far outweighs that  of our differences. That world is one in which the possibility  of a deepening rift between developed and developing  countries, and of a serious political deterioration in  regions of interest to both India and Australia, is real.

 In the early part of this decade, a sustained and  unprecented period of growth in the world economy came to  an end. Whether this is temporary or permanent remains to  be seen, and will depend essentially on the quality of 

 statesmanship available over the next year or two.

 In the developed Western world, this has been followed by  a period of high inflation, high unemployment and low  growth. In the developing countries, there have been two  significant developments. First, strong and co-ordinated  demand for changes in the international economic system, and 

 secondly, rapid against-the-trend growth on the part of a  small but significant group of developing countries, many  of them Asian.

 .  .  ./5

 5

 The interaction of these developments is of profound  importance for the future of the international order in  every sense - economic,  political and strategic.

 There is a real danger that, beset by their own economic  problems,  under strong domestic political pressures and to  some extent divided among themselves, the developed countries  will react negatively and in a protectionist spirit to the  needs of the Third World. Indeed, there are disturbing 

 indications that this is already happening.

 There is evidence in some quarters in the West of a  disinclination to look with discrimination and sympathy  at the claims of developing countries to see which  proposals may offer the prospect of ensuring increased 

 production and overall wealth for both groups of  countries.

 There is even clearer evidence of a resort to protectionist  measures - some quite open, others more covert - against  those developing countries which are successfully expanding  their manufacturing export sectors. If this approach  were to prevail, the result would be disastrous.

 By demonstrating to the developing countries that there was  little sympathy for their problems and a negative response to  their efforts to work within the Western system of trade it  would strengthen the hand of those who have an interest in 

 confrontation and inflexibility.  Who could then say with  strength that they were wrong? The result would be  increasing alienation, instability and adventurism.

 It is essential, therefore, that this approach should not  prevail. We must have policies based on a recognition  of interdependence, of the fact that in crucial respects  the future of the developed and developing worlds are 

 inevitably linked, and that cooperation between them  is essential.

 These economic issues do not stand apart from other aspects of international relations. The days when they could be thought of in a separate compartment are gone. They have to be considered as part of the totality of relations,

 interacting closely with political, social and strategic questions.

 There is profound truth in Pandit Nehru's assertion that: "There can be no security or real peace if vast numbers of  people in various parts of the world live in poverty and  misery. Nor can there be a balanced economy for the world 

 as a whole if the underdeveloped parts continue to upset  that balance and drag down even the more prosperous nations".

 .  .  ./6

 6

 just as economic development and prosperity are vital for  peace,  so peace is vital to economic development.  As recent  events in a number of regions of importance to India and  Australia have brought home, the conditions for peace still  elude the world.

 In South East Asia, the end of the Vietnam War brought  hopes that this troubled region might at last enjoy some  peace and stability. The progress made by ASEAN and the  quite remarkable economic growth achieved by some of 

 its members, strengthened these hopes.

 There were signs of a possible reapproachment between  ASEAN countries and Vietnam. Many believed that economic  and development issues, not power politics, would now  dominate the affairs of the region. Recent events have 

 cast a dark shadow over such hopes.

 A renewed intrusion of great power politics, the escalation  of violence, the apparent determination to press the  advantage of military superiority, make it seem that the last  few years represented not a fundamental change, but a 

 short breathing space.

 In the Middle East,  a region of particular importance to  India, which has over a million of her people working there,  the situation has assumed a fluidity which, given the  region's geo-political sensitivity, is very dangerous.

 The turmoil and uncertainty in many countries in the area,  combined with the interest which we all share mean that any  miscalculation by superpowers could have grave consequences.

 We have recently had a graphic reminder in Iran that rapid  growth, does not itself guarantee stability, that it can in  fact result in destabilising.

 In Southern Africa blatant racialism, which constitutes  a basic affront to human dignity, has created a situation  which already involves bloodshed and misery and which,  unless speedily resolved, is almost certain to result 

 in a major political crisis.  This is the world in which  we are living.

 My central theme is that in such a world there is a vital  role for actors who are not dogmatic; who are not set  on confrontation;  whose behaviour reflects more than  short-term and narrow self-interest, there is a need for 

 such actors in the developed world,in the developing world  and in a variety of regional settings. If they do not  appear and assert themselves vigorously, the prospects  are bleak.

 It seems to me that both India and Australia are eminently  capable of performing such a role as forces of cooperation,  moderation and toleration, and countering those of  confrontation, dogmatism and bigotry, indeed, in a real sense 

 India has been performing that role since she achieved independence

 .  .  ./7

 As I understand it, the notions of mediation, of opening  rather than closing of doors, of reconciliation and compromise,   constitute important elements in the wider concept of  non-alignment.

 Within the non-aligned movement itself you have provided  much of the statesmanship required to hold together and to  find constructive compromises between groups with different  views. India has acquired great moral authority, based  on its readiness to take a disinterested but principled  view of a wide range of issues.

 Closer to home, Australia has watched with appreciation  the constructive role India has taken in initiating a new  era of hope and cooperation in the sub-continent.  Your  good neighbour policy has led to greater self-confidence  and an easing of tension and uncertainty.

 The same spirit is evident in your efforts to begin a  new phase in your relations with China: moves which have an important bearing on the future peace and stability  of the Asia/Pacific region.

 As far as Australia is concerned, during the last three  years my Government has consistently acted on the belief  that both an enlightened understanding of our own interests  and the interest of international peace and stability require 

 that we make a constructive and cooperative response to the  needs of developing countries.

 We have played a leading part among the OECD countries in  supporting the Common Fund proposal and in contributing  to make it a practicable, workable arrangement. On this issue  we took an independent initiative at a time when rigidity 

 on both sides threatened a stalemate which would have had  serious ramifications.

 We have strongly resisted the retreat towards protectionism  on the part of some Western countries. We recognise, of  course, that the immediate removal of all barriers would  be impossibly disrupting and we do not for a moment  propose it.

 What we firmly believe is that the trend must be away  from, not towards, protectionism. We have taken every  opportunity to extend the dialogue between the developed  and developing countries and to make it as genuine a  meeting of minds as possible.

 Only a few weeks ago I was in Jamaica to attend a discussion  of current economic problems between seven Heads of  Government from developed and developing countries. It  proved to be an eminently worthwhile meeting, informal 

 and unstructured, free from dogma and rhetoric.

 8

 We have condemened the racialist regimes in Southern  Africa in the strongest terms and have used what influence  we have to get those governments to change their  repugnant, dangerous and self-destructive policies.

 Nearer home,  we have always supported ASEAN as a practical  example of regional cooperation, and we have established with  ASEAN an extensive system of consultation and cooperation.

 We based our policy towards Vietnam on the need to encourage  her to integrate herself into the region and devote her  formidable energies towards internal reconstruction and  development. Recent events have forced us to reconsider, 

 but for the longer term we have not abandoned that hope. We have taken more refugees from Vietnam per head of  population than has any other country in the world.

 Thirty years ago, soon after the foundation of your Republic,  India and Australia acted together to provide their good  offices in the conflict which was then being waged in  Indonesia.

 It was one of the earliest diplomatic initiatives of the new  India and of an Australia emerging from its own dependence. The fact that two significant countries within the region  acted this way was not without effect.

 Australia and India are countries which prefer to dissolve  rather than erect barriers in international relations. This approach lay at the basis of the Commonwealth's  successful emergence as a diverse association of independent  nations bringing together like and unlike. .

 The Commonwealth's ability to adapt to new needs and to new  circumstances has ensured not just its survival but its  continuing relevance.

 The present Commonwealth is relevant to the needs of the  world today in a way the old Commonwealth could never  have been.

 The Heads of Government Regional Meeting at Sydney again  demonstrated that the Commonwealth was capable of developing  important new forms of cooperation.  The approach of both our  countries to international affairs can fairly be described 

 as one of principled moderation, moderation, that is, which  derives not from indifference or lack of conviction, but is  a positive, active force derived from the democratic experience  of compromise and from knowledge and awareness of the 

 importance of interdependence.

 There is not an over-abundance of such moderation in the  world today, yet it is badly needed; and it badly needs  to speak out.

 .  .  ./9

 9

 In too many situations it is the moderates who are in the  majority but it is the extremists who prevail. We are not far  from that situation which Yeats described where "The best  lack all conviction while the worst are full of  passionate intensity".

 It is in speaking out with the civilised voice of moderation  that I see a role for your country and mine.  India speaks  for moderation with moral force as a founder and leader  of non-alignment.

 We seek to speak for moderation from different origins. We are aligned. But the very fact that nations - aligned  and non-aligned - are concerned to find reasonable  solutions will strengthen the cause of moderations.

 If the non-aligned alone spoke for moderation the cause of  reason would be seriously weakened. By speaking out for  moderation from our different positions it will  be reinforced.

 We cannot leave everything to the great powers, nor the sheer  weight of numbers either. We need to draw on our experience  of compromise and express our conviction of the reality  of interdependence.

 Let our passion be for moderation: let our strength be in the cause of reason. Let our determination be for the  breaking down of barriers between people. Let that be  our role. But more than that it is a duty, an obligation.

 It can be fulfilled more effectively to the extent that  we strengthen our relationship.

 I hope my visit to India.can serve some part of that  purpose.

 —  000—

