---
title: "Australian development assistance program 1980/81"
date: "1980-08-19"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213737247
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10028841%22
---

 MINISTER FOR  

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 No. Date

 Mil 7(ai

 NEWS RELEASE

 THE HON. ANDREW PEACOCK M.P.

 19 August 1980 EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.P.M. 

 19 AUGUST 1980

 AUSTRALIAN DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 1980/81

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Andrew Peacock,  today announced details of Australia's development assistance  program for .1980-8.1 ,

 Mr Peacock said that some $547 million was provided  in ‘ the Budget for direct expenditure on the 1980-81 program. This represented an increase of $48.6 million over actual  expenditure last financial year.

 Of this amount, $445.8 million - or 81.4 per cent  of .the total aid appropriations - was earmarked for assistance  to Third World countries on a bilateral basis. As in previous  years, Papua New Guinea would be the major recipient of these  funds with $243.7 million going to that country in 1980-81.

 About $118.7 million had been allocated to project  and technical assistance activities in a large number of other  countries. The countries of South-East Asia and the Pacific  would continue to be the main recipients of this assistance  but there would also be significant programs in South Asia and 

 East Africa.

 Mr Peacock said that the other major forms of  bilateral assistance were the training of developing country  personnel - for which $16.2 million had been allocated - and  food aid totalling $56.6 million. Total food aid, including 

 significant support to the World Food Program, would amount to  $78.5 million.

 The Minister noted that Australia had recently  reaffirmed its commitment to provide 400,000 tonnes of food-  grain aid annually.

 Mr Peacock said that $102.1 million would be provided  to^multilateral agencies - an increase of 14 per cent over the  previous year. One organisation to receive a particularly  large increase this year - from $22.7 million last year to 

 $33.8 million - was the International Development Association  of !the World Bank. The Government considered that this  organisation provided one of the most effective means of . channelling Australian aid to the world's poorest countries.

 Mr Peacock noted that there were a number of significant  new features in Australia's development assistance programs.

 2.

 Development Import Grants,  designed to enable low-  income countries to meet immediate resource needs,  would be  made available as a regular component of the program to  certain South Pacific, African and Indian Ocean countries. A  Development Import Finance Facility was also to be introduced 

 this year. This facility would enable ASEAN countries to  import capital goods and services required by their develop­ mental objectives on more concessional terms than were  available commercially.

 The Minister said that it was necessary for Australia  to give particular consideration to a number of other areas  requiring assistance,  owing to special circumstances. For  example, Australia had agreed to provide $10 million in develop­ ment assistance to Zimbabwe to help it during its initial post­

 independence phase. Disbursement of this amount was expected  to be completed by the end of 1982.

 The plight of the Kampuchean people was another such  instance. The Australian Government had already pledged  $13.8 million to international appeals for Kampuchea, while the  Australian public,  through a public appeal sponsored by t h e (   voluntary agencies' International Disaster Emergency Committee,  had contributed more than $10.3 million. The concern shown by 

 the Australian public had been recognised by the Government's  decision to allow as tax deductions contributions made to this  appeal during 1979-80.

 Another area of particular need was in East Africa  where people were suffering extreme hardship and malnutrition  because of the severe and prolonged drought and where serious  refugee situations also existed. The Government had approved 

 the expenditure of $2 million to provide approximately 8000  tonnes of grain to the World Food Program for relief activities  in the East Africa region. Mr Peacock expressed strong support  for the African Relief Appeal of the International Disasters  Emergency Committee launched on 2 July.

 Mr Peacock said that in recognition of the work  performed by many of the voluntary bodies involved in the  provision of overseas aid the Government has decided in principle  to allow taxation deductions for gifts made to eligible non­ government organisations extending assistance to approved  programs and organisations in developing countries.

 Eligible organisations will be determined by the  Treasurer after consultation with the Minister for Foreign  Affairs, who will be consulting relevant bodies including the  Australian Council for Overseas Aid.

 . Full details on the 1980-81 aid program are to be  found in Budget Paper No. 8.

