---
title: "United Nations Day"
date: "1980-10-24"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213737328
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10028873%22
---

 Date THE HON. ANDREW PEACOCK M.P.

 M145 24 October 1980

 UNITED NATIONS DAY

 Today, 24 October, marks the thirty-fifth anniversary of the  entry into force in San Francisco of the Charter of the United Nations.

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Andrew Peacock, today  re-affirmed the Government's commitment to the United Nations and its  belief in the value of the world body. Although weaknesses and problems  existed, the international community remained firmly committed to the  further strengthening of UN activities.

 Mr Peacock said that he had led the Australian delegation to  the current session of the United Nations General Assembly and had  addressed the Assembly on 24 September. In his statement he had covered  a wide range of issues which are currently under consideration in the UN, 

 including nuclear arms control and disarmament, North/South relations,  refugees,  human rights, decolonisation, Kampuchea, Afghanistan, southern  Africa and the Middle East. He had also been able in his statement to  welcome two fellow members of the Commonwealth, Zimbabwe and St. Vincent 

 and the Grenadines, as new members of the United Nations.

 Mr Peacock commented that today's anniversary should serve to  remind people that with the deterioration of the international situation,  the UN had assumed even greater importance in safeguarding the peace  and well-being of people everywhere.  The UN provided the means for  ensuring that the world's problems were tackled through discussion and  negotiation and in a spirit of goodwill and co-operation.

 "This will not happen automatically. The role the UN will play  depends on the will and capacity which all of the members of the United  Nations bring to bear to make the organisation relevant and effective", Mr Peacock said.

 The Minister added that as well as serving as a forum for  multilateral negotiation and discussion, the activities of the United  Nations - particularly in the humanitarian and technical fields - had an  impact on the daily lives of people throughout the world. It was 

 important to strengthen the United Nations' ability to provide the  framework and procedures, so necessary in an increasingly interdependent  world, to enable the nations of the world more readily to harmonise  their interests.

 The Minister noted that during 1980 the United Nations had  held special sessions - on economic development and Palestine - and the  World Conference of the UN Decade for Women. These had each served to  bring together the nations of the world to focus on a range of issues

 2.

 of vital importance to people everywhere. As well there had been a  full calendar of conferences and the on-going activities of the  specialised agencies.

 Mr Peacock expressed satisfaction at the progress made during  the year by the Third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea. He also  recalled that during the past year there had been considerable inter­ national efforts - in which Australia had been pleased to play an .  

 active part - to alleviate the suffering of the Kampuchean people.

