---
title: "Press Release - Opposition moves amendment to Afghanistan resolution"
date: "1980-02-20"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Shadow Minister for Industry and Commerce"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213735674
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08006891%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE BY MR CHRIS HURFORD, M P , SHADOW MINISTER FOR 

 INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE ^

 OPPOSITION MOVES AMENDMENT TO AFGHANISTAN RESOLUTION

 Mr Chris Hurford, MP, moved the Opposition Amendment (copy 

 attached) to the Government resolution on Afghanistan when he 

 opened the resumed debate in the House of Representatives today.

 He said: "The effect of this amendment is two-fold. ,

 "Firstly it includes all of the Government's resolution except 

 the final 13 words of the first paragraph.

 "Condemn the invasion of Afghanistan certainly we do. But to . 

 describe it (quote) 'as potentially the gravest threat to inter­

 national peace and security since 1945' (unquote) clearly just 

 cannot be substantiated. It is an inane comment.

 "What about the Cuban Missiles Crisis, Vietnam, the Suez Crisis, 

 the Middle East war, the invasion of Czechoslovakia and Hungary etc.

 "Secondly the Opposition amendment adds four clauses (i.e. (6),

 (7), (8) and (9)). Mr Hurford described the four as points which 

 should be supported by all members. He continued: "We in the . 

 Labor Party in these difficult circumstances would have liked to 

 have forged a bi-partisan approach to this problem of Soviet 

 expansionism.  I believe there are men and women on the other side 

 of the Australian political fence with whom we could have forged 

 such a useful bi-partisanship.

 "Some of them are in this Parliament.  From what I have read of his 

 statements to date, I have no serious quarrels with the original 

 attitudes of the Minister for Foreign Affairs before his enforced 

 sommersault in relation to the Olympic Games. I believe for the 

 most part his tour through parts of Asia was valuable and the sort 

 of activity in communication with friendly neighbours which we 

 should carry out regularly.

 "It is no secret in informed circles in this country that he and his 

 Department of Foreign Affairs have tried to keep responses and 

 rhetoric within reasonable bounds.  But they have failed".

 2.

 Mr Hurford pointed out that it was not without significance  

 that the Minister for Foreign Affairs had not taken part in this  

 debate. He had every opportunity to do so on Tuesday - but he has  

 avoided the debate. '

 Canberra,.

 20 February, 1980.

 1978-79-80

 .  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 AFGHANISTAN - INVASION BY SOVIET UNION - 

 MOTION - MR VINER

 (Amendment to motion to be moved by Mr Hurford)

 That all words after "region" be omitted with a view to substituting the following:

 "(2) notes that a significant majority of world opinion,  including Islamic opinion,  has viewed the invasion  with grave concern - as expressed in resolutions of  the United Nations General Assembly on 14 January 

 1980 and at the Islamic Conference of Foreign  Ministers on 29 January 1980;

 (3) calls for the immediate unconditional and total  withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan in order to enable that country to regain its sovereignty,  territorial integrity,  political independence and 

 non-aligned status; and to permit its people to  determine their own form of government free from  external intervention,  oppression,  coercion or other  constraint; .

 (4) with a view to the furtherance of the aforementioned  objectives,  urges all independent-minded nations to  take action separately or in concert to register with  the Government and people of the Soviet Union,  their 

 abhorrence of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan;

 (5) urges the provision of humanitarian relief assistance  to alleviate the hardships of the Afghan refugees in  co-ordination with the United Nations High Commissioner  for Refugees,  and calls for the attainment of  conditions necessary to permit the voluntary return to their homes of the Afghan refugees;

 2 .

 (6 )

 (7)

 '(8 )

 (9)

 views with extreme concern the possibility that   strategic arms limitation may be abandoned and   an uncontrolled arms race resumed;

 urges the Government to recognise the serious   problems which exist in Australia's own region   and which have a direct effect, upon Australia   and its future;

 calls on the Government to take a diplomatic   initiative directed at convening an international   conference which would have the objective of de­ militarising Kampuchea and allowing the people of  

 that country to determine their own future, and

 condemns the double standard applied by the Prime   Minister in sanctions against the Soviet Union by   harra'ssing Australian athletes while permitting   continued trade.".

 i

