---
title: "Ethnic media in Australia"
date: "1981-07-03"
creators:
  - "Mackellar, Michael"
source: "Minister for Health"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213769275
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10019389a%22
---

 J63/81

 JOINT PRESS STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER  FOR HEALTH, THE HON. M.J.R. MacKELLAR,  AND THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, .  SENATOR THE HON. F.M. CHANEY

 f l f ' i ,

 PRESS RELEASE FOR THE ETHNIC MEDIA IN AUSTRALIA ,

 The Minister for Health, the Hon. Michael MacKellar, and the

 Minister for Social Security, Senator the Hon. Fred Chaney, today

 jointly appealed to migrants, refugees and members of the various 

 ethnic communities in Australia to make sure they had proper health 

 insurance arrangements to protect their families after September 1.

 "We appeal to those members of the ethnic communities who 

 have good English language capabilities to help other people "  

 to understand the new health insurance arrangements.

 "From September 1 people must be insured, either individually,

 or as a family, with a health fund in order to receive Federal

 Government financial help with their medical and hospital bills.

 "The Government is encouraging insurance coverage by 

 offering a tax rebate on the cost of the insurance. At the end 

 of each financial year, taxpayers can claim a rebate of 32 cents 

 for every dollar they spend on obtaining basic health insurance.

 "If, for example, a family spends about $480 a year on 

 obtaining basic, level insurance * the tax rebate will be worth 

 about $150. In other words, the cost of the health cover comes 

 down to about $330 a year.

 "It is important to remember that some health services can 

 be expensive, such as a prolonged stay in hospital. If you do 

 not have health insurance, then you must meet the cost of all 

 medical expenses from your own pocket.

 2 .

 "The Commonwealth Benefit, whereby the Government meets 

 30 per cent of medical bills where a doctor charges the scheduled 

 fee, will only be available to those people who have health .

 insurance. '  ”

 "The Government believes that it is certainly in the interests 

 of both single people and family groups to obtain health insurance 

 before September 1.

 "The Government realises that there are many people in the 

 community who need special help for their medical and hospital 

 bills.

 "The Government has decided that all migrants and refugees 

 during their first six months in Australia should receive free 

 medical and hospital care.

 "This will give newly arrived people the chance to decide what 

 sort of health insurance best suits their needs.

 "Beyond that, the Government is also giving free medical and 

 hospital care to low income groups and to pensioners with a 

 Pensioner Health Benefits Card."

 Hr MacKellar and Senator Chaney said full details of the 

 scheme could be obtained from the Social Security Department 

 and the Health Department.

 Friday 3 July 1981

