---
title: "Radio Broadcast Australia's immigration system badly needs a thorough overhaul"
date: "1981-09-13"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213770230
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08010935%22
---

 Leader of the Opposition 5 7

 RADIO BROADCAST  (embargoed until 9am  Sunday,  September 13, 1981)

 Transcript of weekly radio broadcast by Mr Bill  Hayden on 2KY, Sydney, and 3KZ,  Melbourne

 Australia's immigration system badly needs a thorough  overhaul.  We now need to look seriously at how many migrants  we bring here each year, where we get them from, how we  select them, and what we do for them when they arrive.

 As a nation we owe a lot to immigration. Well over one  million people have settled in this country in the last  35 years. They come from all parts of the world,  from  different backgrounds and cultures,  and they have participate; 

 in and enriched our way of life.

 Certainly we must have more migrants. We in the Labor  Party support an immigration policy that enlarges our popul­  ation as a cohesive, pluralistic society of diversity  and mutal respect among all our people.

 Within this policy there must be no room for bigotry or  prejudice, for in a real sense, all of us —  except our  Aboriginal people —  are transplants from other countries,   the progeny of people who came to Australia in search of 

 a better deal and a better way of life.

 But it is pointless to bring people to Australia on the  promise of better job opportunities, better living standards,  and a better future,  and then -- when they arrive —  they  find that all we can offer them is the dole queue,  poor 

 services, and unemployment benefits.

 This year the Fraser Government is seeking to bring  120.000 new settlers to Australia. Yet we already have 350.000 people unemployed, the highest interest rates and  the highest taxes in our history, and a Government which 

 is cutting back on public programs and services right  across the board.

 And the latest Fraser Budget is spending less on migrant  education,  less on migrant housing,  and less on general  migrant services.

 For many new settlers, the prospects of finding a job  are appalling. Their unemployment rate is three times higher than for the rest of our people. And many of those who 

 do get work find they are being exploited as cheap factory  fodder in jobs and conditions that other Australians wont  tolerate.

 . . ./2

 Parliament H ouse, Canberra, A.C.T. 2 6 0 0

 2

 i

 

 This isn't good enough in a country with our wealth and  our ptential.  Any responsible immigration policy must be  based on a sustained economic recovery.

 At the same time, the procedures we use to select migrants  cannot be allowed to continue. The present unfair system  must be scrapped. We must introduce a new family reunion  program that genuinely re-unites families which have been 

 broken up by the absurdities of present Government policy.

 We should abolish maintenance guarantees for new settlers.  We should allow former permanent residents to return.  We  should grant citizenship to permanent settlers after 12 month:  residence.

 We should continue to accept refugees —  but only if they  are genuine refugees.  Many Vietnamese now coming here are not  refugees at all. They are simply short-circuiting the  proper immigration procedures. They are squeezing out others  who have a more legitimate claim to migration to Australia.

 That is, they are jumping the queue. It is a practice  the Fraser Government must stamp out in the interests of  equity and fairness in our immigration program. .

 In summary,  what I'm talking about is a sensible, multi­  cultural policy attracting people to Australia who can add  to the variety, and develop the harmony, of our society.

 It's a policy that's compassionate to the needs of  migrants,  and yet responsible in determining what our economy  can sustain —  not only in terms of increased immigration,  but in terms of the needs and hopes of all people who already 

 live here.

 Australia in 100 years time will be vastly different to  the Australia of today. Our nation's success, a century away,  will be determined in many important respects by what we  do now.

 And in this respect, our attitude to immigration —   supported by fairness and tolerance —  will be vital to our  future.

