---
title: "Call for a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Migration and Refugees"
date: "1981-10-21"
creators:
  - "Young, Mick"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213770796
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08011634%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE FROM MR MICK YOUNG  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 CALL FOR A JOINT PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE ON MIGRATION  AND REFUGEES .

 The Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr Mick Young.last night called for the establishment of  a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Migration and Refugees.

 "I ask the Minister.to look at the matter seriously and  discuss with the Government the way in which both sides of  Parliament could be used to form such a committee.

 "I do not want to belittle or denigrate the role of public  servants.  But immigration seems to me to be a far more  important issue than one which involves public servants  on an errand to try to sort out what ought to be the policy 

 adopted by this Parliament.

 "I think it would be a great advantage to the Australian  Parliament to have a committee on migration and refugee  programs so that parliamentarians could visit and talk to  people involved in this field in overseas countries. 

 Especially with professional people from U.N.H.C.R.

 "There are 10 million refugees, spread all over the world.  Some 1 million people enquire each year for migration to  Australia. I don't believe we are dealing with these  matters as professionally as we should be.  There is too 

 little debate in Parliament about these issues. There is  too little scrutiny by parliamentarians.

 "When I was overseas recently I visited Washington, Madrid  and Rome. I talked to people involved with the immigration  programs of these countries.  They knew a lot about the Far  East, many of them even visited Australia. But unfortunately 

 at the moment we do not have a parliamentary committee to  deal with these issues.

 "We have had a very vigorous migration program operating in  Australia for a long time. Many difficult decisions will  have to be made from here on. It seems to me that there is  a great pressure for us to have a look at the mechanisms which 

 are used to formulate immigration policies."

 Canberra  21 October 1981

