---
title: "Financial support for participants in community refugee settlement scheme (CRSS)"
date: "1981-09-06"
creators:
  - "Macphee, Ian"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213770120
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08009956%22
---

 t=Fi

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs. The Hon. Ian Macphee, M.P.

 6/7/S/

 FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR PARTICIPANTS IN COMMUNITY . REFUGEE SETTLEMENT SCHEME (CRSS)

 The Government has decided to provide financial support to  groups in Australia sponsoring refugees under the  Community Refugee Settlement Scheme (CRSS) the Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr ,:Ian Macphee said today.

 "The grants will be available to groups sponsoring their .   second and subsequent refugee families and individuals under  the Scheme".

 "An amount of $135,000 has been set aside for this purpose. This initiative recognises the demands placed on the resources  of sponsoring groups. .  It should enable the participation .   of groups which would like to participate but have inadequate 

 resources to do so.

 "More than 2,000 offers of places for Indo-Chinese and Eastern  European refugees were approved under the CRSS program in 1980/  81", Mr Macphee said. "It is hoped to substantially, increase  the level of participation this year".

 "The Government sees the scheme as increasing Australia's  capacity to assist refugees and enabling community groups  in cities, towns and rural areas to become actively involved in  receiving and caring for refugees".

 Mr Macphee said that the subsidy was up to $400 for a family  group or up to $150 for an individual. The actual amount would  depend on the personal circumstances of the refugees and the  expenditure involved on the part of the sponsoring group.

 The grants will be available to eligible CRSS groups submitting  second or subsequent sponsorship applications on or after  1 September 1981. Applications can be made on forms available  from the Regional Offices of the Department of Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs. .

 "As a particular special purpose grant under the scheme, funds  would also be made available to one of the most innovatory  projects of the CRSS" Mr Macphee said. "The Monastery .   Refugee Project at Glen Osmond, South Australia, under the 

 auspices of the Fathers of the Passionist Order, has  thrown open its Retreat House for CRSS refugees, particularly  those from Kampuchea. The Monastery Project has settled over

 . . ./2

 - 2-

 300 refugees. I am delighted to be able to show support for this  important program by announcing financial assistance of up to  $24,000 per year".

 "Schemes like this are introducing a new and welcome element  into the pattern of refugee settlement in Australia".

 Canberra 6 September 1981

