---
title: "Kimberleys Report"
date: "1981-04-16"
creators:
  - "Ryan, Susan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Aboriginal Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213767576
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08011328%22
---

 Thursday 16 April 1981 PRESS R E L E A S E

 THE SENATE

 STATEMENT BY SENATOR SUSAN RYAN, Following her trip to the Kimberleys and  other Aboriginal communities in Western Australia

 After spending a week visiting remote Aboriginal communities and 

 the Ashton diamond mine in the Kimberleys, Federal Opposition Shadow Minister 

 for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Susan Ray, said that the viability of 

 Aboriginal society was under major threat from powerful mining interests and 

 gross inadequacies in Government policies.

 "Kimberley Aboriginals are living in abject poverty. Refuge 

 camps in Thailand and Kampuchea give better living standards to refugees than 

 Federal and State Governments combined providing for Kimberley communities.

 "Health, housing, water, power, transport and communication 

 services are fragmentary, ill organised and often non existent.

 "Rapidly accelerating mining activities in the area have 

 confused and undermined some positive Aboriginal developments. The 

 establishment of the CRA/Ashton Joint Venture diamond mine near Lake Argyle 

 .  has created serious divisions and disharmony among Aboriginal groups in the 

 area.

 "Compensation for the disruption by CRA has so far been minimal 

 and selective. At Kalumburu, (the Benedictine Mission) the community is 

 seriously disrupted not only by oppressive Mission practices and lack of 

 access to reserve land but also most recently by fears that a proposed CRA 

 bauxite mine will disrupt their circumstances further."

 Senator Ryan said the outstation movement deserves full 

 Government support. "This is working well in places like Oombulgurri. Lack 

 of Government support for oiitstation facilities is hampering the movement of 

 the Gordon Downs community to its new location at Ringers Soak."

 "Aboriginal pastoral leases at Loome, Lake Gregory,

 Billiluna and Noonkanbah are providing opportunities for employment and 

 self sufficiency.

 Unemployment amongst Aboriginal communities is endemic.

 Senator Ryan was highly critical of the fact that most Aboriginal communities 

 are existent on unemployment benefits. "Unemployment benefit is totally 

 inappropriate as a form of income support for Aboriginal communities."

 CONTINUED OVERLEAF

 , .  , .  â–   .  .

 Senator Ryan called on the Federal Government to investigate 

 immediately a better scheme for providing permanent and adequate income 

 support for those communities where conventional employment does not 

 exist and is not likely to develop.

 Senator Ryan also called for the establishment of a uniform 

 plan for the introduction of mining companies into Aboriginal land.

 The plan should inform mining companies in advance of the existence of 

 sacred sites and guarantee Aboriginal communities enough time and legal 

 resources to negotiate their agreements with companies. The Kimberley Land 

 Council should be given a role in this plan.

 Senator Ryan also called on the Federal/State Governments to 

 set a timetable for planning a comprehensive range of essential services 

 to remote communities. Federal funds for Aboriginal health, education 

 and housing should be transferred away from State programs direct to 

 Aboriginal organisations.

 '  â–   -  2  -  "  ·  '

 Enquiries :  Senator Ryan

 513154 (over weekend)

