---
title: "Fraser Government fails to ensure fair and just treatment for Aborigines"
date: "1981-09-16"
creators:
  - "Ryan, Susan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Aboriginal Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213770302
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08011289%22
---

 PRESS R E L E A S E

 k

 16 September 1981

 jyu

 THE SENATE

 Statement from Senator Susan Ryan, Shadow Minister for Aboriginal Affairs

 FRASER GOVERNMENT FAILS TO ENSURE FAIR AND JUST TREATMENT FOR ABORIGINES

 Speaking in the Senate today Senator Susan Ryan said the  Government had failed to protect the human rights of Aboriginal  citizens, particularly against racist State Governments and it had  failed to redress the gross disadvantage suffered by Aboriginal  Australians.

 Senator Ryan was speaking on the Matter of Public Importance  dealing with the failure of the Fraser Government to ensure fair and  just treatment of its Aboriginal citizens.

 Senator Ryan said the Government had neglected its  constitutional responsibilities to Aboriginals conferred on it by  the 1967 Referendum.

 "The Aboriginal Referendum was the first and I believe  the only in Australian history to be carried in every constituency  in the House of Representatives. Its majority was the most massive  in Federal history.

 "Despite the fact that the Government was given the most  overwhelming mandate in Australian history, the bulk of responsibility  for Aboriginal Affairs remained with the States.

 "For the huge infusion of funds, the development of a  comprehensive policy on Aboriginal Affairs, and the upsurge in Federal  activity to assist Aboriginals we had to wait for the election of a  Labor Government in 1972.

 "During the Whitlam years, Aboriginal Affairs ceased to  be peripheral to the affairs of State and became an important area of  Federal Government concern and activity. Since the election of the  Fraser Government the area of Aboriginal Affairs has been downgraded  both in terms of importance and financially.

 "In real terms the allocation for Aboriginal Affairs has  dropped by $213 million since 1975 despite an election pledge by the  Government that the level of funding would be maintained.

 "As was highlighted in the recent World Council of Churches  Report the living standards and particularly the health of Aboriginal  people are becoming notorious worldwide as one of the most blatant  examples of discrimination and deprivation in any free, democratic  and affluent Western nation."

 Senator Ryan said that some of the living conditions she had  seen in the Kimberleys were worse than those in the refugee camps  she had inspected in Kampuchea.

 CONTD OVERLEAF

 2

 "When faced with the desperation and hopelessness of  people such as those evicted from Gordon Downs, one can not help  but realise that the Federal Government has the power to prevent  such occurrences.

 "The Federal Government can secure land for Aboriginal  people; it can act to prevent discrimination against Aboriginals by  State Governments; it can support rather than impede its Commissioner  for Community Relations in his attempts to enforce the Racial  Discrimination Act; it can restore funding for Aboriginal Affairs 

 to 1975 levels and wherever possible it can channel funds directly  to Aboriginal organisations in line with its stated policy of self­ management.

 "However the Government in the main has failed to do these  things. If the Government believes that by spending $147 million  out of a total Government expenditure of $40 billion this year on  Aboriginal advancement programmes its responsibility towards  Aboriginals is discharged, it is mistaken.

 "Aboriginal people still suffer discrimination at the hands  of State Governments and gross disadvantage in every area. Aboriginal people have no share in the prosperity and affluence of  the Australian nation."

 -oOo-

 Enquiries : 726152

 NOTE : Senator Ryan's Private Member's Bill for Aboriginal land  rights in Queensland was debated this afternoon in the  Senate.

