---
title: "Migrant service levels maintained in budget"
date: "1982-08-17"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213893630
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001840%22
---

 V

 From the Minister for Im m igration,  and Ethnic Affairs. THE HON JOHN HODGES,  MP

 ^ v ·  17 August 1982

 MIGRANT SERVICE LEVELS MAINTAINED IN BUDGET MEDIA KIT (1)

 Expenditure by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs, would increase from $111.7 million last year to $119 million.  

 this year,  the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,

 Mr John Hodges, announced today.

 After allowing for non-recurring expenses ,  this 

 meant an effective increase of $12.6 million, Mr Hodges said.

 "The Budget for the Department; of Immigration and Ethnic 

 Affairs for 1982/83 is a reflection of the Government's desire to 

 keep expenditure down while maintaining services for migrants," 

 he said.

 Some of the features of this year's Budget include:

 .  increased funding for the Australian Institute of Multi­

 cultural Affairs;

 .  an increase of 85% - from $1»77 million to $3.27 million 

 for the Grant-in-Aid Scheme;

 .  a $2 million increase - from $32.2 million to $34.2 

 .  million - in the funding for the Adult Migrant 

 Education Program.

 Mr Hodges said the Government would continue to encourage 

 self help activities within ethnic communities through the 

 funding of voluntary bodies. The Government had re-affirmed its 

 commitment to a multicultural Australia with its acceptance of the .  

 Evaluation·by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs 

 of the Galbally Report on migrant programs and services.

 The Institute of Multicultural Affairs (AIMA) would receive 

 $3.8 million this year to cover recurrent expenses and to begin 

 building its permanent headquarters in Victoria. The headquarters 

 will be sited on land provided by the Victorian Government.

 v...

 2.

 As announced in the AIMA Evaluation of Migrant programs 

 and services,  the Grant-in-Aid Scheme will receive a boost of 

 $1.5 million. The Scheme provides funds for voluntary bodies 

 to employ a social welfare worker to assist migrants.  Since 

 1978, $5.3 million has been allocated in grants to 96 

 organisations.  .

 Increased funding for the AMEP will cover a six-point plan 

 to upgrade the programs,  recently announced by Mr Hodges.

 The changes will make the program more responsive to migrant, needs 

 English learning opportunities will be improved through the use 

 of a computer information base and new course arrangements.

 .  MEDIA KIT (1.2)

 Media contacts :  Anna Mars den-Stewart., Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  (062) 64 2184 or . Scot Prasser,  Minister’s Office, (062) 733446.

 MEDIA KIT (2)

 OVERSEAS STUDENTS CHARGE

 The Minister for Inndgration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr John Hodges,  

 today announced details of changes.in overseas student charges.

 Masters degree and Ph.D. courses will renain unchanged at $ 2500. 

 Charges for medicine, veterinary science and dentistry will be 

 $ 2350 (previously $ 2200) and for all other courses $ 1850 

 (previously $ 1700). .

 Mr Hodges said that the increases since the charge was introduced 

 'were significantly less than education cost increases and now 

 represented only, around 33% of the average per student cost for 

 higher education. .

 "The Government believes it is reasonable to ask overseas students 

 to continue to make a contribution towards the cost of their 

 education in Australia," Mr Hodges said.

 "It is intended to revise the charge on an annual basis, taking 

 account of cost increases over the previous year..

 "The overseas student charge is not intended to reduce the overall 

 number of students caning to study in Australia. .  .

 "By requiring seme contribution from overseas students Australia 

 can assist additional students to study in Australia without 

 substantially increasing the cost to the Australian taxpayer."

 Mr Hodges said that the Government intended to maintain the overall 

 contribution made by overseas students at around its current level.

 MEDIA KIT (3)

 SAVINGS FOR DEPARTMENT

 The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs would 

 save an estimated $4.16 million on assisted passage costs this 

 year,  the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr John .  

 Hodges said today.

 .  Following the Review of Commonwealth Functions in April 

 last year, migrants applying to come to Australia no longer 

 qualify for fares ..assistance. From now on, only refugees and a few 

 migrants coming from countries with which Australia has 

 migration agreements will be eligible for this kind of assistance.

 Mr Hodges said that savings of an estimated $200,000 would 

 continue to accrue this year from the encouragement of 

 voluntary departure by prohibited immigrants,  instead of 

 deportation. .  .

 "Prohibited immigrants,  once apprehended,  are being 

 encouraged to leave Australia at their own expense, though still 

 under supervision," Mr Hodges said.

 " Besides saving the Australian taxpayer's money,  this has 

 an added benefit for the prohibited immigrant in that he will 

 not have the stigma of deportation attached to him," Mr Hodges 

 said. '  .  .

