---
title: "Minister for immigration and ethnic affairs to hold public forum in Hobart"
date: "1982-06-24"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213892679
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001825%22
---

 From the M inister for Im m igration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 THE HON JOHN HODGES,  MP .

 51/82 24 June 1982

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS TO HOLD PUBLIC  FORUM IN HOBART

 Hobart Town Hall has been chosen as the first venue for a 

 series of forums in all capital cities to seek the public's views 

 on a range of issues concerned with multiculturalism in Australia, 

 and proposed changes to Australia's citizenship law. The forum 

 is being held on Sunday at 2.30 pm to 5.30 pm at a time that will 

 enable people to attend from other parts of the State.

 The forum will be attended by the Federal Minister for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr John Hodges,  and the Opposition 

 spokesman on immigration and ethnic affairs,  Mr Mick Young.

 "Multiculturalism and citizenship are relevant to all  Australians," Mr Hodges said in Canberra today. "I hope therefore 

 that the widest possible cross-section of the community will  attend. Most of the forum will be given over to people in the 

 audience to enable them to put their views to me and to other 

 Parliamentary representatives.

 "I hope that at the end of the forum in Hobart I will 

 have a better understanding of Tasmanians' views on both 

 these important subjects."

 The forum will be chaired by Mr P. Sinclair,  State Chairman 

 of the Bicentenary Authority.  Guest speakers will be Hobart's 

 Linda Goggin,  champion woman golfer,  and Professor Jerzy (George) 

 Zubrzycki of the Australian National University,  Canberra,  an. 

 authority on multiculturalism.

 The topic of multiculturalism received prominence recently   with the publication of the statement 'Multiculturalism for 

 all Australians' by the Australian Council on Population and 

 Ethnic Affairs which was released by Mr Hodges on 16 June.

 Proposals to change the law on Australian citizenship were 

 outlined in Parliament on 6 May by the previous Minister for 

 ;  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Ian Macphee. .

 i 6 . 

 ■  While in Hobart, Mr Hodges will be handing over the keys of

 a house constructed by members of the congregation of the Reformed 

 ;  Church of Kingston to a Vietnamese refugee family. The house ^

 :  includes features specially designed to cater for the two handicapped 

 i children of the family. This ceremony will take place at the 

 ;  house in Denison Street, Kingston on Saturday at 3.30 pm.

 Media contacts: Mr Bruce Hartney, Department of Immigration

 and Ethnic Affairs, Hobart (002) 205238 or 

 Mr Oreste Biziak, Minister's Office, Canberra 

 (062) 73 3446.

