---
title: "Australian Defence Minister extends co-operation with Thailand"
date: "1982-08-10"
creators:
  - "Sinclair, Ian"
source: "Minister for Defence"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213893415
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR10015776%22
---

 (>.

 FOR INFORMATION

 TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 1982 NO. 121/82

 AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE MINISTER EXTENDS CO-OPERATION \

 WITH THAILAND

 Text of news release issued in Bangkok August 7, 1982.

 Australia shared with Thailand a common concern

 for the security and stability of South East Asia and the 

 Indo-Chinese region, the Australian Minister for Defence, 

 Mr Ian Sinclair, said on his departure from Bangkok today.

 came at a particularly opportune time when ASEAN members were 

 striving, to reduce the. dangers for future stability in the 

 region arising directly from the Soviet backed Vietnamese .

 .  presence: in. Cambodia·. -

 Mr; Sinclair was paying his first visit to .  

 Thailand since his appointment as Minister for Defence in the 

 Australian· Government last May.. He was accompanied by the 

 Secretary of the Department of Defence,  Mr W.B. Pritchett, the 

 Chief of Defence Force Staff, Air Chief Marshal. Sir Neville 

 McNamara, and a party of senior Defence officials.

 Mr Sinclair said that his visit to Thailand

 Im u m I by the Directorate of Public Relatione, Department of Defence, Canberra ACT, 2600

 2

 During his four day visit the Minister held 

 discussions,with General Prem Tinsulanonda in his capacity 

 as Minister for Defence,* Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila, 

 Minister for Foreign AffairsGeneral Rien Disthabanchong,  in 

 the absence overseas of General Saiyud Kerdpol,  Supreme 

 Commander) and Air Chief Marshal Panieng Kandharat, Deputy 

 Minister for Defence, about the situation in the South East 

 Asian and Indo-Chinese regions and on defence matters, including 

 the Australian Defence Co-operation Program. .

 Mr Sinclair also had discussions with the 

 commanders-in-chief of the three armed Services.

 Mr Sinclair visited the headquarters of the 

 9th Infantry Division at Wattana Nakhorn and the Khao-I-Dang 

 refugee holding centre near the Thai-Camhodian border.

 Mr. Sinclair said that he had been, particularly 

 impressed with the manner:, which Thailand was coping with its 

 special security problems..

 Mr Sinclair said that he noted the special concern 

 felt over the Vietnamese presence on the' Thai border and the 

 increased reliance Vietnam placed on the Soviet Union. In 

 these circumstances he was glad of the opportunity to discuss 

 with members of the Thai Government the important initiatives 

 undertaken by Thailand and other members of ASEAN to form a 

 new coalition government in Cambodia. This would clearly require 

 the withdrawal' of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.

 -  3

 Mr Sinclair said that his visit to Thailand 

 came very soon after his appointment to his present Ministry.

 He had come to Thailand to meet his counterpart and exchange 

 views,  to be briefed on the areas of defence concern,  and to 

 explore possible avenues for closer practical defence contact 

 and co-operation.

 A number of new initiatives had emerged which he 

 would be looking at with a view to further development of 

 practical defence co-operation between Thailand and Australia.

 Mr Sinclair said that over the last two years 

 the Australian-Thai program of defence co-operation had 

 expanded significantly. In money terms expenditure has grown 

 from 2.4 million baht in 1978-80 to around 35 million baht in 

 1981-82.

 ,  "Such, programs provide a, tangible expression of 

 Australia's: interest in regional security and co-operation,"

 Mr Sinclair said-.,

 ^ Mr Sinclair said that, over 100 Thai Servicemen

 would; train in Australia during 1982.-83 in a wide range of 

 activities, - from advanced specialist, training in areas such 

 as armaments,  artillery and signals to underwater medicine 

 courses. Specialist study visits by groups of Thai Servicemen 

 to Australia to identify and develop other areas of practical 

 support were a particular feature of the program with Thailand,  

 and would continue. .  .

 4

 Mr Sinclair announced during his visit that 

 Australia would provide an assistance package worth 28.25 

 million baht over the next three years to support the 20 

 Australian-built Nomad aircraft which are being progressively 

 delivered to the Royal Thai Air Force. .

 Further projects involving the repair and 

 maintenance of Thai military aircraft by Australian defence 

 related industries were identified for detailed examination 

 and consideration. .  _

 Mr Sinclair said that he and his party had 

 been impressed by the warmth of their welcome in Thailand and 

 he was particularly pleased that in the defence area, as with 

 all aspects of Australia's relations,  a friendly and fruitful 

 relationship was being developed.

 ,  * * * * * *â–  * *â– 

 Further Inquiries; Mr Geoffrey Hole 02 241 1651 

 ,  062 72 7576

