---
title: "Federal and state ministers meet on immigration and ethnic issues"
date: "1982-09-10"
creators:
  - "Hodges, John"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213894227
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09001857%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 83/82 10 September 1982

 FEDERAL AND STATE MINISTERS MEET ON  IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC ISSUES

 A Conference of Federal and State Ministers concerned with  immigration and ethnic affairs met today in Sydney.

 Mr Aussie Malcolm, New Zealand Minister for Immigration  also attended the Conference. .

 Ministers welcomed the Commonwealth Government's decision  to expand its program of assisting State and Northern  Territory Governments to establish and Operate translator 

 and interpreter services. .

 Mr John Hodges, Federal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs,  said he would welcome further proposals from the  States for new services to meet the needs of non^English  speaking migrants.

 Special arrangements to assist those migrants living  outside the major metropolitan areas would also be  considered. .

 The Conference discussed plans for the expansion of the  Grant-in-Aid Scheme under which the Commonwealth provides 

 funding for community organisations to employ social and  welfare workers.

 . . / 2

 2.

 It was agreed that there should be a flexible approach in 

 funding programs to assist migrant women experiencing domestic 

 violence.  These arrangements will complement existing programs  for migrant women in domestic crisis.

 Ministers agreed on the need ..to establish a permanent 

 national body responsible for the testing and accreditation 

 of interpreters and translators. .

 Further discussion will be held in the near future to develop 

 firm, proposals for this body.

 The interim body,  the National Accreditation Authority for 

 Translators and Interpreters (NAATI), will continue to develop 

 and administer tests until these arrangements are finalised.

 Ministers discussed the level of the present migration program 

 and expressed appreciation of the long-term economic,  social 

 and cultural benefits brought to Australia by migrants.  They ·   agreed that close attention had to be paid to the labour market 

 in Australia,  and the need for family reunion.

 Ministers accepted Australia's humanitarian obligations 

 towards refugees.

 The Conference noted efforts being made to expand the ~  

 business migration program.  They acknowledged that business 

 .nigran c s brought expertise and capital to Australia,  and 

 helped create jobs for Australians.

 Ministers supported action being taken against illegal 

 immigrants by the Commonwealth. It. was stressed that the  new measures were clearly aimed only at those people who 

 had broken Australian entry laws.

 Contacts:  Scott Prasser 07/38 3364 and Tom Stratton 02/239 3631.

