---
title: "Migrant youth especially disadvantaged"
date: "1983-12-19"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213903136
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004679%22
---

 JOINT RELEASE FROM THE MINISTER  FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS, THE HON STEWART WEST, MP AND THE  MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND YOUTH  AFFAIRS,  SENATOR THE HON SUSAN RYAN, M P . 

 95 "

 103/83 19 December 1983

 MIGRANT YOUTH ESPECIALLY DISADVANTAGED

 There are serious gaps in the programs of general education,   training and English language available to young men and women  of non-English speaking background,  according to a Commonwealth  Report just released.

 The Report Immigrant and Refugee Youth in the Transition from  School to Work or Further Study, highlights the particular  disadvantage and vulnerability of immigrant and refugee youth  aged 15-24 years whose inadequate English reduces their . opportunities in education and employment.

 Echoing other reports to Government on the particular needs of  immigrants, the Ethnic Liaison Officer Working Party's Report  identified competence in English as the key factor in the  realisation of young immigrants' full potential in education  or employment.  .

 Among proposals submitted in the Report are initiatives in â–    English Language programs; "recovery" education programs for  those with a disrupted education; income support for needy  secondary level full-time students and more effective co­ ordination between agencies involved in the delivery of services  to immigrant and refugee youth.

 The Report was released today by the Minister for Education and  Youth Affairs, Senator the Hon Susan Ryan,  MP, and the Minister  for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Hon Stewart West, M P . The Ministers said they were pleased that an Interdepartmental  Task Force has been established to coordinate the consideration  and implementation of the Report's proposals. The Task Force  will be chaired by a senior'officer of the Department of 

 Education arid. Youth Affairs and has representation from relevant  Commonwealth departments and authorities.

 The Report is now available in all States and Territories from  the AGPS bookshops.

 Media Contacts:  Ms Frederika Steen, Department of Education and Youth Affairs,  Canberra (062) 89 7549 or  Nick Spinocchia, Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, Canberra (062) 64 2184.

