---
title: "Talks with Perth's ethnic communities"
date: "1983-09-26"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213901476
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004702%22
---

 From the Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs.

 HON S J WEST MP

 79/83 26 September 1983

 The Federal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  — Mr Stewart West, said today that he welcomed the opportunity  to meet and talk with representatives of Perth's ethnic  communities.

 Mr West, who will be attending a Federal Cabinet meeting i n —   Perth tomorrow,  said he had expanded his trip so he could view  his Department's operations in Perth, and visit various  migrant centres.

 "I have already met with the Board of the Perth Asian Community  Centre,  and visited the North Perth Migrant Resource Centre with  Dr Ric Charlesworth MP, Federal Member for Perth",  Mr -West said.

 "I will also be'visiting Graylands Migrant Centre, and my  Department's detention centre".

 Mr West told over 100 representatives of Perth's ethnic ’   communities,  who were his guests at a function -held .at__the  Italian Club, that the Australian Labor Government had  substantially shifted the emphasis of its migration policies.

 "Without drastically reducing our migration intake, the Labor  Government has addressed itself to the needs of both Australian-  born and non-Australian born people living in our country", Mr West said.

 "The previous Liberal Government,  in 1982/83, only settled  27,000 people under the family migration category."

 "The Labor Government believes family reunion is a crucial  humanitarian component of our migration policy, and we hope  to settle about 57,000 people under this category in our  first full year of Government".·

 "Similarly,  the plight and needs of refugees,  including those  suffering infringement of civil liberties in their home countries,  is a significant part of the Government's program", Mr West said.

 In 1982/83, the Liberal Government settled almost 32,000 people  under the labour shortage and business migration category. The  Labor Government, -recognising that the unemployment situation  for people already living in Australia, is. severed, has -

 drastically cut intake under this category to no more than  11, 000" .  ..

 ../2

 Mr West told the function that settlement programs for new  arrivals would be expanded this financial year,  in accordance  with the Government's commitment to a real multicultural  society. ·

 "The overall budget for my Department will increase by -$19.5 million,  or 14 percent,  this financial year",  Mr West said.

 "These extra funds will be-directedy amongst other -things ,  to  an increase of 60 grants-in-aid to community organisations,   a 43% -increase, in -funding to Migrant -  Resource Centres ,  -and - -  child care facilities for migrant women attending English  classes under the Adult Migrant Education Program".

 '  / .

 "The Government has. also made $1 million available this —   financial year for teacher permanency under the Adult Migrant  Education Program honouring our pre-election commitment".

 Mr West said that due to the Government'  s emphasis on family . . .   reunion,  migrant hostels were not being used to their full  capacity. He said that the Government was presently examining  the most useful ways.in which these valuable- community resources  could be used.

 Mr West outlined the Government's innovative legislative program,  including amendments to the Migration Act to remove discrimination,  and proposed changes to the Citizenship Act.

 "I am currently considering a .complex set—of amendments to  the Citizenship Act," Mr West said.

 "The Government encourages people living in Australia to  become citizens. Although applications for citizenship rose  by 30% last year, there are still 1.2 million people in  Australia eligible to become citizens who have—not applied.

 "To further encourage- these people ,  the Government is  considering reducing the residential qualifying period.from  three to two years, and changing the Oath of Allegiance to  be more truly Australia in flavour",-Mr. West said.

 Contact: Kerry-Anne Walsh Tuesday 27 September (09) 325 8994  or (062) 733 446 after that date.

