---
title: "Visit to US"
date: "1983-07-29"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213900182
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004721%22
---

 ST

 61/83 July 29, 1983

 From the Minister for Immigration _  and Ethnic Affairs.  The Hon Stewart MP

 At the invitation of the United States Government, the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr Stewart  West, will leave Australia on Sunday for Hawaii to  participate in Inter-Governmental Consultations on 

 refugee problems.

 The meeting will be attended by representatives of the  United States (Ambassador E .  Douglas - U.S. Refugee  Co-Ordinator),  Canada (Minister L. Axworthy - Minister  for Employment and Immigration),  Japan (Toshijiro Nakajima -  Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs),  and the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (Deputy High 

 Commissioner W. Smyser).

 Mr West said that one aim of Australian participation in  the meeting would be to maintain broad international  assistance for Indochinese' refugees. He said that the  western community generally has a humanitarian rescons ibility 

 for refugees which is linked to past involvement in the  region.

 Following the meeting,  the Minister will visit four South  East Asian countries - Singapore,  Indonesia,  Malaysia and  Thailand - as well as a number of refugee camps.  He will 

 visit the camp on Galarig Island, return to Singapore and  then proceed to Kuala Lumpur where he will visit the  Sungei Besi and Bidong refugee camps.  In Thailand Mr  WTest will visit the Khao-I-Dang and Phanat Nikhom camps,  the Thai-Cambodian border area, and the Lao camp at Na Pho 

 in northern Thailand.

 He will be having discussions with Ministers and senior  officials during the course of the visit.

 "I will be emphasising that the Australian Government is  committed to participate in the international efforts to  find lasting solutions to the plight of those displaced  from Indochina" Mr West said.

 "This year, 20,000 places are being made available under  our Refugees and Special Humanitarian Program. About half  of these places will be for Indochinese refugees, which is  a slight reduction on last year".

 Mr West will be accompanied by the Secretary of the  Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr W A (Bill) 1  McKinnon, and the First Assistant Secretary, Operations and  International Division of the Department,  Mr Peter Eyles.

 The Minister will return to Canberra on August 18 1983.

