---
title: "Minister's visit to Darwin"
date: "1983-10-21"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213902020
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004696%22
---

 THE HON STEWART WEST, MP

 FROM THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 "IS

 84/83 21 October 1983

 MINISTER'S VISIT TO DARWIN

 The Federal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr  Stewart West,  said today that he welcomed the opportunity to  meet and talk with representatives of Darwin's ethnic communities

 Mr West said that while in Darwin he would take the opportunity  to visit his Department's operations, the Tamarind Migrant  Centre and the Migrant Resource and Settlement Centre.

 Mr West told over 100 representatives of Darwin's ethnic  communities, who were his guests at a function held at the  Hotel Darwin, that the Australian Labor Government had sub­ stantially shifted the focus of its migration policies.

 "Without drastically reducing our migration intake, the Labor  Government has addressed itself to the needs of both Australian-  born and non-Australian born people living in our country," Mr West said.

 "The previous Liberal Government, in 1982/83, only settled  27 000 people under the family migration category.

 "The Labor Government believes family reunion is a crucial  humanitarian component of our migration policy, and we hope to  settle up to 57 000 people under this category in our first  full year of Government.

 "Similarly, the plight and needs of refugees, including those  suffering infringement of civil liberties in their home countries  is a significant part of the Government's program," Mr West said.

 "In 1982/83, the Liberal Government settled almost 32 000 people  under the labour shortage and business migration category. The  Labor Government, recognising that the unemployment situation  for people already living in Australia is severe, has drastically  cut intake under this category to no more than 11 000."

 Mr West told the function that settlement programs for new  arrivals would be expanded this financial year, in accordance  with the Government's commitment to a real multicultural society.

 2 /

 ' -  2

 "The overall budget for my Department will increase by $19.5  million> or 14 per cent, this financial year," Mr West said.

 ."These extra funds will be directed, amongst other things, to an  increase of 60 grants-in-aid to community organisations, a  43 per cent increase in fundingito Migrant Resource Centres, * and child care facilities for migrant women attending English  classes under the Adult Migrant Education Program.

 "The Government has also made $1 million available this financial  year for teacher permanency under the Adult Migrant Education  Program honouring our pre-election commitment."

 Mr West outlined the Government's innovative legislative program,  including amendments to the Migration Act to remove discrimination,  and proposed changes to the Citizenship Act.

 "I am currently considering a complex set of amendments to the  Citizenship Act," Mr West said.

 "The Government encourages people living in Australia to become  citizens. Although applications for citizenship rose by 30 per  cent last year, there are still 1.2 million people in Australia  eligible to become citizens who have not applied.

 "To further encourage these people, the Government is considering  reducing the residential qualifying period from three to tv/o  years, and changing the Oath of Allegiance to be more truly  Australian in flavour," Mr West said. 'â– 

 Media.Contacts: Ursula Doyle, Minister's Office, (062) 73 3446 or Alberto Corboz,  Department of Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs, (062) 64 2726.

