---
title: "Uruguayan families arrive under the CRSS"
date: "1983-08-18"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213900620
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09004715%22
---

 From the Department of Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 66/83 18 August 1983

 URUGUAYAN FAMILIES ARRIVE UNDER THE CRSS

 Five more Uruguayan families arrived in Australia last week,  four of them under the Community Refugee Settlement Scheme (CRSS).

 Mr David Vinas-Twyford,  40, was a journalist and trade union  official in Montevideo, before he fled to Brazil. He has been  sponsored by the Society of St. Vincent de Paul in Sydney, who  also sponsored the first Uruguayan family to come under the CRSS,  the Martinez, who arrived in Australia in November 1982.

 Fittingly, Mr Vinas-Twyford is staying with the Martinez in Sydney.

 Two families were sponsored by the Federal Catholic Immigration  Commission in Melbourne and will consequently settle in that city.  They are Mr Miguel Sosa Imbert and his wife Marta; and Mr Ramon  Cuelho Martinez, his wife Ana, their daughter Cintya (16) and their 

 son Sergio (13).

 Another family will settle in Adelaide, as they were sponsored by  the Spanish-Latin American Institute of that city. They are Mr Luis  Milans, his wife Maria, their son Liber (5), their daughter  Yandinora (2) and their 8-month old daughter Tania.

 The last family, Jose and Maria Villar and daughters Mariela, Sandra  and Alejandra have joined relatives in Wollongong.

 With an increasing number of refugees expected this year from  Latin America, immigration authorities hope that Spanish speaking  individuals, groups or organizations in Australia will play an  increasing role in their successful settlement through the CRSS,  because of the obvious cultural and settlement advantages to newly 

 arrived refugees.

 Experience has shown that in a great majority of the cases,  families settled under the scheme have quickly become self-sufficient  due in part to the support and assistance provided by sponsors and  members of their particular ethnic groups.

 A good example of the smooth transition into a new life was perhaps  provided by a comment made by Mr Vinas-Twyford. As he was having  lunch with the Martinez family, the day he arrived, h e 'said with  a smile: "This is incredible. My first day in Australia and I am 

 eating 'asado' and drinking 'mate'."

 Media contact: Alberto Corboz, Department of Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs (062) 642726.

 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE COMMUNITY REFUGEE SETTLEMENT SCHEME (CRSS)

 From November 1979, when the scheme started, until 31 July 1983,  Australia received 7 262 refugees under the CRSS.

 Originally the scheme was set up in response to community interest in  becoming more directly involved in the resettlement of Indochinese  refugees.  Later, it was expanded to include also refugees from Poland  and other Eastern European countries. Last year, the scheme was opened  to refugees from any part of the world.

 The CRSS provides an alternative to migrant centre accomodation,  with  refugees moving directly into a community environment where they  receive support and assistance from sponsoring individuals, groups or 

 organizations. .

 Offers to participate in the scheme may be made by established  voluntary agencies, including church and other community organizations,  organised groups, including those formed especially for the purpose,  and also individuals.

 However, individual sponsors will need to have "back-up support"  from an established organization or group, who will undertake to  assume settlement responsibilities if the individual sponsor is  unable to do so.

 Before the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs accepts a  sponsorship offer, it assesses it against a number of settlement  factors, such as: existence of a local ethnic community; clear ,   understanding of the responsibilities involved in participation; 

 access to supporting education and health services; experience or  involvement in community welfare matters; and others.

 Assessment is generally informal and is undertaken through discussion  with those involved. Any group or organization interested in providing  sponsoring support is welcome to approach any office of the Department  for a chat.

 Community groups sponsoring refugees under the CRSS are entitled to  a grant from the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, to  assist them in the initial expense of settling the families in their  care. The grant covers expenses shch as initial accommodation, food  and transport costs.  The current level of assistance is $170 for  an individual and $450 for a family of four, with $70 for each  additional family member.  The CRSS grant is available to sponsors 

 assisting their second and subsequent refugee families.

 There are more than 400 CRSS sponsor groups throughout Australia,  which include all major Christian churches, as well as clubs and  groups of families.

