---
title: "Progress in the Australian migration program"
date: "1984-03-07"
creators:
  - "West, Stewart"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213904393
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03002422%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 7 March 1984

 PROGRESS IN THE AUSTRALIAN MIGRATION PROGRAM

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Stewart West MP ,  today outlined to the Parliament current  developments in the Australian migration program.

 Mr West also strongly attacked the Opposition for supporting  a prejudiced minority which alleged that the Government was  discriminating against European and U.K. citizens. He repudiated  suggestions that the Government was downgrading European  migration in favour of Asians.

 "I urge the Opposition not to support any emerging anti-Asian  sentiments in Australia. Suggestions that this Government  is discriminating against British and European settlers is  barely concealed racism", Mr West said.

 Mr West told Parliament that the Asian percentage of the  migration program was rising due to a lessening interest in  sponsorship from people from traditional source countries,  and  the number of refugees accepted, particularly Indochinese,   under a program initiated by the former Government.

 Mr West said the Government was moderately reducing the  Indochinese refugee intake whilst increasing direct family  reunion from Vietnam.

 "In 1982/83, there were 12,400 refugees from Indochina. In  this financial year the intake will be 10,000 with moderate  increases in the Orderly Departure Program", Mr West said.

 "The Government is stressing the need for voluntary  repatriation and increased involvement by the United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees.

 "We have honoured our family reunion undertakings.  In 1983/84  there will be up to 43,000 visaed family reunion migrants,  compared with 27,000 in 1982/83 under the former Government. There will be fewer brothers and sisters and non-dependent  children admitted in 1983/84 than estimated six months ago.

 I expect up to 16,000 in Category C in 1983/84", Mr West said.

 "The fall-off results from a lessening interest in sponsorship  of people from the United Kingdom and Europe.  For example, in  the last financial year only 9.3% of total sponsorships related  to the U.K. and 0.8% to Italy. This compares with 13.4%

 Sri Lanka and 25.8% from other Asian countries. In addition,  many sponsorships which would have been potentially successful  were not taken up by relatives in Europe.

 . ./2

 . ./2

 "Contrary to the expectations of their family in Australia,  many are opting to remain at home or defer migration to  Australia. For instance, 60% of sponsorships are not taken  up in Athens."

 Mr West also outlined the proposed new system of selecting  migrants under a new skilled labour category.

 "This system will involve a forward assessment of labour  requirements in approximately 60 skilled occupations. The  Department of Employment and Industrial Relations will  provide annual reports on labour market needs from which 

 ceilings on occupational intake will be set. For the first  time, immigration of skilled labour will be integrated  into a workforce planning concept involving three departments:   Employment and Industrial Relations, Education and Youth  Affairs and Immigration and Ethnic Affairs."

 Mr West said that the total migration program was an enlightened  forward looking, humanitarian and internationally accepted  program.

 CONTACT: Mr Michael Ross 062/733 446

