---
title: "Better planning to reduce reliance on skilled migrant workers"
date: "1984-02-22"
creators:
  - "Willis, Ralph"
source: "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213904140
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03001313%22
---

 22 February 1984 46/84

 BETTER PLANNING TO REDUCE RELIANCE ON SKILLED MIGRANT WORKERS

 Australia's needs for skilled workers are to be determined 

 through improved planning which will emphasise greater training  of Australians and a reduced reliance on skilled migrants.

 A new strategy to pursue this objective was announced today  by the Federal Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, 

 Mr Ralph Willis, and the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Stewart West.

 "We want to ensure that Australians have the opportunity to 

 take up ah increasing share of skilled jobs and that our need  for overseas workers can be reduced as a result," they said.

 "The current method of assessing our needs for skilled workers  is too short-sighted, and is unable to account properly for  changes over time in labour market conditions.

 "The new strategy represents a significant step towards a 

 more rational and effective method of determining Australia's  skilled labour needs, both from local and overseas sources."

 The main elements of the new strategy are to:

 .  undertake an annual survey of skilled occupations, co­ ordinated by the Department of Employment and Industrial  Relations and involving education and immigration authorities,  and relevant industry departments, to provide the basis for  medium-term objectives for skilled labour supply to guide the 

 education,  training and immigration systems, as well as  industry's training efforts

 Parliament House, Canberra A.C.T. 2600 1 -2-466 March 83

 Telephone (062) 73 2136 

 Telex: 6 2 2 8 0 2

 - 2- 

 /

 *

 .  on the basis of this survey, designate occupations in which 

 immigration is likely to play a significant role so that the  education and training systems can respond by increasing  domestic supply of skilled labour wherever possible.

 .  use the recently announced Review of Commonwealth Labour  Market Programs as a basis for developing new approaches  to improving the flexibility of training systems, particularly 

 in the trades

 .  place a ceiling, to be reviewed every six months, on the 

 numbers of overseas workers who can be recruited to  designated occupations, to complement domestic labour supply  in meeting expected labour market requirements.

 Although the lead times typically involved in education and 

 training limit the extent to which domestic labour supply can  be raised to meet unanticipated requirements, improved co­ ordination in preparing labour market assessments and increased 

 flexibility in the education and training systems will enable 

 a better matching of the two.

 The new strategy will also achieve improved control over the 

 skilled migrant intake.

 The existing system for determining intakes of skilled migrant 

 workers relies on assessments of short-term demand across the  major skilled occupations, carried out every six months.

 "By the time migrant workers are selected on the basis of this information and actually arrive in Australia, labour market conditions may have changed substantially," the Ministers said.

 "Under the new arrangements, the assessment of skilled migrant 

 intakes will endeavour to anticipate rather than react to  changing requirements.

 . . . /3

 - 3-

 "Assessments will be based on a medium term assessment of  underlying demand and supply trends, with adjustment for  identified shifts in short-term labour market conditions.

 "The essence of the strategy is to change the balance between  domestic and overseas skilled labour supply for the long-term 

 benefit of existing workers and the community at large.

 "This will involve much more than turning the skilled immigration  tap on and off in response to short-term changes in the labour 

 market.

 "It will involve integrating for the first time Australia's 

 education, labour market and immigration policies," the 

 Ministers said.

 The new procedures are currently being developed and are expected  to apply from the beginning of the next financial year.

 Mr Willis and Mr West emphasised that the strategy for skilled 

 migration will in no way impinge on the Government's commitment  to maintain the priority it has accorded Family and Refugee 

 Migration.

 CANBERRA

 Further enquiries can be directed to:

 Mr John Bowdler (DEIR)

 (062) 43 7365

 Mr Nick Spinocchia (DIEA)

 (062) 64 2134

