---
title: "Migration talks in Greece"
date: "1985-04-30"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213911774
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015105%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 26/85

 MIGRATION TALKS IN GREECE

 Athens, 27 April; "As economic conditions continue to  improve, the Australian Government will examine whether it  is possible to ease the arrangements for family reunion,"  the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and Minister  Assisting the Treasurer, Chris Hurford, said in Athens  today.

 "This could have significant benefit for the Greek community  in Australia."

 Mr Hurford was speaking at the end of an official visit to  Greece, during which he discussed immigration and ethnic  affairs with the Greek Government and community leaders.

 "I assured Greek authorities that Australia places a high  value on continuing the excellent links with Greece," Mr  Hurford said.

 "The Greek community in Australia has made an outstanding  contribution to the development and culture of our nation.

 â– Future immigration flows can only strengthen further the  relations between our two nations."

 Mr Hurford said that Greek authorities had been anxious to  ensure he was fully aware of the extent to which Greece was  providing temporary asylum to refugees from Eastern Europe  and the Middle East.

 There are now more than 3,000 persons in Greece who claim to  be refugees and who are seeking resettlement in other  countries.

 Mr Hurford said he had untertaken to carry this message to  Australia and see if we could do even more to help.

 2/

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 The Greek Government had also said it wanted to start  negotiating a reciprocal social services agreement with  Australia immediately after the Greek elections.

 Mr Hurford said that Australia was prepared to start  negotiating with Greece when negotiations with Italy were  concluded soon.

 In Athens, Mr Hurford met with Mr Yannis Skoularikis,  Minister for Public Order, Mr Dimitris Sapountzis,  Under­ secretary for Interior, Mr Assimakis Papastavrou, Secretary-  General, Secretariat for Greeks Abroad, and Mr Pantelis  Menglides,  Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Division  of Greeks Abroad. The Minister also met with Mr Garry  Perkins,  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  representative in Greece.

 Canberra ·

 30 April 1985

 Media Contact:  Mick Atkinson, Minister's Office, Parliament House,  Canberra  Tel: (062) 72 6635 (062) 49 8048 (home)

