---
title: "Chipp: Australia sells PNG out on Irian Jayan refugees"
date: "1985-10-30"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213914633
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09012940%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE THE SENATE P.R. NO. 85/277

 CANBERRA   30 OCTOBER 1985

 CHIPP: AUSTRALIA SELLS PNG OUT ON IRIAN JAYAN REFUGEES

 Senator Don Chipp,  Leader of the Australian Democrats, today hit  out at the Minister for Immigration M r 'Hurford and the Minister  for Foreign Affairs over the way they had handled the Irian Jayan  refugee problem and the effect their mishandling has had on the 

 Papua New Guinea Government.

 "I can well understand why the Papua New Guinea Government is  totally fed up with the way the Australian Government has handled  the situation," Senator Chipp said.

 "The Somare Government feels that the Hawke Government has been  playing them for suckers. Mr Hurford has been talking about  regional solutions for regional refugee problems as a basis for  Australia's policy, but apparently believes that Irian Jayan 

 refugees are not part of the geographic region, let alone that  Australia should be involved in a regional solution to this  problem.

 "The Somare Government is simply adopting the same policies as  the Hawke Government. In their view, if there is to be a regional  solution, Australia must inevitably be part of it. They are also  adopting Australia's line on third coutry re-s^ettlement for  genuine refugees - with Australia being one of the third 

 countries.

 "This change in PNG Government policy is a direct response to  Australia’s insensitivity in dealing with the whole question of  Irian Jayan refugees. Up to now Mr Hayden has said it's strictly  a matter between PNG and Indonesia, and has tried to keep 

 Australia out of it by alternatively pressuring the Somare  Government and giving them "hush" money.  Neither of these tactics  have really helped to solve the problem.

 "The PNG. Government is absolutely right: they were not involved  in the political manoeuvres in the 1960's which set up political  boundaries, but Australia was, and as such cannot just wash their  hands of it and leave it to PNG.

 "Mr Hayden obviously believes that he will be able to turn up  next Week in PNG and pressure Somare into taking full 

 respori-iibi 1 ity for Irian Jayan refugees, but Port Moresby is in  no mood to be told that what is good for Australia is not good  for PNG," Senator Chipp concluded.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:  HELENE TEICHMANN 03 61 3064

