---
title: "Questions to the minister in Parliament"
date: "1985-09-20"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213913782
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015069%22
---

 (oS

 s/ΤΊ

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 66/85

 OTTF.STTON τ η  THF. MTNTSTER IN PARLIAMENT

 SOUTH AFRICA: IMMIGRATION

 Mr STEVE DUBOIS (St. George, NSW). My question is to the  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.  What is the  Government's immigration-policy response to the worsening  situation in South Africa, with the increasing unrest and 

 Government repression affecting all sections of the  South African community?

 Mr CHRIS HURFORD (Adelaide, S.A.) - By way of background  to this matter, 1,700 people - white, black and coloured -  arrived as immigrants from South Africa in 1984-85. Whether more people will arrive this year depends on who 

 qualifies under our global non-discriminatory rules. It  is now too early to tell, but the House may be interested  to know that inquiries in our offices in Pretoria and Cape  Town have doubled in the first half of 1985 compared with 

 the first half of 1984. Indeed, there was a big increase  in July, 1985, when eight times the number of people were  in touch with our office compared with July, 1984.

 Of course,  inquiries do not necessarily mean that those  inquiring will come under our global rules and qualify to  come to this country. Frankly, I do not expect any  dramatic increase. If I can remind the House of those  global rules, they are based on family reunions, on our 

 skilled labour requirements and on business migration. When it comes to refugees and the special humanitarian  program, only nine people came here from South Africa in  1984-85 as refugees.

 The only exceptions to our global rules are New Zealand,  where we have a common labour market, and also the  Lebanon, where temporarily we are discriminating in its  favour because of its troubles.

 The Government has no plans to make any exception for  South Africa. Any such move would also apply to Sri Lanka  or any other sadly disrupted place.  Resettlement in  Australia is not a solution to all of the trouble spots of 

 this world, whether it be Sri Lanka, South Africa or  anywhere else. .

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 I wish to say a little more about those global rules as  they apply to South Africa because although there are a  number of Honourable Members in this House who are at the  moment interested in other things, a lot of people in 

 Australia are interested in the future of settlement from  South Africa. The global rules are such that no account  is taken of a person's race, colour or ethnic origin. The  predominant numbers applying in Pretoria are white, but 

 70 per cent of those applying in Cape Town are non-whites,   mainly coloured people. Another point is that anecdotal  evidence shows us that those coming here are predominantly  opponents of apartheid.

 Lastly, I would like to say that although an immigrant's  politics are not usually known, there are selections where  we take note of whom we are bringing here and our  selection processes bar anybody with a terrorist 

 background and also people who are known racists, who  would consequently not settle well in this multiracial,  nmlticultural society of ours.

 This Government's objective in relation to South Africa  remains peaceful change.  We have sought to play our part  to change the hearts and minds of South Africans to bring  about peaceful change through our sports contact policy  and through our sanctions. Just as we would not be  allowing racists here under our settlement policies, at  the same time we hope we will not attract too many 

 sensible South Africans who have a capacity to lead  South Africa to that peaceful change.

 Canberra 20 September, 1985

 Contact: Mick Atkinson Tel: (08) 213 2200 (08) 271 0842

