---
title: "Five Irian Jayans"
date: "1985-07-17"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213912450
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015080%22
---

 SM-

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 49/85

 FTVF. TRTA N  JA Y A N S

 Five Irian Jayans who arrived illegally in northern  Australia would not be given permanent residence in  Australia, the Minister, for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 

 Chris Hurford said today.

 In accordance with humanitarian principles always  practised by Australia, the Government had decided that  any who decide not to return from where they have come and  who seek refugee status or political asylum will be  properly processed by us. If they prove their case,  they  will be recognised as refugees temporarily in this country  until arrangements are made for a third country to  resettle them.

 We shall not prejudice the situation of any person  recognised as a refugee.  Such persons would not be sent  back to their country of origin.

 This policy will apply not only to Irian Jayans but also  to people from any country in our immediate neighbourhood  from which people could arrive so easily.

 "There are precedents for this all round the world" Mr Hurford said. "In many instances countries  experiencing large numbers of border crossers seeking  refuge are asking the international community through the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to 

 help these people settle elsewhere. We have a close  association with the UNHCR and will be using that office  to assist us to find a suitable country for resettlement,   if that is needed, just as the UNHCR calls on us for 

 assistance to resettle so many refugees from other  countries of first asylum".

 Mr Hurford said that there were a number of important  reasons why the Government had taken this decision.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "One is the 'draw' effect." he said. "We could be  deluged with people crossing the short distance in small  boats to the islands and other coastline of northern  Australia. The 'grapevine' is a very potent one and news 

 travels fast." ·

 "Nor does Australia want to be a front line State for  political dissidence or other grievances with our friendly  neighbours.  Many countries try to resettle this type of  political activist outside their region."

 "This Hawke Labor Government is determined to be in  control of its immigrant intake."

 Mr Hurford stated that a group of officials from the  Departments of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Foreign  Affairs and Prime Minister and Cabinet were working on the  administration of this policy to ensure that the rights of 

 individuals as well as the interests of Australia were  protected.

 Canberra  17 July 1985

 Media contact:  Mick Atkinson, Minister's Office Parliament House,  Canberra  Tel: (062) 72 6635 (062) 49 8048

