---
title: "Chipp: Hayden heavies PNG over Irian Jayan refugees"
date: "1985-11-07"
creators:
  - "Chipp, Don"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213914842
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09012927%22
---

 PRESS RELEASE â–   THE SENATE

 CANBERRA  PR 85/290  7 NOVEMBER 1985

 CHIPP : HAYDEN HEAVIES PNG OVER IRIAN JAYAN REFUGEES

 Senator Don Chipp, Leader of the Australian Democrats, today said 

 that he was astonished by Mr. Hayden's comments in Port Moresby 

 on Irian Jayan refugees in PNG.

 "How can Mr. Hayden reject suggestions that Australia has a moral 

 obligation to resettle Irian Jayan refugees? Mr. Hayden is 

 clearly trying to 'heavy' the PNG Government and is consciously 

 trying to reject any responsibilities - moral or legal - to help 

 resolve the situation. No doubt the PNG Government is being 

 told of the economic consequences of standing up to Australia  on this issue. .

 "To say, as Mr. Hayden has, that the PNG Government has got plenty 

 of room and therefore should take all refugees is shameful. .

 If size of land and wealth were to be the criteria,  Australia 

 would probably get the lot.

 "What are people in Australia expected to think when we hear reports 

 that Mr. Hurford has suggested to Cabinet that Australia take a 

 number of genuine Irian Jayan refugees, and close off the illegal 

 entry loopholes, while on the other hand Mr. Hayden says its none 

 of our business and we will take none? Government policy is in 

 total chaos. ,  .

 "To. say ...that Australia will assist PNG in handing the problem over .  

 to the United Nations will not make the problem go away.

 The United Nations then has to try and find countries prepared to 

 take them, and Australia will be high on their list.

 "The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr. Hurford, :

 has said Australia does have responsibilities towards refugees in 

 the region. Any definition of reigion would -include Irian Jaya and 

 Papua New Guinea. ·  .

 .../What exactly is

 2

 "What exactly is this Government on about? They are vacillating 

 and trying to buy time while hoping that the problem will either 

 go away or that they can heavy Somare into silence", Senator 

 Chipp concluded. .

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: Senator Don Chipp 062 72.7175

 Helene Teichmann 062 727556

