---
title: "Disarmament and security: the regional perspective"
date: "1985-11-20"
creators:
  - "Sinclair, Ian"
source: "Shadow Minister for Defence"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213915132
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03005113%22
---

 ADDRESS BY .  THE LEADER OF THE NATIONAL PARTY AND SHADOW DEFENCE  MINISTER, IAN SINCLAIR, AT A DINNER ORGANISED BY THE AUSTRALIAN  INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS,  TASMANIAN BRANCH, DRYSDALE  HOUSE, HOBART, WEDNESDAY 20 NOVEMBER 1985

 "Disarmament and Security : the regional perspective"

 With the US-Soviet Summit talk now getting under way in Geneva,   this dinner is a very appropriate forum for a look at some of the   issues involved in that vital meeting,  from the perspective of   the region in which we live.

 Hobart is also an appropriate location for this.exercise.

 Australia's traditional northward orientation puts Tasmania at  the bottom of the map -- although this has never stopped  Tasmanians from being keenly interested and involved in  international affairs.

 It was after all a Tasmanian paper,  as I recall, which began a   celebrated editorial years ago with words that have passed into  history: "We warn the Czar."

 That aside, the point is that Tasmania is at the top of the map  of the region to our south,  which will be increasingly important  to Australia for a number of reasons.

 It is also.Tasmania which has made and is making such an  important contribution to the nation's maritime record, an  achievement recognised with the siting in this State, by the  Coalition Government,  of the Australian Maritime College.

 Tasmania's location has made its people particularly sensitive to   maritime issues,  and this is very relevant today.

 The eminent British scientist J B S Haldane once warned :

 "This is my prediction for the future -- whatever hasn't  happened will happen and no-one will be safe from it."

 That should be drawn to the attention of Australia's defence  planners.

 It should also be borne in mind by everyone concerned with  disarmament and international security, and with the regional  perspective of those issues.

 For some years now,  the security position in our region has been  undergoing fundamental changes. .

 The pace of that change began to accelerate with the election of   a Labour Government in New Zealand,  but we can be sure that there  is more to come.

 If we do not recognise the implications of those changes now,  and   act on them, we risk a parallel with the case of the widow who,   sitting alone with her cat,  was polishing an old lamp when with a   puff of smoke, a genie appeared and offered her three wishes.

 2

 The widow thought quickly and then said: "I'd like to be rich,  I'd like to be young again,  and I'd like my cat to. turn into a   handsome prince."

 There was another puff of smoke,  and she found herself young and  glamorous,  in a beautiful evening g- own and dripping with jewels.

 The cat had disappeared,  but a handsome prince stood beside her,   holding out his arms.

 As she melted into his embrace he murmured softly into her ear: "Now I bet you're sorry you took me to the vet for that little  operation."

 The actions of individuals can often have unexpected consequences  -- the same is true of nations,  only the consequences are usually  more serious.

 In the case of Australia, it is important that we understand the  implications for us not only of changing perspectives of regional  security, but of international security, and the options behind  the talks in Geneva.

 There is no doubt that Australia and the world has a stake in   those talks.

 It is important to resist the temptation to posture —  to adopt  the "We warn the Czar" attitude I referred to earlier.

 As an ANZUS member, however,  and through that as a member of the  broader Western Alliance, we can have a legitimate expectation  that the summit meeting between Mr Reagan and Mr Gorbachev can  help lead to an easing of tensions between the superpowers — 

 tensions which affect us all. .

 There are some important points to be made.

 Expectations should not be pitched too high.

 This is the first substantive meeting between the leaders of the   United States and the Soviet Union for several years, and  realistically, major progress in all areas of disagreement should  not be expected.

 President Reagan and Premier Gorbachev are their own men but  inevitably reflect the national aspirations of their respective  systems.

 The central issue', that of nuclear arms control,  is such a   complex issue, with so much riding on it for both sides, that any  process of resolution can only extend over years rather than  days.

 A second point is that all nations, in spite of their hopes for  progress at the summit,  should not let these hopes obscure  clear-sighted assessment of the goal of arms reduction: a future  in which all the world can feel safe from the threat of nuclear 

 annihilation.

 3

 That threat comes not only from the superpowers but from the  maniacal fringe,  spurred by the martyrdom of terrorists to new  depths of insanity to achieve obscure political goals and  personal aggrandisement.

 -  I doubt if it will ever be possible to put the genie back in the   bottle and rid the world of all nuclear weapons.

 I doubt even more if it will ever be possible to rid the world of   war.  _ .

 What we can realistically work toward is a major reduction in the  size of the nuclear stockpiles held by East and West,  and a   reduction in tension between both sides. .

 If the world's nuclear stockpiles can be reduced to a level which  does not threaten the existence of any nation or its people,  and .   at the same time all nuclear weapons States can be confident  their security is protected,  that will be a momentous 

 achievement.

 As I pointed out,  however,  there needs not only to be a reduction  in nuclear stockpiles, but in international tension, because the   two go together.

 Historically, tension between the two superpowers has increased  the pressure for arms build-ups, and those same build-ups have  themselves increased tension.

 An editorial in the "Australian" yesterday made two valuable  points. It stated:

 "It has to be remembered that weapons do not cause wars. They  are the means of fighting wars which have their origins in   conflicting national interests.

 "Without a fundamental realignment of the Soviet Union's  hitherto consistently expansionist foreign policy it will not  be possible to eliminate tensions between the two major power-   blocs which carry with them the danger of war."

 The Soviets show no sign of accepting that any such realignment  is necessary.

 Even putting aside the situation in Eastern Europe, the Soviets  are intensifying their control over Afghanistan.

 They continue to indulge a policy of adventurist intervention in   Africa, both directly and through their East German and Cuban  surrogates.

 Although their influence in the Middle East has been reduced,  they continue to seek a role there and to profit from the tragedy  of Lebanon.

 In South America,  they are backing the Marxist regime in  Nicaragua,  with its clear potential for exporting disruption to   neighbouring countries at the back door of the US.

 -  4

 In our own region, the Soviet Union has allied itself as closely  as possible with Vietnam, which now occupies Kampuchea,  and  completely dominates nominally independent Laos. .

 At the same time, the Soviets are building up their forces in the   Far East and consolidating their ability to project force into  the Indian Ocean.

 It is as an alternative to the nuclear deterrent that the US is   irrevocably committed to a massive research program into the  feasibility of the Strategic Defence Initiative.

 SDI changes the entire dimension of the arms reduction process,  and this is fully understood by the Soviet Union.

 Indeed, it appears to have been a major factor bringing  Mr Gorbachev to Geneva.

 SDI is not another weapon —  it is not a weapon at all, because  it is purely defensive. 1

 It is high-tech deterrent.

 To a layman or woman,  incomprehensible in its physics but - magnificent in its concept.

 If feasible, it could be a breakthrough which creates a "fast  track" path through the whole convoluted arms control process.

 That is because it has the potential to render existing nuclear  war tactics, based on the concept of MAD -- mutual assured  destruction -- at least uncertain and at best outdated.

 With SDI systems in place —  and the US has offered to share the   technology with Moscow -- a major incentive for massive nuclear  arms stockpiles disappears.

 Clearly, although the Soviet Union has its own SDI research  program,  it is intensely suspicious of the motives of the US and  fearful of the US ability to perfect such a system before its own  scientists can do so.

 That is to be expected,  and it explains Moscow's massive campaign  of disinformation on SDI.

 Clearly, most of this has been swallowed whole by the peace  movement,  which explains the contradiction of organisations which  are supposed to be horrified -- and rightly so -- by MAD,  condemning a development which could hurdle the whole concept.

 It is vital, however, that the West stands firm, both against the   propaganda efforts of the Soviets and the efforts of its own  "peace" movements,  and helps the US to establish whether SDI is   in fact feasible.

 SDI should not and cannot be seen simply as a bargaining chip  against which to trade off arms reductions —  it is a development  which is separate from but integral to that whole process.

 5

 The refusal of the Hawke Government to participate in the SDI  research program is a major security blunder.

 It severely weakens the credibility of the Government in the arms  control process and,  even more importantly, denies Australia the   voice it should have when deterrence is on the disarmament  agenda.  .

 Coupled with the debacle over testing of the MX missile, it also  casts doubt over the Hawke Government's ultimate commitment to   the US alliance when faced with concerted pressure from the left  wing of the Labor Party and the trade unions.

 At least the Government has continued to support the vital  element of our relationship with the US in ANZUS and the broader  military relationships which flow from it, as well as the joint  facilities at North West Cape,  Pine Gap and Nurrungar.

 As far as the public record goes, that support has been  consistent.

 There are real grounds for concern, however, about the strength  of that commitment in the Labor Party as a whole, and the  implications of this situation for the US-Australia alliance in   the future.

 I have mentioned the Government's decisions on MX testing and SDI   research.  ,

 Its conduct of the negotiations on the nuclear-free zone in the  South Pacific has given further grounds for concern.

 In spite of its public posturing, the real argument advanced by  the Government for its support of the treaty is that by working  for a document which would have very little real effect, it was  able to head off moves for a more aggressive treaty.

 This has some superficial appeal, but is essentially fraudulent.

 If the Australian Government,  speaking as the major power in the   South Pacific, were to have made clear from the start that it   would have no part in this exercise,  there is no doubt that it   would have wielded significant and possibly decisive influence 

 against the limitations _the treaty imposes on US naval  operations.

 Instead,  the Government, in its attempts to appease its left wing  and the so-called "peace" movement, was hauled aboard the Lange  bandwagon for the second time, and our national and regional  security interest forgotten.

 Following its performance over the New Zealand ban on warship  visits, where our opposition was limited to a letter from  Mr Hawke to Mr Lange which was disowned as soon as its contents  were made public, it is another element in weakening the 

 deterrence environment.

 6

 The Hawke Government's policy on Pacific security is political  harlotry -- offering national integrity for sale to the highest  bidder in the political marketplace.

 I give notice that in Government, the Coalition will review this  treaty,  although we would preserve opposition to nuclear testing  and the dumping of nuclear waste in the South Pacific.

 It is also useful to spell out the Coalition's policy on the  central issue of regional security at the moment:  the New Zealand  stand on ANZUS. :  .  .

 It must be emphasised that the Coalition deeply regrets the stand  taken by the Government of a country with which we feel very  close bonds.

 We have a responsibility, however,  to the nation and the region  which goes far beyond those bonds.

 The New Zealand Government has chosen to go into ostrich mode on  ANZUS and has collectively tried to sell a fiction to its people:  that they can remain an ANZUS partner and at the same time reject  their ANZUS responsibilities.

 New Zealanders are about to learn that they have been misled,  and  the consequences of that lesson are a matter for the Government  of that country.  .

 The crunch will come when the New Zealand Government moves to  give its stand on US warship visits legislative force.

 The US Administration has clearly signalled that such a move will  mean the effective end of ANZUS.

 I understand that the Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Palmer,  plans to visit Australia soon to inform the Hawke  Government of his government's proposed legislation.

 If we are given the opportunity, the Coalition will inform  Mr Palmer of our total opposition to the action planned by New  Zealand.

 We respect New Zealand's sovereign rights,  but we have a duty to   speak for Australia,  which the Hawke Government is clearly not  prepared to do.

 The action proposed by New Zealand will have serious consequences  for Australia and the region.

 ANZUS has been the foundation of regional security for more than  40 years.  .

 We will not do as the Hawke Government:  sit on our hands while  our prime security compact is thrown on the scrapheap.

 If the ANZUS treaty comes to an end as a result of the action of   Mr Lange and the impotence of Mr Hawke, Australia will find  itself adrift in very perilous seas.

 7

 We will be negotiating with the US on a bilateral basis in a very  different atmosphere to that of more than four decades ago.

 In 1951, the US was the supreme world power.

 Japan was shattered,  and the ASEAN nations were under colonial  rule or in the throes of establishing postwar order. ,

 Australia and New Zealand were the only independent regional  powers emerging territorially relatively unscathed from the  Japanese drive southward. '

 If Australia has to negotiate bilateral security arrangements  with Washington in 1986 or later, how different the political,  social and above all economic climate will be.

 Japan and the US today enjoy close political and economic  relations.

 The western rim of the Pacific is the emerging economic dynamo of   world trade.

 The ASEAN nations enjoy a much respected international status and  look to the US to underpin their own security arrangements,  and  to further their commercial progress.

 China and India have staked their claim to regional influence.

 The Soviet Union,  almost invisible in South East Asia and the  Pacific after World War Two, now maintains a Pacific Fleet which  is the largest single element of its world wide Naval forces,  recently reinforced by the battlecruiser Frunze, one of the most  powerful warships afloat.  -  .

 At the former US base, Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam,  it maintains its   largest airforce and naval facility outside the Soviet Union  backed by a mercantile and fishing fleet, in ship numbers and  tonnage far in excess of any other in the region with the  possible exception of Japan and the US itself.

 At the same time, regional stability, for long stabilised after  the post-colonial turmoil, has been under increasing pressure.  .

 I have already referred to the situation in Vietnam and Cambodia,  which has implications for Thailand and its border security.

 The NPA,  fuelled by Communist elements is gaining in strength in   the Philippines, while popular dissent with the Marcos regime  increases and the US bases there look increasingly problematical.

 Incidentally, and just to show I never forget my rural roots, I   should point out that the EC must bear some of the responsibility  for unrest in the Philippines sugar regions because of the  poverty brought about by the depressed world sugar prices caused 

 by its Common Agricultural Policy.

 There is unrest too over French rule in New Caledonia and it is   conceivable, if not likely, that similar problems may arise in   Tahiti in time.

 8

 Border problems in Irian Jaya have the potential to fray  relations between Jakarta and Port Moresby,  and the refugee issue   is already souring PNG-Australia relations.

 On the other side of the region, the situation in Southern and  South Africa casts a cloud over the strategic future of the whole  continent and Indian Ocean security.

 A black revolution in that country can only advantage the Soviets  who already enjoy more than a toehold on the Indian Ocean through  base facilities in Madagascar, Ethiopia and Afghanistan,  not to   mention the Red Sea port of Aden.

 Further ahead —  and of particular importance to Tasmania - —  we  can expect the resources of Antarctica to become the focus of  international rivalry and the future of that continent to become  one of the major pressure points of the first part of the next  Century.

 It is worth noting, even today,  that the Soviet Union has four  well-established bases in Antarctica, three of them in Australian  Antarctic Territory.

 Australia has a total of three bases,  and with the leased supply  ship Nella Dan stuck in pack ice off Enderby Land, no airstrip  and a minimal budget for scientific research, our territorial  claim is staked on a shoestring.

 I am not saying that Australia is under any serious immediate  threat -- there is no question of this.

 It is worth remembering,  however,  the prediction I quoted  earlier:

 "Whatever hasn't happened will happen,  and no-one will be safe  from it."

 The point is that we may soon find ourselves negotiating  bilateral security arrangements with the US in an atmosphere very  different from that in which the ANZUS treaty was concluded.

 There is no doubt of the goodwill of the US or its desire to  ensure that the security of Australia is not threatened.

 The pressures on the US are complex, however, and its loyalties  and interests are much more diverse than they were. '

 Any arrangements negotiated by the Administration must pass the   hurdle of Senate ratification, and here in Australia,  if Labor is   still in Government in Canberra,  there will be strong pressure  from a diverse group of vociferous interests which would see the   end of ANZUS as a golden opportunity to end our ties with the US',  

 forever.

 The strength of this group, and its influence in the media,   should never be underestimated. ‘

 It was instructive to note the reaction to a statement in  Parliament on 15 November by the Defence Minister,  Mr Beazley.

 9

 In.the course of answering a question on the joint facilities, he   made what as far as I am aware was the first official Australian  ministerial announcement of constant Soviet satellite  surveillance of Australia.

 Mr Beazley said that up to six Soviet surveillance satellites in   non-geostationary orbits passed over Australia each day, and had  done so for many years.

 If Mr Beazley had been talking about US surveillance satellites.,   or perish the thought,  French satellites, can you imagine the  outcry?

 But no. These were Soviet satellites. And as far as I am aware  not one word has been printed or spoken about it since.

 In an article in "Australian Outlook" in August this year, Paul  Dibb, who is currently undertaking a major review of force  structure and Defence policy for the Government,  wrote that the  Soviet Union would like to see ANZUS terminated and the close  relationships between the treaty partners,  ASEAN nations and  other countries of the region ended.

 He warned:  "A breakdown of Anzus would represent a major advance for the Soviet cause."

 If "the price of liberty is eternal vigilance" we ignore this  warning at our peril as do all those who genuinely seek to  preserve the cause of peace.

 -- ooo---

