---
title: "Resettlement not a panacea for displaced people"
date: "1985-08-16"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213913016
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015077%22
---

 5Γ7

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 57/85

 RESETTLEMENT NOT A PANACEA FOR DISPLACED PEOPLE

 Resettling Indochinese refugees in third countries is not   an adequate solution for all refugee problems,  the   Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Mr Hurford,   told, the Refugee Council of Australia in Sydney today  

 (Friday).

 More comprehensive policies were needed,  he said,  such as:

 .  normal migration arrangements with source countries (for example,  the Orderly Departure/Family Reunion   Program from Vietnam);

 .  voluntary repatriation;

 .  screening procedures (for example,  those developed by the United Nations High Commissioner for   Refugees and the Royal Thai Government,  which apply   to Lao); and

 .  integration in the immediate locality.

 "Indochina is the source of the problem and we must look   to Indochina for the most durable solution," Mr Hurford   said.

 Mr Hurford said that when he was in Thailand and Malaysia   in April there was concern that resettlement was not   available to some of those most in need of the protection   provided by third-country resettlement.

 For others,  resettlement caused shock and dislocation. For those in the source country, large-scale resettlement   had a "draw" effect that could exacerbate the exodus.

 "Perceptions have changed markedly over the past five   years," Mr Hurford said.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "All major countries accept that resettlement must  continue to be an essential part of Indochinese refugee  policy, but not the only part.

 "Motives for migration in the region are now seen as  mixed, including economic and family-reunion  considerations, as well as discrimination."

 Mr Hurford said Australia's response to refugees was  arguably the best in the world and the Hawke Labor  Government would continue its compassionate response to  refugees.  -  -

 But the Government would address the hard questions of  refugee policy and re-evaluate policy in the light of the  Indochinese experience.

 "I would hope the Refugee Council could be a valuable  source of independent advice in this process," Mr Hurford  told the meeting.

 "But it must address the hard questions and advocate  practical, realistic policies that take account of all the  constraints faced by the Government."

 Adelaide  16 August, 1985

 Contact:  Mick Atkinson Minister's Office, Adelaide

 Tel (08) 213 2200 (08) 271 0842 (home)

