---
title: "To the citizenship ceremony in Woodville - Adelaide"
date: "1985-08-01"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213912730
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03004769%22
---

 ts 

 i ηα

 PRIME MINISTER

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

 TO THE CITIZENSHIP CEREMONY IN WOODVILLE -  ADELAIDE - 1 AUGUST 1985

 Lord Mayor, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen.

 Thank you for the opportunity to be with you tonight to  participate in this most important ceremony.

 Those people who have received citizenship tonight come  from very diverse backgrounds and from every continent  on earth. Their act of commitment has been witnessed by  members of their families, representatives of almost 

 every ethnic organisation in South Australia, and by the  community at large.

 I congratulate those taking this step. Through this act  of commitment you have the opportunity to become fully  participating members of Australian society. We are  proud to count you now as Australians.

 You will be eligible to obtain an Australian passport  and receive the protection that this affords around the  world.  Importantly, you will become eligible to vote  and participate in the democratic processes. Maybe some 

 of you may wish to join the Public Service or stand for  election to State or Federal Parliament. Indeed one of  you may aspire to take over my job as Prime Minister of  this country. All of these avenues are open to you.

 You have become citizens under the Australian  Citizenship Act - an Act which provides the basis for  the citizenship of all Australians regardless of their  origin, culture or linguistic background. Under that 

 Act people can become citizens by birth in Australia, by  descent through birth of a child to an Australian parent  living overseas, or by applying to become a citizen and  electing to take part in a ceremony such as this one  here tonight.

 My Government has taken steps to ensure that the  legislation does not discriminate between persons on the  basis of their sex, marital status or present or  previous nationality; we have also provided for review 

 by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal of decisions to  refuse citizenship under the Act; and are making sure  policy in this area is thoroughly Australian in  character.  We aim to encourage new settlers to become 

 fully participating members of our society as soon as  possible. We have reduced the residential requirement-  from 3 to 2 years and have eased the English language  requirement from an adequate to a basic knowledge of 

 English.

 From my earliest time of thinking about our great  country I have judged much of that greatness,  and  potential for greatness, to be associated with our  readiness to open up our land to those who would join us 

 from other countries.

 Australia has been immeasurably enriched by the  contribution of immigrants to our national life. One of  our nation's greatest achievements has been its  acceptance of a wide and diverse range of people, 

 regardless of race, religion or ethnic background.

 The fundamental principle of my Government's migration  program is that migration should continue to enrich our  lives and bring social, cultural and economic benefits  to our nation.

 This will only occur if the program is carefully  designed and well managed. .  ,

 First of all as a responsible and humanitarian member of  the world community, Australia has a duty to make an  appropriate contribution to the resolution of the world  refugee situation.

 Secondly we have obligations to those Australians in our  community who are separated from their immediate family  (that is spouses, dependent children and aged parents,)  and want to bring them here to join the family group.

 For the rest, potential migrants must be selected on the  basis of their likely contribution to Australian society  if we are to maximise benefit, aid our economic recovery  and make immigration more acceptable to the Australian  community.

 As more than one million people express an interest to  migrate to this country every year we have to make  choices carefully.

 3

 Our target level of immigration for 1985/86 is about  84,000. At a time of unacceptably high unemployment  this level would not be responsible if it only added new  migrants to unemployment queues and reduced job 

 opportunities for the unemployed in Australia.

 To avoid this, selection is oriented towards those  applicants most likely to find productive employment in  Australia without competing with the unemployed for  jobs.

 The increase in migration, therefore, in 1985/86 is  focused on the economic categories - skilled labour,  employer nominees and business migrants.

 I believe that we will be able to increase migration  levels further in the longer term as economic recovery  strengthens, but only if we are selective and ensure  that the program is structured in the short term to be  of maximum benefit to our nation.

 I am firmly convinced that a sensitive and carefully  managed migration program of this kind will contribute  to economic recovery and continue to enrich our society 

 and our culture.

 In this regard, my Government believes that it is vital  that there be specially designed programs for new  arrivals to settle successfully in this country. Since 

 coming to office we have examined many of the programs  which are provided for new settlers to ensure that they  provide the best possible assistance for those in need.

 For instance we have increased the Grant-in-aid scheme  to ethnic community organisations; extended the adult  migrant education program as well as those programs  especially designed for migrant school children, and 

 boosted the interpreter/translator services. A review  of all aspects of the adult migrant education program is  now under way.

 We have done all this against the background of a keen  appreciation that the commitment to this country our new  citizens are making - their full identification with  this nation - imposes obligations and responsibilities 

 on all of us.

 The commitment of citizenship we have witnessed tonight  is important for the health of the nation and is  necessary for full participation in the Australian  community.

 On behalf of all Australians I welcome you as new  citizens and hope that you are able to contribute as  much to this country as the generations of migrants that  have gone before you.

 ****************************************

