---
title: "Australia will continue its substantial refugee effort in Thailand"
date: "1985-05-02"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213911836
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09015103%22
---

 3 Î›

 Viv .  ,,

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 The H o n . CHRIS H U R F O R D , M .F ;

 MPS27/85 2 May 1985

 Bangkok, 2 May.1985: "Australia will continue its substantial refugee effort in Thailand," the Australian  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Chris  Hurford, said in Bangkok today.

 Mr Hurford was speaking at the end of a series of  discussions on refugee issues with the Thai Prime Minister,  the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Interior, government  officials and representatives of several concerned organ­

 isations.

 Thailand has the largest refugee caseload in the region,  with more than 120,000 registered refugees.

 "Australia understands the problems this is creating for the  Thai government and people," Mr Hurford said.

 "We see a continued resettlement program out of Thailand as  essential and Australia will continue to play its part.

 "I expect Australia will resettle more than 2,000 refugees  from Thailand this year."

 However, Mr Hurford said that, by itself, international re­ settlement could not resolve the refugee problem in Thailand  or anywhere else in South East Asia.

 "We need to give attention to other solutions," he said.

 "For example,  Australia supports the progress made by  Thailand in developing screening procedures for newly  arrived Lao, and in voluntary repatriation for Lao already  in Thailand.

 â– Australia believes that voluntary repatriation should be  pursued vigorously for refugees from all countries in the  region."

 2/

 Parliament House, Canberra

 - 2  -

 He said that he would raise this issue in Vietnam next week.

 Mr Hurford expressed his appreciation for the valuable  briefings he had received over the past few days.

 â– Thailand is one of Australia's most important neighbours,"  Mr Hurford said.

 â– Relations between our two countries are very strong, and we  need to build on this relationship to our mutual advantage."

 Canberra, 3 May 1985

 Media Contact: Mr Mick Atkinson, Parliament House, Canberra. Tel: (062) 73 2179.

