---
title: "Most Australians favour larger population"
date: "1986-12-03"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214043087
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04000400%22
---

 /^CxIED ΙΖΪΓίΧ] CxlDS C ^/^0

 ΐϊίϊΘ C O s cQ d  (3ΧΙλ Ώ Θ  (X lQ O tllX sX Iil^) K L C P c

 MPS 131/86

 MOST AUSTRALIANS FAVOUR LARGER POPULATION

 Australians have positive attitudes to population growth and   migrant settlement needs. And they also are increasingly   better informed about population and immigration issues.

 These findings of a recent Australia-wide survey by Reark   Research were given in Adelaide today to the national   conference of the Australian Population Association by the   Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Chris Hurford.

 Mr Hurford said the results underlined growing community   acceptance of the Hawke Labor Government's population rationale   and immigration policies.

 The Reark survey, commissioned by the Department of Immigration   and Ethnic Affairs, polled more than 2200 people in urban and   rural areas in all States and Territories. It found that:

 - half the Australian population is aware of the present   population size and only 10 per cent consider it   excessive

 - the majority considers there is either no optimum   population for Australia or that it is 25-100 million

 - two-thirds of Australians consider that with proper   management, a larger population need not harm the   environment

 - a majority considers that a thinly-populated continent   will cause problems for Australia in the future and   one-thrid of respondents favoured a bigger population   for defence reasons alone

 - 85 per cent think that Australia's current population   growth rate is either about right or too low

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 - 60 per cent consider that Australians do not favour  larger families and a majority say the Government should  not provide financial or other help to assist people who  want more children. Notwithstanding this, a majority 

 said the Government should encourage bigger families in  preference to increasing immigration

 - a majority said that doubling Australia's population  would result in similar, if not higher, standards for  living for the average Australian

 - only 12 per cent of those surveyed indicated the  Government should be doing less to help new migrants to  settle in Australia. 85 per cent of Australians believe  existing settlement programs and services should be  maintained or increased

 - more than half considered that Australia should maintain  or increase its intake of refugees and displaced people.

 Mr Hurford told the conference that recent calls for rapid and  dramatically expanded immigration programs should recognise the  increasing but cautious community support for higher  immigration intakes.

 "These calls amount to too much, too soon," Mr Hurford said.  "They take no account of the significant dislocations that  would occur if the intake were increased willy-nilly without  planning. The strains created on health and education services 

 alone would be enormous.

 "Population increases need to be matched with the capacity of  the economic and social infrastructure, the capacity of the  labour market and community attitudes.

 "Our policy is to work towards larger migration intakes phased  in against responsible and balanced time frames.  Planning is  essential.  -

 "Since I assumed responsibility for the immigration portfolio  our Government has increased the migration intake from 70,000  in 1984/85 to around 100,000 in 1986/87.

 "I am of the view that this order of increase has been welcomed  by the Australian community and I believe it will be possible  to maintain this rate of increase in coming years.

 "While the Government welcomes the growing support in the  community for a larger migration intake, I would caution those  who are prosposing dramatic and unrealistic increases.

 3

 "There is always the risk that such proposals will simply  create a backlash against migration - thus defeating the  objective we all share," Mr Hurford said.

 Adelaide 03 December 1986

 Media Contact: David Lander Godfrey Wiseman

 DIEA Minister's Office

 Tel: (062) 64 2421 (08) 213 2200

