---
title: "Youth Services Documentation and Promotion Program (YSDPP): Announcement of projects"
date: "1986-04-02"
creators:
  - "Dawkins, John"
source: "Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Youth Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213917839
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09023152%22
---

 ·»

 i

 MEDIA RELEASE

 YOUTH SERVICES DOCUMENTATION AND PROMOTION  PROGRAM (YSDPP)s ANNOUNCEMENT OF PROJECTS

 The Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for  Youth Affairs, John Dawkins^ today announced that  a further 30 youth services* would be allocated  grants to undertake a documentation and  promotional study of their operations.

 The Youth Services Documentation and Promotion  Project is one of the four components of the  Youth Services Development Program; part of the  Priority One: Young Australia Strategy, which  seeks to improve young people’s access to the  services which can assist them.

 Projects selected for documentation cover a  diverse spread of areas, including: housing,  employment, education, training and community  support services. They have been selected on the  basis of their effectiveness in meeting young  people's needs, and their use of innovative 

 approaches in encouraging young people's own  initiatives.

 Mr Dawkins explained that the projects were  nominated by State and Territory youth bureaux  and the youth field itself and recommended by  both an Advisory Committee of experts and the .   Youth Services Development Working Party whiph 

 contains representatives of Commonwealth, State  and local governments and the non-government f  sector.

 Mr Dawkins said that through the documentation of  these services effective approaches would be  promoted for meeting the diverse needs of young  Australians coming from all cultural and socio­

 economic backgrounds.

 * Full list of documentation projects attached.

 Contact: Sally Babbage

 Telephone: (062) 724938

 2 April 1986

 PRIORI!  O N EYOUNG AUSTRALIA

 PR ESS  RELEASE

 ATTACHMENT

 FINAL PHASE OF PROJECTS SELECTED FOR DOCUMENTATION UNDER  THE YOUTH SERVICES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

 A. Basic Needs

 1. Illawarra Youth Housing (NSW) Offers medium and long-term accommodation in  Wollongong and Nowra. Assists young homeless  people in a migrant working class area and 

 involves young people in management of the  project.  ,

 2. Annie Kenny (Tas) Young women's refuge in Hobart.

 3. Hedland Community Youth Service (WA) Energetic group providing a suite of programs  for young people in Port Hedland including  emergency housing

 4. Windsor Youth Emergency Shelters (QLD) The only mainstream "emergency" service being  documented.  This refuge encourages young  people to take responsibility for their lives  and to become effective members of the 

 community.

 5. Indigenous People's Council (NSW) Agency based in Bankstown providing · .  accommodation:services for Aboriginal people.

 6. Abode of the Friendly Toad (S A ) Low cost meals provided by a group of highly  committed Christians in Adelaide.

 B .  Labour Market Program

 7. Action Centre (SA) CYSS project providing work experience and  skills courses in Adelaide, for instance aged  care,  creative writing,  retail skills plus 

 vocational advice.

 8. Youth and Family Services, Logan City (QLD)  Multi-service Christian Brothers community  working in social wasteland of new tract  housing and minimal infrastructure. Uses 

 surrogate parenthood to allow young people to  live with a boarding family and thus enable  family conflicts to be resolved. The  programme provides a local initiative to keep  young people within the community rather than 

 sending them to children's homes or  institutions.

 programme provides a local initiative to keep  young people within the community rather than  sending them to children's homes or  institutions.

 9. Caloola Farm (ACT) Rural· setting for instilling confidence ana  skills in the unemployed.  Provides  accommodation and facilities for developing 

 skills and recreational activities.

 10. KEG Inc. Highly motivated group working in inner city  high rise area of Melbourne loosely associated  with Kensington CYSS. It is a non-profit, 

 self-help programme which aims to provide work  experience for unemployed young people in area  of garden maintenance.

 11. Barwon Youth Employment Development Office (VIC)  Geelong-based employment lobby group running  computerised job matching service with  assistance of the local CES.

 12. Wollongong Out of Workers Union (NSW) Acts as a support group for unemployed people,  with activities such as conducting research  and staging concerts.  Only unemployed people 

 may join.

 13. Pipkorn1s (Cambrai) One of the most common issues raised by rural  young people is their lack of access to a  range of education and employment  opportunties.  This project was developed by 

 the Cambrai Area School, and is run in  conjunction with the local community. Upon  leaving school, students are interviewed in  relation to their interest areas.  They are  then encouraged to undertake correspondence  courses, with support from school staff.

 14. Employment 2000, WA Training, work experience and career  counselling offered.  Also offers opportunity  for unemployed to develop self-employment  projects.

 Education and Training

 15. CITY High Schools Program (SA) Introduction for students to youth issues:  employment,  drugs,  counselling, decision­ making etc. CITY is part of the SA Department

 of Labour.  Unemployed young people are  trained to run seminars on unemployment in  secondary schools.

 16. A Program for Asian Refugee Youth EPUY course concentrating on labour market and  survival skills, especially for Vietnamese  young people.

 17. St KiIda Community High School  Alternative govenment schooling for students  rejecting mainstream education.  Many of these  students are from single-parent backgrounds 

 living on pensions and experiencing low self­ esteem. The curriculum of the school  encourages participation of young people to  have input in the school curriculum. Young  people have some control over their decision  making and adopt a more positive approach in 

 their lives.

 18. ACT Family Planning Association (ACT)  provides sex education advice for young  people.

 19. Trax (Council of Adult Education) (VIC) An integrated educational experience for young  unemployed people in the western suburbs of  Melbourne.

 20. Frankston College of TAFE  Running programs for girls to do  apprenticeships in non-traditional female  trades.

 21. Tranby Aboriginal College (NSW) Courses provided include:  Business studies, skills courses,  coures to do parks and  wildlife work. As part of IYY developed state 

 network of Aboriginal youth workers and peer  support groups.  Also provides child care to  Aboriginal young women students at the College  so that they can obtain literacy and general 

 educational skills.

 Community Support Streetwork - Theme Treatment (possibly) Arts - Theme Treatment

 22. Haywire Melbourne-based young women's program, which  provides support services and emergency  accommodation.

 23. Brisbane Youth Service Youth service concentratiny on outreach  accommodation counselling and referral work.  Co-ordinator is Mike Tanskey.

 24. Cosmos (TAS) Program for disabled young people  concentrating on recreational integration with  the non-disabled.

 25. Nhulunbuy Youth and Social Club (NT)  Recreational group in isolated mining town,  with a population consisting of 500 young  people between 12 and 18 years; The town has  had problems with anti-social behaviour. This 

 club offers a broad range of activities and  services.

 26. Filipino Young Women Project (WA) This is sponsored by the Catholic Church and  offers cross cultural counselling for  Filipino brides. There is a social support  group and religious sister to give spiritual 

 support.

 27. Fairfield City Council (NSW) High migrant density area with innovative .   services of quality run by local council.

 28. Youth of Byron Shire (YOBS) (NSW) Assists unemployed by running a shop and small  enterprises. Also involved in theatre  production.

 29. City of Springvale Provides broad range of social/leisure  activities and education, employment and ' welfare related services.

 30. 20/10 (NSW) A community group providing support and  accommodation services in Sydney for young  homosexual men and women.

 31. Aboriginal Child Care Agency Various programs supporting young Aboriginal  mothers and placing children in foster homes  when needed.

 Community Development and Co-ordination

 32. Liverpool Young Women's Resource Centre (NSW)  Specialised women's only resource, research  and referral agency.

 33. SEQYAC (QLD) -

 Youth accommodation coalition in SE Queensland  undertaking research, referral and networking.  Is conducting research into needs of homeless  youth and providing services to respond to 

 these needs. Offers short medium and long  term accommodation options. Collaborates with  any other organisation working in this area.

 34. Roma and District Family Association (QLD) Multi-service agency operating in rural  Queensland:  accommodation employment . counselling (drug,  alcohol)  and information.

