---
title: "Refugees and drugs"
date: "1986-01-22"
creators:
  - "Cadman, Alan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213916259
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09018869%22
---

 4-

 PRESS RELEASE ALAN CADMAN M.P.   SHADOW MINISTER FOR   IMMIGRATION &  ETHNIC   AFFAIRS

 REFUGEES AND DRUGS

 On returning from Bangkok this morning, the Leader of the Coalition  Task Force on Refugees and Drugs, Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs, Alan Cadman, said that the disruptive and  destabilising effect of Vietnam was being felt throughout the  region.

 "The displacement of persons caused by the totalitarian regimes  in Cambodia and Laos has been such that hundreds of thousands  of people have fled the obnoxious regime imposed on those countries  by North Vietnam and the Soviet Union. .

 "The world has responded strongly to the humanitarian needs of  refugees in Indo China, but we have yet to deal with the political  problems of Vietnam. .  .

 "The withdrawal of Vietnam from Cambodia and Laos, especially  would be welcomed by the people of those countries, and that would  produce stability, and opportunities for movement back into those  countries by displaced Lao and Cambodians currently living in camps in  Thailand.

 "Australias role in family reunion for Lao and Cambodian people ' has not been as strong as I would wish to see.

 "There are a few hundred close relatives whose chance to come to  Australia must be confirmed.

 "Following effective family reunions,then I believe the remainder of  individuals in most of the refugee camps would prefer resettlement  in their country of origin. This will only be achieved if  sufficient poltical pressure, supported by Aid Programmes, is  applied to the Vietnamese controlled regimes in Cambodia and Laos.

 "In regard to drugs, the Task Force was very strongly and favourably  impressed by the efforts of the Thai Government to control the  movement of drugs, to conduct a crop substitution programme for 

 opium poppy growers, and to use advanced techniques for rehabilitation  of adicts.

 "Australia must show its willingness to deal forcefully with the  drug trade, both by way of penalties for traffickers, and by strong  co-operation with the Governments of Indo China, and particularly  those Governments where production of poppies for heroin has been  a tradition.

 "The good levels of co-operation amongst the appropriate police  forces has commenced, but Australian efforts need to be upgraded  and supported, both in Thailand and in Singapore.

 r

 "There are a number of Thai medical and investigation officers  who, if invited to Australia, would provide useful information  on rehabilitation programmes, and on detection and control. I will be making recommendations to the appropriate Ministers 

 in regard to the possible visits of these individuals."

 .  ■  .  -  2  -  - '  .

 22 January 1985 

 Contact: 02 639 5155

