---
title: "Misunderstandings about new category of migrants dispelled"
date: "1986-10-28"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214042290
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04000416%22
---

 C O M M O N W E A L T H   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY C. I. s.

 MOMDStHIKI [?©[& A M ©  [Ï‹Î“ÎœÎœÎ™ÎŸÎ² A C ^A Em

 MPS 111/86

 MISUNDERSTANDINGS ABOUT NEW CATEGORY OF MIGRANTS DISPELLED

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Chris Hurford,   today moved to dispel minunderstandings about the new   Independent and Concessional category of migrants.

 The category, introduced on 1 July this year, permits extended   family members - sponsored brothers, sisters, non-dependent   children, nephews and nieces - to migrate to Australia,   provided they also qualify in relation to employability, age, 

 education and skills.

 The category can also apply in certain circumstances to people   with no family in Australia to sponsor them.

 Mr Hurford stressed that applicants were assessed against a   points system which selected in favour of people who were   young,  skilled, educated and employable and thus would settle   better in Australia without the need for welfare services.

 "I must emphasise there is no guarantee that extended family   members will be able to migrate to Australia automatically," he   said.

 "People need to reach a pass mark of 70 points to qualify, and   most of those points relate to employability, age,  education   and skills.

 "Sponsorship of a brother, sister or grown up (non-dependent)   child results in an entitlement to 10 points, while sponsorship   of nephews or nieces results in a five point entitlement. Five   further points are available for sponsorship by an Australian   citizen.

 Parliament House, Canberra

 2

 "This means, in fact, that extended family members and those  sponsored by Australian citizens have an advantage by receiving  a bonus of five, 10 or 15 points.

 "The remaining points have to be scored against the other  criteria - for example,  whether the people would be readily  employable in their occupation in Australia, whether they have  recognised professional, technical or trade skills, what level  of education they have reached, their age group, and so on."

 Mr Hurford said it was essential Australia employed a  "rationing" system for its migration program. There were  hundreds of thousands more people wanting to come here than  there were places available.

 "We allocate a number of places on compassionate grounds to  refugees and to reunions of close family members," he said.  "While we do give advantages to extended family members, we are  also obliged to give some preference to those whom this country  needs to aid its economic growth.

 "I must emphasise that, although there is an increase in our  migrant intake for this financial year 1986/87, that increase  does not mean a lowering of assessment standards because the  demand to come here is so much greater than the number of  places available," Mr Hurford said.

 Canberra  28 October 1986

 Media Contact: Eric Brookbanks DIEA  (062) 64 2321

 Translated copies are available in Arabic, Chinese, French,  Greek, Italian, Khmer, Lao, Polish, Protuguese, Spanish,  Turkish, Vietnamese, Creation and Serbiann.

