---
title: "Australia, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea"
date: "1986-03-14"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Resources and Energy"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213917432
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09022657%22
---

 PRESS STATEMENTMINISTER FOR RESOURCES AND ENERGY  SENATOR GARETH EVANS Q.C. .  14 March 1986

 EMBARGOED UNTIL 9.30 am SATUDAY, 15 MARCH 1986 ' â–   \  â– 

 A U S T R A L I A ,  I N D O N E S I A  A N D  P A P U A  N E W  G U I N E A

 A t t a c h e d  is a c o p y  o f  a n  a d d r e s s  S e n a t o r  E v a n s  w i l l  

 d e l i v e r  in M e l b o u r n e  t o m o r r o w . H e  w i l l  be s p e a k i n g  to t h e  

 T h i r t e e n t h  N a t i o n a l  C o n f e r e n c e  of the A u s t r a l i a n  I n s t i t u t e  

 o f  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A f f a i r s , in h i s  c a p a c i t y  a s  M i n i s t e r  

 A s s i s t i n g  t h e  M i n i s t e r  f o r  F o r e i g n  A f f a i r s .

 P l e a s e  n o t e  t h e  e m b a r g o . .

 * * * * * * * *

 CANBERRA/MELBOURNE

 AUSTRALIA, INDONESIA AND PAPUA NSW GUINEA: THL VIEW FROM CANBERRA

 Address by tne Minister Lor Resources and Eneryy and Minister  Assisting the Minister tor Foreign Attairs, Senator Gareth Evans  QC ,  to the Institute oi International Attairs L 31 t i  National  Conference, Pharmacy Co L  I .  eye,  Royal Parade, Parkvilie, Melbourne, 

 IS Ma r c h 19U b

 I congratulate the Australian Institute oi International 

 Affairs for the choice of topic at this its 13th National 

 Conference.  It is timely and appropriate for informed 

 opinion in Australia,  Indonesia and Papua New Guinea to be 

 calmly considering tne issues wnich arise as a consequence. 

 of the march of developments in those areas where our 

 three countries' interests and boundaries touch.  The need 

 for understanding between neighbours and for cooperation 

 in resolving the issues whicn inevitably arise between 

 them, is fundamental to the stability and progress of us 

 all.

 It certainly seems that tne political will to achieve this 

 understanding and cooperation has been strongly and 

 increasingly evident in all three countries. In the last 

 four months Mr Hayden has visited Indonesia and Papua New 

 Guinea, Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Dr Mochtar,  has come 

 here and Papua New Guinea's Foreign Minister, Mr Vagi has 

 visited both Australia and Indonesia.

 My contribution to the conference will be to focus on one 

 side and two corners of the triangle - relations between 

 Australia and Indonesia and between Australia and Papua 

 New Guinea. Australia has diverse relations with both 

 Indonesia and Papua New Guinea but it is only certain 

 aspects,  albeit very important ones, which impinge on all 

 three countries.

 In this sense, the notion of a triangular relationship 

 between the three countries is perhaps a little misleading 

 - it certainly cannot be described as a menage-a-trois in

 -2-

 the strict sense of that term. There are undoubtedly many 

 important interests which the three countries share (not

 least of which is regional stability) and there are

 important problems which they have to solve together. But 

 it would be an error to develop an undue focus solely on 

 problems such as the border crossers in PNG and the 

 arrivals of Irianese in the Torres Strait. The three 

 countries are aware of the sensitivity o.f these issues and 

 deal with them carefully.  But it has been the cornerstone

 of policy in each country not to. allow these problems to

 overwhelm the development and expansion of the several 

 bilateral relationships.

 This was very much tire approach taken d,ur ing Dr Mochtar 1  s 

 recent visit to Australia and Mr Hayden's visit to Jakarta 

 just two weeks ago which were in the nature of regular 

 exchanges to review shared interests and concerns.  During 

 those visits it was obvious that there was no question of 

 either Indonesia or Australia ignoring, the differences 

 between them or attempting to ignore problems. But it -nas 

 also been clear to us both that wq. mush not allow these  differences to overshadow the important areas where we 

 have mutual interests and aspirations.

 Bilaterally,  Australia and. Indones.ia are working closely 

 together to expand the contacts be.tween our societies in 

 the pursuit of economic development, .  cultural and 

 educational exchanges, and the cultivation and expansion of 

 "people to people" contact. Qur different histories and 

 cultural affinities have, in the past/ made it difficult 

 to develop many of those links, which should be natural 

 between such close neighbours. I think it is also 

 apparent that in the past there was a degree of neglect, 

 or perhaps ignorance,  about this a,sp.e.ct of our relations. 

 Indeed there is still much work to-be done to redress-, the 

 deficiency.

 -3-

 Ï‹f c  course, the success of our mutual efforts to bridge the 

 differences between us will be achieved only tnrough a 

 good deal of patience, ana a will to develop understanding 

 on both siues. Australians must come to accept that 

 Indonesia faces vastly different social and economic 

 pressures than does Australia.  Indonesians must similarly 

 come to understand tne individualism which is fundamental 

 to Australian society. With such understanding, the 

 development of the relationship promises enrichment for 

 the peoples of Doth countries, with the very differences 

 between the societies offering much for the other to learn 

 by .

 Economic relations between Australia and Indonesia nave 

 perhaps not developed at the pace which both countries 

 would like,  but they do have promising aspects, and there 

 are quite exciting long term prospects,  especially in the 

 light of the moves now gathering pace towards joint 

 development of the hydrocarbon resources of the Timor 

 Gap.  Joint ventures between Australian and Indonesian 

 companies also nave potential in such areas as gold and 

 coal mining,  and fisheries. We are both countries rich in 

 resources and there is obviously scope for cooperation in 

 their development.

 On international and regional issues,  Australia and 

 Indonesia are continuing close consultation in the pursuit 

 of their many shared goals. This was an important element 

 of Mr Hayden's recent talks in Jakarta. We both support 

 efforts towards a peaceful settlement in Cambodia and 

 towards the general promotion of regional stability. We 

 share tne desire to work towards disarmament and the 

 defusing of superpower rivalry. We also have common cause 

 in tne pursuit of free and open international trade and in 

 resisting protectionist tendencies.

 -4-

 Austra L ia and Indonesia also share a desire for good

 relations with their mutual neighbour, Papua New Guinea.

 The immediate region in which tne three countries find

 themselves is something of a crossroad between Asia, 

 Oceania and the South Pacific, but it is - somewhat 

 surprisingly for any crossroad - a region of peace and 

 stability, and this is due in large measure to the 

 importance which each of the countries involved places in 

 developing sound bilateral relations with the other.

 For Australia, Papua New Guinea has always had a special

 importance - being recognised all the way back to the 

 early days following Federation. Both geographic

 proximity and historical connections have facilitated the  development of cooperation in a great many fields, and 

 this cooperation has been increasing steadily over the 

 past ten years.

 Recently the relationship has been subject to both 

 reappraisal, and change. 198-.5 marked; ten years since 

 Papua New Guinea's independence and this symbolic 

 achievement occasioned assessments within Papua New Guinea 

 about its own future and the future of its relations with 

 others, including Australia. In that year Australia and 

 Papua New Guinea negotiated new long, term aiid arrangements 

 and there were a number of high level exchanges between 

 the two countries.

 Of course, at the end of last year· the Government of Mr 

 Michael Somare in Papua New Guinea was replaced by that of 

 Mr Paias Wingti - the result of a constitutional and 

 democratic process. This change testif-ies once more to 

 the strength ana vitality of Papua New Guinea's political; 

 institutions. .

 -5-

 Despite reappraisal and change,  the relationship between 

 Australia and Papua New Guninea is characterized by 

 continuity and stability. One important illustration is

 in the relationship, we have in the area of development 

 assistance, which is to move on to a new oasis from the 

 middle of tnis year.

 For the decade after Papua New Guinea's independence, 

 under two long-term aid agreements, our assistance 

 basically tooK the form of direct budget support. From 

 1976/77 to 1980/81 a total of $1,060 million was 

 transferred to PNG as direct budget support, and from 

 1981/82 to the end of the current year a further $1,394 

 million will be paid. The Governments of Australia and 

 Papua New Guinea were in agreement that aid in this form 

 best suited PNG's development needs and the requirements 

 of the bilateral relationship at this time. It met two 

 important Papua New Guinea Government requirements: 

 fiscal security and full flexibility.

 Significant changes in the aid relationship are occurring, 

 but at a measured pace. The objectives of security and 

 flexibility in matters of finance remain critical to Papua 

 New Guinea, but two others are also identified as of key 

 importance: self-reliance and economic growth. There is

 broad consensus on these objectives within PNG, as well as 

 among others - including the international financial 

 institutions, the experts commissioned to review the PNG 

 economy or aid to PNG, and Australia itself. Our own

 position has been influenced by the 1984 report of the 

 Committee, under Sir Gordon Jackson, to review the 

 Australia Overseas Aid program.

 The framework for the aid relationship over the next five 

 years is now in place, and discussions in recent months 

 between the two Governments have looked to the

 implementation of these arrangements. In the new

 -b-

 agreemunt Australia again stressed our long-term 

 commitment to assisting the development of PNG. Papua New 

 Guinea's objective of greater fiscal self-reliance, its 

 need to know in advance for planning purposes what 

 variations there will be in aid levels and the funding of 

 specific activities in accordance with P-NG '  s priorities 

 were ail recognised in the negotiations 1  that led up to the 

 agreement.

 Agreement on new long-termâ– aid arrangements was reached in  1985 and signed by the two Prime -Ministers in Port Moresby 

 last September. Under the agreement:

 - Australia will contribute some $1,400 million :at

 1985 prices over the five years commencing

 1986/87;

 - the real level of budget support aid will decline 

 by 5% in each year of this period; and

 - the current amount of non-budget aid will 

 increase each year so that the annual rate of 

 decline in overall aid levels will be 3%.

 These new arrangements will mean -sustained cooperative 

 efforts by both Australia and Papua New Guinea since 

 neither of us until recently has had -in place the 

 mechanism to handle what will be a rapidly growing

 Australia-PNG program of projects, training and other 

 forms of aid. For Papua New- Guinea, which must .define 

 priorities, within '.national 'economic development

 parameters, the new arrangements will create challenges. 

 In the past PNG has not absorbed non-budget aid of such

 variety or in such volume. Continuing dialogue between us 

 will be necessary to identify appropriate ways to use., new 

 forms of aid and -  to ensure against any underexpenditure 

 due to inability to meet targets. Such dialogue .is--, well 

 under way and I am confident -that it will -  produce 

 beneficial results.

 -7-

 New patterns of bilateral Australia-PNG aid, and the 

 gradual but deliberate decline in the real aid levels, 

 will also have broader implications.  Tne gains in terms 

 of self-discipline in management and of greater 

 self-reliance are likely to have a favourable impact on 

 national politics and on the economy, and should outweigh 

 any short term discomfort. Furthermore, Papua New Guinea 

 may also choose to diversify its sources of aid. This is 

 something Australia would unequivocally welcome - a 

 narrow, quasi-dependence on us certainly does not serve 

 Australia's interests and would be incompatible with PNG's 

 increasingly outward-looking foreign policy.

 PNG has recently been taking a more active stance 

 internationally and within the region. It has developed 

 commercial and trade links with a greater number of 

 countries. At the United Nations, in its relations with 

 the ASEAN countries, and in bilateral relations with other 

 countries it has shown confidence and a readiness to 

 develop new lines of approach. Papua New Guinea's 

 positions on major international issues are, in many ways, 

 consonant with Australia's.

 We are looking forward to continuing to work together on a 

 range of matters of mutual interest, including those 

 concerning the South Pacific. We are both members of 

 institutions - such as the South Pacific For urn and South 

 Pacific Commission - in which Pacific Island countries are 

 able to advance their political and economic interests.  We 

 share the same ideal of a region peacefully pursuing 

 development within a secure environment. Neither of us 

 wishes to see the South Pacific,  still perhaps the most 

 peaceful region in the world, prejudiced by destabilising 

 influences brought in from outside.  .

 -8-

 Of course, a mu j o r foreign policy cons lue r  at ion ol Papua 

 New Guinea is its r e la t ionsh ip with Indonesia. The two

 countries have a common land border, crossing inhospitable 

 terrain and dividing people o£ close Kinship. Hut the

 relationship between them is now well developed. For a 

 number ot years Indonesia and PNG nave maintained a close 

 dialogue and they have in place a basic agreement by which 

 they can regulate matters of common concern. Australia 

 has always respected the obvious bilateral nature of these 

 ar r angeinen ts .

 It is true that over the past two years in particular, 

 aspects of the PNG-Indonesia border have had ramifications 

 beyond tne immeoiate area. Indeed this has led - perhaps 

 misleadingly, because tne problems remain essentially 

 bilateral ones - to increased focus on the notion of a 

 "triangular relationship" between Australia·, Indonesia and 

 Papua New Guinea. One dimension of this has been the

 international relief efforts to assist the border crossers 

 who now number over 10,000 and remain located in camps 

 inside Papua New Guinea. Another dimension has been the

 crossing into Australian territory in the Torres Strait of 

 small numbers of Irianese - 11 so far (the latest ones 

 being in February) - who in each case to date have first 

 spent some time in Papua New Guinea.

 These developments are clearly of some concern to

 Australia. Again, from our perspective, they remain issues' 

 whose basic element must be untangleo by Indonesia., and

 Papua New Guinea themselves. In tne. case of Irianese. in 

 border camps Australia has been the largest contributor to 

 the relief efforts administered by the United Nations High 

 Commissioner for Refugees; our contributions have already, 

 totalled nearly two million dollars. Beyond that we.-have 

 an obvious concern in any matter. which may have

 implications for security and stability in, the region.

 -9-

 On 21 January Papua New Guinea's Prime Minister, Paias 

 Wingti,  announced a new policy for dealing with the 

 border-crosser problem.  The key element of this was the 

 decision by his Government to accede to the 1951 United 

 Nations Convention and 1967 Protocol Relating to the 

 Status of Refugees. The Australian Government has welcomed 

 this decision. Mr Wingti in his announcement also 

 foreshadowed new measures representing a significant step 

 forward in attempts to resolve the problem of the border 

 crossers in camps in Papua New Guinea.

 The three countries which are the subject of this 

 conference are probably as different as any three in the 

 world thrown together in such a way.  Between us we 

 reflect enormous disparities in population,  land area, 

 problems of development, and social historical and ethnic 

 background.  But let us not forget we also have a good 

 deal in common.

 We have all been colonies. Australia,  Indonesia and Papua 

 New Guinea all have an outlook on the world which 

 coincides in important respects. Our perceptions of the 

 security needs of our region are not dissimilar. We are 

 all in that stage of economic development in which we are 

 hostage to the ups and downs of world commodity prices.

 While the three countries are important to each other for 

 the reasons I have given, each also looks outward to other 

 relationships. For Indonesia, ASEAN and other countries 

 to its north are a principal focus of interest, and issues 

 of importance in South East Asia necessarily preoccupy 

 it. For Papua New Guinea, the South Pacific is an 

 important area of interest and,  indeed,  there is a very 

 real sense in which the Indonesia/Papua New Guinea border, 

 dividing a single island though it does, is the boundary 

 between South East Asia and the South Pacific. For 

 Australia,  in addition to our prime concern with the

 -10-

 region in which we live,  South East Asia and the South 

 Pacific,  there are important connections beyond including, 

 of course,  our participation in the system of Western 

 alliances.

 The future will for all' three countries-, however,  depend  to a significant extent on our relations with each other. 

 Indeed for most countries economic growth will require a 

 large measure of harmony in relationships in their 

 particular region.  To maximise trading· opportunities, 

 including in the area' of commodities, and to develop fully 

 their natural resources and national potentialcountries, 

 like ours should as far as possible work together in an 

 international environment at once more uncertain, mqre 

 complex and also more interdependent than ever.

 Our prospects for realising our national goals - the 

 prosperous development of our peoples in a region at peace 

 - will be greatly helped by our strengthening the ties 

 between us.

 Exchange and communication at all levels,  increasing our 

 awareness of each other and facilitating the solution of 

 any difficulties that may arise is the appropriate way to 

 set about the task. It is low in cost and the potential 

 rewards are high. This conference itself should be seen 

 as a positive step geared toward achieving this objective, 

 and - on behalf of the Foreign Minister and the Australian 

 Government as a whole - I wish its proceedings well.

 * * * * * * * ' *

