---
title: "New category for migrants"
date: "1986-04-10"
creators:
  - "Hurford, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213918016
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04000470%22
---

 KBfflgMINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 30/86 10 April 1986

 NEW CATEGORY FOR MIGRANTS

 A major change to the migration program will assist more-  distant relatives to apply to immigrate from 1 July this  year, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Chris Hurford, said today (Thursday).

 "We have introduced a new category, called Independent and  Concessional," Mr Hurford said. "The new category is  based on the principles of the present extended family  (Category C) program. But it will include even  more-extended family, and also those without any family 

 here. ·

 "I stress that in this category, extended family or  another relationship with Australia will not of itself  create eligibility. All applicants will be selected  against uniformly applied objective criteria emphasising  employability, age, education and skills."

 Mr Hurford said that the points assessment pass mark would .   be raised by 10 points, to 70. But because of the  economic support that could be provided by family, points  would be given for

 sponsored brothers or sisters or non-dependent  children (10 points)

 sponsored nephews or nieces (5 points), and

 sponsorships by an Australian citizen (5 points).  This would be available only to brothers, sisters,  nephews, nieces and non-dependent children.

 So for brothers and sisters or non-dependent children, the  points requirement will, in effect, remain the same -  60 points plus the bonus 10 for the relationship,  resulting in 70 points.

 Parliament House, Canberra  2/

 2

 "People overseas with more-distant relatives in Australia,  and people without any relatives here, will be able to  apply directly overseas without any sponsorship," Mr Hurford said.

 "Anyone wanting to sponsor a relative will have to be  resident in this country for at least two years, the same  as the present system," Mr Hurford said.

 "I have estimated a total of 25,000 visas in this category  next year, which is more than the planning level of 16,000  for the current year.

 "Reunion of close family members - spouses, dependent  children and parents - has remained relatively stable in  recent years, and I estimate 26,000 visas could be issued  next year.

 "The planning level of 12,000 for refugees and special  humanitarian cases is maintained. There is a drop in the  need for Indo-Chinese resettlement and a minor increase in  that for East European.

 "I believe that migrant communities will welcome this new  program," Mr Hurford said.

 Media contact: Eric Brookbanks, Migrant Entry Branch  DIEA, Canberra. Tel (062) 64 2321.

