---
title: "Department of Foreign Affairs- Agent of Vietnamese Government?"
date: "1987-12-22"
creators:
  - "Cadman, Alan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214051845
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09024347%22
---

 ' Î¯ 

 , ' Î¯ Î¯ 

 1 Î¿ ·  ÎŸ ÎŸ Î“ ,  V Î– / Î½ Î¿ 

 I  t L NO .

 3 ^ -

 M R  A L A N  C A D M A N  Îœ . Î¡ .  

 S H A D O W  M I N I S T E R  T O R   I M M I G R A T I O N  & E T H N I C   A F F A I R S

 DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS - AGENT OF VIETNAMESE  GOVERNMENT? .

 The treatment dished out to Vietnamese students who want to  stay in Australia has been reprehensible.

 This matter was first raised by Sydney Morning Herald last  week when it was indicated that the four Vietnamese students  were seeking to stay in Australia.

 I have read sworn statements made by the students, Australian students at the Australian Nation University, an  Australian public servant and a leading medical  professional.

 The actions of Foreign Affairs, when informed of the  students' intention to seek a change of status, has been to  try to enforce the' offensive attitudes of the Vietnamese.   Embassy and the high communist students leaders of the  group. The whole matter was made public by the Department despite  the risks to personal safety that such an action would  cause.

 Students have faced consistent harrassment, intimidation,  curfews, seizure of their bank books, abuse and instructions  to report* every movement and conversation to the group 

 leader of the students, Mr. Nam.

 The students are here as part of an Australian aid programme  and are studying at the Australian National University.

 When informed that some students wished to stay in  Australia, officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs  said they would not interview or assist the students but  finally a social worker was sent to interview a 

 student.

 The only advice given to the students has been to give  themselves up and to return to Vietnam. Fear of death,  re-education camps, threats to families in Vietnam or

 COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  C. I. S.

 imprisonment has meant nothing to this Department.

 The action of the group leaders and the Vietnamese Embassy  have implicitly been endorsed by the Department of Foreign  Affairs.

 The Department has allowed students to be treated in a way  which no free, democratic society should tolerate.

 The Government's infatuation with the Government of Vietnam  has been interpreted by an Australian Department to mean  that Vietnamese dissidents have been singled out for  intolerable discrimination.

 All students should immediately be debriefed by a senior  official of the Department of Foreign Affairs.

 Under no circumstances should any of the students be seen,  on their own, by any official of the Vietnamese Government.

 Processing of applications for refugee status should begin  immediately.

 Whilst not prejudging the outcome of the refugee claim, I  wish the applicants well.

 All officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs who have  been involved should be severely reprimanded.

 22nd December, 1987

 Contact no (02) 639 5155

