---
title: "Australian and New Zealand ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs meet in New Zealand"
date: "1987-04-01"
creators:
  - "Young, Mick"
source: "Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214045323
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027630%22
---

 JO

 U c  ■ 

 P arliament^ l^ C./.S.  library

 NEWS RELEASE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND

 ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MICK YOUNG M.P.

 MRS 13/87

 AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MINISTERS FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC   AFFAIRS MEET IN NEW ZEALAND

 The appropriate level for Australia's immigration intake for   the coming yea r, 1987/88, was one of the major issues discussed   at the annual conference of Commonwealth and State and   Territory Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, held in   Wellington, New Zealand, today.

 The Ministers travelled to Wellington at the invitation of the   New Zealand Government. New Zealand traditionally participates   in the annual conference which was hosted by the Acting   Minister for Immigration, Mr Stan Rodger.

 The meeting, chaired by the Federal Minister for Immigration   and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Mick Young, exchanged views on the   immigration program for the next financial year, based on an   examination of current progress towards the 1986/87 planning   level of 115,000.

 Mr Young said he was confident Australia would get close to   this level by 30 June.

 "The Government's decision to increase this planning level by   20,000 during the current program year reflects strong overseas   interest in migrating to Australia within almost all intake   categories" Mr Young said.

 . . . /2

 Page 2

 "My state colleagues also generally supported a modest increase  for our 1987/88 intake in view of the evident social and  economic benefits involved.

 "The also recommended that the level of settlement services  available be closely monitored,  and that they be kept in line  with needs.  "

 Federal Cabinet will shortly consider planning levels for next  year's program, and will take into account the views of State  and Territory Ministers.

 Other matters discussed at the Wellington meeting included  review and appeal issues in relation to migration.

 Ministers welcomed the establishment of the Federal Office of  Multicultural Affairs and the Advisory Council.

 They agree that the Office should work in close association  with State and Territory government agencies, particularly in   its responsibility for access and equity objectives at the  Federal level.

 Mr Rodger briefed the conference on recent developments in   immigration, settlement, ethnic affairs and multiculturalism  issues in New Zealand.

 The conference also provided the opportunity for face-to-face  bilateral discussions with Mr Rodger on matters of common  interest.

 "Australia has a special migration relationship with  New Zealand, reflecting our geographic proximity and the  historical ties between our countries," Mr Young said. "The  free flow of people across the Tasman provides social and  economic opportunities for both sides, and especially for young  Australians and New Zelanders."

 Mr Young also commented that Australia and New Zealand shared  many interests and objectives in immigrtion policies.

 "We both see immigration as a valuable economic tool, to bring  in skills and capital, and as a social and humanitarian  mechanism in the context of family reunion and refugee  intakes," he said.

