---
title: "ALP Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Policy Launch"
date: "1987-06-18"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214047118
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09028225%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY

 STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER  ALP IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS POLICY LAUNCH  MELBOURNE - 18 JUNE 1987

 Ladies and Gentlemen, Fellow Australians, Friends,

 Since I was a student at the University of Western  Australia, the capacity of this great country to accept and  to give opportunities for a decent life as equals in our 

 society to people from beyond our shores has been a matter  of great personal importance to me. It was the vision of  Australia, under Chifley and Calwell, opening its doors to  settlers from a world ravaged by war,  which first inspired  me to join the Labor Party. *

 The quality of life which we are able to offer to our ethnic  communities is one of the most decisive measuring sticks by  which any Australian Government should be judged. In this  area,  this Government has one unbeatable advantage over its 

 predecessors and its competitors: in Mick Young, we have one of the great figures of Australian public life, one of  the great personalities of the ALP, and one of the very  great Immigration Ministers in Australian history.

 In launching my Government's immigration and ethnic affairs  policy I want to emphasise three p o i n t s w e are inspired  by the success of Australia's immigration program over four  decades and inspired by the role of Labor Governments in 

 that success; we are proud of the record of the present  Government over the last four years and we are challenged by  the opportunities of the next three years and beyond.

 Australia has been immeasurably enriched by the contribution  of immigration to our national life and by the success of  the immigration program. It is one of our nation's greatest  achievements that people have been accepted from a wide and  diverse range of backgrounds, race, religion and culture.

 We take pride in the role of Labor Governments in the  success of the migration program. It was a Labor Government  that began the migration program just after the War. It was  another Labor Government - the Whitlam Labor Government -  which expunged the last traces of discrimination from our  migration policy.

 2.

 It is with that great Labor tradition behind me - that  tradition of vision, compassion, courage and fairness - that  I speak to you today.

 The Government is totally committed to the concept of  Australia as a truly multicultural society.

 What this means is that we believe that all Australians,  irrespective of their ethnic or religious backgrounds, their  cultural heritage or their linguistic tradition, should be  able to exercise their rights and obligations as full and  equal members of the community. We believe multiculturalism 

 is central to any commitment to social justice.

 However we need to translate those beliefs and commitments  into action.  That is ultimately the test of any Government.  When I look at the track record of my Government over the  last four years, I am proud of what we have achieved.

 As with other areas of Government policy, we have got the  fundamentals right.

 At times this has meant hard and painful decisions but in  the end I believe we have established the basis for a  multicultural Australia.

 The main points I would like to highlight are:

 .  An immigration policy which, through community  consultation and careful planning, has steadily  increased and has given priority to family reunion. My  Government has successfully balanced economic, social  and humanitarian considerations.

 .  The careful development by Mick Young and Susan Ryan,  with an input from the Office of Multicultural Affairs,  of a National Policy on Languages - a policy designed  both to provide opportunities for all Australians to 

 achieve competence in English and to maintain and  develop Australia's valuable language resources. At the  same time the provision of English courses through the  Adult Migrant Education Program has been vastly 

 improved. Funding has increased; new education centres  have been established; ancillary child care facilities  have been extended; and the teaching staff have been  transformed from a casual to a permanent, professional  workforce.

 .  A commitment to people in need, particularly low income  families. In contrast to the fall in real disposable  income experienced by poor families under the previous  Howard Government, payments have increased in real terms  during the period of my Government.

 .  Special emphasis, particularly funding increases, in the  provision of welfare services to the ethnic aged,  migrant women, refugees and ethnic youth.

 3.

 .  The establishment of the Office of Multicultural Affairs  within my own portfolio, giving it the opportunity to  have a policy input at the highest level of Government.

 .  The implementation of an Access and Equity strategy,  designed to ensure that people of non-English speaking  backgrounds have equal access to and an equal share of  Commonwealth programs and services.

 . Extensive support for ethnic community organisations.  Under my Government unprecedented financial support has  been given to ethnic community organisations.

 Let me repeat that we are proud of our achievements. We  have laid a firm foundation for multicultural!sm in  Australia.

 We now look forward to the challenges and opportunities of  the next three years and beyond. I wish to draw attention  to six major areas of activity in the next three years.

 1) implementation of the National Policy on Languages.  Already we are committed to an integrated package of  initiatives that will allow the on-arrival component of  the ESL program to be doubled; provide substantial 

 funding for community, trade and Aboriginal languages;  and tackle the problem of adult illiteracy. To meet  that challenge we will spend an additional $15m next  year, and $25m in the following full year. Of these 

 figures, an extra $5.3m will be available for on-arrival  ESL for school-children in 1987-88, increasing to $13.6m  in 1988-89.

 I should say that the Government is committed to  maintaining sufficient levels of funding flows to  general ESL programs,  in recognition of the need to  ensure that people of non-English speaking background  are not disadvantaged in Australian society, and that 

 the education and skills they bring to this country can  be fully utilised to the benefit of all Australians.

 The national policy on languages is also designed to  maintain the community languages that form an  indispensable part of the rich ethnic heritage of  Australia, as well as improving the quality of our 

 workforce, increasing our tourist potential and allowing  us to expand our trading opportunities.

 2) Production of a Green Paper on immigration.  This will  examine all aspects of immigration policy including the  points system. The Green Paper will be produced in  consultation and with the full co-operation of the  community, including ethnic organisations.

 4.

 3) Extension of the access and equity strategy. All  Commonwealth Departments and agencies will now be  required to develop three year plans of actions on  measures they are taking to ensure that all Australians,  

 irrespective of their ethnic origin, enjoy a 'fair go'  in access to Commonwealth programs and services.

 4) Drawing maximum benefit from the Office of Multicultural  Affairs and the Advisory Council of Multicultural  Affairs. The Office, which will have a presence in each  capital city of Australia, will be required to 

 co-ordinate policy advice, implement the access and  equity strategy, provide community information and to  consult extensively with community organisations. The  Council has been asked by me to translate the principles  of multi culturalism into a series of long-term concrete 

 initiatives - a National Agenda for a Multicultural  Australia.

 5) Cutting the delays and backlogs in the immigration  appeals system. We will do this by increasing the  Immigration Review Panel from 32 to 137 members and by  setting up, for the first time, new Panels in Brisbane,   Adelaide and Perth.

 6) Finally, but crucially important to many of you, we will  ensure that with a steadily expanding immigration  program priority will be given to the reunion of  families.

 Those are the main elements of what Labor offers over the  next three years. And there is not the slightest  possibility that our opponents will go close to matching it.

 The importance Mr Howard attaches to these matters can be  seen from the fact that his spokesman on immigration and  ethnic affairs is not only outside the Shadow Cabinet, but  is in fact one of the most junior members of his Shadow  Ministry. And this in a Party which has the widely 

 respected Ian Macphee languishing on the backbench.

 Moreover, in an environment where the Liberal Party is  threatening huge, unspecified cuts of 2.5 billion dollars in  Government programs, it is certain that they intend to  impose a disproportionate and unfair share of the burden on  our ethnic communities. Mr Howard has identified certain 

 areas where his cuts would not fall.  Very significantly,  ethnic and multicultural programs are not on the protected  list. Under the Liberals,  they are destined to suffer.

 We will not allow this to happen.  The Labor Party has made  its commitment to multi culturalism, not merely in words but  in effective, on-going programs.  We will ensure that help  continues to go to those who need it. We are not going to  be party to any redistribution of public wealth from  ordinary Australians to the greedy few in our society. We 

 stand for an Australia, richly diverse but cohesive, in  which every Australian, whatever his or her background, can  enjoy a fair go. ***************************

