---
title: "Advisory Council to prepare a National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia"
date: "1987-04-09"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214045499
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09028351%22
---

 w*·

 .  Vvf 4*

 PRIME MINISTER

 FOR MEDIA

 The Government's newly established Advisory Council on   Multicultural Affairs is to prepare a National Agenda for a   Multicultural Australia.  I proposed this to the Council at   its inaugural meeting in Canberra today.

 The National Agenda will comprise a program of specific   priorities that will translate our policy of   multi culturalism into a series of concrete initiatives. It   will need to be developed on the basis of consultation with  

 a broad range of community interests.

 My Government sees multi culturalism as a key social policy   which significantly affects all Australians. It is central   to the pursuit of social justice.  There is a need to ensure   that all Australians, regardless of ethnic origins,  are able  

 to enjoy equal life chances.

 Through the National Agenda,  the Council is being asked to   assess how far Australia has come in achieving these   objectives,  and to chart future directions.  I envisage that   the Agenda will incorporate policies designed to promote   equity and access in both the public and private sectors, as   well as plans for effective community education.

 In determining a National Agenda for a Multicultural   Australia, the Council will look at such areas as the law,   education, employment,  health,  media,  culture,  women's and   youth affairs, trade unions and business.

 I am confident that the varieties of talents represented in   the Council will ensure that it is well placed to provide   the Government with the best possible advice.

 The 22-member Advisory Council on Multicultural Affairs is   charged with providing advice to me and the Minister   Assisting, Mr Young, on ways in which the Government might   advance its objective of encouraging the further development  

 of our multicultural society. It is chaired by Justice Sir   James Gobbo, of the Victorian Supreme Court,  and includes Mr   George Wojak (Deputy Chairperson), of the Federation of the   Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia; Mr David Brydon,   Managing Director of ACI International Ltd; Sir Nicholas  

 Shehadie,  Chairman of SBS; and Mr Simon Crean, President of   the ACTU. The Advisory Council,  the full composition of   which is attached,  will be supported in developing the   National Agenda by the new Office of Multicultural Affairs   within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.

 COMMONW EALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 C. I. s. 

 9 April 1987

 2

 The National Agenda will look to a multicultural future in   which all Australians,  irrespective of background, are able   to participate fully in national life, in which community   resources are fairly available to all,  and in which the  

 skills and abilities of all Australians can be harnessed   without barriers of discrimination and prejudice.

 An action-orientated Agenda will make a major contribution   to my Government's commitment to equity. I see   multi culturalism as central to enhancing the quality of life   for the next generation of Australians.

 ATTACHMENT

 ADVISORY COUNCIL ON MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Justice Sir James Gobbo  (Chairperson) President, Co As It  President,  Italian Historical 

 Society

 Mr Wlodzimierz (George) Wojak Chairperson, Federation of (Deputy Chairperson)

 Mr David J. Brydon

 Mr Simon Crean

 Ms Helen Cattalini

 Dr David Cox

 Ms Hanifa Dean-Oswald

 Mrs Rena Frangioudakis

 Miss Eugenia Grammatikakis

 Mrs Margaretha Hanen

 Ethnic Communities' Council  of Australia Member, National Population  Council

 Managing Director, ACI  International Ltd

 President of the Australian  Council of Trade Unions

 Commissioner, Multicultural  and Ethnic Affairs Commission  of Western Australia

 Snr Lecturer, Social Work,  University of Melbourne  Chairperson, Settlement and 

 Ethnic Affairs Section,  National Population Council

 Acting Manager,  Community  Education, Commissioner's  Office for Equal Opportunity  in Victoria

 Greek radio broadcaster,  3EA  Committee member, Ethnic  Children's Television  Foundation

 Secretary, Ethnic  Communities' Council of  Tasmania

 Ethnic Consultant, Office of  the Commissioner for the  Ageing SA, Executive, Ethnic 

 Communities' Council of SA

 2.

 â–  *  · . *  

 t.v

 Mr Steve Karas Snr Lecturer, Law, Queensland  

 Institute of Technology   Chairperson, Ethnic   Communities' Council of   Queensland, Member of Review  

 of Migrant and Multicultural   Programs and Services, 1986

 Ms Morag Loh Member, Historic Records  

 Search Committee for the   Bicentenary Oral historian of immigrants;   multilingual theatre work

 Miss Lidia De Luca Snr Vice-Chairperson, Ethnic  

 Communities' Council of the   Northern Territory

 Mrs Therese Thi Huong Morris Secretary, Vietnamese   Community of Newcastle and   the Hunter

 Mr Nontas Pezaros Editor, Neos Kosmos

 Mr Nino Randazzo Editor, 11 Globo, Victoria

 Mr Timothy Ching-Ming Shao National Director, Australian   Council of Churches' Refugee   and Migrant Services   Executive, Refugee Council

 Dr Joachim Schneeweiss President, Executive Council   of Australian Jewry 1977-9,   1981-3 Board member, Australian   Jewish Welfare Society

 Dr Ahmad Shboul Snr Lecturer, Arabic and  

 Islamic Studies, University   of Sydney Hon. Adviser to the Islamic  

 Federation

 Sir Nicholas Shehadie Chairman, Special  

 Broadcasting Service

 3.

 Ms Maria Vukadinovic-Jockel Deputy Chairman, Ethnic  Affairs Commission of  Victoria Hon.  Life member,  Australian-Yugoslav Welfare  

 Society

 Professor Eric Willmot Head of Education, James Cook University, Head, ACT Schools   Authority (Appointment in   1987)

 i

