---
title: "Immigration Minister Congratulates Amnesty on Achievements"
date: "1987-10-30"
creators:
  - "Young, Mick"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214050845
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09027656%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,  LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

 MPS 72/87

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER CONGRATULATES AMNESTY ON ACHIEVEMENTS

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and 

 Ethnic Affairs, Mick Young, tonight congratulated Amnesty 

 International on its achievements in promoting the cause 

 of human rights throughout the world.

 Mr Young was guest speaker at.a dinner.in.Melbourne marking 

 the 25th anniversary of the founding of the Victorian chapter 

 of Amnesty.

 One of the organisation's finest achievements, he said, 

 had been the creation of a broad-based public awareness of 

 the need to challenge violations of fundamental human rights 

 and freedoms.

 "Like Amnesty, both the Hawke Government and the Australian 

 Labor Party deplore violations of human rights wherever they 

 occur," he said.

 "We remain committed to ensuring the rights of all 

 Australian citizens and to promoting vigorously the cause of 

 human rights internationally in all forums."

 Mr Young assured guests that the Government paid close 

 attention to the views of Amnesty and other important non­

 Government organisations, as well as to the office of the U.N. 

 High Commissioner for Refugees, in determining the annual intake 

 of refugees and Special Humanitarian Program migrants.

 The Government carefully considered on an individual 

 basis the claims of every person who sought to enter or remain 

 in Australia as a refugee.

 He cautioned, however, that it would be irresponsible 

 of the Government to ignore the fact that over one million 

 people a year sought to migrate to Australia and that our total 

 intake capacity was limited.

 Parliament House, Canberra . . . / 2

 2 .

 "However, within the limits of our capacity we seek to 

 be responsive and compassionate to those most in need of asylum," 

 Mr Young said.

 "Our refugee programs cannot, by themselves, right every 

 wrong in the world, but they certainly do play a part.

 "We will continue to work to improve our procedures, 

 and we welcome continuing dialogue with all organisations con­

 cerned, including Amnesty International, in this important 

 work."

 MELBOURNE, 30 October 1987

 MEDIA CONTACT t Peter Cotton Minister's Office  (062) 726 751

