---
title: "The world development debate 1988 "is aid fair?" poverty relief & economy growth main focus of AID program"
date: "1988-07-27"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214056017
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017296%22
---

 NO T I C E

 T H E  W O R L D  D E V E L O P M E N T  D E B A T E  1988

 IS AID FAIR?”

 W E D N E S D A Y  J U L Y  27

 A C A D E M Y  O F  SCIENCE  C A N B E R R A

 K E Y N O T E  S P E E C H   BT M R  BILL H A Y D E N  M.P.  MINISTER F O R  F O R E I G N  AFFAIRS 

 A N D  T R A D E  

 9.30AM

 O P E N  T O  A L L  M E D I A  A N D  PUBLIC

 AUSTRALIAN INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE BUREAU

 No. Date

 M119 ;  27 July 1988

 EMBARGOED TILL 10.30AM 27 JULY 1988

 Poverty relief and economic growth main focus of aid program

 Australia's humanitarian concern for the poor of the world was  re-emphasised by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr Bill  Hayden, M.P., at a debate about world development held in Canberra today.

 Speaking on the theme, 'Is aid fair?', Mr Hayden said Australia's overseas aid  program was committed to the pursuit of both economic growth and the  alleviation of poverty for the achievement of sustained development.

 "I have instructed the Australian International Development Assistance  Bureau (AIDAB) to increase its emphasis on the equity impact of our aid  programs through educational scholarships; through food for work programs  which promote development and provide jobs; and in placing greater 

 attention on maximising benefits to poorer people in the design of projects,’  Mr Hayden said.

 He criticised the present arrangements for the education and training of  young people from developing countries as contributing to a greater equality  between nations rather than within them.

 "The education subsidy provided through the aid program has so far been  largely directed to those who have had the means to undertake private study  in Australia," he said.

 AIDAB has now developed selection procedures for a new equity scholarship  scheme which will give poorer people from developing countries a better  chance to study in Australia.

 Mr Hayden defended the value of Australia's aid program against those  cynical of its effectiveness and pointed to the many successful programs  throughout the world which have helped the poor and promoted long-term  development. .

 He pointed to the variety of forms of development assistance which includes  emergency relief and refugee assistance, food aid, contributions to  international financial institutions and United Nations organisations as well  as bilateral aid projects.

 "We should never lose sight of the fact that the main aim of overseas aid  programs is quite simple: it is to help the poor and to work towards  eliminating the deep poverty which still exists in many developing countries  on our planet," Mr Hayden said.

 For further information contact Billy Williams, Acting Director, Development  Education and Public Information, AIDAB. Tel. 062- 764 967.

 SPEECH BY MR HAYDEN TO THE WORLD DEVELOPMENT DEBATE

 IS AID FAIR?

 INTRODUCTION

 Distinguished guests,  ladies and gentlemen: welcome to the third World Development Debate sponsored by the Australian  International Development Assistance Bureau.

 The topic of today's debate is "Is Aid Fair?" .  It is an  important question. There is a rich and honorable vein of  support in Australia for the concept of aid. But it has to be  said that there are those who genuinely doubt that overseas aid  is fair. You probably all know about the old jibe that  "foreign aid is the process by which income is transferred from  the poor of rich countries to the rich of poor countries". The  jibe may,  or may hot, be amusing* - but it is certainly  damaging!  Because of such doubts, we need constantly to  reexamine the Australian overseas aid program to ensure that 

 the equity objectives are being achieved. And we need to  ensure that the equity impact of the program is being improved.

 IS AID FAIR?

 Is aid fair? Specifically, in what sense is the Australian aid  program "fair"? "Fair" to whom? The central issue, in  attempting to answer these questions,  is "Who pays, and who  benefits ?"

 It is, of course,  the Australian taxpayer who pays,  because the  aid program is a call on the Australian budget.  The  beneficiaries are the people of the developing countries to  whom we provide assistance. Since this is rather a vague 

 statement, I propose to discuss (first) who precisely benefits  from the Australian overseas aid program and (second) what we  are trying to do to make the Australian overseas aid program  fairer.

 WHO BENEFITS?

 In a global sense, the existence of overseas aid programs which  redistribute income from wealthy countries to developing  nations is obviously a step towards greater world-wide equity.  Despite our own recent economic difficulties, Australia remains 

 one of the world's wealthiest nations. Living standards in  Australia are high. It is true that current exchange rates  suggest that Australian living standards are slipping behind  those of other OECD nations. But more meaningful "purchasing 

 power parity" measures tell a different story.  As a matter of

 2

 J

 fact, on so-called "purchasing power parity" measures, living   standards in Australia are as high as those in Japan! .  Thus in   facing up to our own economic problems, we should not forget   that Australia remains a rich country.

 A second important factor that should be remembered when   considering whether or not "aid is fair" is that it is not only   aid directly targetted on the poor which can assist those with   low incomes. Aid that promotes overall economic growth in   developing countries can indirectly assist the poor. The   Australian aid program gives both kinds of help.

 To those who are critical of an emphasis on growth, 1 simply   observe that ultimately living standards depend on rising   levels of productivity. For hundreds of millions of people in   Western countries, living standards today are much higher than,  

 say, a century ago because of sustained economic growth. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say. that sustained economic   growth is the most effective anti-poverty policy that has ever   been implemented. It is no accident that as a general rule,   the distribution of income is much fairer in rich nations than   in poor ones. As nations grow wealthier, there is more room   for compassion and national generosity in domestic welfare and   tax policies. In contrast, at the national level in developing   countries, there is usually only a small amount of wealth to go   around. It was Prime Minister Nehru of India who pointed out   that wealth needs to be created before it can be shared   around. In India, he said, discussions about the   redistribution of wealth really amounted to discussions about   the redistribution of poverty.

 TARGETTING POVERTY

 In terms of alleviating poverty, the aid program can help   directly in three ways:

 First, it can target the poor at the individual or village   level: either supplementing incomes, or helping people to  raise their own income.

 Second, it can target poor areas or regions, and

 Third, at the national level it can sponsor activities,, such as   agricultural research, that are primarily designed to raise   incomes of the poorest.

 Aid programs should provide a balanced approach across these   three levels. Aid should exploit the complementarities between   different activities through careful programming of aid to   particular countries. On a multilateral level we should   continually assess our contributions to international agencies,   against our aid objectives.

 3

 Turning to examine the Impact of the Australian overseas aid  program In detail, It Is useful to look at different elements  of the program. On the most general level It can be broken  Into "country programs" and "global programs".

 GLOBAL PROGRAMS

 First, I shall discuss global programs.

 Australian emergency relief and refugee packages provide  assistance to some of the world’s most needy people. Such  assistance alms directly to alleviate suffering caused by both  natural and man-made disasters. In 1987/88 AIDAB organised  more than 50 emergency, refugee and relief packages at a cost 

 of more than $40 million.

 Food Aid

 Food aid Is a most Important means through which Australia  provides development assistance and relief. In recent years,  close on 10 per cent of Australia’s aid has been spent on food  aid - of all forms of aid, probably one of the most effective 

 In reaching poorer people.

 Many people think of It as a hand-out that provides only  temporary relief. But only 20 per cent of our food aid Is used  In emergency feeding programs. By far the largest part Is used  In ways that achieve development goals. For example, a good  deal of our food aid gpes In "Food for Work" programs.

 Sometimes the food Is provided In the form of rations as a  dally wage. Sometimes the food aid Is monetized. Whatever the  details, the basic Idea Is the same: jobs are created for unemployed people in developing countries on useful projects,  usually in rural areas, such as reafforestation, road building,  irrigation and dam construction.

 Australia’s geographic Isolation means that It is usually more  efficient to coordinate Australian-sourced food with programs  of other donor nations. We have done this In large scale  relief efforts - such as those in Ethiopia, Mozambique - or for  Afghan refugees living In Pakistan.

 In a small number of cases it is more appropriate to obtain  food from non-Australian sources. In such cases Australia  provides for purchases through agencies such as Australian NGOs.

 International Financial Institutions

 Another major element of our global programs is our support for  International Financial Institutions such as the World Bank and  the Asian Development Bank.

 4

 I

 As Is the case with other forms of aid,  an important aim of the  activities of these institutions is to support broadly based  growth in developing countries rather than any particular  target income group. Nevertheless, these institutions  emphasise the impact of their programs on the poor. During the  1970s, President McNamara of the World Bank emphasised the goal  of poverty elimination.

 More recently, President Conable has initiated reviews of how  effective the Bank has been in trying to alleviate poverty.  These reviews have been quite frank and critical. For example,  in April 1987, the chair of a World Bank poverty task force  noted that there was a widespread perception that the World  Bank had retreated from its concern for poverty and that, 

 overall, the effort is patchy and thin.

 I welcome the fact that the World Bank is now reassessing its  role in trying directly to assist the poor. Australia strongly  supports President Conable in his attempts to have the Bank  overcome its "patchy and thin" record of the early 1980s.

 Progress is also being made towards making World Bank lending  fairer. A World Bank Task Force on Poverty Alleviation has  just concluded that the pursuit of both economic growth and 

 poverty alleviation is essential to lasting, stable and humane  development. It has realised what some of us have argued for  some time: that policies targetted at the alleviation of  poverty are complementary to efficient economic growth policies  rather than ’trade-offs’  for growth.

 World Bank lending to support structural adjustment in  developing countries has caused controversy. Although the  adoption of appropriate policies is necessary if a country is  to develop, the poor can be hurt in the process. This has led 

 to discussion of the need for "Adjustment with a Human Face".  There is now growing recognition of the importance of  reallocating public resources to anti-poverty sector activities  in areas such as agriculture, health, nutrition, family  planning, education and urban development. The 1988 World  Development Report reflects the growing awareness that 

 targetted public finance programs can, if properly designed,  assist poverty alleviation.

 It is sometimes not realised that of the 950 million people  living in absolute poverty throughout the world, over half live  in rural areas with high population densities in South Asia  (about 350 million) and East Asia (about 150 million). The  major regional development bank active in this region is the  Asian Development Bank. The ADB seeks to alleviate poverty 

 through emphasizing economic growth and the efficient use of  resources. But it also recognises that there is a need for a  more direct assault on poverty. It therefore funds a range of  projects focused on rural poverty, especially in the  agriculture sector. In addition, it helps small farmers and

 5

 entrepreneurs by providing credit through developing finance  institutions in the poorest of the developing countries. This  said, the Bank could probably do rather more in this area.  I  look forward to a report on poverty alleviation being prepared 

 in the ADB. I hope that increased attention will be given to  this area as the Bank heads into the 1990s.

 Other multilateral

 In 1987/88 Australia provided over $60 million to various UN  organisations and $10 million to organisations of the  Commonwealth. Not all such aid is intended to reach the  poorest people. For instance,  the World Health Organisation's  programs to eradicate diseases benefit the world as a whole. But many programs are undoubtedly effective in assisting the  very poorest.  The work of those organisations that assist  refugees and displaced persons,  almost by definition, helps the 

 poor. ,

 UNICEF's work on "Adjustment with a Human Face" is assisting  countries around the world faced with massive debt burdens to  restructure their economies without creating poverty.

 The UNDP and the World Bank are working to develop the cheapest  possible water pumps that can be serviced and maintained by  village communities, who have no other access to safe, clean  water supplies.

 In addition to these organisations Australia provided $5.5  million for international agricultural programs in 1987/88.  These funds were mainly provided to agricultural research  centres belonging to the Consultative Group on International  Agricultural Research. "

 NGOs

 A further $4 million was provided for international health  programs and international NGOs. It is appropriate at this  point to emphasise the fact that the wide range of NGOs in  Australia reflects community concern about poverty in 

 developing countries.  In 1987-88 around $11 million was  provided directly to support the development activities of  Australian NGOs.  In addition, there have been increasing  efforts to involve NGOs directly in the official aid program.

 COUNTRY PROGRAMS

 I turn now to the issue of Budget Support in our country  programs. Almost 30 per cent of all Australian aid - $275  million - is spent on budget support for Papua New Guinea.  Of  all forms of aid, of course, open-handed generous budget 

 support is the hardest to evaluate. It can really only be

 6

 Justified on grounds of fairness in terms of broad differences ·  in living standards between the donor and the recipient  country. Both Australia and Papua New Guinea agree that we  should move steadily away from budget support towards other  forms of aid which can be better targetted.

 Bilateral Projects

 Much of the rest of our country program aid is delivered  through bilateral projects. Some critics of overseas aid  programs argue that such aid often fails to help the poor in  developing countries. The impact of project aid is admittedly  variable, and often hard to measure. But this does not mean 

 that project aid is ineffective in reaching the poor. Projects  can target poverty in any of the three ways I mentioned  earlier; at the village, the regional, or the national· level.

 Many Australian projects are carried out in extremely poor  areas in developing countries. One example is the NTT (West  Timor) Integrated Area Development Project. This project is  designed to raise the living standards and Incomes of 80,000 

 farming families in one of the poorest provinces in Indonesia.  It aims to increase livestock, poultry and food crop production  (both for home consumption and the market), to improve domestic  water supplies; and to improve local roads, markets and  agencies that provide services to farmers. It aims also to  help womens* production in such activities as raising small 

 animals, poultry and foodstuffs. Another example is the  Highland Agricultural and Social Development Project in  Thailand. This project helps hill tribes in North and _ Northeast Thailand to improve their farm production and access 

 to markets and to reduce their dependence on opium production.  It also provides health, education and nutrition programs which  provide direct assistance to hill tribe women.

 Education and Training are particularly interesting elements of  the aid program from the point of view of equity. More than 10  per cent of our aid budget, about $120 million, was spent on  education and training in 1987-88. Much of this - $85 million  - was spent on subsidising the fees of students from developing 

 countries who came to study in Australia.

 We face a policy dilemma of sorts in allocating aid money to  education and training. We are all agreed, I am sure, that  education is a good thing and a significant factor in economic  growth. But the simple truth is that, under present  arrangements, the training in Australia of young people from  developing countries contributes to greater equality between  nations, rather than within them.

 I mention this because one of the main criticisms of our  education and training aid is that it has benefited those  people in developing countries who are already rather well

 7

 off. In particular, the education subsidy provided through the  aid program has been largely to those who have had the means to  undertake private study in Australia, and the official  government-to-government training program has largely assisted 

 relatively well-off public servants.

 I am not suggesting that this aid has been ineffective in  development terms. It has helped people and governments to be  self-reliant and to overcome problems such as malnutrition or  poor agricultural productivity. But the equity dimension seems  to be largely missing from this aid. There are limits on how  far we can go to upgrade equity considerations in our current  education aid programs, both among countries and within them,  but we are now looking at this issue more closely.

 TOWARDS FAIRER AID

 Late last year I told AIDAB that I was unhappy with the way aid  funds were being used in our education programs. I instructed  AIDAB to come up with new selection procedures which would give  poorer people from developing countries a better chance to 

 study in Australia.

 As a result, this year we will be offering to the Government of  Thailand a new pilot equity scholarship scheme in which special  opportunities will be provided to students, who would tend to  miss out under the existing government-to-government training 

 program.

 If this pilot scheme is accepted by the Thai Government, 40 -scholarships will be available to students from farming  families in Northeast Thailand, which is the most economically  and socially disadvantaged region in the country. Half the  students selected will be women. The students will receive ; English language training in Thailand. Most will come to study  in Australia for agricultural diplomas. The program  concentrates on agriculture because agriculture is one of the  main activities in the northeast region to which the students  will return. I have also asked that AIDAB prepare a new  program of merit-based scholarships to complement the kind of  equity scholarships I have just described.

 More generally, I am confident that provided there is the will  to do so, a greater emphasis on the equity impact of our  programs can be introduced. The Policy Branch within AIDAB has  recently embarked on a detailed study of ways to incorporate  more of a poverty focus in the aid program. I expect this 

 study to show how we can increase our focus on poverty in  different ways: at the individual and community level, in poor areas and regions; in larger-scale activities that target  specific issues related to poverty relief.

 We will probably look for a balance between these three types. As I have mentioned, Food For Work programs are one effective

 8 \ V

 way to both promote development and provide jobs for poor   people. Country program activities In sectors such as health   and water supply can raise living standards In poor   communities. Greater attention In the design stages of AIDAB   projects should also help to ensure that maximum benefits are   provided to poorer people within the project area. Increasing   our focus on women and children can often be beneficial to the   poor. We may also want to look again at the projects run by   International organizations. Some of these projects are   especially effective in reaching the poor.

 In conclusion, let me say this: I realise that some people are

 cynical about the effectiveness of overseas aid programs In   lifting the living standards of poor people In developing .   c o u n t r i e s .

 To those who say that It cannot be done; I simply point to the   many successful programs throughout the world which have done   much to help the poor and to promote long-term development.

 To those who say that AIDAB Is not doing enough, I can promise   them that It Is the policy of this Government to emphasise the   equity and development'goals of overseas aid and assure them   that the management of AIDAB Is strongly committed to  

 Implementing these goals.

 And to those who say that equity does not matter because   overseas aid Is mostly given for other reasons, I must say that   they are wrong. The ultimate motive for overseas aid programs   is a humanitarian concern for the plight of people In poorer   countries. If this motive Is not In the forefront of policy,   and If It Is not evident In the Implementation of programs, It   Is Inevitable that support for overseas aid will dwindle. We   should never lose sight of the fact that the main aim of   overseas aid programs Is quite simple: It Is to help the poor

 and to work towards eliminating the deep poverty which still   exists In many developing countries on our planet.

