---
title: ""Mainly European migration" motion insulting and outrageous"
date: "1988-07-24"
creators:
  - "Reynolds, Margaret"
source: "Minister for Local Government"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214055968
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017936%22
---

 NEWS RELEASE

 Minister for Local Government

 Minister Assisting th e Prime Minister on th e Status of W omen

 COMMOhiV/fcALTH j  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY C. i. S .

 The acting Minister for Immigration, Local Government and  Ethnic Affairs, Senator Margaret Reynolds, has called on the  West Australian branch of the Liberal party to over­ whelmingly reject what she called an outrageous and 

 insulting motion due to be discussed at its State conference  this week.

 The motion from the Dunsborough branch of the Liberal party  demands a return to "mainly European migration." It has  targetted Asian immigrants saying that "our pioneers did not  do all that work to have this country taken over by Asians  paying 12 percent tax in their own country, so that they can 

 accumulate capital impossible for us to achieve on our tax  here."

 The motion also calls for a referendum on immigration which  it says "must be done now, before the hoardes outvote the  real Australians."

 Senator Reynolds said the motion by the West Australian  Liberals was a direct attack on the non-discriminatory basis  of immigration policy which still had bipartisan support in  the Federal Parliament, despite recent comments from the  Leader of the Opposition, Mr Howard, questioning the 

 immigration mix.

 "Furthermore, this ill-informed motion ignores the  tremendous contribution of immigrants over the last two  hundred years and is an insult to all Australians," The  Minister said.

 She said the success of a person's application to immigrate  to Australia should have nothing to do with their race,   colour or creed and everything to do with what they had to  offer this country and whether they had family here to 

 support them.

 "The capital and skills brought to Australia by immigrants,   no matter what their source country, make a great  contribution to the development of our economy and job  creation.

 "Migrants pay the same tax as all other Australians when  they arrive here and the logic of the Liberals attack on the  various tax rates in other countries escapes me.

 "As for the Liberals call for a twenty percent limit to  family reunion and refugee intake,  its grossly unfair to put  an arbitrary limit on the reunion of Australians with their  immediate families.  Nor should we abandon our humanitarian  committment to refugees," the Minister said.

 Senator Reynolds said the Family Reunion and Refugee intake  comprised one third of Australia's 1988-89 immigration  intake.

 "I have no doubt that all thinking and humane Australians  agree that families and refugees should continue to be given  high priority in our immigration program," the Senator said.

 "This is especially true of the forty percent of the  Australian population who were either born overseas or are  the sons and daughters of immigrants," She said.

 CANBERRA SUNDAY JULY 24

 MEDIA CONTACT: Peter Cotton WK (062) 72 6751 HM (062) 82 4539

