---
title: "Work experience to be used in assessing overseas technical qualifications"
date: "1988-10-12"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214057424
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017541%22
---

 ftfLi.Parliament House, Canberra, ACT, 2600 Phone: (062) 77-7860 Fax: (062)73-4144OFFICES: Minister for Immigration Local Government and Ethnic Affairs4 Treasury Place, Melbourne, Vic. 3002 Phone: (03)650-4479 Fax: (03) 650-9106 Senator the H on. R obert RayCOMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY C. I .  S.MPS 112/88WORK EXPERIENCE TO BE USED IN ASSESSING OVERSEAS TECHNICAL QUALIFICATIONSThe Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Robert Ray, said today that the failure of trades and professions to recognize migrants' work experience resulted in a massive wastage of skills.Senator Ray was announcing a new system of assessment which will take into account the work experience of overseas qualified technicians.The Senator said the Council on Overseas Professional Qualifications (COPQ) had initiated the new system of assessment.The TAPE National Centre for Research and Development had been asked to prepare the new system which would take into account migrants' knowledge, experience and skills."Australia's economic development has been impeded by the failure to effectively recognize the qualifications of its migrants," Senator Ray said."Our immigration program aims to attract skilled people. We must ensure that the talent we attract is not wasted."In their assessment of overseas qualifications, trade and professional associations often only give weight to paper qualifications."They often ignore the skills developed through years of work place experience," the Senator said.He said the move to assess the work experience of overseas qualified technicians would address many of the valid criticisms of the existing assessment procedures."The development of these procedures will benefit migrants whose academic qualifications are outdated, are not directly equivalent to Australian qualifications or are incomplete," the Senator said.

 ··'·· · ·· ·

 He said it would also help refugees who may have lost  documentary evidence of their qualifications.

 Assessing skills rather than just paper qualifications was a  fairer and more equitable process.

 Senator Ray said COPQ had developed a number of methods for  assessing skills. Work experience was already taken into  account in a range of professions such as architecture,  engineering, computing and nursing.

 "This latest initiative will give technicians the  opportunity to demonstrate their skills for recognition.

 "It will also ensure that we get the maximum benefit from  our migration program," the Minister said.

 CANBERRA! 12 October 1988

 MEDIA CONTACT: Peter Cotton

 Minister's Office  (062) 77 7860

 John Rowling Overseas Professional Qualifications  Branch (062) 64 4002 _

