---
title: "Aid for resettlement of Afghan refugees"
date: "1988-06-22"
creators:
  - "Hayden, Bill"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214055417
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08017311%22
---

 ;

 No. M 1 0 4  Date 2 2  J u n e .  1 9 8 8

 Aid for resettlem ent of Afghan refugees COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   C. I. S.

 Australia will contribute $20 million to the first two years of a resettlement  program for Afghan refugees, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr  Bill Hayden, M.P., announced today.

 The Prime Minister, Mr Hawke, advised the UN Secretary-General, Mr  Perez de Cuellar of this decision in New York yesterday.

 Mr Hayden's announcement follows the Soviet military withdrawal from  Afghanistan which began on 15 May 1988 and the Secretary-General’s  recent appeal for support for the refugees. It is estimated that 5.6 million  Afghan refugees are now in Pakistan and Iran with a further one million 

 persons being displaced inside Afghanistan.

 A United Nations Humanitarian and Economic Assistance Program relating  to Afghanistan has been established to coordinate the resettlement of Afghan  refugees in their own country. It is estimated that the program will require  more than US$1 billion during the first two years of operation.

 Mr Hayden said the funds would be used predominantly to provide food.  Funds would also be channelled through a mix of international agencies and  Australian non-government organisations.

 Australia's contribution will be subject to the satisfactory coordination of  international arrangements for the resettlement program.

 This amount is additional to Australia's assistance to Afghan refugees based  in Pakistan.

 "Australia remains committed to assisting Afghan refugees based in Pakistan  and will continue to support them as appropriate," Mr Hayden said.

 Australia has contributed $4.3 million in emergency assistance for Afghan  refugees in 1987/88.

 The contribution to the resettlement of Afghan refugees is part of the  Government's humanitarian aid program managed by the Australian  International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB).

 For further information contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, Director, AIDAB Public  Information. Tel: (062) 495 801.

