---
title: "Immigration policy and the Fitzgerald report"
date: "1988-06-05"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214054852
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08015922%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  News Release by John Howard, MP COMMONWEALTH

 L58/88

 IMMIGRATION POLICY AND THE FITZGERALD REPORT

 The FitzGerald Report is a thoughtful high quality document.

 It will contribute to a more objective informed debate about  immigration.

 Many of the Committee's recommendations echo concerns  already publicly expressed by the Opposition.

 The call for a greater economic emphasis and concerns about  multiculturalism are but two examples of this.

 To many multiculturalism is a confusing, even aimless,  concept. We must preserve tolerance and fair treatment of  diversity.

 But our great goal must be one Australia united in support  of certain common principles of national life.

 Many of the Committee's recommendations are a damning  indictment of the Government's stewardship of its  immigration policy.

 Mr Holding's clear discomfort at his news conference on  Friday was evidence of that.

 As I have already said, Australia's present immigration  program is unbalanced and significant changes are needed.

 Australia will benefit enormously from a vigorous but  tolerant debate on immigration.

 Dr FitzGerald is right in saying that immigration has been  pushed to the periphery. It should not be at the periphery.  It is a mainstream issue affecting every aspect of our  national life.

 Immigration policy should be framed to match the national  goals we have for ourselves as a people.

 The Liberal and National Parties will advocate an approach  to immigration which places Australia's national interest  first.  As I have indicated on earlier occasions this must  include humanitarian considerations.

 ) Λ

 2 .

 We have a proud record of the tolerant absorption of  refugees from many countries.

 If bipartisanship is possible all well and good. However,  the overriding objective must be to have the right policy.

 This will not be sacrificed in a blind pursuit of bipartisan  agreement.

 SYDNEY  5 June 1988

