---
title: "Citizenship ceremony"
date: "1989-01-26"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: "Prime Minister"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214059008
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02000520%22
---

 9

 COMMONWEALTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH -- ----------— -----------

 PRIME MINISTER

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

 SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER   CITIZENSHIP CEREMONY   TAMWORTH - 26 JANUARY 1989

 Let me first of all extend my congratulations and thanks to   the Tamworth City Council for organising this important   ceremony today.

 This Australia Day, citizenship ceremonies are being held in   towns and cities throughout Australia. They are all part of   the special effort we are making this year, the Year of   Citizenship, to encourage people to take up the rights and   obligations of full membership of the Australian community.

 Tamworth has done a fine job, not just in administering the   oaths and affirmations of citizenship but also in reminding   us that those formal declarations of commitment to our   nation are of deep significance for all of us.

 Mr Mayor,

 I am told you have forgone the opportunity to visit the   United States in order to be here today. May I pass on,   through you, to your Council and to the people of Tamworth   my thanks for their efforts today.

 It's probably fairly typical of the laid-back Australian   style that we usually spend Australia Day enjoying ourselves   - like thousands of people do annually at the Country Music   Festival here in Tamworth.

 But Australia Day is also an occasion to celebrate our   identity as Australians and our unity as a nation.  It is a   day for reflecting on what we are today and what we might   become.

 Australia Day last year, in our Bicentennial year, was   particularly significant. But every Australia Day gives us   an opportunity to celebrate our achievements as a nation -   and we have a lot to celebrate.

 In particular,  Australia Day is a very fitting time for   ceremonies such as this, at which we enlarge the family of   Australian citizens.

 2.

 So having thanked our Tamworth hosts, I now want to direct   some particular comments to these twenty five people who are   our guests of honour today - our twenty five new fellow   citizens.

 You men and women have just taken one of the most important   decisions that anyone could take in their life. You have   declared publicly your commitment to the country you have   made your home.

 You have come to Australia and to Tamworth from many   different nations - Britain,  France,  Laos, New Zealand,   Portugal and Singapore.

 Now as Australians, you have taken on all the rights and   obligations of Australian citizenship.

 You have made a conscious declaration - one that those of us   who were born here are not required to make.

 So this occasion gives us all an opportunity to consider   carefully what citizenship means.

 Being Australian means many things.

 It means sharing an identity as Australians in the midst of   our tremendous diversity of origins and backgrounds.

 It means having pride in the diversity of our multicultural   society, and in the values of fairness, equity and   understanding which have created it.

 It means taking responsibility for the future prosperity and   harmony of our country.

 But above all else, being an Australian means having a   commitment to Australia.

 As I said on this day last year, during our Bicentennial   celebrations on Sydney Harbour,  the one thing needed to be   an Australian is commitment to this country and to its   future.

 The way you look, the way you dress,  the faith you observe,   the place you were born - they are all important things but   they are irrelevant to the question of whether you are a   fair-dinkum Australian.

 What is relevant is your commitment to our parliamentary   institutions, to the rule of law, to freedom of speech, to   our values of tolerance and a fair go for all - in short,   your commitment to Australia.

 Citizenship is the best expression of that commitment and   Tamworth is a great place to celebrate it.

 Tamworth is a living proof that Australia is, at heart,  a   nation of immigrants.

 3.

 We perhaps tend to associate immigration with the inner   suburbs of the great cities,  but that's only because those   areas tend to be home to the people who are the most recent   arrivals in this country.

 The truth, of course,  is that over our two hundred year   history every part of our nation has been influenced and   enriched by the hard work and commitment of immigrants and   the descendants of immigrants.

 Before 1788, the Tamworth district was originally the home   of the Kamiilaroi Aboriginal people.

 Then it was the Scots who laid the foundations of the great   New England pastoral industries.

 Then it was the Chinese and the Americans and others from   around the world who came to the gold fields.

 As the Mayor has already said,  Tamworth today has a   population made up of people from every part of the world -   a microcosm of mankind.

 Australia will continue to accept immigrants who contribute   to our economic growth and prosperity through their skills   and business investment.

 And we will continue to do so using selection procedures   that are utterly free of discrimination on grounds of race.

 The days of the White Australia policy are dead and buried.

 Australia also has a proud record in acknowledging our   international humanitarian responsibilities by accepting for   resettlement people who have been affected by war or tragedy   in their country of birth.

 The people of Tamworth have shared in this responsibility.   Over the past 10 years the Tamworth Uniting Church and St   Peter's Anglican Church have helped to resettle a large   number of Laotian refugee families.

 Today Tamworth has one of the largest Laotian communities   outside Melbourne and Sydney, and I am delighted that some   of the members of this community have become Australian   citizens today.

 Ladies and Gentlemen

 Today is a day of anniversaries.

 We're probably all a bit blase about celebrating   anniversaries,  having just had the Bicentenary - which I   know in Tamworth coincided with the one hundredth   anniversary of Tamworth becoming the first town in Australia   to use electric street lighting.

 But we should still recall the significance of today.

 4.

 It is of course the 201st anniversary of European settlement   of this continent.

 It is the fortieth anniversary of the introduction of the   Chifley Government's Nationality and Citizenship Act - the   law that created for the first time the legal concept of   Australian citizenship.

 The Bill had been introduced into Parliament the previous   September,  and it was on the 40th anniversary of that   occasion last year that I announced 1988-89 would be a Year   of Citizenship.

 During this Year of Citizenship I want to draw attention to   what it means to be an Australian citizen,  and I want to   encourage as many people as possible who are qualified to   take up Australian citizenship, but have not yet done so, to   make that public affirmation of their commitment to this  

 country.

 I have written recently to all Australian households about   the importance of citizenship, and encouraging those who are   not citizens to think carefully about taking this big step.   The example set by these twenty five new citizens is a   valuable element of the Year of Citizenship - an example I   hope will be followed by many more people throughout the   Year.

 As the Year of Citizenship TV advertisements say, to become   an Australian all you have to do is swear - that is to make   a public declaration of your commitment.

 I said today marks a number of anniversaries. Today also   breaks something of a drought for Tamworth.

 I am told that a search of your records has revealed the   astonishing fact that before today, no Prime Minister had   visited Tamworth for more than sixty-six years.

 Billy Hughes made the last visit in 1922.

 I don't know why all those Prime Ministers since then missed   out on the warmth of your hospitality.

 Billy Hughes was a remarkable man but I am sure he wasn't as   warmly welcomed as I have been.

 Then again, Billy Hughes didn't bring Slim Dusty to town.

 Slim Dusty is going to play for us shortly - and I am sure   that even in the tough competition of the 17th Country Music   Festival he will as usual be a hit.

 And may I say how delighted I am to have had the chance to   hear Eric Bogle, Ted Egan,  Norma Murphy, and John Williamson   at this ceremony.

 There's a very relevant lesson to be learned from country   music in Australia.

 5.

 Country music has its origins in other parts of the world.

 But Australian country music artists have moulded and   adapted it, imbued it with their own spirit and their own   experience.  They have given it a distinctively and   genuinely Australian character.

 In particular, country music is a place where black and   white Australians have found common ground.  Black artists   as well as white have left their mark on the country music   tradition and have been very popular entertainers.

 So like so much that is great about this nation,  country   music has its roots elsewhere.

 But who would say that the Tamworth Festival is not one of   the great celebrations of Australian culture?

 I would like to conclude by addressing myself once more to   the people who have become citizens.

 You join more than two million others who have made this   declaration during the past 40 years since the introduction   of that Chifley Government Act.

 Many different paths have brought you here.

 You represent many different backgrounds and many different   histories. But you all have in common the wish to declare   yourselves proudly as Australians.

 As Prime Minister of Australia I am proud to welcome you as   Australians and as fellow citizens.

 From now on, we can work together as fellow Australians to   ensure this nation's future prosperity, peace and freedom.

 ******************************

