---
title: "Dawkins launches new federal skills advisory body"
date: "1989-11-03"
creators:
  - "Dawkins, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211176932
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1657015%22
---

 MEDIA

 RELEASE

 Minister for Employment, Education and Training The Hon. J S Dawkins, M.P. 190/89

 DAWKINS LAUNCHES NEW FEDERAL SKILLS ADVISORY BODY

 The Minister for Employment, Education and Training, John Dawkins, announced today the members of the new National Advisory Committee on Skills Recognition (NACSR). His announcement coincided with the Sydney launch of NACSR by the Deputy Prime Minister, Lionel Bowen.

 "The Committee is to advise me on matters relating to the recognition of overseas skills and on aspects of the Government's associated reform strategy", Mr Dawkins said.

 Under terms of reference provided by the Minister, NACSR is to take a leading role in promoting discussion and debate of the problems caused by not recognising the skills of migrants.

 "I have specifically asked the Committee to act as an advocat e. of reform", Mr Dawkins said.

 "It will bring to public notice any inequitable, inefficient or protectionist occupational entry requirements which operate against the national interest by preventing migrants from contributing to Australia's economic development.

 "At the launch of the National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia the Prime Minister announced the appointment of a distinguished Australian, Sir William Keys, as Chairman of this Committee", the Minister said.

 "To complement him the Government has appointed a group of talented men and women from a range of backgrounds."

 The members are:

 • Jenny Acton from the ACTU;

 • John Fiocco, a barrister and solicitor;

 • Marion Gluck, a German-trained doctor;

 • Helen Hughes, the well-known economist;

 • Quang Luu, former refugee and now head of SBS Radio;

 Carmel Niland, representing the New South Wales Government;

 Gareth Roberts, an architect and academic;

 ccmiMONWE :  ', I

 1s^'t tFai.. !. Y a :` i. ._S a:

 y

  $4

 - 2 -

 • Naga Narayanan, Chairman of the Ethnic Communities Council of Western Australia

 • Bernie Ryan, representing the Western Australian Government; and

 • John Rowling, the Director of the National Advisory Committee on Skills Recognition (ex officio)

 "I will, in addition, be appointing a further member with a business background, and I expect that the Victorian Government will be sending a representative," the Minister said.

 Sir William Keys is keen to have the Committee up and running.

 "The injustice of inadequate recognition of migrant skills and qualifications has gone on too long," Sir William said.

 "This Committee looks forward to playing its part in getting a fair go in skilled employment, regardless of the place of their origin or training."

 CANBERRA

 3 November 1989

 Enquiries:

 Wayne Burns Mr Dawkins' media secretary (062) 777 460

