---
title: "Afghanistan: Withdrawal of Soviet forces"
date: "1989-02-16"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214059253
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR09030447%22
---

 No. M21 Date 16 February 1989

 AFGHANISTAN :  WITHDRAWAL OF

 .

 C O M M O N W E A L T H  

 P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  LIBRARY   M IC  A H

 wrnrr'FORCEs

 The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Michael Duffy, today welcomed the withdrawal of the remaining  Soviet forces from Afghanistan.

 Mr Duffy said that the withdrawal of Soviet troops  after almost a decade-long occupation of Afghanistan marked the  fulfilment of the main Soviet commitment under the terms of the  Geneva Accords.  Soviet withdrawal had been the crucial  prerequisite for any long-term settlement in Afghanistan.

 "The withdrawal of Soviet forces does not in itself  present a solution for Afghanistan", Mr Duffy said. "The  post-withdrawal problems facing Afghanistan remain as daunting '   now as they did when the Geneva Accords were signed ten months  ago - to put an end to the violence in the country, to  establish a viable government representing all elements of  Afghan society and to begin the long process of national, 

 economic and social reconstruction."

 Mr Duffy also welcomed the cessation of the appalling  aerial bombing by the Soviet air force which had cost many  lives in the past few weeks. He hoped that, in line with the  Geneva Accords, there would be no further attempt to interfere 

 in the internal affairs of Afghanistan now that the Soviet  troops had left.

 Mr Duffy said he hoped that the Soviet departure would  clear the way for a concerted effort by all the various parties  to the dispute within Afghanistan to work together to resolve  their differences. "There has been more than enough misery and  bloodshed in Afghanistan", Mr Duffy said, "and I urge the 

 competing factions to co-operate peacefully in the formation of  a post-withdrawal government acceptable to all Afghans."

 Mr Duffy said that Australia would continue to assist  Afghan refugees in this difficult period of transition. During  the Prime Minister's recent visit to Pakistan, the Pakistani  Prime Minister, Ms Bhutto, had expressed the appreciation of  her Government for the more than $45 million of humanitarian 

 assistance Australia had provided for Afghan refugees in her  country since 1979.

 Mr Duffy said that Australia had also pledged $20  million over three financial years to the United Nations  Humanitarian and Economic Assistance Program for Afghanistan.

