---
title: "New system and additional resources for refugee status and humanitarian claims"
date: "1990-10-26"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214093916
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021891%22
---

 Media Release 4*^ Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 55/90

 NEW SYSTEM AND ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FOR REFUGEE STATUS AND  HUMANITARIAN CLAIMS

 The Federal Government today announced the introduction of a  new system for determining claims for refugee status and  humanitarian stay in Australia.

 The Government will also provide significantly larger  resources to speed up decision-making on refugee  applications.

 The new system, which will come into effect on 10 December,   was foreshadowed by the Government in June this year.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand,  said the changes were necessary in  order to deal with the growing number of people applying to  stay in Australia on refugee and humanitarian grounds.

 Mr Hand said from December 10, 1990, the process for dealing  with such claims will have three stages:

 .  A primary stage for applications to be assessed and  decisions made quickly on refugee status;

 .  a review stage where there are negative assessments;  and

 .  where there are clear grounds for humanitarian stay,  but where refugee status is not recommended, Ministerial approval for temporary entry on  humanitarian grounds.

 The Minister said a Refugee Status Review Committee will be  established at the review stage, replacing the existing ,   Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) Committee.

 26 October 1990

 2

 For the first time, Mr Hand said, a non-Government  representative will be involved in the refugee decision­ making process. A representative nominated by the Refugee  Council of Australia will be a member of the Committee, 

 together with representatives of the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade, the Attorney General's Department, and  the Department of Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs (Chair).

 A representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR) will continue to attend meetings in a  advisory capacity.

 Mr Hand said the Government was committed to a system which  deals with asylum seekers in Australia in a compassionate  and humane way.

 "The refugee determination system which we have decided upon  is built on fairness and openness and will provide  applicants with every opportunity for a full and impartial  examination of their claims."

 Mr Hand noted that a particularly important element of the  new system was the inclusion of a community representative  on the Review committee. This would underline the  independence and integrity of the refugee determination  process.

 The Minister said the Government had agreed to significantly  increase the resources available to process applications for  refugee status in order to speed up decision-making.

 "It is essential that Australia be able to decide refugee  applications quickly and fairly," Mr Hand said.

 "Delays in resolving cases add to the insecurity and  uncertainly of applicants and undermine the credibility of  our procedures.

 "These changes will also ensure that frivolous and unfounded  claims are dealt with expeditiously," the Minister added.  "This will maintain the integrity of the asylum system as an 

 important protection for those in need. The Government will  not tolerate its cynical abuse by those simply seeking to  delay their departure."

 Mr Hand said that new arrangements for considering claims to  remain in Australia on humanitarian grounds would come into  effect on 10 December 1990. This would give effect to the  commitment made by the Minister in June that individuals who 

 sought to stay in Australia on strong humanitarian grounds  would have an opportunity to have their claims considered as  part of the refugee determination process.

 iU  â– · · '

 Applicants who are granted permission to remain in Australia  on humanitarian grounds by the Minister will receive a  four-year temporary entry permit on the same conditions as a  refugee.

 CANBERRA, 26 October 1990

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Sharon O' Neill Minister's Office  (06) 277 7860

 Evan Arthur  DILGEA (06) 264 2470

