---
title: "Dawkins to blame for ELICOS shambles"
date: "1990-06-13"
creators:
  - "Kemp, David"
source: "Shadow Minister for Education"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091464
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08019634%22
---

 I  LL INO . Ιύ .Ub ,yu y:4b K .  D'Z

 2 ^

 DR DAVID KEMP MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR GOLDSTEIN SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

 145 KOORNANG ROAD  CARNEGIE, VIC. 3163  PH; (03) 571 3311  FAX; (03) 571 6020

 13th JUNE, 1990 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

 MEDIA RELEASE "Dawkins to blame for ELICOS  shambles": Kemp

 The shambles in the ELICOS Industry and the related problems  facing the government over Chinese student refugees and refunds  of tuition fees for Chinese students who have since had their  visa applications rejected is largely the result of Mr Dawkins'  bungling of the development of the education export industry, Dr.  David Kemp, the Shadow Minister for Education said today.

 Dr Komp was referring to the growing number of bankruptcies  occurring amongst Colleges offering English Language Intensive  Courses for Overseas Students (ELICOS courses).

 "It was clear from the beginning that great care had to be 

 exercised to ensure that the education export industry developed  in a manner that served Australia's interests.  What was needed  was careful planning and experimentation in a well-thought out  framework.

 "Instead of fostering sensible development of the industry, the  Minister went out of his way to create boom time expectations  amongst participants and prospective participants in the ELICOS  industry.

 "In November 1988 the Minister issued a media release 

 paraphrasing comments he had made at a conference on education  export which contained statements such as:

 * "Australia's export education earning are expected to exceed  more than $ 500 million over the next few years if the country's  full-fee overseas student program keeps growing at its present

 * "While I'm not suggesting that we will replace riding on a  sheep's back with balancing on a mortar-board, I think that our  education sector can play a very important part in our overall  trade performance.H

 "Such comments by the Minister were all the more irresponsible  in light of the fact that there had already been articles in the  media more than a year before warning that many prospective  overseas students viewed ELICOS courses as a one way ticket to

 rate".

 TEL No . 13,06,90 8:47 P.03

 come and live in Australia.

 "When the Minister fijayally did realise the folly of his ways, his  heavy handed and precipitous response greatly damaged Australia's  reputation overseas and triggered a financial crisis amongst  ELICOS Colleges. The Minister's subsequent modification of his 

 initial response constitutes a belated recognition of this fact.

 "Mr Dawkins failed dismally to properly manage the development  of Australia's education export industry. He failed to ensure  that proper regulations were implemented to regulate student  entry and he failed to ensure that the ELICOS Colleges observed  proper financial management, especially with respect to deposits  they had received from students who had yet to arrive in the  country.

 "The Minister's ineptitude and the behaviour of a small number  of ELICOS Colleges has inflicted considerable damage on the  mainstream of the ELICOS industry and on Australia's reputation  in the Asia/Pacific region."

 END

 Contact: Dr. David Kemp MP  ,  Ph; (03) 571 3311

