---
title: "Prime Minister creates Confusion on Refugees"
date: "1990-06-06"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091322
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020613%22
---

 /SO

 John Hewson Leader of the Opposition  M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 50/90

 6 June 1990

 PRIME MINISTER CREATES CONFUSION ON REFUGEES»

 The Prime Minister's statement this evening on "A Current  Affair" concerning the refugee status of Chinese students  and Cambodian boat people constitutes an extraordinary and 

 totally unsatisfactory way of announcing a major Government  decision.

 It revealed both a dangerous lack of consistent standards  and a short-circuiting of established procedures for  determining refugee status.

 The situation of the Chinese students and the Cambodian  boat people in Australia calls for generosity and  compassion. But it also demands consistency and clear  policies.

 What Mr Hawke's comments tonight seem to indicate is that

 .  a special new category of refugees will be established  to accommodate the claims of those Chinese students who  were in Australia on 20 June 1989 and who wish to stay

 .  none of the recently arrived Cambodian boat people will  qualify for refugee status.

 This is an extraordinary and hasty conclusion to reach and  it prejudges the processes now underway to determine the  refugee status of both groups.

 Mr Hawke's performance tonight begs the question of whether  his announcement is the outcome of a Cabinet decision or  whether it is the result of a talk with Mr Hand or whether  it is just a case of Mr Hawke shooting from hip.

 The Opposition believes that the only way to make a humane,  generous and compassionate response to the claims of the  Chinese students and the Cambodian boat people is to  implement a case-by-case assessment of them.

 The Prime Minister's statement tonight does little to  advance the likelihood of such a response and may well have  undermined it.

 For further information contact: 06 - 277 4022

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 A

