---
title: "Changes to refugee and humanitarian policies"
date: "1990-06-27"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091682
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021908%22
---

 r o r o

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600  .

 Telephone: (06) 277 7860 .

 The Federal Government today announced a number of changes  affecting Australia's refugee and humanitarian policies and  processes.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said the changes were necessary to cope  with the increasing number of foreign visitors and students  seeking to remain in Australia by citing political unrest in 

 their homeland.

 In recent times Australia, like other western nations, has  experienced unprecendented growth in applications to remain in  this country on humanitarian and refugee grounds.

 Mr Hand said the changes will involve the introduction of new  procedures in the assessment of refugee and humanitarian claims  as well as new arrangements for residence once an individual has  been granted refugee status or found to have a humanitarian 

 claim. ■  .

 "Australia has an exemplary record in dealing with people who  have sought protection on refugee and humanitarian grounds and  this Government has a deep felt commitment to maintaining that  record," Mr Hand said.

 "However there is a difference between providing protection as  required under our international obligations and granting  immediate permanent residence to those who gain protection.

 The Government intends, therefore, to make these two things  quite separate," the Minister said.

 "People assessed as being refugees, or as having strongly based  claims on humanitarian grounds will initially be provided with  temporary entry permits, and not grant of resident status as is  now normally the case.  The Regulations are being amended to give  an immediate effect to this principle.

 CHANGES TO REFUGEE AND HUMANITARIAN POLICIES

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  . M IC  AH

 2 .

 ι>

 "People holding temporary entry permits with an ongoing need for  protection will have the opportunity to seek permanent residence  after four years subject to places being available under the  Migration Program. If places are not available and there is a 

 need to continue -protection they will be able to seek a further  temporary entry permit." .

 Mr Hand said the Government is proposing to amend the Migration  Act to give refugee determination a sound base in domestic law,  whereas it has previously been covered by international treaty  alone.'

 "In doing so we are looking to ensure natural justice and  guarantee fairness to all applicants." .

 The Minister added that the DORS processes would be reviewed so  as to expand their capacity to handle a larger number of cases  while also ensuring that refugee and humanitarian applications  were assured a fair handling of their claims.

 "The new mechanism will also be used to assess the claims of any  individuals who apply for protection on strong humanitarian  grounds in the future. .

 "In addition," Mr Hand said, "the Government will also provide  temporary entry permits on a class basis to any groups it judges  in need of humanitarian support by means of special regulations,"  the Minister said.

 CANBERRA  June 27, 1990

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Sharon O'Neill (06) 277 860  Wayne Gibbons (06) 264 2522

 t

