---
title: "Australian aid for distance education program for Palestinian refugees"
date: "1990-03-01"
creators:
  - "Duffy, Michael"
source: "Minister for Trade Negotiations"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214062212
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08022796%22
---

 3| S J 0  MN3 Date : 1 March 1990

 Australian aid for distance education program for Palestinian  refugees

 Australia will contribute $250,000 for a primary level distance education  progam to assist Palestinian refugee children in the Occupied Territories, the  Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr Michael Duffy, announced  today.

 Australia's contribution will be channelled through the United Nations Relief  and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA). - ■

 The program will give Palestinian refugee children the opportunity to continue  their studies despite the closure of all educational institutions in the West Bank  and the disruption of school operations in the Gaza strip since early 1988.

 "Australia is concerned that this disruption may have serious long-term effects  for Palestinian students at primary schools. The distance education program  would attempt to maintain literacy levels where possible, while  simultaneously offering a beginners program for Year One pupils," Mr Duffy 

 said.

 Mr Duffy noted that 140,000 pupils attending 245 UNRWA schools in the West  Bank and Gaza Strip were affected.

 The education program would be administered by means of a remote learning  literacy television program broadcast from Jordan. It would be backed up by  learning kits distributed to individual households.

 Australian assistance to the Occupied Territories forms part of the  Government's overseas aid program administered by the Australian  International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB), Canberra.

 For further information contact Annmaree O'Keeffe, Director, AIDAB Public  „ Information. Tel: (062) 764960.

