---
title: "Hawke and the Refugee Issue: A Shambles Becomes a Fiasco"
date: "1990-06-12"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091425
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020605%22
---

 John Hewson M E D IA  RELEASE Leader of the Opposition

 57/90 12 June 1990

 HAWKE AND THE REFUGEE ISSUE: A SHAMBLES BECOMES A FIASCO

 There has been confusion and concern ever since the Prime  Minister made his ill-considered and ill-informed announcement on  6 June about the future in Australia of Chinese students and  Cambodian boat people.

 In his press conference today, the Prime Minister twisted and  turned on the issue yet again, making the confusion even worse  and the concern even greater.

 To the confusion and concern that the Prime Minister's actions  have generated among his own Ministers, the Opposition, the  media, ethnic groups and Australians generally, there is now the  added confusion and concern of the Chinese students themselves. 

 Those of them who arrived before 20 June 1989 were led to believe  by Mr Hawke last week that they could stay in Australia but he  informed them today that their stay will be a limited one, the  duration of which i§ not yet determined, but which will be not 

 less than six months and not more than ten years.

 The Prime Minister senses that popular opinion did not support :   his earlier show of selective morality in judging who were and  who were not genuine refugees. He is now desperately trying to  get off the hook. His statement today shows yet again how little 

 his decision making is guided by principle and logic and how much  of it is driven by short-term political advantage.

 A shambles has now become a fiasco. On each of the main points  which Mr Hawke made his "announcement" on 6 June, he has plainly  backtracked. But as he has done so, he has not been man enough  to concede that he may have been mistaken or confusing in his 

 original statement. In fact he now lashes out at anyone who  suggests that he has shifted his ground despite the clear fact  that he has.

 At his press conference today, the Prime Minister demonstrated on  three key points how dramatically he has stepped back from his  6 June statement that was meant to re-establish his leadership.

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 2

 On the Chinese students,  he now says that those arriving  before 20 June will be allowed to stay for a period of time  at the end of which they can make a judgement about the 

 political climate in China. He added that those who arrived  after 20 June would be presumed to be returning to China but  could apply for refugee status in the normal way.

 This is an extraordinary "clarification" - and one that is  all the more so because the confusion was allowed to continue  for six days since the Prime Minister's original statement.

 The implications of the Prime Minister's latest contortion on  this issue are very serious. He has failed to clarify any of  the following dilemmas: ;

 - Will those students who arrived before 20 June be  allowed to apply for refugee status under the DORS  guidelines during their "temporary period"?

 - Will those who arrived after 20 June be able to achieve  permanent residency in the relatively near future if  their application for similar refugee status is  approved?

 - How can those students granted "temporary" permits,   whatever their length of time, be expected to plan  careers, employment and further education or to apply  for family,reunion rights?

 The principle at issue here is clear and no amount of  confusing semantics by Mr Hawke will conceal it: all Chinese students should have access to long established processes for  determining refugee status and their applications should be 

 processed fully, properly and as expeditiously as possible on  a case-by-case basis.

 Under pressure, Mr Hawke has now conceded the relevance of  this principle for the Cambodian boat people and for those  Chinese students who arrived after 20 June. He must do the  same for those students who arrived before 20 June.

 The Prime Minister must have the guts to accept the relevance  of the above principle which the Opposition has been  consistently emphasising for all refugee cases.

 The unfortunate irony of the Prime Minister's latest formula  is that those persons whom he was trying hardest to help  (namely those Chinese students who arrived in Australia  before 20 June 1989) are now those who will be most  disadvantaged.

 )

 V

 - 3 -

 .  The Prime Minister cited "mechanical problems" in the  processing of refugee claims as an important reason why he  distinguished between those Chinese students who arrived in  Australia before 20 June 1989 from those who arrived after 

 that date.

 But the figures show that on this point, as on so many  others, he is wrong again. The number of Chinese students in  Australia who arrived after 20 June 1989 exceeds those who  arrived before 20 June 1989.

 It is clear, therefore, that even though not all of those  who arrived after 20 June will apply for refugee status, the  "mechanical problems" associated with processing the claims  of a significant number of them will be as great if not 

 greater than those that would have been associated with the  cases of those who arrived before 20 June.

 .  The Prime Minister insisted at his press conference that on  the issue of the Cambodian boat people he had always been  aware of their entitlements under the DORS procedures. But  if this were the case, he needs to explain why it was that on 

 6 June he stated that "these people are not political  refugees". That determination is precisely the purpose of  the DORS committee and the Prime Minister's clumsy  intervention effectively pre-empted the rights about which he  has insisted that he knows so much.

 Every time the Prime Minister has intervened on this issue over  the past week he has made matters worse. More than ever he must  now end the confusion with a clear and complete statement of the  Government's policy on this issue. Until he does this he  will continue to create futher confusion. He must as a matter of 

 priority reaffirm the principles of generosity and consistency  which have been characteristic of Australia's proud record on  refugees.

 For further information contact: 06 - 277 4022

