---
title: "Immigration portfolio: Federal budget 1990-991"
date: "1990-08-21"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092756
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021896%22
---

 Media Release Minister for immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 50/90

 IMMIGRATION PORTFOLIO; FEDERAL BUDGET 1990-91

 The Immigration Department's Budget allocation will enable  it to meet increased commitments in 1990-91.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said tonight decisions taken on a  range of issues in recent months had posed important  challenges for the portfolio, and the allocation was a 

 realistic recognition of the additional workloads involved.

 He said the Budget provided for:

 - an increase in outlays of 12.5 per cent to a total of  $300.7 million;

 - a growth in revenue (not affecting outlays) of about 12.5  per cent to $91.1 million;

 - an increase of around 7 per cent in the Average Staffing  Level to 2607; and

 - maintenance of the level of cost recovery at around 35 per  cent.

 Mr Hand said 1989-90 had been a year of significant change,  with implementation of a number of major initiatives flowing  from the inquiry by the Committee to Advise on Australia's  Immigration Policies.

 In particular the changes to the Migration Act and the  introduction of a large body of new Regulations had impacted  on portfolio administration,  requiring a reallocation of  existing resources.

 There would be a further period of "bedding down" in the  current financial year to ensure that the legislative  requirements were being appropriately administered and  achieving the intended results.

 Mr Hand said the Budget allocation also took account of the  Government's immigration program for 1990-91 which will see  the selection of 126 000 new settlers.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAT-1

 2 .

 4 / f4· ,

 He said the National Immigration Outlook Conference, to be  conducted by the Bureau of Immigration Research in November  this year, would create a solid foundation on which the  Government would base its consideration of the size and 

 shape of future immigration programs and the funding  necessary for them.

 The Minister said other recent decisions impacting on  portfolio workloads included:

 - the granting of permission to Peoples' Republic of China  nationals who were in Australia on 20 June 1989 to remain  in Australia for four years as temporary residents,  pending future consideration of conditions in their  homeland. This has necessitated the introduction of 

 special processing arrangements,  principally in New South  Wales and Victoria, including the opening of a new office  in Sydney exclusively for PRC applicants;

 - the implementation of new measures designed to reduce the  numbers of people in Australia illegally. As announced  earlier this month, compliance staff in the Department's  Regional Offices are to be more than trebled, a detailed 

 compliance strategy is being developed and enhanced  computer systems are being introduced. This will give the  Department a greater capacity to follow up and apprehend  people overstaying their entry permits and/or working 

 illegally, and to undertake associated activities to curb  illegal migration;

 - changes to refugee and humanitarian policies and  processes,  which have been introduced to cope with the  increasing number of foreign visitors and students seeking  to remain in Australia by citing political unrest in their  homelands. People assessed as being refugees or as having 

 strong humanitarian claims are to be provided initially  with four-year temporary entry permits, with the  opportunity to seek permanent residence at the end of that  period, subject to Migration Program places being 

 available. In this context, the Government is addressing  the resource implications of reducing the large backlog of  refugee applications currently before the Determination of  Refugee Status Committee.

 â– â– â– %'

 3 .

 In addition to meeting these special requirements, Mr Hand  said, the Budget allocation would allow the Department to  continue to meet its migration and settlement commitments in  an efficient and responsible manner, providing a high level  of service to clients while fulfilling its mission to enrich  Australia through the entry and settlement of people.

 CANBERRA, 21 August 1990

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Sharon O'Neill Minister's Office  (06) 277 7860

 Eric Brookbanks  DILGEA (06) 264 2093

