---
title: "Immigration and Refugees: Policy without Substance"
date: "1990-06-27"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091711
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020579%22
---

 70/90 27 June 1990

 IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES: POLICY WITHOUT SUBSTANCE

 The decisions announced by the Prime Minister today concerning .   the cuts in Australia's migrant intake and the status of Chinese  students in Australia are seriously, flawed. Cabinet has  preferred to defer yet again the hard decisions and to try to 

 cover up for the Prime Minister's ineptitude rather than  addressing Australia's real national interests in these matters.

 The decisions constitute a desperate, divisive and ultimately  unsuccessful attempt by Cabinet to make some sense of Mr Hawke's  inept and pre-emptive statements on immigration and refugee  issues. Cabinet's main concern has been to get the Prime  Minister off the hook but, in trying to do so, it has created  concern, confusion and inconsistency that will surround  Australia's immigration program for years to come.

 What is clear from the carefully worded ambiguity of the  Government's statement today is that Ministers are deeply divided  on important issues. That is no basis for a sensible  immigration policy that commands community respect.

 Today's decision represents a hastily cobbled together set of  compromises that only add to the utter confusion that the Prime  Minister has created.

 There were obviously serious divisions with the Cabinet on the  following key issues:

 .  whether the total immigration intake should have been  cut at all, and by how much

 .  whether Chinese students in Australia before 20 June  1989 should have a case-by-case#assessment of their  claims to permanent residency during or after their .  "temporary" residence

 .  whether publicly funded benefits should be available to  them, and if so to what extent

 .  whether cuts in the immigration intake should apply  equally to skilled and family reunion migration.

 These are central issues in immigration policy. No carefully  worded statement and no deferral of decisions (e.g. on access to  social security rights)  will paper over the fact that Cabinet is  deeply divided on them.

 The decision to reduce the total migrant intake is yet another  example of a Government in disarray making policy on the run. No glib rationalisations by the Prime Minister should obscure the  following facts:

 .  this reduction has been forced on the Government simply  to accommodate the Prime Minister's recent ill-informed  and pre-emptive undertakings concerning the Chinese  students

 .  the Government has given no substantive explanation (on  economic, environmental or other grounds) for the  reduction. The reason is that it has none since the  outcome of current official enquiries on those matters 

 is incomplete

 .  the Prime Minister indicated in the Election campaign  that the current annual level of migrant intake  (140,000) was "about right" and committed his Government  to continuing it. The Prime Minister must explain what  has changed between March and now. Unless he does so  adequately, there is no option but to add one more to  the Prime Minister's broken promises.

 On the status of Chinese students in Australia, I have made it  clear in a number of recent statements that the Prime Minister's  (and now the Government's) policy constitutes a damaging break  with clear, long-established and well-accepted processes for 

 determining refugee status.

 By making blanket judgements and "special categories", the  Government's policy lacks consistency in the application of those  processes. And, without consistency, there can be no fairness  or genuine compassion in our refugee policy.

 The Government had a simple duty in this matter - to recognise  that all Chinese students (irrespective of when they arrived in  Australia), and any other applicants for permanent residency on  refugee or humanitarian grounds, have a right to have their 

 claims heard fully and as expeditiously as possible on a  case-by-case basis.

 3

 The Government has failed in that duty. It has preferred to try  and cover for the Prime Minister's blind emotionalism in these  matters.  That is no basis for sensible policy. It only leads  to unfairness and arbitrariness where compassion and consistency 

 should apply.

 We now have the situation where an arbitrary cut-off date (20  June 1989) will determine which Chinese students (irrespective of  the legality of their status at that time) are given the de facto  offer of permanent residency and which students "are expected to  return to China" subject to appeal on a case-by-case basis.

 That decision lacks logic, consistency and genuine compassion.

 It has also created even more confusion. The Government has now  indicated that Chinese students may be able to stay permanently  in Australia (if they so wish) but yet may not be granted  permanent residency. All will depend on how the Australian  Government of the day views the prevailing situation in China.

 This extraordinary situation of having "temporarily permanent"  residents in Australia with as yet undetermined access to social  security benefits is solely the outcome of Cabinet trying to pick  up the pieces of the Prime Minister's disastrous intervention on 

 this issue. It gives the Chinese students no firm basis for  planning their lives or building their careers. ;· ' '

 After weeks of invisibility, Gerry Hand has finally made an  appearance and has made one useful contribution to the debate  over the status of the Cambodian boat people.  His comments on  how grossly improper it would be to make judgements about the  Cambodian cases now before the DORS Committee only highlight the  thoroughly improper and ill advised public judgements which the  Prime Minister and Senator Evans have made on this issue.

 For information: (02) 277 4022

