---
title: "Hawke's Semantics can't conceal the need to Clarify Refugee Issue"
date: "1990-06-10"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091416
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020606%22
---

 56/90 10 June 1990

 HAWKE'S SEMANTICS CAN'T CONCEAL THE NEED TO CLARIFY REFUGEE  ISSUE

 It is very disturbing that the gap between reality and the  Prime Minister's perception of it is now greater than ever, and  continues to grow.

 No one is questioning the Prime Minister's compassion and  humanity on the issue of refugees. But he must be big enough  to recognise that his statement last week on Chinese students  and Cambodian boat people caused considerable confusion within  the Chinese community, the ethnic community generally and  throughout Australian society.

 The Prime Minister has clearly jettisoned without explanation  long-established and well accepted practices with regard to  refugees.

 The Prime Minister had the opportunity today to admit what  everyone - including the media, the Opposition and his own  Ministers - has been telling him over recent days: namely, that he got it wrong on some important aspects of his 

 announcement this week about Chinese students and Cambodian  boat people, or at a minimum that his language was imprecise  and his timing premature.

 But what did we get from the Prime Minister? Nothing but his  insistence that he alone has been right and that everyone else  continues to be wrong.

 It is important in terms of the honesty of political debate in  this country that the Prime Minister's statement today on this  issue is seen for what it is - a re-writing of history to suit  his own purposes and a distortion of the facts.

 On two key issues, the Prime Minister tried to tell us that his  position has not changed when it is obvious that it has.

 .  On the Chinese students, he said that he had "been saying it for twelve months" that there would be "a  special category" to accommodate them in terms of  refugee status.

 the facts of course are different: the Prime Minister may have spoken previously about the  Chinese students receiving "special  consideration" but he had never before indicated  that there would be a special immigration  category to allow them to stay in Australia

 2 .

 - that is why his statement this week caused the  news that it did and why it disturbed his own  Ministers so greatly

 .  On the Cambodian boat people, the Prime Minister said that "obviously" he always understood about the legal  rights to which they were entitled and how their  status would be determined by the DORS Committee.

 - but if this was always so obvious to the Prime  Minister, why did he say in his announcement on  6 June in reference to the Cambodian boat people  that "these people are not political refugees"?

 - that determination is precisely what the DORS  Committee is supposed to do and the Prime  Minister pre-empted the whole process.

 It is simply not good enough for the Prime Minister to hide  his mistakes behind brave assurances that Australia's  immigration policy will not be determined by outsiders. No  one is arguing that it should. It is simply not the issue 

 in this matter.

 Nor is it good enough for the Prime Minister to bury his  head in the sand, to insist that he is right against all the  evidence and to hope that the issue will lose its political  heat. His ineptitude has begun a process that will affect  Australia's immigration program for years to come. This 

 process must not be dominated by the Prime Minister's  mistaken semantics, as the debate over child poverty has  been. ...

 The Prime Minister insists that his actions have been  "intellectually and politically proper". No objective  observer of events should let him get away with that  distortion. His announcement this week and his egotistical  cover-up today add to the confusion. They are as 

 intellectually bankrupt as they are politically inept.

 The Prime Minister's "clarifying statment" today did nothing  to address the central questions which his announcement this  week raised. I indicated what those questions were in a  press release on 7 June (attached). The Prime Minister has 

 still made no attempt to answer them.

 The Opposition has always insisted that genuine compassion  in refugee applications demands both generosity and  consistency. The Prime Minister's generosity in this matter  is not at issue; his consistency most certainly is.

 I urge the Prime Minister to clarify this situation  immediately.

 Contact : (06) 2774022

