---
title: "Joint statement on Chinese Nationals in Aust"
date: "1990-06-27"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091718
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021906%22
---

 v.

 }’  ^  .  A" : · /  *  *

 FOR MEDIA 27 JUNE 1990

 JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE MINISTER FOR  IMMIGRATION., LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS'; MR HAND

 PRC nationals in Australia on 20 June 1989 will be able to  stay in Australia for four years under a special category of  temporary residence permit. No PRC national in Australia on  20 June 1989 will be required during the four years or  subsequently to return to China against their will unless  they have seriously breached Australian laws.

 Whether PRC-nationals in this special category who wish to  stay beyond the four years gain an extension of their  temporary residence status or whether they gain permanent  residence will depend upon conditions then prevailing in  China. Unless we were confident that the situation in the 

 PRC was such that human rights were no longer generally at  risk, permanent residence would be granted to those who  apply, subject to normal health and character checks. The  timing of such a grant of permanent residence, will depend  on the rate at which places can be provided in the 

 immigration program at that stage, and in the meantime their  temporary residence permits would be extended.

 In reaching this position the Government has had regard to  the inherent uncertainty of developments in China over the  coming years. The Government does not believe that PRC  nationals in this group should be compelled to make  decisions in the near future about their longer term plans 

 in conditions of such uncertainty and risk. This decision  therefore combines the government1s humanitarian  obligations to this group of people, with its responsibility  to maintain control over the size and structure of  Australia's immigration:program in the national interest.

 The decision to allow four years'  temporary residence to  this group before considering the option of permanent  residence will give these people a generous period in which  to assess developments in their homeland before deciding  whether they wish to return there, or stay in Australia. In  making those decisions they will obviously be heavily 

 influenced by developments in China over that time. But  they will also be influenced by the pull of homeland, family  and friends. Many may choose to leave Australia over the  next four years. A good number has already done so.

 V

 / ‘\·

 2.

 The special four-year permit will carry the same conditions  as those applying to the permits to be granted to those  given refugee and humanitarian status under the new Asylum  policy announced today. Holders of the special permits will  be allowed to work. They will be entitled to lodge 

 sponsorship for their spouses and dependent children after 1  February 1991. The Government will now be considering in  detail the terms attaching to the temporary residence  permits to be held by this group, including such issues as  access to income support, health services and labour  market/training programs.  An announcement on these matters  will be made soon, after Cabinet consideration.

 Chinese nationals in Australia on 20 June may apply for the  special four-year permit from 1 August 1990, when the  regulation creating the category will come into force.

 They will not need to seek refugee or humanitarian status  to qualify for the special four-year permit, and those who  have already sought such status should seriously consider  withdrawing those applications and apply instead for the 

 special permit. There are long processing queues for  residence on refugee or humanitarian grounds, and while in  the queue, applicants will not have the sponsorship rights  of those in the special group.

 Tertiary students in Australia on 20 June 1989 can apply for  the balance of the four years at the conclusion of their  courses. The same applies to PRC nationals in Australia on  20 June who are unsuccessful in their applications for  permanent residence.

 PRC nationals who arrived in Australia after 20 June 1990  will not be entitled to the special four-year permit. The  government assumes they will return home when their entry  permits expire, like any other temporary residents.

 These people went through revised exit procedures before  leaving China, and they entered Australia on a temporary  basis, in full knowledge of the conditions in their country.   Anybody who arrived after 20 June 1989 who believes he or 

 she has particular claims is of course entitled to apply for  refugee or humanitarian status but such claims will be  assessed on a case by case basis.

