---
title: "Senate seat lost but democrats will soldier on"
date: "1990-01-15"
creators:
  - "Jenkins, Jean"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214061303
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR04008804%22
---

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 Western Dem ocrat Jean Jenkins Australian Democrats Senator for Western Australia

 No 15 January *90

 Correspondence invited to: Senator Jean Jenkins, 15 Lawrence Ave, P.O. Box 883,  West Perth WA 6005. Phone: 321 2110. Fax 321 2103. Office Manager: Madeleine  Foster. Research: Richard Jeffreys & Barbara Churchward. Media: Brian Jenkins.

 Number 16 June ’90

 SENATE SEAT LOST BUT DEMOCRATS WILL SOLDIER ON

 My seat in the Senate was lost in the Federal Election on March 24th  and my term as Senator for WA will therefore end on June 30th.

 It is ironic that this should be the result when we increased our  primary vote in WA by some 63% and we were the only party nationally  to secure a significant increase in our vote in all States. Every  other State returned a Democrat Senator, even Tasmania where the  Democrats scored a lower vote than in WA.

 It is also ironic in that of thirty candidates  for the six vacancies in the Senate for WA I  received the highest ’below the line’ vote -  some twenty thousand votes.

 My defeat is as much as anything a product of  the system of marking Senate ballot papers which  allows a voter to mark a [1] in a box for a 

 party and thereby surrender their choice of  preferences to that party - the so-called  ’ticket vote’. This enables parties to have a  significant influence over the outcome when 

 voters are seduced by the simplicity of it -  and, unfortunately, some 80% - 90% of voters are  so seduced.

 In this case effectively the ticket vote  provision made it possible for the ALP to decide  whether Senator Vallentine or I would win the  sixth and final seat for WA. Labor decided to  give the seat to Senator Vallentine, essentially  because The Greens (WA) were prepared to  recommend preferences in the House of 

 Representatives to Labor - which was  instrumental in saving the Labor Government’s  skin. The Democrats were not. prepared to make  such a recommendation.

 Labor was possibly also influenced by the fact  that Senator Vallentine in her first two Senate  terms addressed only a narrow range of issues  and did not take part in every vote. She is  therefore not a thorn in the side of ALP

 Governments as the Democrats are because, as  true independents, we vote on every issue on its ‘  merits. As a result we often vote alone, '

 sometimes with Labor and sometimes with the  Opposition. ,

 Many of the present Greens, when they were !  independents and regarded all parties as  corrupt, refused to be associated with the  Democrats because, they said, we were always  "doing deals" with the other parties. It is  therefore highly ironic to find the Greens i

 "doing a deal" with Labor which ensured my :  defeat in the recent election in which they !

 bartered their preferences in the !

 Representatives for Labor’s ahead of us in the I  Senate.

 It is even more ironic that the real winners ,

 have been the Liberals - the party regarded by '  the Greens as having the worst record on the  environment - who picked up an additional Senate 1   seat as a result of the split in the progressive ’ 

 green vote over the last two Federal Elections. Thus the decision by greens to run separately '  has reduced green representation in WA from two |  Senators to one, and given the other seat to the ! 

 weakest party on the issues of conservation.

 It’s no use crying ...

 ... over spilt milk, however. Nationally the result for the Democrats was outstanding. It had 1

 been widely predicted that we would be wiped out  in a half-Senate election; instead we are  established in the Senate with increased  representation.

 Also, for the first time, we came very close to  winning several seats in the House of  Representatives and it is highly probable that  that significant landmark will be achieved in  the next Federal Election. Janine Haines’s  highly publicised run for the House of  Representatives was in fact not our closest  result. In the seat of Cunningham in NSW we went 

 within a thousand or so votes and there were six  or seven seats where we were within six percent.

 In Tasmania, where the Greens a year ago gained  up to 18.5% and five seats in the State Election  there, the Green vote slumped to only 4.5% and  it was Democrat Robert Bell who was elected to  the Senate. In the other mainland States  ’greens’ were hardly a factor of any  significance. However, the total "green" vote 

 (i.e.- Democrats plus other green independents  and parties) was close to 20%, which augurs very  well for the future.

 Federal and State elections over the last two or  three years have demonstrated a strong and  enduring trend against the two major "dinosaur"  parties - Labor and Liberal. Australia is in the  process of making the enormously significant  transition from an antagonistic two party system  to a three party democracy, perhaps in time a  multi-party democracy. Some fear instability -  Israel and Italy are often quoted - but the  evidence from countries such as Holland, Belgium, West Germany and the Scandinavian 

 countries is that multi-party democracy produces  stable, just, tolerant and prosperous societies,  and better legislation.

 Where do we go from here?

 The Democrats will maintain a Parliamentary  Liaison Office in WA until we regain  parliamentary representation. This will be in  operation from August 5th onwards at the 

 following address: First Floor, 50 Angove St,  NORTH PERTH WA 6006. The phone number  [09] 227 9624 and we have a fax [09] 328 9090.  The present Senate office in West Perth will  cease to be operational as from June 25th and 

 will close as of June 30th.

 The Parliamentary Liaison Office will do as much  as possible to organise continued Senate  representation of WA issues, through the good  offices of our eight Australian Democrats  Senators. We will have no full-time staff and

 limited resources and will only be able to  function on a "liaison" basis.

 How much it will be possible to do is yet to be  seen; a good deal will depend on the willingness  of volunteers to help with all the work. To an  important degree it will be up to groups who 

 want WA issues effectively represented to supply  the people power to get the essential work done.

 At the personal level, I will continue to work  as much as I can for the issues which have been  the focus of my Senate term: the environment,  social justice, electoral reform, multicultural  issues, a sustainable economy and society, and  particularly for the interests of individuals  and groups who have suffered injustice at the  hands of the ’establishment’ and the  institutions of our society.

 We also expect to continue publication of the  ’Western Democrat’, or an equivalent newsletter,  to keep constituents and supporters in WA aware  of developments in Federal Parliament and  informed about issues on which the Democrats in  WA are working. A ’return slip’ is enclosed to  enable you to let me know whether you wish to 

 continue to receive newsletters and to enable  you to inform me about your interests and  involvement.

 MIGRATION During my term we have had the Fitzgerald Report  (Committee to Advise on Australia’s Immigration  Programme), the Government’s response to that  report, a small mountain of Migration Act  Amendment Legislation and a large mountain of  migration regulations.

 The amendments and the regulations emphasised a  dry economic approach to immigration and  attempted to codify every step of the decision  making process, as if human beings and human  situations were capable of being neatly pigeon  holed. Family reunion and refugee elements of  the programme, which the Democrats believe  should be the priorities, were not emphasised. Quite offensive and draconian measures were  proposed to deal with over-stayers and illegals.

 The Democrats opposed very many of the changes  to the law and to the rules. I myself moved  forty-two amendments designed to restore  flexibility and humanity to the migration  decision process and to ensure an independent  and effective review system. However, the

 familiar coalition of Labor, Liberal and  National Senators voting against the Democrats  defeated all these amendments.

 But, as so often is the case, the Democrats are  being shown to have been right all along. The  regulations have already had to be changed 

 several times since they were introduced a scant  six months ago. The vital element of discretion  has been re-introduced into the process. The  Secretary of the Department of Immigration, Local Government & Ethnic Affairs, and at least  one other senior officer, have been pressured  into resigning. And the new Minister has  announced a further investigation into the  migration programme, which no doubt will have to  take account of the many weaknesses to which I  drew attention last year.

 The Australian Democrats are urging the  government to develop a population policy which  will take into consideration a whole range of  issues, including the pressure on our major  cities, regionalisation, environmental and  conservation concerns and social life-style  aspects.

 We believe that it is only after the development  of a population policy that we can arrive at a  rational immigration policy. By "rational" I  mean a policy that takes into consideration but  is not constrained by a population policy. Other  considerations must be those based on our  humanitarian and compassionate responsibilities,  as befits any society which calls itself  civilised.

 The Democrats vehemently oppose soliciting for  migrants on a skills or business basis.

 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION  Workers’ compensation is designed to protect  injured workers from exploitation and economic  loss. If even half the stories I have been 

 hearing are true, the workers’ compensation  system in WA has been substantially corrupted.

 My office has been conducting for six months a  wide-ranging inquiry into the experiences of  injured workers, and also people injured in  traffic accidents. This effort culminated in a  major speech in the Senate on May 28th in which 

 I outlined the complex web of fraud,  incompetence, unprofessionalism and malpractice  in which injured workers commonly find  themselves entrapped.

 These problems originally came to my notice as a  result of an earlier inquiry into epidural  injections of the steroid Depo-Medrol; many of

 the people affected by these injections were  given them involuntarily under workers’  compensation provisions.

 Although the majority of the problems affect  people working under State awards and in the  private sector, rather than Commonwealth  Government public servants, I discovered a very  serious problem affecting employees of Telecom  in a number of States.

 Experiences of injured workers are worst it  seems when the injury is RSI or a ’soft-tissue’  back injury; various tactics are used to deny  the existence of a condition, or to attribute it  to a cause other than a work injury, and thus to 

 avoid liability.

 Work on this issue is ongoing and it is one that  is so crucial that we plan to continue to work  on it after my term ends, with the support and  involvement of the people affected. Copies of  the speech on this subject are available on  request.

 FOREIGN OWNERSHIP It has become very apparent to me through my  contacts with constituents that very many  Australians, especially in WA and Queensland but  also in all other States, are deeply concerned  about increasing foreign ownership of Australian  land, business, property and resources.

 The government is encouraging what it calls  ’foreign investment’ to bring money into  Australia to compensate for all the money going  out to buy consumer goods. Essentially this  means that we are selling off: our assets and our  birthright to pay for an inflated and  unsustainable life-style.

 People realise that a family is headed for  disaster if it spends more than its income every  week, and sells off assets and the family home  to bridge the gap between income and expenses.  Neither the present government nor its Liberal 

 opposition seem to be able to grasp this simple  but so significant rule of economics.

 In my final session I initiated an urgency  debate on the need for a register of foreign  ownership - something the Democrats have been  advocating for years - and also introduced into  the Senate a Private Senator’s Bill to implement  this proposal.

 Predictably, the National/Liberal "collusion" in  the Senate joined Labor in voting against the  urgency motion. In the debate they trotted out  the usual pathetic arguments about the need to  stimulate ’growth’ and the need to make 

 Australia ’competitive’. They still have not  realised that it is patently apparent that  continued economic growth is unsustainable and  that the need is desperate to begin the shift to 

 an indefinitely sustainable economy, in which  cooperation rather than wasteful competition  will be essential.

 TIMOR GAP - AUSTRALIA’S SHAME  The recent Senate sittings witnessed a further  chapter in Australia’s shameful conduct with  regard to East Timor.

 The Timorese were brave allies of Australia  during World War II. In 1976 East Timor, then a  rather neglected colony of Portugal, was invaded  by its powerful neighbour Indonesia. A news team  of five Australians attempting to cover the  Indonesian invasion was murdered by Indonesian 

 troops. Subsequently East Timor was illegally  incorporated into the Republic of Indonesia.  Australian protests were very muted, out of fear  of alienating our most significant neighbour.

 International covenants to which Australia is a  signatory specifically prohibit the acquisition  of territory by armed force. The incorporation  of East Timor into Indonesia is not recognised 

 by the international community and is plainly in  violation of international law. Indonesian  hegemony has all along been, and continues to  be, opposed by the East Timorese.

 Nonetheless, the ALP government has proceeded to  negotiate with the Indonesian government over  the seabed boundary between Australia and East  Timor, and over the exploitation of oil reserves  and other resources expected to be discovered in 

 that area - an area known as the Timor Gap.

 A treaty has now been concluded between the  Australian and Indonesian governments to share  out the spoils. Thus Australia has colluded in  the carve up of the resources which belong to a  captive people, who have no say at all in the  arrangements. Bills to ratify this shameful deal 

 passed through the Senate, with only the  Democrats, of the parliamentary parties,

 speaking and voting against them.

 It is a virtual certainty that if this treaty is  challenged in the International Court it will be  found illegal. Given Australia’s tradition of  standing up for the ’little battler’ and 

 distaste for bullies, I found it depressing to  watch Liberal, Labor and National Senators  voting in support of the principle that might is  right.

 The same Senators have made stirring speeches in  support of the independence of the Baltic  Republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia -  which are in a precisely parallel situation. In 

 that case of course we can make a noisy stand  for the independence of captive nations without  any economic cost to ourselves.

 MYANMAR ELECTIONS There have been extraordinary developments in  Myanmar (formerly Burma). The military there  finally agreed to the holding of national 

 elections. They made it very difficult for the  opposition to campaign and kept its leader Aung  San Suu Kyi under house arrest.

 Nonetheless, the opposition won by a landslide. Not all the results are in yet but the National  League for Democracy (NLD) won 72% of the vote  and about 400 of the 485 seats in the National  Assembly. An interesting sidelight was that the 

 NLD did very well even in military cantonment  areas, where army families are congregated. Thus  even the army voted to reject military rule.

 What will happen next is not clear. Aung San Suu  Kyi is still under house arrest. The military  authorities say they will hand over power, once  a new constitution has been drafted by the newly  elected members of the National Assembly, a  process that could take a long time.

 The NLD is avoiding any action which might  provoke the military and is waiting for the  final election results to come in before asking  for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and other 

 political detainees. The game now is largely a  ’wait and see’ one. The Democratic Alliance of  Burma, which is composed of ethnic groups  opposed to the regime in Rangoon, Burmese  students and overseas expatriate groups, is also 

 waiting to see what happens once the final  election results are declared before deciding  its future course.

 GREEN INDEPENDENT SEES THE LIGHT  Former NSW Green independent Senator Robert Wood  has joined the Australian Democrats. When he  entered the Senate in 1987 Robert was initially 

 wary of the Democrats, as he had not known of  our record on environmental and other green  issues. But after hearing the Democrat Senate  team constantly advocating the policies he was 

 committed to, and after finding himself voting  with the Democrats in division after division, Robert realised that the future of green  politics lies with the Democrats.

 Robert was subsequently removed from the Senate  on a citizenship technicality - he had come to  Australia as a child and had not realised he was 

 not technically an Australian citizen when he  stood for election.

 The Green Scene

 SHARK BAY Conservationists were encouraged by the  Government’s announcement, just before the 

 Federal Election, that Shark Bay was to be  nominated for World Heritage status.

 It was therefore depressing to learn recently of  moves to permit trawling within the waters of  Shark Bay. While world heritage status does not  rule out economic activity, the marine aspects  of the Shark Bay World Heritage proposal - 

 including the dugong herds and the sea grass  beds - are a vital element of the rationale for  listing the area for world heritage status.

 It is clear that the battle for Shark Bay is far  from won. It is crucial that the final  boundaries cover all the areas and features  which need to be preserved and that no  activities are allowed within the heritage area 

 which will lead to degradation.

 nomination of the Shannon National Park to the  Register of the National Estate.

 Another Notice of Motion drew the Senate’s  attention to the fact that only 1.9% of the area  of Western Australia is designated as national  park, the smallest of any of the States. I  called on the Federal Government to do all in  its power to ensure that the State Government 

 gazettes the many national park proposals which  have been endorsed by the EPA since 1974 but  which have not yet been implemented, including  Mount Lesueur.

 A third notice of motion condemned the WA  Government for political interference in the  withholding of data which showed that the  proposed Mount Lesueur coal mine and power  station would have a severe impact on the  ecology and national park potential of that  area. I also pointed out that the proposed power  station would increase WA’s emissions of the  greenhouse gas carbon monoxide by 13 per cent  over its thirty year lifespan.

 MINERAL SANDS WA’s booming, and environmentally degrading,  mineral sands industry featured prominently in 

 the material I used in the Senate when  addressing the issue of foreign ownership of  Australian resources.

 Carr Boyd Minerals, the owner of the Mount Weld  prospect which is considered to be the richest  rare earths prospect in the world, has been  taken over by Ashton Mining Ltd. Ashton in turn  is 46% owned by the Malaysian Mining Corporatior  Berhad, itself 100% owned by the Malaysian 

 Government and operator of a rare earths  processing plant in Malaysia.

 Carr Boyd, in association with the UWA and the  CSIRO, has done a lot of research into the  mining and processing of processing of rare  earths and metals, which should add considerably  in Australia to the value of minerals produced  from the Mount Weld deposit.

 There is a serious danger that the foreign  take-over of Carr Boyd Minerals could result in  the shelving of the Mount Weld mine, loss of the  downstream processing in Australia of the ores  from Mt Weld and the very many benefits which  would flow to Australia if the mine were  developed with Australian ownership. Mt Weld is  one deposit which is not located in an area of  environmental sensitivity.

 Another recent case study is the sale of assets  worth $550 million by Pioneer International Ltd, I

 There is a serious danger that the foreign  take-over of Carr Boyd Minerals could result in  the shelving of the Mount Weld mine, loss of the  downstream processing in Australia of the ores 

 from Mt Weld and the very many benefits which  would flow to Australia if the mine were  developed with Australian ownership. Mt Weld is  one deposit which is not located in an area of 

 environmental sensitivity.

 Another recent case study is the sale of assets  worth $550 million by Pioneer International Ltd,  including mineral sands mines in the South West  of WA, operating as Cable Sands, to a Japanese 

 corporation.

 An alarming aspect is that the proposed, highly  controversial Cable Sands mine at Jangardup on  the south coast was assessed by the Foreign  Investment Review Board (FIRB) as a currently 

 operational mine. According to FIRB guidelines,  the sale of a currently operating mine does not  need approval. There is no way that Jangardup  can reasonably be classified as a currently  operating mine.

 STOP PRESS!

 PEOPLE POWER SAVES ARALUEN  Araluen Park near Roleystone is up for sale and  was in danger of falling into the hands of  private developers and, quite possibly, of 

 foreign investors.

 The historic sixty hectare hill site contains a  botanial garden of extreme beauty and a memorial  to young members of the Young Australia League  who died in World War I.

 Mrs Noelene Drage, a strong advocate of  Araluen’s remaining an asset for the people of  WA, literally put her money where her mouth was 

 and put up $8,000 to take out an option on the  property. Members of the Art Deco Society of WA  (of which I am proud to be patron) and thousands  of the general public rallied to the cause.

 Finally the State Government stepped in to buy  the Park. We are all relieved that it will  remain a public asset. What a shame that it took 

 so long; what a shame that people like Mrs Drage  had to work so hard to persuade the Government  to do the right thing!

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS SENATE  TEAM AND SHADOW PORTFOLIOS  - AFTER JULY 1st

 National Leader: Senator Janet Powell (Vic) Prime Minister & Cabinet  Administrative Services  Women

 Deputy Leader: Senator John Coulter (SA) Environment Industry, Technology & Commerce

 Science Health

 Whip: Senator Paul McLean (NSW) Defence Veterans Affairs  Industrial Relations  Small Business

 Senators: Senator Robert Bell (Tas) Agriculture Education Employment & Training 

 Youth Local Government

 Senator Vicki Bourne (NSW) Foreign Affairs  Energy & Resources  Housing Arts & Heritage

 Senator Cheryl Kernot (Qld) Transport & Communications  Aboriginal Affairs  Consumer Affairs  Territories

 Senator Meg Lees (SA) Social Security (inc. Retirement Incomes)  Community Services (inc. Aged Care) 

 Sport  Tourism

 Senator Sid Spindler (Vic) Attorney-General (Inc. Justice) Treasury & Finance 

 Immigration & Ethnic Affairs  Trade & Customs

 Registered by Australia Post  Publication No WBG 2237

