---
title: "Senator Evan's delusions of grandeur on Cambodia"
date: "1990-07-20"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092125
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020884%22
---

 H r

 nw s < ? n  M edia R elease Leader of the Opposition

 87/90

 20 July 1990

 SENATOR EVANS'S DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR ON CAMBODIA

 The Opposition has always welcomed constructive  proposals that would help to end the suffering and  military conflict in Cambodia. In fact, during my  recent visit to Asian capitals, I expressed the 

 Opposition's support for important elements of the  current Australian initiative on Cambodia.

 But Senator Evans is playing domestic politics by trying  to claim that recent American moves to inject momentum  into the Cambodian peace process is the result of his  peace plan. He continues to exaggerate the importance  of his own involvement and he is deluding himself and  others in maintaining that Australia is the central  driving force behind the recent breakthrough and future  prospects for peace.

 The recent decision by the United States to open a  dialogue with Vietnam on the future of Cambodia is a  welcome development. But it is stretching reality for  Senator Evans to insist that it is all part of his own 

 initiative. On the contrary, the American decision has  far more to do with the fact that the peace process  (including the Australian initiative) has been stalled  and that the Khmer Rouge strength on the ground in  Cambodia has been gaining. The Americans obviously  concluded that a new course towards peace in Cambodia  needed to be chartered.

 The U.S. initiative is one element of a possible  "package arrangement" which offers the best prospects  for a lasting negotiated peace in Cambodia, for fair and  free elections and for preventing a return to dominance  by the Khmer Rouge.

 During my recent visit to Asia, I discussed the  Cambodian issue at length with regional leaders.  We  focussed on the best means for breaking the existing  impasse in the peace process and for improving the  prospects for a negotiated settlement to end the ongoing  conflict.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   ivllCAH

 In a major speech in Singapore last week I spelt out  what I considered to be the clear linkage between  separate issues that had now emerged and the promising  scope for leverage that now existed. I noted that

 .  China is currently seeking ways to restore access  to international trade credits and technology

 .  the Khmer Rouge are dependent on China's military  supplies

 .  Vietnam is in desperate need of international  economic assistance which could be linked to a  return of refugees and a settlement in Cambodia

 .  the U.S., Japan and other Western countries are central to facilitating the aid necessary in Indo­ china to underwrite a peace settlement

 .  the U.N. has indicated that it is willing to become  involved in overseeing a settlement

 The recent U.S. change in policy could be the first step  in this process of linkage. It is early days yet but  at least the U.S. initiative has increased the chances  of gaining Vietnam's co-operation in a negotiated 

 settlement in Cambodia.

 The next key step will be to persuade China to adopt a  constructive role in support of a negotiated settlement  based on fair and free elections and to end its flow of  military supplies to the Khmer Rouge. The United  States, other members of the U.N. Permanent Five, and  Japan, with the support of ASEAN and countries like  Australia, will have vitally important roles in creating  the incentives and disincentives for China to commit 

 itself to such a course.

 These next steps are fundamental to progress towards  peace in Cambodia. For many reasons, but particularly  because of the current state of our official relations  with China, Australia's capacity for influence in this 

 next phase is limited.

 Australia's involvement in the Cambodian peace process  has made some positive contribution. But it is  inflating our own importance for domestic political  advantage for Senator Evans to keep congratulating  himself for recent developments and for him to create  the delusion that we remain the driving force in this  evolving process.

 For further information - 06/277 4022

