---
title: "Overseas visit by Senator Evans"
date: "1990-08-21"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092689
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021591%22
---

 No. Date:

 -/ M145 21 August 1990

 OVERSEAS VISIT BY SENATOR EVANS

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth  Evans, will leave tomorrow for a week of high level 

 discussions on the Gulf crisis in Europe, Egypt, New York and  Washington.

 In Europe, he will meet in Venice on Saturday, 25 August, with  Italian Foreign Minister, Mr Gianni de Michelis, who has just  returned from leading an EC "troika" mission to Egypt, Jordan  and SiLiidi Arabia. Italy currently holds the EC Presidency,  and the talks - while focusing on European reactions to the  Gulf crisis - will also cover a full agenda of bilateral and  multilateral (including Cambodia and South Africa) issues.

 These talks will be preceded on Thursday and Friday, 23-24  August, with a previously scheduled visit to Geneva,  where  Senator Evans will address the 4th Review Conference on the  Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and have discussions with 

 the Chemical Weapons Convention negotiators,  and also the UN  High Commissioner for Refugees.

 On Sunday, 26 August, Senator Evans will fly to Cairo for  meetings with Egyptian leaders, who have been playing a  leading role in mobilising the reaction of moderate Arab 

 States against Iraq, and possibly other Arab leaders convening  that day for a further Arab summit meeting.

 On Monday, 27 August, Senator Evans will meet in New York with  senior UN Secretariat members and key Security Council  Permanent Representatives.

 On Tuesday, 28 August, he will be meeting with the US 

 Administration in Washington.

 Final details of Senator Evans's itinerary and meetings are  still being settled, but he is expected to return to Australia  to brief Cabinet before the end of next week.

 In his talks, Senator Evans will be discussing the future  handling of the Gulf crisis, the UN's and Australia's role in  it, and the prospects for its peaceful resolution.

 The requirements of this trip, and the Gulf crisis generally,  have forced the postponement of a visit Senator Evans was to  have made from 26 August - 6 September to Latin America, in  company with the Ambassador for the Environment, Sir Ninian  Stephen. This Ministerial visit - to Brazil, Argentina,  Chile, Uruguay and Peru - was to have focused particularly on  Australia's Antarctic initiative (which is to be discussed at

 2 t  -α

 an important Treaty Party Consultative Meeting in Chile in  November), but also cover a range of multilateral and  bilateral trade and foreign affairs issues.

 Senator Evans said that the visit would nonetheless proceed,  to the extent possible, with Sir Ninian being joined by  Australia's most senior Foreign Affairs official, the  Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr  Richard Woolcott AO. Senator Evans said that he placed the  greatest importance on Australia's relations, economic and  political, with the major Latin American countries, he hoped  to be able to reinstate his own visit to the region in the not  too distant future.

 * *  *

 CANBERRA

