---
title: "Immigration Minister announces new-style grants to help migrant settlement services"
date: "1990-01-05"
creators:
  - "Ray, Robert"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214061189
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021877%22
---

 Minister for  Immigration  Local Government  and Ethnic Affairs Senator the Hon. Robert Ray

 OFFICES.

 Parliam ent House,  Canberra, ACT, 2600  Phone: (062) 77-7860  Fax: (062) 73-4144

 4 Treasury Place,  Melbourne, Vic. 3002  Phone: (03) 65(F4479  Fax: (03) 650-9106

 MRS 4/90 NOTE: EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE 10 JANUARY 1990

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER ANNOUNCES NEW-STYLE GRANTS TO HELP   MIGRANT SETTLEMENT SERVICES

 3

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic   Affairs, Senator Robert Ray,  today announced the first of a   series of grants under the Federally-funded Migrant Access   Projects Scheme (MAPS).

 Seventeen projects in six States have been awarded a total   of $805 946. .

 Senator Ray said the scheme aimed to improve the design,   planning and co-ordination of settlement services for   migrants. .

 "MAPS incorporates the former Migrant Project Subsidy Scheme   and complements the existing Grants-in-Aid scheme which is   continuing unchanged," he said.

 "While the Grants-in-Aid scheme focuses on self-help   services for migrants of non-English-speaking background,  and recent arrivals in particular, MAPS aims to ensure   better access for such-mi grants to the broad range of  

 general community services.

 "The scheme, which has a total budget of around. $1.8 million   for 1988-89, provides two levels of grant. The first   provides major grants of up to some $50 000 a year for a .  maximum of two years.

 "These larger projects encompass broad-based research needs   and service co-ordination in given areas, or promote   measures to improve general services.

 "The second level provides for grants of up to $10 000 for   small projects, mainly for office equipment for migrant   organisations or to help the organisations research their   clients’  needs."

 Senator Ray said he was particularly pleased with the range   of projects funded in the initial round,  and with the   diversity of the organisations receiving the grants.

 COM M ONW EALTi I j 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY }  M IC A H

 2 .

 Innovative larger projects included the development of plans   which would: '

 - improve migrant access to services which are essential for quick and successful settlement; ,

 - help migrants in rural and isolated areas, especially  women, to access community services;

 - ensure that elderly people of non-English-speaking background make better use of home support and other  services for the aged; and .

 - enhance the provision and co-ordination of services for   migrants at the local government level.

 Senator Ray said he expected to announce sooh further  grants, including those funded under the first level of MAPS   and those, under Grants-in-Aid.

 A SUMMARY OF THE GRANTS IS ATTACHED. SEPARATE MEDIA  STATEMENTS ON INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS ARE AVAILABLE FROM THE   MEDIA LIAISON SECTION, DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION, LOCAL   GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS (tele. (062) 64 2183).

 CANBERRA, 5.1.90 .

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Trevor Griffiths '

 .  .  DILGEA

 (062) 64 2061

 MIGRANT ACCESS PROJECTS SCHEME (MAPS)

 STATE

 National

 NSW

 NSW

 NSW

 NSW

 ORGANISATION GRANT PROJECT

 WA Migrant Welfare $49,953

 Workers Association/ Centre for Multicultural  Studies (Wollongong Univ.)

 To develop a national  computerised client  data base using migrant  service statistics.

 Canterbury/Bankstown  Migrant Resource Centre $100,770  (over 2 

 years)

 To prepare a comprehen­ sive local settlement  plan for Canterbury/  Bankstown to ensure  migrants have access to 

 those services essential  for quick and successful  settlement.

 St George Community  Services Inc. $31,000 To research and  implement strategies to 

 increase the access of  elderly migrants to  major aged and home  support services in the 

 area.

 Local Community Services $45,000  Association To ensure development  within Neighbourhood 

 Centre network of  culturally sensitive and  appropriate services to  migrants, particularly  migrant women.

 Immigrant Women’s $44,370 To decrease the sense of

 Speakout Association isolation felt by 

 migrant women in rural  '  areas by establishing

 self help support groups  and setting up training  workshops for service  _ providers in rural

 areas.

 STATE ORGANISATION GRANT PROJECT

 NSW

 VIC

 VIC

 VIC

 VIC

 QLD

 Federated Ironworker's  Assoc, of Australia

 Family Mediation  Centre

 Ecumenical Migration  Centre Inc.

 $23,000 To produce a multi­ lingual video tape to  assist FIA in making itc-  non-English speaking  background (NESB)  members aware of the 

 award restructuring  process in the steel anc  metal industry.

 $41,918 To pilot a bridging service to migrants  which will help improve  their access to main­ 

 stream family support  services.

 $50,000 To develop a demonstra-tional multicultural  training package on  _  access and equity and

 cross cultural  sensitivity for staff of  local government  authorities and health  centres.

 Broadmeadows Community $43,335 Health Services To develop models of  program design for 

 services to migrants  which will serve as a  guide to health and  welfare service 

 providers in other areas  of Australia.

 Victorian Association of $50,000 Citizens' Advice Bureaus (VACAB)

 To develop a client  information strategy for  new migrants in  Victoria, using the  VACAB network, that will  be transferable to other 

 States.

 Queensland Council of $40,000 Develop strategies to Social Services assist service agencies

 _ and local government to

 respond more effectively  to migrant needs in  rural/remote areas.

 3

 STATE ORGANISATION GRANT PROJECT

 QLD Logan City Migrant 

 Neighbourhood Centre $50,000 Migrant needs analysis  in outlying suburbs and develop strategies to 

 increase the responsive­ ness of mainstream  service providers to the  needs of NESB migrants.

 develop consultative and  co-ordinating mechanisms  between local government  and service providers to 

 improve service  strategies.

 an integrated service  network to help migrants  in the settlement  process.

 awareness of employers  and the public about  migrant welfare,  employment and training 

 issues and overcome  barriers to labour  market participation  including the difficul­

 ties in recognising  overseas qualifications.

 SA Local Government Assoc, 

 of SA 

 $50,000 To develop a refugee/  migrant data base and

 SA Community and Neighbour- $45,000

 hood Houses and Centres  Assoc.

 To develop models for  language learning, child  care and information  services for NESB  people.

 WA City of Wanneroo $43,000 To develop a model for

 WA Bunbury Community Group $48,750 To increase the

 TAS School of Social Work, $49,850

 Tasmanian State Institute  of Technology

 To develop a settlement  plan for Tasmania to  ensure effective  servicing of new 

 migrants.

