---
title: "Senator Evans: visit to South and South East Asia"
date: "1990-07-24"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214092193
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08021673%22
---

 NO. M127 Date24 JUly 1990 '

 SENATOR EVANS :  VISIT TO SOUTH AND SOUTH EAST ASIA

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth  Evans, leaves Australia tomorrow for South East Asia 

 (Indonesia, Singapore and Thailand) and South Asia (India,  Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka).

 In Jakarta from 25-29 July, Senator Evans will take part in the  annual ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference (PMC),  one of the most  significant high-level annual engagements for the Australian  Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Senior Ministers from 

 ASEAN, the United States, Japan, Canada,  New Zealand, the EC  and PNG will be present. Formal discussions are expected to 

 focus on Cambodia and Indochinese refugees, with other issues  likely to include regional cooperation, the Uruguay Round and  bilateral relations with ASEAN countries.

 Cambodia is also likely to feature prominently in his bilateral  discussions between Ministers attending the PMC. Senator Evans  said that the meeting in Paris on 16-17 July of the five 

 Permanent Members of the UN Security Council and the shift in  the United States position especially on opening a dialogue 

 with Vietnam on Cambodia constituted significant moves  forward. Discussions at the PMC will be directed at  maintaining momentum for a comprehensive settlement.

 â– t- -â– 

 «

 From Jakarta, Senator Evans will travel to Singapore to lead 

 the Australian delegation at the second Ministerial-level  meeting on Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).  The 

 Minister for Trade Negotiations, Neal Blewett, will also be  representing Australia at the meeting. As with the inaugural  meeting held in Canberra in November 1989, this will involve  participation by 12 economies - Australia, the 6 ASEAN  countries, the United States, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, and  the Republic of Korea.

 Senator Evans said that the Singapore APEC meeting would mark a  further consolidation of the APEC process. Coming immediately  after the conclusion of the Trade Negotiation Committee meeting  in Geneva, an important theme of the Singapore meeting would be  to explore the scope to support and strengthen the open  multilateral trading system. The meeting will be a valuable '  

 opportunity for countries in the region to send a strong signal  to the rest of the world on the need for a comprehensive and  timely outcome to the Uruguay Round," Senator Evans said.

 APEC members will discuss the regional economic outlook and the  implications, for regional economies, of developments elsewhere  in the world, including the European Community's progress  towards a Single Market and the revolutionary changes which  have occurred in Eastern Europe; review progress on the work  program of cooperation in specific areas initiated at the 

 Canberra meeting to increase gains from regional  interdependence; and discuss the future direction of APEC.

 Senator Evans will visit India (1-2 August), Pakistan (2-6  August),  Bangladesh (7-9 August) and Sri Lanka (9-11 August).

 It will be the first regional tour by an Australian Foreign 

 Minister since Mr Hayden went to India, Pakistan, Nepal and Sri  Lanka in 1985. In the case of Bangladesh, the visit will be  the first by an Australian Minister since that by Mr Whitlam in  1973. ,

 2 .

 3 .

 Senator Evans said that the South Asian region was one of  considerable importance to Australia, strategically and - 

 increasingly - economically. The Australian Government was  concerned to develop its relations with the countries of the  area to the maximum extent permitted by its own resources.

 Senator Evans will arrive in New Delhi on 1 August for a round  of discussions with Indian Ministers. It will be his first  such meetings with members of the Government of Prime Minister  V.P. Singh, which took office in December 1989. The aim of the  visit would be to continue to develop a more diverse and 

 substantial relationship between Australia and India.

 In Pakistan, Senator Evans will follow up the progress achieved 

 as a result of Prime Minister Hawke's visit in February 1989,  and the recent signature of a trade agreement in Canberra on 12  July. He also plans to visit Afghan refugee camps and aid 

 projects in the North West Frontier Province, near the border  with Afghanistan. '

 The visit to Bangladesh will focus primarily on economic  relations. A number of Australian firms are embarked upon or  competing for contracts in Bangladesh, while others are known  to be interested in doing business there. Bangladesh, for its 

 part, is actively investigating opportunities for increasing  its exports to Australia.

 In Sri Lanka, as well as talks on trade/economic issues, Senator -Evans will be seeking to receive at first hand the Sri  Lankan Government's assessment of the renewed hostilities with 

 the Tamil militants and to discuss its approach to the handling  of the conflict.

 "While we recognise the extremely difficult situation which the  Sri Lankans face, there are some particular aspects of that 

 conflict, notably in the human rights area, which I. intend to  discuss," Senator Evans said.

 *·

 In Bangkok, Senator Evans will sign an Economic Cooperation  Agreement between Australia and Thailand. The visit will also  enable farther talks on Cambodia and on a range of bilateral  issues. Senator Evans commented that his visit would build 

 further on the strong recent development of the bilateral 

 relationship, and noted that there were encouraging commercial  opportunities for Australia in the booming Thai economy which  he would pursue in his discussions.

 4 .

 * * * * * * * * * *

 CANBERRA

