---
title: "Cambodia & refugee issues addressed during talks in Thailand"
date: "1990-07-08"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214091904
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08020901%22
---

 ,  r-----------

 '  John Hewson Leader of the Opposition  M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 8 J u l y  1 9 9 0  

 7 8 / 9 0

 CAMBODIA & REFUGEE ISSUES ADDRESSED DURING TALKS IN THAILAND

 I am leaving Thailand today after a two day visit that has  included talks with Senior Ministers in the Thai Government.

 I met with Deputy Prime Minister, Pong Sarasin, Deputy  Foreign Minister Prapas Limpabandhu and Commerce Minister  Dr Subin Pinkayan.

 In addition, I met with senior officials from the UN High  Commission for refugees (UNHCR) and from the UN Economic and  Social Council for Asia and Pacific (ESCAP).

 I have also benefited from meeting with members of the  Australia-Thai Chamber of Commerce and the Australian-Thai  Business Council. I discussed with them the practical  business challenges and opportunities in the  Australia/Thailand relationship. 1

 My discussions with the Thai Ministers focused on the rapid  pace of change in the Asia-Pacific region and the powerful  economic factors now influencing the foreign policies of  regional governments.

 I emphasised that the Coalition Parties welcomed the  commitment to democratic processes that now prevails in  Thailand and that we attach great importance to the  promotion and further strengthening of democracy in  Thailand.

 An important focus in our discussions was the issue of  Cambodia.  The Thai Ministers emphasised to me the  importance of China in resolving the Cambodian conflict. They indicated that the forthcoming meeting of the UN  permanent five group in Paris could be crucial in pressuring  China to take a constructive initiative.

 We also exchanged views on the significance of recent  Khmer Rouge military gains on the ground in Cambodia and how  they reaffirmed the need for China to take a leading role in  helping to break the cycle of violence in Cambodia.

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 /

 1

 2

 International and regional trade issues were another focus  of my discussions with the Thai Ministers. We shared  similar views on the importance of the Uruguay Round and the  potential significance of APEC. The Thai Ministers  emphasised the importance of resolving the issue of APEC  membership for the People's Republic of China, Hong Kong and 

 Taiwan.

 We also discussed the development of policies within ASEAN  on the issue of relations with China. We exchanged views on  the significance of recent moves by Indonesia to give  diplomatic recognition to China.

 I had particularly useful discussions on the Thai economy  and the opportunities for Australian trade and investment. I noted the significant potential for expanding existing  trade in raw materials and agricultural products and for  developing trade in services and Australian support for  major transport and energy development projects planned in 

 Thailand.

 Some of the Australian business people I met commented on  the problem of duplication between Commonwealth and State  Governments in promoting trade and investment opportunities  for Australia in Thailand. They noted that this duplication 

 sometimes confused Thai officials and business people.

 I was deeply moved by my meeting with the UNHCR. I was  briefed in detail on the refugee situation on Thailand's  borders.  I exchanged views on the current threat to the  continued viability of the Comprehensive Plan of Action for  Vietnamese boat people, particularly in relation to the role  of first asylum countries.

 The scale of the refugee tragedy on Thailand's borders is  frightening and shows no sign of being resolved. This  UNHCR briefing reaffirmed for me that an essential  prerequisite for Australia's refugee policy must be a case  by case assessment of applicants. Without that, there is  uncertainty and arbitrariness where consistency and  compassion are demanded.

 I also had discussions with ESCAP to assess how current  programs for technology transfer and economic development in  our region are progressing. I was briefed on the recent  Australian decision to reduce its financial contribution to 

 ESCAP.

 * * * *

 For further information: 02 - 277 4022

