---
title: "The UNHCR - Forty years on"
date: "1991-11-05"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214099136
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02002524%22
---

 THE UNHCR - FORTY YEARS ON

 A SPEECH BY SENATOR ROBERT HILL, LEADER OF THE 

 OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW MINISTER FOR 

 FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TO THE 40TH ANNIVERSARY CEREMONY 

 OF THE FOUNDING OF THE OFFICE OF THE UNHCR

 CANBERRA

 5 NOVEMBER 1991

 On behalf of the Coalition parties I congratulate the Office of the United Nations 

 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on forty years of invaluable and 

 compassionate effort. Since its establishment in 1951, the UNHCR has earned the 

 gratitude of the international community through its effective assistance of more 

 than 20 million refugees throughout the world.

 When the UNHCR was first established, its mandate was mainly concerned with the 

 needs of refugees created as a result of the second world war - an estimated one 

 million refugees. However, the number and type of refugees has grown ever since, 

 reaching about eight million in the 1970s and currently standing at 15 million 

 refugees worldwide. Sadly, this reflects the increase in the number of conflicts and 

 the changing nature of such problems in the last 40 years. Instead of diminishing 

 in relevance as it solved the refugee problems of 1950s Europe, the UNHCR has 

 become an essential part of the international response to human suffering.

 The need for the UNHCR in the world of today is unlikely to diminish. In the post­

 Cold War era it will have many more challenges to face, as changing international 

 circumstances unleash a plethora of national, ethnic and religious turmoils and 

 conflicts which will inevitably result in the mass movement of populations.

 We are seeing this already, with the largest and fastest refugee movement in 

 UNHCR history. After the Gulf War, the Iraqi refugee population in Iran 

 skyrocketed from 50 000 in March to 1.4 million in mid-May, with another 500 000 

 refugees in the border regions or Turkey. It says much for the efforts of the 

 UNHCR that approximately 80% of these refugees have now been successfully

 2

 repatriated to Iraq. It was, of course, a tragedy that this should ever have 

 happened.

 I suspect that the UNHCR will also have to face new problems, including the mass 

 movement of populations from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe to the West. 

 Distinction will need to be made between refugee movements and shifts of 

 population which are largely migratory in nature. But more importantly, this 

 reinforces the vital interest of the whole international community in the successful 

 economic transition of these states and the establishment of new, stable political 

 orders.

 It does, however, lead to the problem of defining "refugee" and thus the 

 circumstances in which such people are entitled to UNHCR help. The 1951 United 

 Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol places 

 great stress on the fear of persecution as the defining criteria. However, as a result 

 of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social 

 Council, the UNHCR has been assisting a broader category of refugees. This 

 includes victims of war or other civil strife and those suffering from economic or 

 social deprivation - displaced persons, both inside and outside of their countries, who 

 are in refugee-like situations. Whilst this appears to be a commonsense approach 

 in the face of increasing human suffering, because of the legal consequences and 

 costs which follow, it has in fact led some states to become more restrictive. It is 

 obviously a matter the international community must resolve.

 It is clear that UNHCR will be increasingly required to take on new roles, and

 3

 nowhere was this more clearly demonstrated than in the Gulf where the UNHCR 

 was involved in assisting and protecting the Kurds who had become displaced within 

 their own country. The innovative nature of the concept of UN guards to carry out 

 the protection task provided a first for the UN. More effort needs to be devoted to 

 ensuring that the mandate for the UNHCR is clear and relevant to current 

 international conditions, and that states understand their obligations in these 

 circumstances.

 The problem of growing numbers of refugees is reflected in the UNHCR's budget. 

 In 1971 it stood at $7 million, in 1979 at $280 million and in 1989 it was $587 

 million. This does not include the large amounts of money spent by individual 

 countries providing asylum to the refugees. However, the projected total needs for 

 1991 stand at an enormous $982.5 million.

 The distribution of the expenditure of the UNHCR has remained fairly constant 

 between regions over the last five years however, although the 1990 figures will 

 undoubtedly show a shift of funds to the Middle East. In 1989, the Africa program 

 by far accounted for the majority of expenditure.

 This expenditure reflects the continuing problems of refugee movements in Africa 

 as a result of its generally unstable political and economic situation. The number 

 of refugees is increasing, with the Sudan, Malawi and Somalia among the countries 

 experiencing greater influxes. In addition, the problems resulting from the mass 

 exodus of Afghan refugees as a result of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan still 

 exist, with five million Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iraq. Hopefully this tragedy

 4

 might soon end.

 In Asia, the numbers of refugees leaving Vietnam still poses a major problem, 

 particularly for Hong Kong which is host to 63 000 boat people. The recent 

 agreement between Hong Kong and Vietnam to return all boat people found to be 

 illegal economic migrants instead of genuine political refugees may ease the 

 situation. However, bearing in mind Vietnam's human rights record, the returns 

 will have to be closely monitored. But in its place, UNHCR will have a massive and 

 challenging task ahead of it in the return of 350 000 Cambodian refugees currently 

 in camps along the Thai border.

 The activities of the UNHCR, I note, are being curtailed by the unpredictable nature 

 of its funding. It works on an annual budget cycle for over 95% of its funds, which 

 results in problems in responding to new emergencies or implementing long term 

 measures. It is to be hoped that the current in-depth evaluation of the UNHCR 

 being conducted by the UN Economic and Social Council will come up with a 

 practical solution to this problem.

 In carrying out its tasks, one of the primary functions of the UNHCR is to identify 

 and implement durable solutions to refugee problems. This is becoming even more 

 of an imperative with growing numbers of refugees and with the often desperate 

 economic circumstances of the host countries. With increasingly permanent refugee 

 camps being set up to accommodate some of the more long term problems, there is 

 the danger of creating a dependence on aid which becomes self-perpetuating.

 5

 Instead, more international attention needs to be devoted to two areas which have 

 the potential to alleviate the refugee problem. Firstly, there is the need to avert new 

 flows of refugees by identifying and recognising conditions likely to create refugee 

 problems, and taking effective action to prevent this from occurring. Secondly, once 

 there is a refugee problem, the most effective solution is to establish conditions in 

 home states which will allow refugees to voluntarily return.

 The responsibility for this, however, cannot only lie with the UNHCR. The United 

 Nations as an organisation needs to re-evaluate the role it is to play in changing 

 international circumstances. Traditional responses will need to be altered and often 

 this will require more pre-emptive action, more structured and timely responses. 

 Given that the root cause of the refugee problem is increasingly the result of events 

 internal to states, and not conflicts between states, the traditional taboo on 

 interference in the domestic affairs of states will become less relevant in the face of 

 the urgent need to alleviate human suffering. A UN capacity to take more timely 

 action to prevent the causes of such problems will make the work of organisations 

 such as the UNHCR much easier.

 In concluding, I again congratulate the UNHCR and its staff for work well done 

 amongst some of the world's most needy and saddest populations. I hope the 

 international community in the new world order will accept their responsibility to 

 explore, with new determination, ways to avert the creation of such human misery 

 as is embodied in refugee populations throughout the world.

 6

