---
title: "New humanitarian guidelines"
date: "1991-03-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095673
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004773%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas Electorate

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Tel: (02) 858 1011

 and Ethnic Affairs Fax: (02) 804 6739

 March 15 1991 a/h (02) 630 4575

 NF.W HUMANITARIAN GUIDELINES

 As Immigration Minister, Senator Ray created a monument in the form o f a rigid migration act and  regulations which is now being torn apart brick by brick.

 It was always clear that an absence o f Ministerial Discretion to deal with difficult cases would severely  test the new regime.

 Minister Hand today released new guidelines providing for applicants to stay in Australia on  humanitarian grounds, and which provide for the Minister to exercise his discretion on the  recommendation of the R efugee Status Review Committee.

 It is made clear that the remedy is discretionary and that the Minister cannot be compelled to exercise  it.

 Although tortuous and repetitive the guidelines appear to have the potential to be effective in limiting  unreasonable claims.

 Running to two pages they restate in various ways the following grounds for a D om estic Protection  Entry Permit. An individual must face in his or her home country a significant individualised threat to  his or her personal security. This threat must be ongoing; it must involve intense personal hardship and  the individual must be personally the target.

 Further limitations contain access to the remedy if there exists a third country willing and able to accept  the claimant or an area or region of safety within the home country.

 Compassionate cases involving econom ic hardship, family demands, medical difficulties or arising from  a desire for a better life are not sufficient and remedies if at all available, must be sought in other visa  categories.

 With up to 10,000 applications for refugee status now reported, unsuccessful claimants are very likely  to press for consideration to stay on humanitarian grounds. This additional remedy will undoubtedly  encourage many more o f Australia's 150,000 illegal entrants to seek refugee status as a last resort  avenue.

 If the Government is not alert to the risks involved, the very considerable delays already being  experienced in determining refugee status, could well becom e the basis for a new form o f migration:  that occasioned by bureaucratic inertia.

 The delays in processing the Cambodian boat people suggest that this process may already be  underway. ______ _

 95 -

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 C O .ilM O N V v E A -T i I 

 P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  LIBRARY  M IC A H

