---
title: "Refugees"
date: "1991-03-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095463
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004779%22
---

 4 ' Ί

 Philip R uddock MP ή

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Parliament House 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 R EFU G EES

 There has been a significant increase in the number of arrivals of so-called "boat people"  on Australian shores in the past 15 months.

 Yesterday morning, a boat carrying 33 Vietnamese refugees arrived in Darwin and a  second group of Cambodian refugees is due to arrive tomorrow.

 In Australia provision exists for the assessment of claims and repatriation of Vietnam ese  asylum seekers if refugee or humanitarian status is refused. There are no international  agreements governing the resettlement in third countries, or repatriation, o f Cambodian  refugees from countries of first refuge.

 It is understandable therefore, though certainly not defensible, that Cambodians are  pushed back onto the high seas by countries like Malaysia.

 For Australia there is an urgent and pressing need to have put in place comprehensive  arrangements for dealing with Cambodian asylum seekers along similar lines to the  comprehensive Plan of Action adopted to alleviate the predicament o f the Vietnamese.

 There is little obvious activity on the Government's part according this matter priority.

 The Australian Government already has a poor record in assessing claims of more than  200 Cambodians already in Australia as boat people. This indicates to the Khmer that  a desirable outcom e may arise in the event of a successful sea passage.

 Reports disclose that many o f these arrivals have yet to complete application forms  claiming protection. This suggests that the Government may believe that inertia will limit  political damage and allow it to avoid having to make difficult decisions involving possible  deportations with all its attendant problems.

 While there are in excess of 7,000 refugee claimants in Australia, the Government's  claims that its new screening process would enable expeditious handling of applications  has obviously not been applied in relation to the boat people.

 The Government should now clearly expedite consideration o f claims for protection, have  them determined to allow those with valid claims for refugee or humanitarian protection  4-year temporary visas and return those without proper claims. Delay only makes these  decisions more difficult.

 March 5 1991

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY \  MICAH

