---
title: "Transfer of Cambodian boat people to Sydney"
date: "1991-08-30"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097998
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009555%22
---

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 57/91

 TRANSFER OF CAMBODIAN BOAT PEOPLE TO SYDNEY

 One hundred and thirteen Cambodian boat people who have been  housed at the Enterprise Migrant Hostel at Springvale in  Victoria since April 1990, were transferred to the  Westbridge Centre at Villawood in New South Wales early 

 today.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said that the group had arrived  illegally at Broome in March 1990 and had been held in  custody as unauthorised arrivals since then under Section 88 

 of the Migration Act.

 The Minister said that the move had become necessary to  a vo id~furtKer~abscondi-ngs—by—the-boat—people_from_the______ _ Hostel, now numbering 11 in recent weeks.

 "It must be remembered the boat people are illegally in  Australia, and by law must be held in detention," the  Minister said. "Regrettably, some of the Cambodian boat  people saw fit to take advantage of the less strictly- 

 guarded environment in Springvale and absconded into the  community, rather than await the outcome of their refugee  applications.

 "There is a need for tighter security than is possible at  Springvale, and this is now available at Westbridge  following the recent conversion of part of it to a holding  facility for illegal entrants," the Minister said.

 "The transfer will not affect the processing of the group's  refugee applications, which have now been lodged with the  Department, after a long delay."

 Mr Yasunobu Sato of the Office of the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees travelled with the group to  Sydney, and a doctor also accompanied the party.  The  group's legal advisers were informed in advance of the  transfer and a legal adviser, Eve Lester, also accompanied  them.

 .. ./2

 -2-

 Mr Hand said that currently there were more than 300 boat  people housed in various parts of Australia. He had already  announced the Government’s intention to progressively relocate  them to a new base in Port Hedland which would be opening 

 shortly.

 ”1 am disappointed that this extra move has become  necessary," the Minister said. "This group has been in  Australia for a considerable period and have been provided  with comfortable accommodation, proper medical and dental 

 care and suitable educational facilities at the taxpayers'  expense."

 The Minister said he had chosen Westbridge for the  Melbourne group because it was a secure location with  readily available access to all services the boat people  might need, including their current legal advisers.

 "Arrangements are being made with the Refugee Advice and  Casework Service to provide assistance with the refugee  status process."

 CANBERRA 30 August, 1991

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

 Laurie Bugden  DILGEA (06) 264.2368

