---
title: "The prime minister now plays "catch-up" on Yugoslavia"
date: "1991-08-28"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097943
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004843%22
---

 34 A

 John Hewson Leader of the Opposition M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 208/91  28 August 1991

 THE PRIME MINISTER NOW PLATS "CATCH-UP" ON YUGOSLAVIA

 The Prime Minister's announcement today that he now supports  United Nations involvement in the Yugoslav crisis comes three  weeks after the Opposition called for precisely such action  from the Australian Government.

 In foreign, as in domestic, policy the Prime Minister is  losing control and playing "catch-up" with the Opposition.

 As with the recognition of the Baltic States, the Prime  Minister seems not only to want to take the running from  Senator Evans on the Yugoslav issue but also to take up one of  the specific proposals which the Opposition called for weeks 

 ago.

 .  On 6 August, the acting Shadow Minister for Foreign  Affairs, Mr Ruddock, said:

 "The United Nations, following its successful role  in resolving the Gulf crisis, could be given a  mandate to play an important role in preventing a  war that could easily spill across the borders of 

 Yugoslavia".

 .  On 26 August, the Shadow Foreign Minister, Senator Hill,  called for "the involvement of the United Nations  Security Council in order to avert disaster" in  Yugoslavia and put a detailed argument in support of such 

 involvement.

 It is ironic that, after weeks of indecisiveness from the  Prime Minister and Senator Evans on the Yugoslav issue, the  Prime Minister chooses the Midday Show to announce a major  change of Government policy along the lines proposed weeks ago  by the Opposition.

 In addition to UN involvement, the Opposition has been active  over recent weeks in calling for other initiatives by the  Australian Government on the Yugoslav crisis.

 .  On 22 August, an Opposition resolution on the Yugoslav  crisis was passed in the Senate despite Government  opposition based on its objection to recalling  Australia's Ambassador in Belgrade for consultations on 

 how best to assist the newly evolving independent states

 . . . / 2

 I  COMMONWEALTH I  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  I MICAH

 .......... -  --- ------..... .

 .  On 27 August, Senator Hill made a series of proposals for  international action to assist thousands of Croatian  refugees

 .  Today, Senator Hill also called on the Australian  Government to actively support the latest European  Community proposal to end the continuing and increasingly  violent conflict in Yugoslavia.

 It is not good enough for the Prime Minister simply to express  his horror at what is happening in Yugoslavia. It is time his  Government acted decisively not only in support of UN  involvement but also in the other ways which the Opposition  has been urging for weeks.

