---
title: "The year in review"
date: "1991-12-16"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214100061
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004500%22
---

 m .

 Philip R uddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 THE YEAR IN REVIEW

 The Minister for Immigration has had chequered success in his portfolio this  year.

 He has had to administer a program which has been sabotaged by the Prime  Minister and compromised by an unwieldy regulatory regime.

 The Prime Minister's decision to grant blanket protection to a group of people  who were not required to meet normal qualifying criteria, destroyed the universal  principles of non-discrimination on the grounds of race and country of origin, and  set in train a number of policy decisions which further compromised the integrity 

 of the immigration program and effected other policy areas.

 The Minister has also had to work with a hastily implemented regulatory regime  which has proved rigid in its application and complex to administer. Moreover,  continual changes to the Regulations hampers the efforts of all those involved in  the administration of the program.

 The Immigration Review Tribunal's annual report condemned the Migration Act  and Regulations, saying:

 "The structure of the regulations has proved difficult and provisions  affecting the outcome of an application are to be found scattered through  the Act and Regulations in a manner that defies logic."

 The Minister had promised in his May 1990 statement that the Migration  Regulations would be simplified, that the current 97 entry permit classes would  be collapsed down to a possible seven. He also said that the regulations would  be redrafted to make them less difficult to understand. This exercise, he said, 

 would be undertaken as a matter of priority, but would take about 12 months to  achieve.

 Some 19 months later, there is no indication from the Minister that this process  is near completion.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 -  2 -

 According to the Minister, the regulations were intended to introduce a measure  of control over the migration program. However, the Minister has presided over  a program which has seen the number of claimants for grant of refugee status on­ shore rise from some 500 per year to a current backlog of more than 23,000. The  number of applications for grant of residence on-shore overall has also risen 

 dramatically, from around 7,000 per year in 1981 to over 36,000 in 1990.

 The number of illegal entrants is also high, somewhere between 70,000 and  150,000. Notwithstanding new regulations introduced to locate and remove illegal  entrants, the Minister has clearly failed in his prime task to control entry to  Australia.

 The Minister has also had to face the criticism of the Auditor General, who  roundly condemned the immigration program for moving away from the selection  of the most skilled applicants and failing to apply program conditions and criteria.  According to the report, the skills level of the program has fallen by some 25% 

 over recent years due to an over-emphasis on the family reunion element of the  program.

 The Minister has also failed to ensure that the Department can implement  Government policy in a timely fashion. The Department has been unable to put  in place a new business skills category to replace the disbanded Business  Migration Program, nor has it been able to collect money for the Government's  new bond arrangements. Regulations governing the activity of migration agents  has also taken an inordinate amount of time to compose. No real legislation will  be in place until July 1992.

 With his pre-occupation over the Labor leadership issue, it is quite clear that the  Minister has not had time to focus on his official duties and deliver an  immigration program which is in the best interests of Australia.

 His New Years' resolution should be to either regain some measure of control  over the program or step aside in favour of someone who will.

 16 December 1991

