---
title: "Guidelines released for applications to stay in Australia on humanitarian grounds"
date: "1991-03-15"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095682
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009583%22
---

 M ed ia Release ;

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, AC T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 15/91

 GUIDELINES RELEASED FOR APPLICATIONS TO STAY IN AUSTRALIA ON  HUMANITARIAN GROUNDS

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today released details of guidelines  under which people will be allowed to remain in Australia on  humanitarian grounds.

 The arrangements are part of a new refugee system introduced  on 10 December 1990.

 Under the system, people who are unable to sustain a claim  to refugee status have an opportunity to have claims to  remain on humanitarian grounds considered.

 Mr. Hand said recommendations for humanitarian stay would be  made by the Refugee Status Review Committee —  the body  which considers all refugee appeals. Decisions on such  recommendations would be made by the Minister himself.

 "The decisions will be made using the Minister's special  powers of intervention under Section 115 of the Migration  Act," he said. "This section allows the Minister to overrule  the rejection of an appeal when he considers it is in the  public interest to do so.

 "The Government has in effect set up a safety net. We are  making sure that people facing a real and significant  threat to their personal security in their own country are  not denied protection, just because they cannot meet the 

 technical definition of a refugee."

 Mr. Hand said the guidelines (see attachment) were designed  to help the Review Committee identify cases which should be  brought to the Minister's attention.

 "The guidelines have been the subject of extensive  consultations," he said. "The final text has benefited  greatly from the positive and constructive input of a range  of voluntary agencies and interest groups involved in  helping refugees.

 /  2

 >·

 - 2 -

 "I believe its finalisation represents an important step  forward in setting up a refugee and humanitarian system  which is both scrupulously fair and operationally efficient.

 "The guidelines maintain a careful balance between ensuring  deserving claimants are not returned to face unacceptable  treatment and opening the doors to people who really do not  need Australia's protection."

 Mr Hand emphasised that the Government would not tolerate  any attempt to abuse the refugee and humanitarian system,  simply to avoid compliance with normal immigration  requirements.

 CANBERRA 15 March, 1991

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams  Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

 Sue Ingram  DILGEA (06) 264.2295

 ATTACHMENT

 GUIDELINES FOR HUMANITARIAN RECOMMENTATIONS

 The Minister has a non-enforceable discretion under s.115 of  the Act to grant an entry permit to a person who has been  determined not to be a refugee, where the Minister thinks  that such action would be in the public interest. The power  can only be exercised after the Review Officer has refused  the grant of a Domestic Protection Temporary Entry Permit.

 In practice, this will occur if the person has had an  application for refugee status rejected on review by the  Refugee Status Review Committee.

 The Refugee Status Review Committee and the Review Officer  may recommend to the Minister cases where they consider that  the Minister might consider granting a Domestic Protection  Temporary Entry Permit under s.115 of the Act. This category 

 is intended to incorporate a wider group of people than  those that fall within the Refugee Convention definition. It  is important not to dilute or compromise the international  definition of a refugee by its inappropriate application  because of the absence of more suitable mechanisms. The 

 following is intended to provide guidance to members of the  RSRC and to the Review Officer on the exercise of their  recommendatory functions but it is not exhaustive of all the  matters which may be taken into account:

 .  It is in the public interest of Australia as a humane and  generous society to ensure that persons who cannot meet  the technical definition of a refugee are nevertheless  not returned to their country of origin if there is a  reasonable likelihood of their facing a significant, 

 individualised threat to their personal security on  return.

 .  It is also in the public interest to ensure that protection is offered on humanitarian grounds, which is  not the result of any international obligation but is  rather a positive, discretionary humanitarian act, is  offered only to individuals with a genuine, ongoing need.

 .  As a discretionary measure, grant of stay on humanitarian  ground must be limited to exceptional cases presenting  features of threat to personal security and intense  personal hardship.

 i

 - 2 -

 It would be inappropriate as part of the refugee status  determination procedure to address cases of a  compassionate nature, such as family difficulties,  economic hardship or medical problems, not involving  serious violation of human rights as a result of  political factors in a country of return.

 It is not intended to address broad situations of  differentiation between particular groups or elements of  society within other countries.

 These provisions are intended to cover only individuals  whose particular circumstances and personal  characteristics provide them with a sound basis for  expecting to face a significant threat to personal 

 security on return as a result of targeted actions by  persons in the country of return.

 In order to ensure that remedies offered under this  process are limited to persons in genuine need, it would  not be appropriate to consider on humanitarian grounds  any person who:

 - has a safe third country in which to reside and that  country would accept the person;

 - could substantially alleviate perceived risk by  relocation to a region of safety within the country of  origin;

 - is seeking residence in Australia principally to secure  better social, economic or educational opportunities,  or a more stable environment in whch to live.

