---
title: "South Africa"
date: "1991-08-30"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214097984
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08000045%22
---

 No. Ml 18 Date 30 August 1991

 SOUTH AFRICA: LOOKING FORWARD

 The following is an address by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade, to the Mandela Foundation, 

 Sydney, 30 August 1991.

 * *  *

 SYDNEY

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 SOUTH AFRICA: LOOKING FORWARD

 Address given by Senator Gareth Evans, the Minister for 

 Foreign Affairs and Trade, to the Mandela Foundation, 30 

 August, 1991, Sydney.

 My immense admiration for Nelson Mandela is a matter of 

 public record. He symbolises the struggle, in South  Africa and overseas, against apartheid and racism. He 

 embodies the qualities that South Africa so desperately  needs:  tolerance, vision and an ability to rise above  narrow, sectional interests. And he has built around him  in the African National Congress a core of mature, 

 intelligent, sophisticated and moderate people who will 

 make splendid leaders of their country if and when they  are elected to play that role.

 I make no apology for my admiration for Nelson Mandela  and his colleagues in the ANC. But I should also say, as  I have on many previous occasions, that is a far cry from  partisan support from the Australian Government for a  particular political party in South Africa. Our interest 

 in South Africa lies overwhelmingly in the removal of 

 apartheid and its institutions, because of the abhorrence 

 in which Australians hold them, the terribly destructive 

 impact they have had on the lives of tens of millions of  non-white South Africans, and because of their 

 destabilising effect throughout the whole of southern 

 Africa.  The ANC has been, and is now, the most prominent  force in the struggle against apartheid. That is a 

 statement of fact. But there is an important 

 distinction, which some will not or can not see, between 

 partisan support for the ANC and recognition of its 

 importance in the scheme of things.

 XV/91

 2

 Political Reform

 The situation in South Africa is fluid and events there 

 are moving fast. We must be careful not to allow the 

 detail to obscure the bigger picture: ultimately, it is  the larger issues that really matter. The largest of  those issues is still the willingness of the National  Party government to make the major steps necessary to the 

 final dismantling of apartheid. I do not want to detract 

 from what has been achieved so far when I say that 

 President de Klerk and his National Party colleagues in 

 Government, consummate politicians that they are, have  moved with their heads not their hearts. I said this  before the revelations of South African government  funding for Inkatha (as well as for anti-SWAPO parties in 

 the "guaranteed free and fair" Namibian elections in 

 1990), and it gives me little pleasure to have my 

 prescience confirmed.

 These revelations have seriously damaged the standing and  trustworthiness of the of the South African Government.  

 They have certainly dealt a blow, both domestically and  internationally, to the credibility of Chief Buthulezi*  s 

 Inkatha Freedom Party: recent opinion polls confirm that  Inkatha has been thoroughly compromised by its 

 association with the government it purports to oppose.   But my judgment is that these revelations will not derail 

 the process of reform - they might even expedite it 

 insofar as the scandal has contributed to levelling the 

 field as between the major players.  The South African 

 Cabinet has been recast in a more reformist mould, with 

 the demotion of ministers Vlok and Malan. The capacity  of Inkatha to play a disruptive role in the future, 

 should it be minded to do so, has been much reduced.  The  security forces are under very much closer rein and  scrutiny than they have been in the past. And there has 

 been something of a blow to the Government's confidence, 

 which is no bad thing in terms of bringing it to the

 3

 conference table In a slightly more measured and balanced 

 way in the future than has been the case so far.

 On the whole, both the Government and the ANC have 

 reacted in a restrained manner to the revelations,  recognising that they have too much at stake in the 

 process now under way to allow it easily to be reversed.   There is evidence of some hard thinking, particularly on 

 the side of the government, about the enormous interests  at stake in a continuation of reform.

 The pace of reform has slowed in recent months, but has  not stopped altogether. On the positive side, the South  African Government has, at last, repealed the so-called  pillars of apartheid, the three abhorrent laws that  enforced the classification and separation of the  population along racial lines. The repressive security 

 legislation that underpinned these laws has also been  reviewed and, in large part, amended, although the South  African Government still retains considerable power to 

 control political activity. In spirit, if not in letter,  the South African Government has removed these hindrances  to further political progress.

 On the other hand there continue to be problems with the  release of political prisoners and the return of exiles,  long identified as crucial preconditions for further  reform. It is the case that the ANC's condition, and 

 that of the Commonwealth, that all political prisoners be 

 released has not yet been met: it is estimated that 

 there are at least 500 people still being held for what 

 are political crimes, though some estimates put the  figure as high as 850, including some 160 in the 

 "homeland" of Bophuthatswana where the South African  Government has claimed, implausibly, that its writ does 

 not run. The issue of political prisoners was debated in 

 the Bophuthatswana parliament as recently as 27 August, 

 though the result was inconclusive. Negotiations for

 4

 release have been a long process but there are 

 Indications that the issue may be resolved shortly.

 I expect, too, that there will be shortly a satisfactory  resolution of the political exiles issues. The main 

 difficulty with the return of exiles has been agreement  on process and administrative machinery. The 

 announcement on 19 August of a role for the United 

 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees follows an 

 agreement whereby UNHCR will now take a leading role in  organising the speedy return to South Africa of the  estimated 20 to 40,000 South African political exiles and 

 refugees. To facilitate this process UNHCR will be  allowed to establish an office in South Africa which will 

 be in charge of the resettlement of exiles.

 The final impediment to the start of formal negotiations  between the South African government and the ANC has been  the horrific level of violence in the black townships.  The apparent reluctance of the South African Government  to take resolute action against this has led many in the  black community to conclude, not unnaturally, that the 

 government was fomenting and using violence to split the 

 anti-apartheid movement. The revelations of the 

 Government's funding of Inkatha greatly strengthened  those suspicions. But there is hope for the future. A  church/business sponsored peace initiative has recently  resulted in agreement on a National Peace Accord which is 

 to be signed in Johannesburg on 14 September by the ANC, 

 Inkatha, the Government, trade unions, political leaders, 

 civic associations and homeland representatives. The 

 Accord will provide for a code of conduct for political  parties, the security forces, a prohibition on the 

 carrying of dangerous weapons, the appointment of police  ombudsman and an independent police board to make the  force more accountable. A National Peace Committee and a  Standing Commission on violence will also be established.

 5

 The next step in South Africa's painful transition from  the wreckage of apartheid will clearly have to be some 

 form of interim government in which executive authority 

 is shared, at the very least in the crucial areas of 

 security and preparation for fair elections. Again, 

 Inkathagate has acted as a catalyst. It has underlined 

 to all sides the impracticality of the South African 

 Government's being both player and referee in the process  of transition. President de Klerk has agreed with the 

 ANC on this. I don't want to minimize the obstacles in  the way of the formation of any kind of interim 

 government, let alone the magnitude of such a 

 government's tasks, but at least the realisation is 

 growing that some form of interim government is. an  inescapable condition for further, real progress.

 Australia can continue to play its part by ensuring that  pressure is maintained on South Africa through all stages  of the reform process. When genuine progress occurs, we  can acknowledge and reward it through the phased easing  of sanctions.

 Australia's sanctions against South Africa are, as agreed 

 by the Commonwealth Foreign Ministers Committee on 

 Southern Africa, divided into three groups: people 

 oriented sanctions; economic sanctions; and sanctions on  purchases of arms. (Sports sanctions are a particular 

 category.of people-to-people sanctions which I will come  back to later.) The Commonwealth foreign ministers 

 agreed that the first group of sanctions, including 

 consular and visa restrictions, the cultural and academic 

 boycott, the ban on tourist promotion and on direct air 

 links, would be lifted when the South African Government  met certain conditions of political reform. Those 

 conditions were the repeal of civil legislation 

 underpinning apartheid, the review of reform of security

 6

 legislation, the freeing of political prisoners and the 

 return of exiles. All those conditions have either now 

 been realised or are very close to it. I hope that my 

 Commonwealth foreign minister colleagues and I will be in  a position to make the judgment when we meet in New Delhi  on 13-14 September that there has been enough movement to 

 justify the lifting of that first group of sanctions.

 Agreement on the other sanctions will require proof of  further significant progress in the constitution making 

 process. We shall only lift trade, investment and the 

 centrally important financial sanctions in response to a  major further movement in constitutional reform - such  as, possibly, the formation of an interim government. We  hope that it will be possible for the New Delhi meeting 

 to look at a detailed strategy for the lifting of those 

 sanctions, defining more precisely the triggers for the  various phases, although it may be that this work will  not be taken very much further before the Commonwealth 

 Heads of Government Meeting itself in Harare the 

 following month.

 As to the embargo on arms sales - supported by UN 

 resolution - there is clear agreement within the 

 Commonwealth, and a little dissent elsewhere, that this 

 should be the last sanction to be lifted, when a new 

 constitution is fully and finally in place.

 We shall not be hurried on all this. Sanctions have been  crucial in bringing about the changes to apartheid that 

 have already occurred. It is only logical to presume  that they will be crucial in bringing about further 

 changes. And only the most wilful optimist would argue 

 that the next round of changes will be easier than what  has gone before. If we want to help the process of 

 transition, the best thing we can do is to reward 

 concrete reforms only after they have been fully 

 realised, and to keep up the pressure for more changes

 7

 throughout the transition process.  It is my strong 

 belief that the easing of sanctions by the EC last 

 December gave premature comfort to the South African 

 Government - making it believe that the international  pressure was off, that it did not need to hurry the 

 domestic reform process, and that it could devote more  attention and resources to building its political base 

 for the post-apartheid future than remedying the 

 injustices of the apartheid past.

 The main argument for the immediate abandonment of 

 sanctions is of course that they hurt most those whom  they are intended to help - that is, the non-white 

 population of South Africa. I can rebut this red herring  only by saying what I have said many times already, that  Black South Africans themselves are best placed to tell  the international community what is in their own 

 interest. And the message we are getting loud and clear  from Black leaders is that international pressure  remains, for the time being, crucial to the achievement  of an acceptable political settlement.

 In discussing the issue of sanctions I have left until  last those against sporting contact. Australia has been  a leader in this area, and I am certain that our actions,  and those of other Commonwealth countries have had a real 

 psychological effect on white South Africans. The 

 severance of sporting links between two such hard-playing 

 and long-standing competitors in sports as dear to the 

 hearts of the publics of both countries as cricket and 

 rugby, did help to bring home to white South Africans the 

 full extent of their international isolation. The policy 

 of the Commonwealth, as proposed by Australia, is now to  treat sports individually, reacting affirmatively to 

 positive changes as they occur. As individual sporting 

 bodies in South Africa become non-racial and unified, and  committed to Black sports development, and then seek, 

 with the blessing of the non-racial sports bodies to re­

 8

 enter international competition, we shall certainly 

 support the successive lifting of the boycotts.

 At this stage it appears that soccer will be the first  major sport in which South Africa will re-establish 

 international competition, followed by cricket.  Developments in cricket are of course particularly 

 welcome to Australia. We fully supported the decision by 

 the International Cricket Council in June to readmit  South Africa, a move which had the full support of the 

 now unified cricket administration in South Africa and  the ANC. We now hope that it might be possible for South 

 Africa to be able to compete in the World Cup to be held  in Australia and New Zealand in the new year. It is 

 clear that there is widespread support for this within  South Africa, including from the ANC, and I hope that the  strength of that support will persuade cricket 

 administrators to allow South Africa to play in the World  Cup. Other sports, including rugby, will of course 

 follow but it is important that this process not be 

 rushed. The recent difficulties with athletics 

 demonstrate the need to ensure that there is clear  agreement among all the relevant bodies that a particular  sport has met the criteria to re-enter international  competition.

 The Next Stage: Economic and Social Adjustments

 In some ways, the political struggle against apartheid is  only the first stage of the process of adjustment. Even 

 before that struggle is over, South Africa will have to  begin making enormous political and social adjustments to 

 the new world it confronts. The principal problem on any 

 agenda for South Africa in the nineties will be how to 

 reconcile much-needed economic reforms with the demands  for greater social justice among South Africa's 

 underprivileged majority.

 9

 South Africa has been isolated from the economic changes 

 that have fundamentally affected Australia, whose economy 

 not so long ago closely resembled South Africa's in its 

 dependence on commodity exports and its protection of 

 domestic manufacturing. Whereas in Australia we have 

 disciplined our spending, reduced tariffs, pursued higher  productivity and sought an international orientation,  South Africa remains bogged down in discredited economic  practices. Its expenditure is undisciplined, its  orientation is inward and levels of competition and 

 technological innovation are low. Over the past decade, 

 incomes and output have fallen, inflation has become 

 entrenched at high levels and investment and savings have 

 declined.

 Apartheid has left an appalling hole in the educational  and training base of the Black population. This 

 significantly constrains the pace at which the economy  can expand its production of sophisticated goods and 

 services. Each year, for instance, South Africa 

 graduates 35 engineers for every one million inhabitants,  compared with 370 in the United States and 220 in 

 Australia.

 So the difficulties of the political transition and the 

 dismantling of apartheid are set to coincide with an  economic crisis caused by structural weaknesses.  Understandably, Black and other underprivileged South 

 African groups will want more resources made available to  them in education, housing and economic opportunities. 

 White South Africans, whose skills will be needed for 

 economic growth, will have to be encouraged to remain in 

 South Africa. It will not be possible to reduce 

 unemployment and increase Black South Africans' access to 

 housing, education and other services except in an  economy growing several times more rapidly than in the 

 1980s. It Is. possible for the economy to grow fast

 10

 enough, but only with much better management than In the 

 years of intellectual stagnation under apartheid.

 Management will be a crucial problem. Until recently 

 there was little awareness in the South African business 

 community and government of the depths of the economy's  problems or the implications of the transition from  apartheid. In the ANC, too, for one reason and another, 

 economic policy for a post-apartheid South Africa  involved little more than simplistic slogans. This has  changed, at least in terms of awareness of the need for  economic policies to deal with insistent problems. 

 Business groups, the government, trades unions and the  ANC have accepted the awful economic reality and are  producing their own prescriptions for dealing with this. 

 Not surprisingly, these prescriptions vary according to 

 the interests of the various groups.  But a sign of hope  is that some senior business people and officials are  engaged in a dialogue with the ANC and the black trades 

 unions to produce a social compact, within which issues  of broad economic policy can be addressed.

 I would share the concern that has been expressed by some  about the direction of economic thinking in the ANC if I 

 could see the evidence for it - but I cannot. It is true  that the South African Communist Party plays a 

 significant role in the ANC. But in my conversations 

 with ANC leaders in July, including quite a number from  the South African Communist Party, I received the strong 

 impression that the Stalinist baggage of central planning 

 and indiscriminate nationalisation was being thrown 

 wholly overboard - very much helped of course by the 

 collapse of East European communism. It would be 

 surprising if there were no pockets of continuing 

 commitment to the Stalinist shibboleths which were so  widely and so recently held, but I saw no sign of them. 

 The main attachment of the ANC leadership to the SACP is 

 sentimental, born of the fact that in the early days of

 11

 the struggle that Party was one of the few groups in the 

 country prepared to treat Black people as wholly equal.

 Still, economic policy-making is a difficult enough 

 business even where debate is well-informed and there is 

 widespread agreement on fundamental economic choices. In  South Africa these conditions do not apply. There is a  great need for help in building up the economic policy­ making base, particularly among the Black population 

 which has few well-trained economists of its own. The 

 existence of well-informed economic advisers in touch  with international thinking could strengthen any future 

 South African government's resistance to the pressure 

 there will undoubtedly be for the excessive expansion of  public expenditure and against the structural changes  needed to enhance the prospects for economic growth.

 It is in this context that the Australian government's  program of strengthening economic decision-making 

 capabilities in South Africa should be seen. Under this  program, announced by the Prime Minister in July, we  provided $2.3 million dollars for scholarships, exchanges  and institutional assistance. The background to this was  the long-stated belief of the Prime Minister that it is  crucially important that the Government which comes to 

 power in South Africa when apartheid has been scrapped 

 should have the will and the capability to manage the 

 economy of that country effectively. It is a matter of  history that the economic policy experience in post­ colonial Africa has not been a happy one and it would be  tragic if the same or similar mistake were made in South 

 Africa. Following discussions with leaders of Black  opinion, including Nelson Mandela during his visit to 

 Australia, the Government sent an Economic Planning 

 Assistance Team, led by Professor Ross Garnaut, to South 

 Africa in May. It recommended, and the Government 

 accepted, the $2.3 million package for the financial year 

 1991/92 and 1992/93 which included visits to and from

 12

 South Africa; consultancies in specialised areas (such as 

 taxation policy); the establishment of an Institute of 

 Economic Research at a South African University; upgraded 

 training for black economists, including student  scholarships; an economic policy research project on the  relationship between bargaining structures, wage growth  and macroeconomic performance; economic scholarships for  students from disadvantaged communities; and finally, the  provision of office equipment worth $83,000 to the ANC to 

 help it to establish a Department of Economic Planning.

 Further, Australia has strongly supported the Centre for  the Study of the South African Economy and International  Finance established under the Dr Jonathon Leape at the  London School of Economics in February 1990. We provided 

 $305,000 in 1989/90 to establish the Centre, and 

 guaranteed the Centre's budget for its first two years to  enable it to review and report on South Africa's 

 international financial links and to gather and publicise  factual information on financial flows to and policies 

 toward South Africa. With the significant developments  in South Africa during the past two years the Centre is  now looking to refocus its efforts on the financial needs  of post-apartheid South Africa. This most worthwhile 

 move will be discussed at the Harare CHOGM in October,  but for myself I am fully supportive of Dr Leape'  s 

 efforts to give the Centre a new and important role in 

 helping to build research capacity on financial aspects  of the economy in the new post-apartheid South Africa.

 The consequences of economic reform in South Africa go 

 well beyond that country's own borders. Despite its  serious weaknesses, South Africa has the only large, 

 relatively developed economy in the whole of southern  Africa. It would naturally be the engine for growth in 

 that region, were it not for the fact that apartheid and 

 the economic sanctions it has elicited have reduced the 

 economic links between South Africa and its neighbours.

 13

 Once sanctions are removed, South Africa can greatly 

 expand trade and investment activity with the countries 

 in its region. Indeed, the evidence suggests that this  has already started in trade, with South African exports  to the rest of Africa increasing dramatically over the  last two years. And as economic activity in South Africa 

 picks up, regional countries will find new markets in the 

 comparatively large and affluent South African market.

 Stability in South Africa and the removal of apartheid  and its institutions will encourage foreign investment  that will probably spill over into other countries of  southern Africa. South African firms themselves,  particularly in mining, will begin to invest in 

 neighbouring countries. In this way South Africa can  play a role far different from the damaging and costly  campaign of destabilisation it inflicted in the seventies  and eighties on its southern African neighbours.

 Australia and South Africa

 Looking ahead to a period when trade, investment and  financial sanctions have been removed, I do not see that  Australia will be either a great winner or a substantial  loser in economic terms from an invigoration of the South 

 African economy. Given the strong similarities between 

 the export bases of the two countries, it is hard to see  South Africa as an el Dorado for Australian exporters. 

 It is more likely that Australian and South African 

 exporters will find profitable niche markets in each  other. Those markets could amount to a relationship of 

 some substance - after all, Australia was one of South  Africa’s ten major suppliers in 1984, and our exports  then included manufactured and transport goods of which 

 we are now more competitive producers. It is important 

 that our exporters be aware of the markets that could be 

 opened when sanctions are removed.

 14

 Most comment, however, has focused on the threat that 

 South African commodity exports might pose to 

 Australia’s. We need to make a distinction here between 

 the effect of trade sanctions and that of financial  sanctions. Trade sanctions, it must be acknowledged,  have not had any really significant impact on South  Africa. Any perception that large amounts of South 

 African production capacity have been blocked from  entering world trade, and will return to supplying old 

 export markets is not justified.  While sanctions had an  adverse impact on South African trade with individual 

 countries and forced quite a deal of price discounting  and subterranean rechannelling, they did not prevent that  country from recording a strong export performance 

 overall. South African merchandise export volumes rose  by 17 per cent between 1985 and 1990 and South Africa  remained around the 25th largest exporting nation in that 

 period.  The basis of that export record lay both in the  capacity to develop new export markets, and in the 

 increased international competitiveness of South African  products that followed from the large devaluation of the  Rand in the mid-1980s.

 To the extent that there has been any significant 

 constraint on increased South African exports of coal in 

 the last five years, it has been the limited capacity of 

 the Richard's Bay coal terminal, rather than a lack of 

 overseas markets.  It has been the weak performance of 

 investment in South Africa that has significantly 

 undermined the long term growth potential of the economy 

 and in this respect financial sanctions have had a much  greater impact on capital-hungry South Africa. The 

 removal of those sanctions could see South Africa 

 increase its investment in the infrastructure supporting  the production and export of, say, coal, iron ore and 

 steel. South Africa could become a more serious 

 competitor to Australia in those areas after it has put

 15

 its economic house in order. We should receive warning 

 of this, since large coal mining and export projects 

 don't spring up in the night like mushrooms. But 

 Australia, too, is becoming steadily more efficient, 

 particularly with the government's reforms of transport.  We should certainly be aware of the prospects of South 

 African competition, and take that prospect into account  as yet another of the many factors pushing us to put our  own house in order.

 The task ahead of South Africa is awesome. The legacy of  apartheid, in social and economic as well as political  terms, is appalling. Those contemplating the future of 

 South Africa, through the current period of change and  beyond, might be forgiven a degree of pessimism. And yet  the very enormity of those difficulties is forcing South  Africans of all races to contemplate fundamental  adjustments to entrenched positions, on political and 

 economic issues. There is justification for optimism in  this evidence of flexibility. I look forward keenly to  the time when that flexibility provides justification for 

 the removal of sanctions and the integration of a multi­ racial South Africa into the international community.

 * * *

