---
title: "International women's day 1991 initiatives for women"
date: "1991-03-07"
creators:
  - "Fatin, Wendy"
source: "Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095531
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02003763%22
---

 3

 NEWS RELEASE The Hon Wendy Fatin MR Minister for Local Government

 Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women

 EMBARGOED UNTIL MIDNIGHT  7 MARCH 1991

 INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY 1QQ1 INITIATIVES FOR WOMEN

 The following is a detailed list of initiatives which will be  announced by the Prime Minister in Brisbane today.

 A. INITIATIVES WITH NEW FUNDING

 1. NATIONAL CHILD PROTECTION COUNCIL

 The issue of child abuse in our society and the need for  preventative measures emerged as priority concerns during the  consultations on the National Agenda for Women.

 A total of $1.2 million has been allocated for the next three  financial years to 1993-94 for the establishment of a National  Child Protection Council. The Council will complement the  community education program on child abuse and family counselling  program announced in the Government's response to the Report of  the National Committee on Violence. It will co-operate and 

 liaise with each State/Territory Government on its child  protection program, including training, legal reform service  development and protection.

 There is currently no co-ordinated national strategy to pursue  issues associated with child protection such as uniform  legislation.

 The Council will work to focus all levels of Government and the  community on the need to reduce the incidence of violence against  children, and to assist in the development of strategies to do  so.

 2. WOMEN AND SPORT PROMOTION AWARDS

 A Prime Ministerial award to encourage women's participation in  sport will be established. Potential categories are:

 . media coverage . initiatives of school/education programs . local initiatives ·

 . support for women with special needs

 One hundred thousand dollars has been allocated each year for the  next three financial years to 1993-94 for awards which will aim

 COMMONWEALTH |  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY I  MICAH

 to raise the profile of, and demonstrate support for, women's  sport.

 This initiative addresses the National Agenda Action Plan to  develop policies and co-ordinate activities which will assist in  reducing barriers to the involvement of women in sport, including  coverage of women's sport in the media; and to assist sporting  bodies concerned with women's sport to develop media liaison,  marketing and sponsorships skills.

 The Women and Sport Promotion Awards will be administered by the  Department of Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and  Territories.

 3 EXTENSION OF TERM OF COMMONWEALTH/STATE COUNCIL ON NON-ENGLISH  SPEAKING BACKGROUND WOMEN'S ISSUES

 The allocation of a total of half a million dollars over the next  three financial years will allow the term of the  Commonwealth/State Council on Non-English Speaking Background 

 Women's Issues to be extended for three years to mid 1994.

 Extending the life of the Council will enable it to complete the  valuable work it is doing and to address other issues of concern  to women of non-English speaking backgrounds. In particular, it 

 allows approaches in consultation which are culturally and  linguistically appropriate and assists in the promotion of an  environment in which women from non-English speaking backgrounds  have an equal share in community resources and equal access to  programs and services.

 The Council reports annually to the Prime Minister and to the  Annual Conference of Commonwealth/State/Territory Ministers for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. The Council first met in  November 1989 and has set in train major projects covering,  health, languages services and legal issues.

 The Council will continue to be administered by the Office of the  Status of Women in the Department of the Prime Minister and  Cabinet.

 4 AUSTRALIAN STATEMENT ON WOMEN AND THE ENVIRONMENT

 The Statement will be used for input into domestic and  international discussions on women, development and the  environment, including the 1992 United Nations Conference on  Environment and Development. This Statement will draw on  consultations with women to be undertaken by the National Women's 

 Consultative Council with regard to development and environment  issues as they impact on women.

 The Statement will be co-ordinated by the Office of the Status of  Women in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet at a  total cost of $150 000 for the next three financial years to  1993-94.

 B. INITIATIVES WITH EXISTING FUNDING

 1. National Strategy on Violence Against Women

 The recently formed National Committee on Violence Against Women  will develop a comprehensive national strategy to reduce the  incidence of violence and murder against women and to identify 

 the assistance needed by victims of violence. The Strategy will  define goals and desired outcomes through the identification of  Commonwealth and State responsibilities, and will pursue  appropriate policy action.

 2. Appointment of Women to Government Bodies

 In keeping with the National Agenda objectives of striving  towards equal representation of men and women on government  boards, committees and authorities, the Office of the Status of  Women has developed the new APPOINT computer system of monitoring 

 appointment to statutory and non-statutory positions.

 The system has been designed to enable government departments to  co-ordinate information on Commonwealth bodies and on people  appointed to them. It also enables retrieval of EEC statistical  data on these appointments and will act as a flag in areas where  women are under-represented.

 3. Pacific CEDAW Seminar

 The United Nations and the Governments of Australia, New Zealand  and the Cook Islands are sponsoring a seminar on the UN  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination  Against Women (CEDAW) which will be held in the Cook Islands 

 later this month.

 The seminar will be attended by participants from the 13  developing South Pacific Forum Island states, plus  representatives from the UN, Australia and New Zealand and  observers from UN bodies, regional inter-governmental  organisations and non-governmental organisations.

 4. National Statistical Profile on Women

 A comprehensive statistical profile on women, to be part of the  ABS Social Report Series, is to be released in 1991. The Report will provide a comprehensive, statistical data base on 

 Australian women which brings together data from ABS and non-ABS  sources, to provide a statistical profile of women and to examine  changes in this profile over the study period.

 5. National Strategy on Implementation of ILO Convention 156

 The Minister for Industrial Relations is developing a  Commonwealth implementation strategy for ILO 156. The strategy  will be presented next year as part of a major Ministerial  statement on Government policy for workers with family 

 responsibilities. This is expected to be a wide ranging  statement addressing matters across a number of portfolios. In  developing the strategy, the need to amend our anti­ discrimination legislation to give effect to the Convention will  also be investigated.

 6. Monitoring of Training Levy

 The Department of Employment, Education and Training is working  with the Australian Bureau of Statistics to commence work on an  enhanced version of the survey "How Workers Get Their Training".  

 The Survey will provide a means of monitoring the equity  implications of industry training behaviour as undertaken by the  Minister for Employment Education and Training in his second  reading speech on the Training Guarantee Act in 1990.

 7. Inquiry into possible Sex Discrimination within Over Award  Payments

 The Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner will undertake an  inquiry into possible sex discrimination in over award payments.   On average women earn less than half the over award payments of  men, and inequitable access to over award payments constitutes a 

 significant part of the 17% gap between male and female average  weekly ordinary time earnings.

 The inquiry will examine whether there have been inequities in  access to over award payments.

 8. Support for Refugee Women

 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has decided  that the focus for its 40th Anniversary year, 1991, will be  Refugee Women.

 Australia in 1989 introduced a program for women at risk as part  of our resettlement program. Grant funds have been made  available through the Refugee Council of Australia to provide  settlement assistance to at-risk refugee women, and the Bureau of 

 Immigration Research has also allocated funds to undertake a  survey of the needs of refugee women in Australia. The results  will be presented at an international conference to be held in  Sydney in June, coinciding with Refugee Week which will focus on 

 the theme of refugee women.

