---
title: "Macau boat arrivals sent home"
date: "1991-10-11"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214098730
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009553%22
---

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600   Telephone: (06) 2 7 7  7860

 MPS 59/91

 MACAU BOAT ARRIVALS SENT HOME

 Immigration Department officers in Darwin have sent home the  remaining members of a group of Macau residents who came to  Australia seven months ago as "boat people".

 They comprised a woman and her three children, including a  baby born in Darwin on 27 September. They were flown out of  Australia on 6 October.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said the latest repatriation took to  eighteen the number of boat people sent home in the past six  months.

 It showed the Government's determination, he said, to refuse  residence to prohibited entrants who were unable to  substantiate claims for asylum.

 The woman and her two older children had arrived in Darwin  on 4 March this year among a group of 33 people who all  claimed initially to be from Vietnam.

 Mr Hand said fourteen of that group, plus the new-born baby,  had now been sent home as follows:

 - one man was returned to Hong Kong at his own request  on 15 June;

 - three men were returned to Macau on 14 July;

 - one man, two women and four children were returned to  Macau on 15 September; and

 - the woman and her two children (plus the new baby)  referred to above left on 6 October.

 None had applied for refugee status.

 Another three men —  two Indonesians and a Bangladeshi who  had arrived on a small boat on 24 March, claiming to be  Cambodians —  were sent home on 6 and 8 April respectively.

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M1CAH

 Mr Hand said the remaining nineteen people from the 4 March  boat were still in Darwin. They had indicated an intention  to apply for refugee·status and would stay in Australia  while any applications they might lodge were considered.

 "While Australia will give a fair hearing to people making a  claim for asylum, I want to make it clear that there is no  room in this country for people who try to enter by deceit,  without any compelling humanitarian reasons for doing so," 

 the Minister said.

 "In the case of the people from the 4 March boat, who had  claimed on arrival that they were ethnic Chinese from  Vietnam, it required patient detective work by my Department  to establish that they were not telling the truth, and that  their apparent claims were abusive and deceitful.

 "The investigators were suspicious from the start because of  a number of puzzling factors.

 "It was quickly obvious that individual members were unable  to give detailed accounts of their backgrounds,  although all  clung tenaciously to their 1  cover1  story.

 "This was to the effect that they were ethnic Chinese born  in a remote village in North Vietnam close to the Chinese  border, and that they were members of an oppressed minority  group which had been forcibly removed from their village and 

 forced to live in a new and undeveloped economic zone where  conditions were harsh. "

 "Intensive questioning eventually 1broke1  the cover story.

 "Fourteen, including the leader, eventually admitted that  they were residents of Macau; the remainder with one  exception were citizens or residents of the Peoples Republic  of China. The one exception was a resident of Vietnam.

 "The Macau group admitted that they had set sail for  Australia in search of a better life style, and had a  confident expectation that they could hoodwink Immigration  authorities into believing their story and that they would  be allowed to settle permanently as refugees.

 "They were just as confident that even if their refugee  claims were not accepted they would be allowed to stay in  Australia."

 Mr Hand said this assumption was very naive.

 "In general,  the group had fallen under the spell of the  leader who had come to Australia as a visitor from Macau in  1986," he said. "He overstayed his visa and worked in Sydney

 until he was arrested as an illegal entrant in 1988 and  deported back to Macau on 10 June that year.

 "He painted a glowing picture of life in Australia and had  little difficulty persuading others to join him in the  venture.

 "With financial help from three of his fellow travellers, he  was able to buy a former Hong Kong-registered fishing boat.  The other passengers promised to pay the leader for the  costs of their passage once they had found jobs in  Australia.

 "The voyage began clandestinely in Macau on 13 February,  with other passengers picked up the next day at an isolated  Chinese coastal village. ,

 "Their only landfall en route was in the Philippines where  the organisers went to elaborate lengths to mislead and  confuse the Philippines authorities and UNHCR, but by not  accepting the offer of asylum in the Philippines they raised  doubts about their bona fides as refugees.

 "I hope the message is clear for others in South-East Asia  who might be contemplating similar ventures."

 CANBERRA, 11 October 1991

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Lynne Adams  Minister's Office  (06) 277 7860

 Richard Henderson  DILGEA (06) 264 2368 (office)  (06) 282 2028 (home)

