---
title: "Immigration department foils bogus entry attempt"
date: "1991-04-09"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096029
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009580%22
---

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 20/91

 IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT FOILS BOGUS ENTRY ATTEMPT

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, revealed today that his Department  had foiled an attempt by three men to enter Australia posing  as Cambodian "refugees".

 The men —  two Indonesians and a Bangladeshi —  arrived in  Australian waters aboard an eight-metre sailing vessel last  month and were discoverd in Admiralty Sound by an Australian  fishing boat.

 In an apprehension co-ordinated by Coastwatch, the vessel,  of Indonesian origin, was towed to Darwin by the Navy patrol  boat HMAS Geelong, arriving on 24 March.  It was in poor  condition and leaking badly.

 The three men claimed to be Cambodian citizens by virtue of  each having had one Cambodian parent, but said they had been  living elsewhere in South-East Asia since childhood. They  said they had left from an island near Singapore on 21  January and had sailed direct to Australia without making  any other landfall.

 Mr Hand said Departmental officers quickly detected flaws in  their story.

 "Not only did the men not look Cambodian, they had no  knowledge of Cambodia itself or of its language," the  Minister said.

 "The Department also found great difficulty in accepting the  claim that the three had survived two months at sea in a  decrepit, leaky boat powered only by a sail, and guided only  by a small hand-held compass, a page torn from an Indonesian  atlas and a crude sketch of Australia.

 "After questioning, the men confessed that they had sailed  from the Indonesian port of Kupang on 9 March.

 "Although aware that what they were planning was illegal,  they intended to settle in Australia and find jobs, hoping  they wouldn't be caught.

 COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M IC AH

 f

 - 2 -

 "They said they had decided to pose as Cambodians because  they had heard that Cambodian boat people had been allowed  to enter Australia."

 Mr Hand said the two Indonesians had been flown home to  Kupang on Saturday (6 April). The Bangladeshi was put on a  flight to Dacca, via Bangkok, at Darwin Airport last night.

 He said the incident underlined the fact that some people  obviously still believed it was feasible to enter Australia  undetected through the sparsely-settled north.

 "It's about time such people realised that the chances of  success —  firstly of avoiding detection before arrival and  secondly of blending unnoticed into the community if they do  manage to get ashore —  are slim indeed," he said.

 "I suggest that others who might be contemplating risking  their lives in leaky boats and trying to bypass Australia's  immigration laws should think very carefully before setting  out on journeys which, like this one, will almost certainly  end with their being sent home again with nothing to show  for their trouble.

 "It simply isn't worthwhile."

 CANBERRA 9 April, 1991

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

 Gordon Benjamin  DILGEA (06) 264.2176

