---
title: "Most recent boat arrivals to be housed in Sydney and Melbourne"
date: "1991-03-07"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214095512
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR03009585%22
---

 Î¯ Î§

 . Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600   Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 Twenty-five of the 35 "boat people" who arrived in Darwin  aboard a 14-metre vessel last night were today flown south  to accommodation in Sydney and Melbourne.

 A shortage of suitable accommodation in the Darwin area  prompted Immigration officials to make the quick decision.

 A departmental spokesperson said the temporary premises in  which they had been housed overnight were not suitable for a  longer-term stay.

 Eighteen of the group will be accommodated in Melbourne and  the other seven in Sydney for the initial processing period.

 The remaining ten will stay in Darwin for the time being.  Five of them are being detained in the northern capital for  further questioning, while the other five are a family group  which is obliged to remain behind because of the wife's 

 advanced state of pregnancy. The woman's husband, two  children and sister are staying with her.

 It is likely that the entire group will later be relocated  in either Sydney or Melbourne.

 The group comprises twelve adult males, seven adult females,  and sixteen children under the age of 18 —  twelve of them  male and four female. The oldest passenger was a woman who  said she was 85; the youngest a child of about 12 months.

 The spokesperson said the group appeared to have suffered no  ill effects from their voyage.

 MOST RECENT BOAT ARRIVALS TO BE HOUSED IN  SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE

 PAGE 2

 The boat's engines had broken down on the final approach to  Darwin and the last 15 miles had been completed under tow by  the Customs Vessel Jabiru. Otherwise the boat appeared to  be seaworthy.

 Detailed questioning will be undertaken with a view to  establishing beyond doubt the identity of the people, where  they had embarked,  the route they had taken, and their  reasons for making the journey.

 Meanwhile officials are continuing their close examination  of the group of 33 people who arrived by another boat in  Darwin on Monday.

 The spokesperson said it had not yet been possible to  establish beyond doubt their identity. A number of puzzling  questions had yet to be answered.

 The group will remain in detention in Darwin in the  meantime.

 The spokesperson added that there was no evidence to suggest  that further boats might be on the way.

 CANBERRA, 7 MARCH 1991

 Media Inquiries: Gordon Benjamin DILGEA, Darwin (089) 463 112 (business hours)  (089) 460 111 (after hours)

 Jenny Hoskin  DILGEA, Canberra  (06) 264 2726

