---
title: "Confusion still abounds amongst Chinese students"
date: "1991-05-10"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096550
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02004747%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP 5 /

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 CONFUSION STTTJL ABOUNDS AMONGST CHINESE STUDENTS

 "It seems that the Government's mishandling of the Chinese students in relation to the events post  the Tienanmen Square incident has also resulted in a misunderstanding on the part of many Chinee  students who have arrived in Australia in recent months," Philip Ruddock, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs said today.

 "I have been approached by a Sydney-based business college concerned at the confusion which still  exists in the minds of some Chinese students in relation to their student visas. Apparently many who  have arrived in the last few months think they can apply for four-year temporary residence permits  and no longer need to continue with their studies. Many believe that they will also be able to work  full-time.

 "This is a misconception and I want to forewarn students who are considering this course of action.

 "The four-year temporary entry permits were only given to Chinese nationals who arrived in  Australia before June 20 1990. However, Chinese nationals who arrived after that date are not  eligible for that special permit.

 "Current regulations allow for four-year temporary entry permits to be issued only to those people  who satisfy the criteria on refugee and humanitarian grounds. The recently released guidelines for  this category are rigorous and only those with a genuine fear of personal persecution are likely to  be successful.

 "The numbers of claims made in the category have risen dramatically from an average of 500 per  annum to over 14,000 now. The success rate of claimants has been fewer than 100.

 "Students who give up their studies whilst their application for refugee status is being considered  (and this could take some time) and are then rejected, will find themselves being sent home without  the skills they sought to gain in Australia, and with little chance of obtaining a further student visa.

 "At last stricter controls on applications for student visas due to the high level of abuse in this  category have been put in place. This is essential, not only to reduce the number of illegal migrants  in Australia, but also to enable colleges providing courses of study for overseas students to run their  businesses efficiently, secure in the knowledge of how many students they have to plan for each year.

 "The Government should be sending a clear message to those wishing to study here, that Australia  will only entertain bona-fide students and that this category should not be seen as a back-door way  of gaining residence."

 May 10 1991 

 COMMONWEALTH  

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY   MICAH

