---
title: "Australia and Iran cooperate on chemical weapons convention"
date: "1991-05-17"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096662
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08000019%22
---

 Ν α  M 62 1 7  ^ a y  1 9 9 1

 AUSTRALIA AND IRAN COOPERATE ON CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION

 Australia and Iran will work together to help overcome  remaining problems standing in the way of the conclusion of a  Convention on Chemical Weapons. The Minister for Foreign  Affairs and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, said today that it  had been agreed that the two countries would cooperate on the 

 issue and that an Australian delegation would visit Iran  within a month.

 The delegation would discuss both technical issues and  political strategies for ensuring adherence to the Convention  once concluded. Senator Evans said Iran was interested in  hearing more about, and possibly applying in the Middle East,  Australia's Chemical Weapons Regional Initiative. This 

 Initiative, involving a program of seminars, workshops and  trial inspections for countries in the Asia Pacific region,  has been designed to build understanding and support for the  Chemical Weapons Convention in a regional context.

 Senator Evans was speaking at the conclusion of a visit to  Canberra by the Iranian Foreign Minister, Dr Ali Akbar  Velayati. Senator Evans said the visit -had provided a  valuable opportunity for exchanges of views on a wide range of 

 issues of importance to both countries.

 He said that he and the Minister for Trade and Overseas 

 Development, Dr Neal Blewett, had had productive discussions  with Dr Velayati on a range of bilateral, regional and 

 multilateral issues. The importance of Iran as an export  market for Australia was acknowledged by all Ministers, and it  was agreed that steps should also be taken to facilitate Iranian exports to Australia. Among matters discussed were:

 - the opportunities for investment by Australian companies  in joint ventures in Iran to take advantage of tax free  zones being set up by the Iranian Government;

 - the possibilities for oil companies in Australia to import oil from Iran;

 - the opportunities for an increase in the number of 

 Iranian students studying in Australia;

 - assistance by Australia to Iran in developing export marketing skills through the provision of two places for  Iran on the next Marketing and Trade Development Course  conducted by the Market Advisory Service of the 

 Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade;

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 2

 V

 - a visit to Iran later this year by a senior official of 

 the Market Advisory Service.

 Senator Evans said that the issue of human rights in Iran had  been discussed in some detail.  He said he had raised 

 Australian concerns about continuing allegations of human  rights abuses in Iran, including large scale executions of  political dissidents, arbitrary arrests, unfair trials and  discrimination against Bahais, and had expressed to Dr  Velayati the hope that the Iranian Government would continue 

 to work with the United Nations Commission on Human Rights,  and to cooperate with the Special Representative of the  Commission. He was encouraged by Dr Velayati's response that  there would be continued progress in human rights in Iran.

 Senator Evans said that he had expressed concern that the  Fatwa calling for the death of Salman Rushdie remained in  force, and that he had suggested to Dr Velayati that as Mr  Rushdie had now apologised for the offence which his book had  caused Muslims that Iran might use its influence within the 

 Islamic world to have the Fatwa rescinded.

 Senator Evans said he had also asked Dr Velayati to use what  influence Iran had with any group holding hostages in Lebanon  to help secure the release of those hostages.

 Senator Evans said he and Dr Velayati had had a fruitful and  valuable discussion about the situation in the Gulf region in  the aftermath of the recent war, including about the future of  Iraq and future security arrangements in the region. Senator 

 Evans applauded Iran's willingness to assist refugees from  Iraq.  Dr Velayati had thanked Australia for the assistance it  had given to the relief effort.

 Senator Evans said that he was pleased Dr Velayati had had an  opportunity to discuss these and other issues with the Prime  Minister and with other Ministers including Mr Kerin, Mr Hand  and Mr Dawkins.

 Senator Evans said he had been pleased that Dr Velayati had  been able to visit Australia, particularly at this important  time for the region in which Iran is situated. He regarded 

 the visit as having made an important contribution to the  further development of the very sound bilateral relations  which already existed between Australia and Iran, and hoped to  have an opportunity in the future to take up an invitation  which Dr Velayati had issued to him to visit Iran at a 

 mutually convenient time.

 *  * *

 CANBERRA

