---
title: "Confusion surrounds defection comments"
date: "1991-05-30"
creators:
  - "Tambling, Grant"
source: "Shadow Minister for Regional Development, External Territories and Northern Australia"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214096881
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02005492%22
---

 Senator Grant Tambling Shadow Minister for Regional Development,  External Territories and Northern Australia

 Media Release

 CONFUSION SURROUNDS DEFECTION COMMENTS

 Australia could not let the defections of East Timorese soccer  players harm its important bilateral relationship with Indonesia,  Northern Territory Senator Grant Tambling said today»

 The CLP Senator said he was concerned that comments by the 

 Indonesian Charge D'Affaires in Canberra were at odds with those  of the Acting Indonesian Consul in Darwin.

 "In question time today, the Foreign Affairs Minister, Senator  Gareth Evans, quoted the Indonesian Charge D'Affaires as saying  that the Indonesian Government did 'not want these events to harm  the bilateral relationship'.

 "However, a report in the Northern Territory News today quoted  the Acting Indonesian Consul in Darwin as saying that Australian-  Indonesian relations could suffer as a result of the defections.

 "Senator Evans must address reasons for this inconsistency as a  matter of urgency.”

 ENDS Contact: senator Grant Tambling (089) 52 8811 Messages: A.Springs (089) 81 3567 Messages: Darwin  Tiz 2eroni (06) 2773436

 30.5.91

 * Senate Hansard (Question Time) follows.

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 .T R M B L I N G . TEL NO . 052773704 11,01,01 20:45 P .  03

 The Senate ______ 30 May 1991

 EAST TIMORESE SOCCER PLATERS

 Senator TAMBLING - My question is addressed to the 

 Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Given that a number  of East Timorese soccer players have remained in Australia  following the recent Arafura Games in Darwin, can the Minister 

 please explain how many have sought asylum with Portuguese  authorities or applied for Australian refugee status? Are the  defections of concern to the Government in light of 

 Australia's diplomatic relationship with Indonesia and 

 Portugal's international court challenges over the Timor Gap?  What was the role played by the Northern Territory Federal 

 member and Labor left Parliamentary Secretary, Mr Snowdon, in  the defections, particularly in light of his close association  with the radical Lafaek and Fretilin groups?

 Senator GARETH EVANS - Obviously this is primarily an  immigration matter. All I can say about those aspects, 

 subject to the brief in front of me, is as follows. An 

 Indonesian soccer team from East Timor was participating in  the Arafura festival in Darwin. Two members of this team 

 travelled from Darwin to Canberra on 27 May where they made  contact with the Portuguese Embassy. I understand that they  were provided with Portuguese travel documents to allow them  to travel to Portugal and they left Australia on 29 May.

 Two other members of the team are reported to have 

 contacted the Department of Immigration, Local Government and  Ethnic Affairs in Darwin to lodge applications to remain in  Australia as refugees. That is, of course, a matter for my 

 colleague the Minister for Immigration, Local Government and  Ethnic Affairs. I understand that any such applications would  be dealt with on their merits through the established 

 determination of refugee status procedures. The remaining  members of the soccer team returned to Indonesia on 29 May. I see no reason for these events to have any impact on 

 Australia's bilateral relations with Indonesia. I note that  the Indonesian charge d'affaires in his remarks to the media  and during his call on my Department yesterday, 29 May, also  made clear that the Indonesian Government does not want these  events to harm the bilateral relationship.

 Conditions in East Timor "are obviously not perfect. We  have made that clear often enough. Although the Embassy's  assessment is that the human rights situation is now 

 significantly better than during September-November 1990 when  the Indonesian authorities were responding to what they 

 perceived to be an increase in security problems, we continue  to monitor very closely the human rights situation in East  Timor. We continue to make representations to the Indonesian  Government where there are credible grounds for concern. Our 

 views on human rights are well known to the Indonesian 

 Government and current events will bo perceived in that light.  As to the role played by Mr Snowdon in these matters, I have 

 absolutely no idea but I am sure he behaved with his usual 

 absolutely impeccable sense of responsibility.

 Senator TAMBLING - Mr President, I ask a supplementary  question. Would it not be a normal function of the Australian  Embassy in Indonesia, at the time of granting visa approvals  to a group such as an Indonesian team visiting Australia, to  acquaint members of that team with issues relating to any 

 change of status that was likely to be envisaged in that area?

 Senator Ga r e t h  EVANS - No.

