---
title: "Keating haunted by Hawke"
date: "1992-06-17"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123842
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006756%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for D undas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Parliament House

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 KEATING HAUNTED BY HAWKE

 The former Prime Minister's decision to give blanket protection to the Chinese nationals  here before the Tienanmen Square massacre, is again coming back to haunt the Keating  Government in Refugee Week.

 Claims are being made again by some that this decision be used as a precedent for  putting aside the proper decision making process for determining entitlement to asylum  and protection.

 That we may have been involved in a war in Vietnam over 15 years ago, is not a proper  factor to be considered in the determination of claims for refugee status. Such an  approach would only serve to undermine the entire process.

 Feelings of remorse can be better expressed in other decisions such as the direction of  aid and a commitment to the peace process and so on.

 Those who have a real interest in ensuring that Australia has a continuing role to play  in these matters, have a responsibility to ensure that the past mistakes are not  compounded. It should be recalled that many PRC Nationals have not yet been asked  to demonstrate that they have an individual claim for protection.

 I have recently returned from Cambodia and made a first hand assessment of the  situation facing most Khmer. There is at this time, no need for temporary arrangements  to be put in place to postpone the return of screened out Cambodian asylum seekers.

 With the unfortunate resumption of hostilities in some remote areas of Cambodia there  is no immediate threat to the more than 80% of Cambodia clearly in the hands of the  State of Cambodia (the SOC).

 Obviously the situation needs to be kept under close review and if there is a material  change in circumstances, then clearly this position should be re-assessed.

 17 June 1992 

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

