---
title: "Immigration minister's final communique to hunger strikers at Port Hedland"
date: "1992-08-05"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124391
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008614%22
---

 M e d ia  R elease Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 47/92

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER'S FINAL COMMUNIQUE TO HUNGER STRIKERS  AT PORT HEDLAND

 At 8.50 am today, Western Australian time,  the Minister for  Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Gerry  Hand, conveyed his response to a grievance claim to detainees  at the Port Hedland Processing Centre who are on a hunger 

 strike.

 A deadline of 9 am Western Australian time had been set by  the detainees but had later been extended to 10 am Western  Australian time.

 The Minister's response was his final communication with the  group on their demonstration.

 The text of that response is as follows:

 I have studied your appeal and,  as you know, I offered to  come and speak to you personally in Port Hedland today. That  offer was a very sincere and serious one.  In return, I asked  you to end your demonstration on the roof.

 You rejected my offer, and I put it to you again. While I  was awaiting your reply the second time, I and other senior  staff of my office and my Department began our trip to Port  Hedland. On hearing your second refusal,  we had no choice 

 but to turn back.

 Your appeal was apparently directed to the Government, and  you had the opportunity to speak to the most senior members  of Government dealing with your cases.  I can only assume  from your response that you do not seriously wish to discuss 

 this matter with us. Rather, you think you can gain what you  want by playing to the media and the public.

 . . . [ 2

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 1041

 J

 - 2 -

 Let me assure you that threats and demonstrations a re  not   the w a y  to obtain refugee status. The grant of r e f ug ee   status depends solely on the claims of the individual. Your   c laims are still being considered and the delegate is y e t  to   take the final decisi on on your appeal. I would s u g g e s t  that   you s e r i o u s l y  reflect on your situations. If you are   u n su c c e s s f u l  in your claims, you have no basis on w h i c h  to   r em ai n in the country. Demonstrations and other d r a m a t i c  

 a ct ion cannot alter that situation.

 C A N B E R R A  5 August, 1992

 M E D IA  ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office   (06) 277.7860

 1042

