---
title: "Keating and WA Inc, Immigration, Unemployment"
date: "1992-05-13"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123384
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009691%22
---

 V 

 Leader of the Opposition

 m

 13 Kay 1992 REF; TRANSCR\NM\S0089

 TRANSCRIPT OP DR JOHN HEWSON HP  INTERVIEW WITH KEL RICHARDS  RADIO 2GB

 E & 0 E - PROOF COPY ONLY

 SUBJECTSi Keating and WA Inc,  Immigration, Unemployment

 Richards;

 The last time T spoke at any length with Opposition Leader  Dr John Hewson it was an interview about his childhood, about  growing up in Sydney. And I must tell you, it was one of the  most delightful interviews I have done.

 This morning, we have to turn our attention to rather more  serious matters,  because in Western Australia the WA Inc  corruption inquiry has criticised Prime Minister Paul Keating  for his actions when, as Treasurer,  he denied them access to 

 taxation records that had been made available to the 

 Fitzgerald corruption inquiry in what one would have thought  were fairly similar circumstances in Queensland.

 John, good morning.  Welcome to the program.

 Hewson:

 Good morning Kel.

 Richards:

 Now, the action of the Prime Minister when he was Treasurer in  denying access to these taxation records - was it the right or  the wrong thing to do?

 Hewson;

 Totally wrong, and it begs the question as to what he's got to  hide, what he's covering up. We have this situation with Paul  Keating that instead of One Nation, we actually have two  nations - one for his mates and one for the rest of us. Look, 

 in these instances,  where he's been on the record in the past  with Fitzgerald Inquiry in Queensland, which was looking into  the Queensland National Party, he's happy to make tax records 

 available.

 P

 Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600 Phone 77 4022

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0089 2.

 Yet when the Western Australian corruption inquiry looks into  the Labor Party and his mates,  he's not happy to make taxation  records available.  It's a double standards that is 

 indefensible.

 Richards:

 There is a fundamental principle of confidentiality of tax  records isn't there?

 Hewson:

 Yes there is,  but there are many precedents for the tax office  making available these records in cases like this. We've just  used the Fitzgerald Inquiry as an example,  as you said, a  comparable situation, and one where...well obviously, 

 Mr Templeman felt very concerned about it to raise it 

 yesterday and to state that they shouldn't draw any 

 conclusions on corruption because they hadn't been able to get  the tax records.  It really almost neuters that inquiry from  the point of its principle terms of reference.

 Richards:

 At this point down the track do you think there is any 

 possibility of getting the Prime Minister's decision reversed?

 Hewson:

 Well,  I think he should reverse it, and we're going to sustain  the pressure on him to see that he does. I think that people  in Western Australia and right around Australia want these  issues cleared up, and to let a situation like this drift 

 simply because he wants to potential1y look after some mates  in Western Australia is not the way for the Prime Minister to  behave.  He got away with it as Treasurer, but he should not  get away with it as Prime Minister.

 Richards;

 Is there a way of releasing relevant and useful taxation  information while still protecting the taxation privacy of  innocent citizens who are not directly involved?

 Hewson:

 I think there is. I'm not close enough to exactly what they  did in the case of the Fitzgerald Inquiry, and I think that is  a legitimate concern Kel.  We would want to be concerned about  that,  but equally we shouldn't stop them chasing these 

 international and domestic money trails which are fundamental  to inquiries determining whether or not there's been  corruption.

 REFs TRANSCR\NM\S0089 3.

 Richards;

 While we're talking, I'd like to also bring up the matter of  immigration.  We've had the new figures announced from the  Minister.  This morning I chatted briefly to Philip Ruddock,  your Shadow Minister on the subject,  and I've also talked to 

 Gerard Henderson,  who argues that in fact Australia 

 gets ...he's arguing the same line you get from some ethnic  communities - that Australia gets an economic benefit, not an  economic cost from immigration,  Is cutting immigration 

 economically a wise thing to do?

 Hewson:

 Well, I think you've got to look at it at two levels. In the  short-term I think we need to cut it, and I would put that  argument on economic grounds,  as well as on other 

 considerations. If you look at the fact that we have a much  restricted capacity to absorb migrants at the present time,  we've got nearly one million Australians unemployed - to bring  in another 100,000 migrants is just going to mean that it's 

 going to be more difficult for those who are looking for work  to get a job.

 Equally, it's not,  I think,  in the best interests of a lot of  those migrants,  because we've seen evidence in recent days  that recently-arrived migrants - some 40-odd percent of them -  have ended up on a Government benefit within a short space of 

 time. Now that's not doing those migrants any good, and it's  not doing Australia any good.  So we've taken the view that in  the short-term our immigration intake should be cut 

 dramatically.

 But I'm one who believes that in the long-term - and there's a  lot of evidence I believe to support this - an expanded  immigration program is essential to Australia. And there's no  doubt,  I think, if we go back to the 50s and 60s and look at  the tremendous contribution that that expanded immigration  program made to Australia in those years,  that it proves the  point.  But in the midst of the worst recession in 60 years,   we've got to face the reality that we can't absorb these  migrants. .

 Richards:

 See,  this is on of these arguments that I, as a 

 non-economically trained layperson find baffling. What you're  saying at the beginning of...at this time,  during a recession  we've got to cut back, is what my open-line callers say. It's  what I as a layperson say. You know, these people are going 

 to be a drain when we've got 10.3% of the workforce 

 unemployed.  But then we get someone like Gerard Henderson who  says "No, look.  I've done the research. If you look at 

 unemployment,  it is worse in Tasmania where they've had no

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0089 4 .

 immigration, and it's lower in places like New South Wales  where they've absorbed high numbers of migrants," It's  because he says the migrants bring in demand. They stimulate.  They don't cost. And for those of us standing on the 

 sidelines, with you as an economist saying one thing and  Gerard Henderson saying something else, it becomes baffling  you see.

 Hewson:

 Well, it's an element of judgement obviously when you  interpret the data. I mean, I think there are reasons why the  Tasmanian economy is depressed and that unemployment is  higher, compared to New South Wales where growth has been 

 stronger, the performance has been better, the capacity to  absorb migrants has been better.

 But it is a national decision to be made as much as it's a  regional decision. I think there's no doubt, and this has  been conceded in recent days, of the fact that a very 

 significant percentage of recently-arrived migrants have ended  up on a Government benefit rather than in the workforce, is  indicative of the strain that that puts on us. Look, I don't  think it's in their best interests either. I don't think they  come here to end up on the dole. They come here to be part of 

 the system and to be part of a dynamic and growing economy.

 It's being reflected now, of course, in the fact that a fewer  number of migrants are wanting to come to Australia. I think,  in sense, to some extent they are expressing that view and  voting with their feet as much as I'm expressing that view. 

 But it's always the way with economists as with most 

 professionals - you can have a difference of opinion and it's  a judgement that has to be made. It's not an easy judgement  to make, I concede that. But it's a judgement we've made very  carefully now over 18 months to 2 years of having considered  this issue. As much as I believe in immigration in the long­ 

 term, in the short-term we just do not have the capacity to  absorb migrants.

 Richards:

 OK, in the short-term, if you were Prime Minister today, put a  number on the cut you'd make.

 Hewson:

 Well, we've said that in similar circumstances in the past,  the numbers have fallen to somewhere between 50-75,000 on net  terms. We haven't put a specific number on it. We really  don't have all the information to do that, but that sort of  order of magnitude of cut is what's happened in the past in 

 less serious recessions, so you'd be looking in that direction  at the most.

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0089 5 .

 We would, however, maintain our humanitarian component which  Australia has had a very good record on, although I must admit  this whole procedure now of assisting refugees is out of hand.  There's nearly 23,000 awaiting determination. That has become 

 a shambles.

 And the other element that we would really get stuck into is  this decision of the Government's to allow 20,000 Chinese  students who arrived before June 1989 to stay here basically  at their will, which Gerry Hand mentioned last night could 

 increase to 300,000 people by the Year 2000.

 Richards:

 Well, that hasn't happened yet. It's 20,000 at the moment.  Gerard Henderson argues they are, by and large, talented,  skilled migrants and they're the sort we'd want anyway.

 Hewson:

 Gerard Henderson would surely agree that what you should do is  make them apply on the same basis as everybody else. There's  no reason why you should have a special category, and I'm not  singling out Chinese. They happen to be Chinese students, but 

 it would be the same...I'd make the same argument if they were  French or European or from any other part of the world. We  have an immigration program. We've set down certain criteria.  They can either qualify as normal immigrants, or if they  consider themselves to be refugees, they should qualify under 

 the DORS procedure as a refugee for admission to Australia.

 The ludicrous situation that's developed is that the 20,000  who arrived before June 1989 have been allowed to stay at  ,  their will. The 15-18,000 Chinese students who arrive after  June 1989 are subject to the normal determination process for 

 -determining refugee status.

 Gerry Hand, I think, has expressed a genuine concern on his  part that that original decision was wrong and it ought to be  changed. It makes a mockery of our immigration program. It  makes a mockery of the policy they announced yesterday, which  was to cut immigration. It doesn't include those Chinese 

 students, and it doesn't include the potential that is there  for those 20,000 - which are expected to go to something like  34,000 I think this year with some dependents arriving - that  it could go to 300,000 by the Year 2000.

 Gerry Hand, I don't believe...! mean, Gerry is close to this  issue. He's been on top of it a long time. I don't think 

 he's ever supported the show of emotion of Hawke at the time  and he's, I think, trying to get that decision reversed  because it was recently confirmed by Keating in a very  expedient way, and I think Gerry Hand, one who's leaving  politics in the near term, has decided to come clean and make

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0089 6.

 sure that the pressure goes back on Paul Keating to make the  right decision. If you're going to have an immigration  program, you've got to maintain its integrity.

 Richards:

 Well, that's something we haven't heard before. You believe  that the Immigration Minister is actually pushing for a  reversal of policy on those Chinese students?

 Hewsoni

 I believe he is, because if you watched his interview last  night on the 7.30 Report, or you read the transcript of it,  you'd see that he went out of his way to make the point. That  300,000... we have warned that the number would blow out. We 

 had no idea that the Government's own thinking was that it  could go as high as 300,000 by the Year 2000. And quite 

 frankly, that does make a mockery of an immigration program  that has had... over.time there's a lot of effort that's been  put into maintaining the integrity of that program.

 It also makes a mockery of the fact that you've got Cambodian  boat people locked up waiting to have their status determined,  and you've got 20,000 students who happened to be here before  a date in June 1989 who are allowed to stay at will and bring 

 in dependents and so on under the normal process. It just  makes a mockery of the whole system.

 Richards:

 John, a quick final question - yesterday you and every other  Federal politician in Australia was visited in the office by a  group of young employed people. Was it a useful exercise?  Did it put a face on the problem for you?

 Hewson:

 It was a very useful exercise. I personally have made a big  effort in the last 12 or 18 months to get around and talk to a  lot of these people myself. I quite often haven't taken the  media or tipped the media off. I've just gone to a Skillshare 

 centre or an employment office or the Sydney City Mission, or  a Lifeline or one of these organisations and spent time  looking at how they're handling the problem, how they're  assessing the problem, talking to these people.

 It was good yesterday to have the opportunity to do that with  another group of people who give you the same disturbing news  of, if you like, the human face of unemployment. We tend to  focus on the need to create jobs, which is fundamental. We  tend to focus a lot on training and retraining, but there's 

 also another dimension, which is that there are real human  problems as well that have to be dealt with - people who run

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0089 7 .

 into financial difficulties...

 Richards:

 It hurts ordinary human beings,  yes.

 Hewson:

 The worst thing, quite frankly Kel, is to see either a young  person, who's tried dozens and dozens of times to get a job,  starting to lose their self-respect and their self-confidence.  Or somebody at the other end, who maybe is 50-odd years old, 

 55, had been pretty much in the one job all their life, lose  their job and think "gosh, I will never get back into the  workforce. I'll never get back into that industry. I may not  ever get back into a job." And you've got the personal 

 dimension, if you like, which tends to get skated over in a  lot of the debate. These people that I met yesterday are very  good at focussing on that dimension and saying "We are going  to have massive social problems spinning off unemployment if  we don't do something about unemployment." You could have 

 crime. You can have drug abuse. You can have.,.

 Richards:

 You could have Los Angeles,

 Hewson:

 ...family crisis, really genuine... and I have been out and  looked at some of these - the Sydney City Mission out in  Campbelltown for example, looking at some of that family  crisis relief as well as their training schemes and other 

 things to get people back into the workforce. And it is...you  need the three strands to deal with the unemployment problem.  You need to have programs to create jobs - things like the  abolition of payroll tax, rebuilding the economy and so on.  You need training schemes that really do retrain people for 

 those jobs as they're created.

 But you also need that strand of policy that deals with the  personal problems. It's one of the reasons why, in the  Fightback! document, we've allocated $50 million more to  voluntary agencies to channel it into things like family 

 crisis relief, or training.. .well,  schemes that deal with  young people who have lost confidence.

 I recently opened a Sydney City Mission, the Hunter Mission,  in The Entrance, which is designed really to deal with these  kids who just lose their self-respect and self-confidence,  just can't get themselves up, to actually continue to go for 

 jobs, or they've had so many rejections that they just think  that they'll never make the grade.

 REF: TRANSCR\NM\S0089 8.

 Richards:

 Indeed.

 Hewson:

 It's a very important dimension of the problem. 

 Richards:

 It is. OK John, we must do this more often. 

 Hewson:

 OK.

 Ends.

