---
title: "Ruddock fronts critics"
date: "1992-11-19"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126138
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006716%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP m .

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Electorate Parliament House 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 R U D D O C K  FRONTS CRITICS

 Philip Ruddock, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, addressed a large  meeting organised by the Australian Chinese Forum, last night.

 The audience consisted of a substantial number of students from the People's Republic  of China. Whilst his formal address dealt with the reasons for a cut in Australia's  immigration program, Mr Ruddock was also questioned on the Coalition's position on the  Chinese students issue.

 Mr Ruddock supported the Coalition's stand on three grounds.

 First, he re-affirmed the need for a non-discriminatory approach to the issue of asylum  seekers which treated all applicants on a fair and equitable basis.

 The Government's approach gave blanket protection to all PRC nationals in a way which  disadvantaged all other asylum seekers who have to submit to case-by-case examination  of their claims.

 Secondly, Mr Ruddock condemned the Government's granting of a special 4-year  temporary entry permit and the promise to allow all Chinese students here at the time  of the Tienanmen Square massacre to stay indefinitely without granting permanent entry,  as creating a community of second class entrants.

 "This amounts to nothing more than the flawed guest worker arrangements which exist  in much of Europe," Mr Ruddock said.

 Finally, Prime Minister Hawke's promise was worthless since the Government has been  unprepared to honour it by changing the law in order to give the PRC students  permanency.

 The Government could have changed the law at any time to effect its promise in the last  two and a half years, Mr Ruddock said. He also questioned the expectation on a  Coalition government to honour the Prime Minister's undertaking when his own and  subsequent governments have failed to do so to date.

 Mr Ruddock called upon the Government to respond positively to the recommendations  of the Joint Standing Committee on Migration Regulations report and endorse the  majority view of the committee which supported the Coalition's approach.

 19 November 1992

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

