---
title: "Increased resources for esl tuition"
date: "1992-08-18"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124548
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008610a%22
---

 HS.

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE BY THE  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING,  MR KIM BEAZLEY, AND  THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS, MR GERRY HAND

 MPS 52/93

 IMMIGRATION BUDGET MEDIA RELEASE 3

 INCREASED RESOURCES FOR ESL TUITION

 New measures to increase English language training for  migrants from non-English speaking backgrounds (NESB)  were announced in tonight's Budget.

 In announcing the new initiatives, the Minister for  Employment, Education and Training, Mr Kim Beazley,  and  the Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said the Government was committed 

 to improving English language learning opportunities for  those who lacked basic English skills.

 The Government expects to spend an additional $105  million over the next four years to help jobseekers  overcome the language barriers hindering their efforts to  find jobs. Together with current Budget allocations 

 being transferred to the Department of Employment,  Education and Training (DEBT), a total of $309 million  will be available to help these jobseekers. This amount  comprises $146.4 million to fund English as a Second 

 Language (ESL) tuition places and $154.3m for income  support.

 This initiative gives responsibility to the Department of  Employment, Education and Training (DEBT) for assisting  jobseekers with ESL needs.

 "With the additional funding, DEBT will provide ESL  training and income support to about 48,000 CES  registered jobseekers .who would otherwise not have had  access to ESL assistance, and little chance of obtaining 

 employment," Mr Beazley said.

 DEBT ESL training, like all other labour market program  training, is aimed at getting jobseekers directly into  employment or into further training which gives them  vocational skills.

 Priority under DEBT programs is given to jobseekers  receiving the Job Search or NEWSTART allowances, in  particular those who have been unemployed for 12 months  or more.

 /2

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, AC T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 CORRIGENDUM

 Please note the following production error in the media kit:

 The number of CES registered job seekers should read 38 000  rather than 48 000.

 This figure appears on Page 2 of Release No 1. Immigration,  Local Government and Ethnic Affairs: Initiatives for the  1990s and on Page 1 of Release No 3. Increased resources for  ESL.. tuition.

 2

 "The new arrangements reflect Government determination to  make labour market programs more accessible to overseas-  born jobseekers who need to learn English as a second  language," the Ministers said.

 Many of the target group have been particularly  disadvantaged by the combined effects of recession and  industry restructuring - as identified during Minister  Hand's national settlement consultations with community  groups last year.

 "The Department of Immigration, Local Government and  Ethnic Affairs (DILGEA) remains responsible for funding  English language tuition for incoming migrants and for  recent arrivals currently enrolled in the Adult Migrant 

 English Program (AMEP)," Mr Hand said.

 In a major departure from the first-come-first-served  arrangements of the past, the Government will guarantee  an ESL course for any incoming migrant who does not have  functional English. This will ensure that all incoming  migrants will receive up to 510 hours of tuition within a 

 set time frame after arriving in Australia.

 Some migrants will be expected to make a financial  contribution towards the cost of the ESL training. This  will range from $4080 for principal applicants in the  employer nomination and business migrant categories,  through to full exemption for refugees and those arriving  under special humanitarian programs.

 "The ESL guarantees for incoming migrants will ensure  that they do not fall into the same predicament that  previous generations of migrants are now in," the  Ministers said.

 Based on current estimates of numbers of incoming  migrants without functional English the AMEP will receive  funding of $440 million over the next five years. This  will enable it to service the annual intake of about 

 22000 migrants without functional English as well as  discharging commitments to about 65 000 current clients.

 The ESL initiatives will impact on existing arrangements  the Government has with providers of ESL services, which  are predominantly administered by State and Territory 

 Adult Migrant English Services (AMES).

 DEBT ESL training will continue to be purchased by  Commonwealth Employment Services through labour market  tendering processes from qualified providers.

 /3

 3

 While these initiatives focus mainly on addressing the  English language needs of incoming migrants and  jobseekers, the Government is aware that there are other  groups, such as "non-jobseekers" with needs, including  women, outworkers, rural communities and the aged.

 Up to $500 000 will be spent in reshaping existing  delivery arrangements within the AMEP such as the home  tutor scheme and distance learning and in expanding the  network of community provision to service the needs.

 CANBERRA 18 August 1992

 Media inquiries: Minister Hand's office  Lynne Adams  (06) 277 7860

 Minister Beazley's office  Gary O'Neill  (06) 277 7460

