---
title: "Year for the World's Indigenous People, Redfern, 10 December 1992"
date: "1992-12-10"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211179559
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/97Y66%22
---

  PRIME MINISTER 

  SPEEClf BY THE HON PRIME MINISTER, P J KEATING MP 

  AUSTRALIAN LAUNCH OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR THE  WORLD'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLE  REDFERN, 10 DECEMBER 1992 

  '~ 

  Ladies and gentlemen \ 

  I am very pleased to be here today at the launch of 

  Australia's celebration of the 1993 International Year of  0e" Wor.ld '.~_l!.1g_igepous People.@ 

  It will be a year of great significance for Australia  It comes at a time when we have committed ourselves to  succeeding in the test which so far we have always  failed. 

  Because, in truth, we cannot confidently say that we have  succeeded as we would like to have succeeded if we have  not managed to extend opportunity and care, dignity and  hope to the indigenous people of Australia - the  Aboriginal and Torres Strait,Island people. 

  This is a fundamental test of our social goals and our  national will: our ability to say to ourselves and the  rest of the world that Australia .is. a first rate social  democracy, that we are what we should be - truly the land  of the fair go and the better chance. 

  There is no more basic test of how seriously we mean  these things. 

  It is a test of our self-knowledge.  Of how well we know the land we live in. How well we 

  know our history. 

  How well we recognise the fact that, complex as our  contemporary identity is, it cannot be separated from  Aboriginal A~s~ralia. 

  How well we know what Aboriginal Australians know about  Australia. 

  Redfern is a good place to contemplate these things. 

  2 

  Just a mile or two from the place where the first 

  European settlers landed, in too many ways it tells us  that their failure to bring much more than devastation  and demoralisation to Aboriginal Australia continues to  be our failure. 

  More I think than most Australians recognise, the plight  of Aboriginal Australians affects us all. 

  In Redfern it might be tempting to think that the reality  Aboriginal Austra~ians face is somehow contained here,  and that the rest of us are insulated from it. 

  But of course, while all the dilemmas may exist here,  they are far from contarned. 

  We know the same dilemmas and more are faced all over  1

  Australia. 

  That is perhaps the point of this Year of the World's  Indigenous People: to bring the dispossessed out of the  shadows, to recognise that they are part of us, and that  we cannot give indigenous Australians up without giving 

  up many of our own most deeply held values, much of our  own identity - and our own humanity. 

  Nowhere in the world, I would venture, is the message  more stark than it is in Australia. 

  We simply cannot sweep injustice aside. Even if our own  conscience allowed us to, I am sure, that in due course,  the world and the people of our region would not. 

  There should be no mistake about this - our success in  resolving these issues will have a significant bearing on  our standing in the world. 

  However intractable the problems seem, we cannot resign  ourselves to failure - any more than we can hide behind  the contemporary version of Social Darwinism which says  that to reach back for the poor and dispossessed is to 

  risk being dragged down.  That seems to me not only morally indefensible, but bad  history.  We non-Aboriginal Australians should perhaps remind  ourselves that Australia once reached out for us. 

  Didn't Australia provide opportunity and care for the  dispossessed_Irish? The poor of Britain? The refugees  from war and famine and persecution in the countries of  Europe and Asia? 

  3 

  Isn't it reasonable to say that if we can build a 

  prosperous and remarkably harmonious multicultural  society in Australia, surely we can find just solutions  to the problems which beset the first Australians - the  people to whom the most injustice has been done. 

  And, as I say, the starting point might be to recognise 

  that the problem starts with us non-Aboriginal  Australians. 

  It begins, I think, with that act of recognition  Recognition that it was we who did the dispossessing. 

  We took the traditional lands and smashed the traditional  way of life. 

  We brought the diseases. The alcohol. 

  We committed the murders. 

  We took the children from their mothers. 

  We practised discrimination and exclusion. 

  It was our ignorance and our prejudice.  And our failure to imagine these things being done to us. 

  With some noble exceptions, we failed to make the most  basic human response and enter into their hearts and  minds. 

  We failed to ask - how would I feel if this were done to 

  me? 

  As a consequence, we failed to see that what we were  doing degraded all of us. 

  If we needed a reminder of this, we received it this 

  year. 

  The Report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths  in Custody showed with devastating clarity that the past  lives on in inequality, racism and injustice.  In the prejudice and ignorance of non-Aboriginal  Australians, and in the demoralisation and desperation, 

  the fractured identity, of so many Aborigines and Torres  Strait Islanders.  For all this, I do not believe that the Report should 

  fill us with-gGilt.  Down the years, there has been no shortage of guilt, 

  but it has not produced the responses we need. 

  4 

  Guilt is not a very constructive emotion. 

  I think what we need to do is open our hearts a bit. 

  All of us. 

  Perhaps when we recognise what we have in common we will  see the things which must be done - the practical things. 

  There is something of this in the creation of the Council  for Aboriginal Reconciliation. 

  The Council's mission is to forge a new partnership built  on justice and equity and an appreciation of the heritage  of Australia's indigenous people. 

  In the abstract those terms are meaningless.~ 

  We have to give meaning to "justice" and "equity" - and,  as I have said several times this year, we will only give 

  them meaning when we commit ourselves to achieving  concrete results. 

  If we improve the living conditions in one town, they  will improve in another. And another.  If we raise the standard of health by twenty per cent one  year, it will be raised more the next. 

  If we open one door others will follow.  When we see improvement, when we see more dignity, more  confidence, more happiness - we will know we are going to  win. 

  We need these practical building blocks of change. 

  The Mabo Judgement should be seen as one of these. 

  By doing away with the bizarre conceit that this  continent had no owners prior to the settlement of  Europeans, Mabo establishes a fundamental truth and lays  the basis for justice. 

  It will be much easier to work from that basis than has  ever been the case in the past. 

  For that reason alone we should ignore the isolated  outbreaks of hysteria and hostility of the past few  months. 

  Mabo is an historic decision - we can make it an historic  turning point;-the basis of a new relationship betwS~n  indigenous and non-Aboriginal Australians. 

  5 

  The message should be that there is nothing to fear or to  lose in the recognition of historical truth, or the  extension of social justice, or the deepening of  Australian social democracy to include indigenous  Australians. 

  There is everything to gain. 

  Even the unhappy past speaks for this. 

  Where Aboriginal Australians have been included in the  life of Australia they have made remarkable  contributions. 

  Economic contributions, particularly in the pastoral and  agricultural industry.  They are there ~n the frontier and exploration history of  Australia. 

  They are there in the wars. 

  In sport to an extraordinary degree. 

  In literature and art and music. 

  In all these things they have shaped our knowledge of  this continent and of ourselves. They have shaped our  identity.  They are there in the Australian legend. l  We should never forget - they have helped build this  nation. 

  And if we have a sense of justice, as well as common 

  sense, we will forge a new partnership. 

  As I said, it might help us if we non-Aboriginal 

  Australians imagined oµrselves dispossessed of land we  had lived on for fifty thousand years - and then imagined  ourselves told that it had never been ours. 

  Imagine if ours was the oldest culture in the world and  we were told that it was worthless. 

  Imagine if we had resisted this settlement, suffered and  died in the defence of our land, and then were told in 

  history books that we had given up without a fight. 

  Imagine if non-Aboriginal Australians had served their  country in p~ace and war and were then ignored in history  books. 

  Imagine if our feats on sporting fields had inspired  admiration and patriotism and yet did nothing to diminish  prejudice. 

  6 

  Imagine if our spiritual life was denied and ridiculed. 

  Imagine if we had suffered the injustice and then were  blamed for it. 

  It seems to me that if we can imagine the injustice we  can imagine its opposite. 

  And we can haY.e. justice. 

  I say that for two reasons: 

  I say it because I believe that the great things about 

  Australian social democracy reflect a fundamental belief  in justice. 

  And I say it because in so many other areas we have 

  proved our capacity over the years to go on extending the  realms of participation, opportunity and care. 

  Just as Australians living in the relatively narrow and  insular Australia of the 1960s imagined a culturally  diverse, worldly and open Australia, and in a generation  turned the idea into reality, so we can turn the goals of 

  reconciliation into reality. 

  There are very good signs that the process has begun. 

  The creation of the Reconciliation Council is evidence  itself.  The establishment of the ATSIC - the Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islander Commi_ssion - is also evidence. 

  The Council is the product of imagination and good will. 

  ATSIC emerges from the vision of indigenous self­ determination and self-management. 

  The vision has already become the reality of almost 800  elected Aboriginal Regional Councillors and Commissioners  determining priorities and developing their own programs. 

  All over Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  communities are taking charge of their own lives. 

  And assistance with the problems which chronically beset  them is at last being made available in ways developed by  the communities themselves. 

  If these thi~gs offer hope, so does the fact that this 

  generation of·Australians is better informed about  Aboriginal culture and achievement, and about the  injustice that has been done, than any generation before. 

  7 

  We are beginning to more generally appreciate the depth  and the diversity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander cultures. 

  From their music and art and dance we are beginning to  recognise how much richer our national life and identity  will be for the participation of Aboriginals and Torres  Strait Islanders.  We are beginning to learn what the indigenous people have  known for many thousands of years - how to live with our  physical environment. 

  Ever so gradually we are learning how to see Australia  through Aboriginal eyes~ beginning to recognise the  wisdom contained in their epic story. 

  I think we are beginning to see hbw much we owe the 

  indigenous Australians and how much we have lost by  living so apart. 

  I said we non-indigenous Australians should try to  imagine the Aboriginal view. 

  It can't be too hard. Someone imagined this event today,  and it is now a marvellous reality and a great reason for  hope. 

  There is one thing today we cannot imagine. 

  We cannot imagine that the descendants of people whose  genius and resilience maintained a culture here through  fifty thousand years or more, through cataclysmic changes  to the climate and environment, and who then survived two  centuries of disposession and abuse, will be denied their  place in the modern Australian nation. 

  We cannot imagine that. 

  We cannot imagine that·we will fail. 

  And with the spirit that is here today I am confident  that we won't.  I am confident that we will succeed in this decade. 

  Thank you 

