---
title: "Hill calls on Australia to support EC's decision on Yugoslavia"
date: "1992-01-15"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122817
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006599%22
---

 M E D I A REL/LASt!,  SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS Wednesday, January 15 

 05/92

 WTT.T, fRT.TJg nw  XTISTBM.TA TO SITPPORT E C ' 8  D E C IS IO N  om y u g o s i a v i a

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today called on the Australian Government to support the  European Community's decision, expected tomorrow, on the  recognition of certain of the former Yugoslav republics.

 "Australia has supported the EC-sponsored and UN-endorsed  peace process in Yugoslavia, and it is important that 

 Australia continues that support," Senator Hill said.

 "The EC must be satisfied with the assurances of protection of  minorities in the former republics, and with the preparedness  of those former republics to work towards a comprehensive,  peaceful settlement of all outstanding Yugoslav issues.

 "If the EC decides in such circumstances that now is an 

 appropriate time, consistent with the peace process, to  recognise the independence of certain of the former republics,  Australia should support that move by also giving recognition  to their independence.

 "The agreement of Yugoslav and Serbian authorities to the  withdrawal of their forces from Croatia, consistent with the  UN 'Concept' paper, enables Croatia to comply with the last of  the outstanding international law criteria - namely, the 

 effective control of its own territory.

 "Australia should continue to support moves by the 

 international community to secure a lasting peace.

 "For example, Australia should encourage an early start to the  process of returning and resettling refugees.

 "There will be a continuing need for the international  community to pursue the humanitarian issues arising out the  conflict - an area in which Australia should also play a part.

 "It is hoped that the current ceasefire will hold in Croatia  to allow the early deployment of the major UN peacekeeping  force in Croatia and the early lifting of economic sanctions  on Serbia and Montenegro.

 "Clearly, there are still many issues to be resolved, but the  international community should offer all its facilities and  support to help the peace process."

 Enquiries» Senator Hill on (085) 533 974 or Mark Batistich on  (08) 237 7920 or (08) 224 0167

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY l ib r a r y   m i c a h

 7  Îª

