---
title: "Cambodian hunger strikers"
date: "1992-11-11"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126001
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008593%22
---

 #4**j  ., .^5Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP Media Releaset::~zrimzsszParliament House, Canberra, AC T2600 Telephone: (06) 277 7860MPS 69/92CAMBODIAN HUNGER STRIKERSThe Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Gerry Hand, today repeated his concern about the condition of three Cambodian women asylum seekers who are on hunger strike in Sydney."Every effort has been made by my Department to dissuade the women from continuing with this futile and tragic action," the Minister said.When four Cambodians, including one of the women, began a hunger strike in August, a counselling team was put together to talk through their concerns. Within hours of the counselling all four resumed eating.Some weeks later, two other women commenced a hunger strike. Further counselling was arranged, although with less success, and a court order was sought to authorise necessary medical intervention. When the women were advised of the order, they resumed eating and drinking.On 16 October these two women, plus the first woman to go on hunger strike, again refused food and cut back on their fluid intake. They were subsequently transferred to hospital, where they accepted appropriate treatment, while their nutritional intake has fluctuated.In the last week, various types of counselling has been undertaken in an effort to encourage the women to break their hunger strike. On 6 November a representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) spoke to the women. Following this meeting they took more fluids. On 10 November arrangements were made for a Buddhist monk to counsel the women. This will continue as long as necessary."My Department is also urgently seeking the services of a Khmer mental health worker recommended by UNHCR who recently returned from the Thai border camps and who is experienced in this type of situation," Mr Hand said../2

 Vs

 -2

 The women's action is understood to be a desperate bid to  avoid return to Cambodia, when they perceived that their  claims to remain in Australia were unlikely to succeed.

 "The claims of these women have been exhaustively tested,"  the Minister said.

 The women belong to a group which arrived off the coast of  Western Australia on 31 March 1990. Refugee status  applications were lodged between 8 and 10 May 1990 and  interviews were held between 28 May and 4 June 1990.

 "Following demands from peak refugee organisations, in  September 1990 I agreed that the entire group could make  further submissions on their applications. These submissions  were not received until mid 1991," Mr Hand said.

 Consideration of their applications included natural justice  procedures of notifying the applicants of the proposed  decisions, to allow them to make further submissions or to  rebut matters they believe to have been misinterpreted.  

 Primary decisions were delivered in early 1992.

 The women then appealed these rejection decisions in March  1992. The Refugee Status Review Committee considered the  appeals in July and August 1992 and unanimously recommended  against the grant of refugee status.

 "Following further comments by the applicants my delegate  made the decision that the applicants were not refugees  early in November.

 "Where persons are found not to be refugees, and to have no  other legal basis to remain in Australia, the law requires  their removal. No pressure, no matter how appalling, can  alter that situation.

 "I am deeply concerned by the stance of some of the  Cambodians to resist the return to their country, no matter  what the cost.

 "To address this, we have put together an expert counselling  team made up of international staff from the office of UNHCR  and staff of the Australian Red Cross to work with the  Cambodian boat people in Villawood and Port Hedland. The  aim of the counsellors, who are working independently of  Government, is to assist the boat people to be better 

 informed about their situation.

 .  . .3/

 * s

 rV / ‘

 -3-

 1 1  The repatriation of failed asylum seekers from Australia is  in the context of the massive repatriation exercise  currently underway in Cambodia. I am following the exercise  with close interest, and yesterday held discussions with the  UNHCR representative in Phnom Penh, Mr Anne-Willem 

 Bijleveld, who was visiting Canberra.

 "The repatriation exercise is proceeding very well. Already  175,000 of the some 350,000 or so Cambodians who had been  living in Thai border camps have returned to Cambodia under  the auspices of the UNHCR, along with smaller numbers from  other camps in the region," said Mr Hand.

 CANBERRA 11 November, 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams  (06) 2777860

