---
title: "Fair, compassionate arrangement for asylum seekers"
date: "1992-08-18"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124543
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008608%22
---

 m 

 §b

 Media ReleaseM —Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MPParliament House, Canberra, A C T 2600 Telephone: (06) 277 7860MPS 54/92BUDGET MEDIA RELEASE 5FAIR. COMPASSIONATE ARRANGEMENT FOR ASYLUM SEEKERSThe Budget provides funds for a new program to assist those in need who are awaiting decisions on their applications for refugee status and for a new, independent tribunal to hear refugee decision appeals.The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said the assistance program would cost up to $8.36m in 1992-93 and would provide essential support rather than cash benefits.The independent Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT), to be established at a cost of $3.2m in 1992-93, would be a simpler appeal system with its elements set out clearly in legislation.$8.36m for asylum seeker assistanceA new asylum seeker assistance scheme would be introduced for asylum seekers in need of material support while their applications were being considered.This will replace the interim arrangements which provide assistance to asylum seekers through voluntary agencies, that have been in place over the past year.Mr Hand paid tribute to the agencies for undertaking a difficult role without the benefit of a formal scheme.The new program would be delivered by one national agency, with the capacity to coordinate assistance throughout Australia. .Negotiations with the Australian Red Cross Society are at an advanced stage, and further details would be announced when negotiations were complete.Mr Hand said assistance would be available to asylum seekers who had no other means of support./2

 2

 An independent Refugee Review Tribunal

 With the new appeal system (RRT), additional costs would  fall to the Department but overall it would not be as  expensive to the taxpayer as the existing Refugee Status  Review Committee (RSRC), Mr Hand said.

 The simpler system would provide a credible and  independent determination system which should help keep  to a minimum appeals to the courts, he said.

 "In addition, the grounds upon which rejected applicants  will be able to appeal to the courts will be defined in  the new legislation," Mr Hand said.

 Mr Hand said the RRT would be completely independent. It  would provide hearings for applicants, assess  applications on their merits, and have the power to  decide appeals.

 It would operate on a non-adversarial basis along  guidelines similar to those of the existing Immigration  Review Tribunal.

 It would have a statutory base, and its procedures would  be set out in regulations, to ensure predictable  processes and consistency in decision-making.

 The RRT would replace the existing RSRC in 1993, and its  establishment legislation is to be introduced into  Parliament during the Budget sittings. '

 Mr Hand said that until the RRT began operating, the RSRC  would continue in its current form.

 "No refugee applicant will be disadvantaged by the  changes,  and decisions will continue to be based on the  United Nations definition of a refugee," he said.

 CANBERRA 18 August 1992

 MEDIA INQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Dario Gastello

 Minister's Office DILGEA  (06) 277 7860 (06) 264 3014

