---
title: "Transcript of Press Conference by Hon John Howard MP"
date: "1992-01-16"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations, Employment and Training"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122839
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006938%22
---

 Transcript of Press Conference by Hon John Howard MP 

 The Entrance - Thursday, 16 January, 1992

 Today's unemployment figures are the worst since the Great  Depression. It is as Nick Greiner called it the Great Recession and  I ask the question that's been asked repeatedly in this By-Election  - where's Paul Keating?

 Bob Can worships the feet of Paul Keating as the Prime Minister  who erected the policies that are now wreaking such a havoc of  misery on Australia's unemployed and I say again, why won't  Keating show his face to the people of The Entrance?

 Why won't Keating do in this By-Election what John Hewson has  been prepared to do, what I've been prepared to do, and that is  come into this By-Election, because unemployment transcends any  other issue in any election, State, Federal or By-Election or general  which is being held in Australia at the present time or in the 

 foreseeable future.

 1 will say two other things - I call on the Prime Minister, who is  today meeting union leaders to seek of the union movement of  Australia the deferment of any general national wage increase.  There is no case on economic or employment grounds at present 

 for a general wage increase unrelated to productivity. All that  will do is to throw more people out of work.

 The second thing the Government should be doing is introducing  immediate and dramatic reductions in Australia's migrant intake.  There is no case for continuing the present level of immigration  while we are adding to the unemployed in Australia. It is a form 

 of economic lunacy to be bringing people into this country and  putting them on to the dole queues and the evidence is that many  of the recently arrived people bulk very large in the unemployed  lists.

 So, there are two issues which Keating ought to take up with the  union movement today - deferral of the national wage case on  general increase grounds and an immediate and dramatic  reduction in Australia’s migrant intake.

 COMM ONW EALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MiCAH

 - 2 -

 Jrnlst: Mr Howard do you expect the unemployment figures and the anti-Keating feeling might make a difference in this  By-Election?

 Howard: I would expect it will. I have no doubt that the thing that dominates everybody's thinking at the moment is  unemployment - whether it’s a State election, a Federal election or  a By-Election. Job security is the reason why nobody's game to  do anything at the moment - they’re frightened of losing their job.  It’s no good cutting housing interest rates unless you can afford to  pay the lower repayment and people who think they're going to  lose their job won’t buy a house even if the interest rate's 5%  because they're frightened they won't have the brass to repay the  mortgage.

 Until there is a turnaround in unemployment, until people are  confident that unemployment is going down - and at the moment  it continues to climb - you are not going to have a pick up in  confidence and all of the energies of the Keating Government, all  of the energies of the union movement, all of the energies of the  business community, should be directed towards a long term  solution of the unemployment problem.

 Jrnlst: What's your special message to the people of The Entrance?

 Howard: My special message to the people of The Entrance is to use it as an opportunity to tell the architect of the greatest  unemployment we've had in 60 years, that the people of this part 

 of New South Wales at The Entrance, hold him more than anybody  else responsible. He's the guy who boasted that they would light  candles in cathedrals in his honour because of what he's done to 

 the Australian economy. He's the guy who said 1 alone have the  answer; he’s the guy who said I'm the world's greatest Treasurer.  Well, he's got the top job now and he ought to be made to be  reminded at every available opportunity of just what his policies  have done and more than anything else, a thumping vote for Bob  Graham at the weekend. A victory here for him will be a  reminder to the architect of the 900,000 unemployed that the  Australian people do not have short memories.

 - 3 -

 Jrnlst: Mr Howard, how much should migrant levels actually drop?

 Howard: I think they should go down very sharply. I just think it is quite ridiculous in present economic circumstances to be  bringing people in and adding them to the dole queues. There are  circumstances I can envisage in the future where we can get back 

 to a higher level of migrant intake but the evidence is that people,  particularly those who have poor English language skills, are  going straight onto dole queues and I would like to see our  immigration intake cut as far as it is possible to do so in the  shortest possible time, having regard to our humanitarian  obligations to take some refugees and some other obligations, but  the present level of immigration is far too high and whilst I'm not  going off the top of my head to put a figure on it, I would like to  see it dramatically reduced. There is overwhelming economic  need for it to be dramatically reduced and I repeat, it is a form of  economic lunacy to be adding to our unemployed to be bringing  people into this country who can't get jobs.

 Jrnlst: But the Opposition's been pressed for some time to quantify it. Why are you so reluctant to do so?

 Howard: I have a figure in mind but it is for Dr Hewson and Phillip Ruddock - the leader and the relevant spokesman - to start  putting figures on it. The fact is the present levels are much too  high and I know Paul Keating and John Dawkins are in favour of 

 much lower immigration. They shouldn't be as intimidated by the  ethnic lobby as was the former Prime Minister. I think it's one of  the issues they ought to take up with the union movement today,  but the more important issue to take up with the union movement 

 today is to do something about that national wage case. It is  stupid to pay people across the board increases at a time of record  unemployment - it just doesn't make sense. I don’t mind people  getting increases if it's justified by productivity but if you're going  to pay people increases irrespective of whether there’s been an  increase in productivity, all you're going to do is put more people  out of work and that is crazy in the present circumstances.

 - 4 -

 Jrnlst: Mr Howard do you think there's a case for freezing public service cutbacks until we're out of this recession?

 Howard: I think there is a case for pressing ahead as fast and as hard as possible with micro economic reform. You can't look at  one sector of the economy in isolation and say look, we’re going to  have a moratorium there. If you have a moratorium on reforms 

 to the public service then you’re going to have an argument for a  moratorium on reforms in the motor vehicle industry, or reforms  in the textile, clothing and footwear industry, and instead of  slowing down the pace of reform in those areas, it should be  speeded up because the sooner we can get through it the sooner  we can get into an era where we are through lower costs and  lower charges, and we have a more efficiently functioning private  sector economy, I am against having moratoria in implementing  policies of reform because all that does is to delay the 

 improvement and the more productive Australian economy that  we all want.

 Jrnlst: Mr Howard do you think we've seen the worst of Australia’s unemployment figures?

 Howard: I would like to be able to say yes to that, but I don't think we have. The Government itself believes it will go over  10,75%. These figures are notoriously erratic month to month. You can have an employment rise in one month followed by an  almost equivalent slump in employment the following month. I  would be surprised if the figure did not reach 11% at some stage  over the next 2-3 months. I hope I am wrong and I will be the 

 first to applaud a fall in unemployment, because I derive no  political, personal or any other kind of joy from seeing so many  fellow Australians out of work.

 - 5 -

 Jrnlsr: Are you surprised at predictions today that unemployment will still be in double figures by election time next  year?

 Howard: No, I'm not surprised at that at all. My reading of the Australian economy is that it will be years, on present policies,  before we get unemployment significantly lower and it is going to  be a very slow grind and the long history of unemployment in this  country is once you go to the sort of peak we've gone to, it always  takes a long time for it to go back. It's harder each time - it was  harder in the early 1980's to get back to the late 1970's levels  and it's going to be harder still on this occasion.

 Jrnlst: On immigration - what particular section of the intake would you like to cut - family reunions, skilled migrants...?

 Howard: Obviously at a time of high unemployment you have to be more sensitive about still taking in the people who we need  and obviously that means that the family reunion category might  have to take a relatively greater reduction, but I'm not going to  get into the specifics of it. I'm talking about the issue from an 

 employment point of view - the minutai of it is something for  others to talk about but the general proposition is that in the  present economic circumstances we are crazy to be taking as  many immigrants as we are and we should do something about it.

 * * * *

