---
title: "Churches' call for consistency"
date: "1992-06-14"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123792
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006757%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration 

 and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 CHURCHES' CAT U  FOR CONSISTENCY

 A  statement released by the Australian Council of Churches and Catholic Bishops Committee  as a prelude to the National Forum on Refugees, raises some important issues.

 In the past, when the Government has put aside long standing migration procedures and failed  to remove from Australia those who cannot substantiate bona-fide claims, the national interest  has ultimately been compromised.

 Failure to subject the claims of Chinese students in Australia at the time of Tienanmen Square  Massacre to vigorous case by case determination is an example of this. The decision to allow  the Chinese students blanket, four-year temporary protection was an outcome which has  satisfied no-one. '

 The call now for the process to be put aside completely to allow all asylum claimants in  Australia to remain, ought to be resisted by the Government.

 To perpetuate the ad-hoc decision making process which characterised the Chinese students  issue would be irresponsible in the extreme.

 There are long-standing arrangements which must be followed. The United Nations  Convention definition of a refugee is still valid today and must be upheld. That is, a refugee  is a person "persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social group, or political opinion, is outside the country of his or her nationality, and is unable, 

 or owing to such fear is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country."

 The Council of Churches has called for the development of fair and even-handed mechanisms  to determine who is or is not a refugee. At the same time it is calling upon the government  to abandon its commitment to internationally recognised criteria and allow all claimants to  remain.

 If consistency is what they require, then they must also accept that to allow the system to  sustain continued abuse, would be to abandon all consistency and capacity to assist genuine  refugees.

 For example, they call upon the need for consistency in decision making - an issue the  Coalition has promoted many times in the past - in the treatment of asylum seekers in  Australia.

 14 June 1992 Further information contact Philip Ruddock on pager (02) 925 3911 #25589

