---
title: "Compensation for asylum seekers"
date: "1992-12-17"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126704
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006695%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal M ember for D undas Electorate

 Shadow M inister for Immigration Tel: (02) 858 1011

 and Ethnic Affairs Fax: (02) 804 6739

 COMPENSATION FOR ASYLUM SEEKERS

 Legislation passed in the House of Representatives last night, limiting the amount of  damages able to be claimed by some asylum seekers for unlawful detention, was  supported by the Coalition.

 The reason why some asylum seekers are now deemed to have been held in unlawful  custody, and not others who are detained under the same provisions, arises because the  vessels in which they arrived may now be unserviceable.

 It is an absurdity to suggest that such an action, which in some cases may have been  carried out for quarantine purposes, should result in the possibility that large claims for  damages be made against the Australian taxpayer.

 It is regrettable, however, that the defect in S.88 was not discovered earlier. It is clear  that there is no mandate for detaining people under the provisions of this section. In his  deliberations on the matter Justice McHugh stated:

 "a person could only be detained under s.88 'until the departure of the vessel from  its last port of call in Australia or until such earlier time as an authorised officer  directs'... It is difficult to see how s.88 could justify the detention of the plaintiffs  when the boats upon which they arrived had been destroyed. The period of 

 detention authorised by s.88 was clearly intended to be no longer than the period  of the temporary stay of the vessel in Australia".

 Support for this legislation to limit the damages claim to $1 per day of unlawful detention  in no way validates any unlawful detention that may have occurred and the Coalition  would not have supported such action. The Coalition would oppose retrospective  legislation which could deny the right to make a claim.

 The form of legislation that was passed ensures that the Parliament's intention in regard  to lawful detention of illegal entrants is clear. It also removes the possibility of the  Australian taxpayer funding enormous damages claims for the unintended consequence  of an antiquated law.

 Claims of between $60 million and $300 million might have otherwise been possible, on  top of the $250 million or more paid as a result of the failure to adequately control  Australia's border arrangements.

 These new claims could erode public support for the need to protect genuine asylum  seekers.

 /έ>5.

 Parliament H ouse  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 17 December 1992 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

