---
title: "Shadow Minister for Immigration concludes Port Hedland visit"
date: "1992-07-17"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124196
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006742%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal M ember for D undas  Shadow M inister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate Parliam ent House

 Tel: (02) 858 1011 Tel: (06) 277 4343 Fax: (02) 804 6739 Fax: (06) 277 2062

 81 .

 SHADOW V IR FOR IMMIGRATION

 CONCLUDES PORT HEPLAND VISIT

 Commenting at the conclusion of his visit to Port Hedland this morning, Mr Philip Ruddock  MP, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, said that the visit confirmed his view  of the desirability of case-by-case determination of claims for refugee status.

 Mr Ruddock met with several groups of detainees and spent several hours speaking with a  large number of detainees individually.

 Mr Ruddock said that while not in any way holding out the promise that he would offer any  assistance to individuals in pursuit of their claims, he was struck by the great diversity of  hardship and oppression that some had suffered.

 The quality of the Port Hedland facility, in comparison to so many camps, visited both in Asia  and Europe is of a very high physical standard, Mr Ruddock said. However it was not intended  to be a facility for the long term holding of detainees and it has been the delays in determining  people's claims which has created such an outcry in the community. "Clearly these delays in  processing peoples claims are unconscionable and it dwells heavily on the minds of the  detainees," Mr Ruddock said.

 It was very clear that the detainees are anxious for decisions to be taken conclusively and while  all would obviously want decisions to be favourable, they are now at the point where what they  really seek, is simply a final decision. It is clear that many of the detainees, some of whom held  for two and a half years in custody want to be in a position to resume a free lifestyle.

 "It is imperative that the processing of claims for refugee status are expeditious and fair," Mr  Ruddock said, "clearly the policy which has led to the long term holding of people in detention  has had an adverse impact on their physical, emotional and spiritual well being."

 "It is very regrettable that the foreshadowed changes in Australia's refuge determination system  will have no impact on the lives of the people presently held in detention," Mr Ruddock said.

 There is an urgent need for the government to make further resources available to bring this  m atter to a conclusion as quickly as possible.

 17 July 1992

 Contact Philip Ruddock after 9pm on (02) 6304575 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

