---
title: "Tighter coastal surveillance required in light of boat people entry"
date: "1992-01-17"
creators:
  - "Newman, Jocelyn"
source: "Shadow Minister for Defence Science and Personnel"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122833
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02007503%22
---

 Λ

 MEDIA RELEASE Senator Jocelyn Newman SHADOW MINISTER FOR

 DEFENCE SCIENCE AND PERSONNEL D2/17th Jan 1992

 TIGHTER COASTAL SURVEILLANCE REQUIRED  IN LIGHT OF BOAT PEOPLE ENTRY

 " Australian coastal surveillance is ineffective if it allows up to 75 unidentified intruders to enter  Australian waters, land, and then wander around in the north of Australia without detection of either  them or their vessel for 10 days." Senator Newman said. .

 " While we have a coastline of 36,735 kilometres and an extremely difficult job of maintaining  surveillance over it, it is totally unsatisfactory to have an unidentified foreign vessel sitting at anchor  in an Australian bay in northern Australia for 10 days. One wonders when that vessel would have  been discovered, if ever, if the Chinese had not reported in to the King Edward River station.

 " It is urgent that there be an immediate inquiry as to how this was able to happen.

 " As a Shadow Minister visiting northern Australia I was told that in addition to the Coastwatch  flights there was an effective network of station-owners, police, light aircraft, aboriginals and  reservists that would detect anybody who wasn't supposed to be there.

 " What if these people had been engaged on military purposes? What if they had studied the terrain  and carried maps and had come to the country to exert military and political pressure on the  Australian Government? It is such "low-level contingencies" for which the Department of Defence has  been planning. We are told that such contingencies are our only perceivable threat for some years into  the future; and yet it appears that we cannot even monitor intrusions.

 " Air Marshall David Evans, Chief of the Air Staff until his retirement in 1985, while giving evidence  in the hearing of a $24m breach of contract claim by Amann Aviation against the Federal  Government, described the civil surveillance operations for 7,000 kilometres of Australia's northern  coastline from Cairns to Broome as "totally ineffective and farcical"." So far as aircraft is concerned 

 99% ,at least, of the Australian northern coastline is wide open." It appears that his concerns have  been treated with complacency, Senator Newman said, and the situation remains unchanged.

 " Currently surveillance is undertaken by the civilian Coastwatch (Administered by the Customs  Department) for quarantine, defence, immigration, customs and drug-related matters. In addition,  the Navy, Army and Airforce have complementary roles. Nevertheless it is clear that with a vast job  to do the resources for the task are clearly inadequate and appear to have failed in this case.

 " It may be of course, that Australia's surveillance bodies are on stand-down for the Christmas/New  Year break - Australia, the land of the long summer holiday is wide open and inviting to anyone with  a beach ball or a mortar in their pack!

 " It is of critical importance that the Government take steps now to improve our coastal surveillance  capabilities, not only for the defence of Australia, but for our environment which could be damaged  by the influx of foreign disease carried in the food or person of illegal entrants." Senator Newman  said.

 For further information: Senator Newman [003] 34-1755 or Jeannie Cameron [06] 277-3660

