---
title: "$1.8 million for Victorian homeless youth"
date: "1992-04-23"
creators:
  - "Staples, Peter"
source: "Minister for Aged, Family and Health Services"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178068
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2970488%22
---

  Hon. Peter Staples M.P. 

  Parliament House, Canberra Phone (06) 277 7220 Fax (06) 273 4146 

  23 April 1992 PS095/92 

  $1.8 MILLION FOR VICTORIAN HOMELESS YOUTH 

  Fifteen new health-related projects for Victoria's homeless young  people were announced today by the Federal Minister for Aged,  Family and Health Services, Peter Staples, and the Victorian  Minister for Health, Maureen Lyster. 

  "These projects are directed towards the needs of a severely  disadvantaged group - young people who are homeless and who have  emotional, psychological or behavioural problems," Mr Staples  said.  Mrs Lyster said that it was very important to the future of 

  homeless young Victorians that their health problems did not go  untreated. 

  "While we have to resolve their homelessness, we also want to deal  with the long term social and behavioural effects of these  circumstances," she said. 

  Mr Staples said there would also be continued support for  25 previously funded projects. 

  The new projects have been developed in response to  recommendations made by the Burdekin enquiry into homeless youth. 

  The new projects were funded under the Innovative Health Services  for Homeless Youth Program which is sponsored jointly by the  Federal and State Governments. 

  More information about the new projects is attached. 

  Details of funding are available from Jo Jansen on  <03> 604 8694 or from Margaret Kerr on (03> 616 7869. 

  COMMONWEAL TH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH 

  Portfolio of Health. Housing and Community Services 

  ATTACHMENT 

  $1.8 MILLION FOR VICTORIAN HOMELESS YOUTH 

  Those to benefit include: 

  young women from a non-English Speaking Background ; 

  . refugees from a NESB; 

  . young offenders from a NESB; 

  . young women subjected to sexual assault and incest; 

  . young women who are pregnant or have young dependents. 

  Other projects are: 

  . projects that address the abuse of prescription medication; 

  . alcohol and drug projects; and 

  . projects that address dental care needs. 

  The new services are located at: 

  Cambodian Community Welfare Centre Inc., Nunawading; 

  Ethnic Youth Issues Network, Fitzroy; 

  HOV/Children's Court Clinic, South Melbourne; 

  Kairos Housing Project The Salvation Army, Camberwell; 

  Werribee Community Health Centre; 

  Cranbourne & District Community Health Centre; 

  Young Women's Christian Association, St Kilda; 

  West Gippsland Community Health Centre; 

  Council to Homeless Persons, Melbourne; 

  Youth Affairs Council of Victoria, Fitzroy; 

  Brosnan Centre Youth Service, Brunswick; 

  St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy;  Corio Community Health Centre; 

  Prahran Community Health Centre; 

  Program Development and Review Division, Health 'oept  Victoria. 

