---
title: "Coalition re-affirms approach to immigration"
date: "1992-12-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126520
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006705%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 EMBARGOED UNTIL SUNDAY DECEMBER 6 1992

 COALITION RE AFFIRMS APPROACH TO IMMIGRATION

 l&l

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 Philip Ruddock, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs spoke  frankly last night to the Federation of Ethnic Communities Councils' of  Australia at a dinner to mark the end of their Third National Congress.

 H e took opportunity to outline the Coalition's immigration reforms and re足 affirm his commitment to strengthening Australia's multicultural society.

 Reviewing the history of the Coalition's approach to immigration and  settlement issues, Mr Ruddock said, "Australia's record in the successful  settlement of large numbers of immigrahts and refugees is one of which the 

 Coalition is very proud. We are particularly proud of the way in which the  Liberal Government in the mid-70's responded to the refugee crisis in Indo足 China, accepting a large number of boat people in the face of Labour Party  opposition and community anxiety.

 "The Coalition is concerned that we build effectively and fairly on the  strengths conferred on us by the diversity of our existing population and the  outstanding successes of the National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia.

 "During a period of declining revenue and increasing demands on all  government budgets, it is crucial to ensure that the advantage we have is not  squandered by permitting that resource to decay and diminish through  underutilisation.

 "That is why the Coalition is committed to maintaining the full range of  settlement services for new migrants, developing the Ethnic Schools  Program, encouraging proficiency in English, supporting community-based  schools, facilitating second language skills, ensuring that prompt recognition  is given to overseas qualifications which equate with Australian standards,  and working to give migrant women, migrant families and aged migrants  more genuine equality of opportunity.

 "The provision of specific funding for other settlement functions, particularly  those performed on a community basis, will also continue to receive our  support." .../2

 %

 4

 - 2 足

 In the context of a smaller program, the Coalition re-affirmed its  commitment to an immigration program which does not discriminate on the  basis of race, religion or country of origin.

 The Coalition has also re-affirmed its commitment not to reduce the refugee  component of the program but to assess Australia's response to refugee re足 settlement against need in the context of our ability to assist.

 Reductions in the program will be achieved largely through a more stringent  application of current laws and regulations, along with some other proposals  to enhance bona-fides testing which the Coalition will introduce in  Government. These include:

 - Enhanced bona-fides testing in all categories, particularly  preferential family reunion and employer nomination;

 - restriction of welfare benefits in the first two years after entry  in the main to all but refugee and humanitarian entrants and in  other cases of changed ^circumstances of a compassionate  character;

 - a clear skills focus with an emphasis upon relevance to 

 Australian labour market requirements.

 Mr Ruddock also re-affirmed the Coalition's decision to retain the Human  Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, "in recognition of the  importance of the Commission and the role it plays in confronting, educating  and resolving conflicts based on sexual and racial discrimination".

 "I am disappointed that the Government has not consulted with the  Coalition about the form of the proposed Federal racial vilification  legislation and that even after two years, we have still not seen it introduced  into the Parliament," Mr Ruddock said.

 'The Coalition has offered in principle support for Federal racial vilification  legislation, but without access to the proposed provisions of such legislation,  it is impossible to encourage wider debate on the implications and  consequences of such legislation", Mr Ruddock said.

 5 December 1992

 Contact Philip Ruddock on Pager (02) 925 3911 number 25589

