---
title: "Government must review refugee processing system"
date: "1992-04-14"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122999
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009276%22
---

 /8Î¿

 John Hewson \ Leader of the Opposition M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 118/92 14 April 1992

 GOVERNMENT MUST REVIEW REFUGEE PROCESSING SYSTEM

 Australia's refugee policy is in crisis and its administration  risks degenerating into a farce.

 There is a real danger that the policy, under its current 

 guidelines, will result in an unnecessary misallocation of  resources and become a lawyers'  paradise rather than acting in  the national interest.

 Existing processes for settling refugee claims are achieving none  of the goals they should.

 Australian policy should be sending a clear signal that non­ refugees who try to jump the immigration queue and get into  Australia through the back door will not be successful and that  swift corrective action will be taken. But the current policy 

 is clearly not doing so.

 The processes should not be so drawn out as to create unnecessary  anxiety and heightened expectations among applicants. But they  are doing just that.

 The processes should not create a backlog of thousands of 

 applicants. But they have done just that.

 The processes should not be costing the Australian taxpayer  hundreds of millions of dollars. But they a re.

 The Government must act decisively to change these realities and  the Prime Minister must show some genuine leadership on the  issue.

 The situation has become critical. There are now over 23,000  refugee applications backlogged in the system. Under existing  arrangements it will take many years to process them. Over half  a billion dollars of taxpayers money has been spent on the needs  of refugee claimants and on processing their applications.

 The cumbersome system of administrative and judicial review that  has been created is not even applied consistently. Chinese  students in Australia prior to 20 June 1989 have been given a  special status that bypasses normal refugee processing 

 arrangements and guarantees that they will not be returned to  China against their will.

 72

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 - 2 -

 The Opposition's policy on this issue has been clear and

 consistent from the start.

 .  We have insisted that genuine compassion demands prompt and  fair processing of claims

 . We have maintained that the only proper approach is to 

 process all applications for protection on a case-by-case  basis consistent with non-discriminatory and 

 internationally recognised criteria

 .  We have emphasised that anyone whose claim for refugee

 status is validated should be given all the rights and 

 responsibilities which that status entails

 . But we have also emphasised that those with no such

 entitlement should not be allowed to remain.

 A  prompt, fair and effective porcessing of refugee claims 

 requires the Prime Minister and the Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic Affairs to make the following changes as a matter of 

 priority.

 . to ensure that costly, unnecessary and time-consuming

 appeals are avoided, the Government should follow the lead  of the Coalition in opposing appeals to the courts beyond  Australia's highly regarded administrative procedures. We  have previously proposed that this change be implemented 

 through amendment to the Administrative Decisions Judicial  Review Act

 .  to ensure that obviously unfounded claims are dealt with  immediately, applicants should first be required to obtain  leave (possibly from the Immigration Review Tribunal)  before further appeal against the decision of departmental  officers is allowed

 .  to accelerate processing, staffing priorities need to be  adjusted, with departmental officers freed up by the 

 decline in migration applications, being redeployed to the  task of refugee assessment

 .  to ensure consistency of standards and equality of 

 treatment, the Hawke Government's 1990 decision to provide  "temporary residence on a permanent basis" to a special  group of Chinese students should be reviewed

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION (06) 277 4055

