---
title: "Government must act on refugee determination"
date: "1992-01-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122858
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006831%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 ? .

 Electorate Parliament House

 Tel: (02) 858 1011 Tel: (06) 277 4343 Fax: (02) 804 6739 Fax: (06) 277 2062

 GOVERNMENT MUST ACT ON REFUGEE DETERMINATION

 The Government must take immediate steps to address the growing problem in the  refugee determination process.

 Firstly staffing priorities need to be adjusted. With migration applications down  departmental officers could be redeployed to the more urgent task of refugee  assessment.

 There are currently 23,000 applications for refugee status backlogged in the system  and over 300 unauthorised "boat people" in detention.

 If screening is not proceeded with expeditiously, periods of up to 10 years for  determining their claims would not be an exaggeration.

 Secondly, manifestly unfounded claims need to be dealt with immediately. If there is  any contest about the judgement of departmental officers in determining this,  applicants should first be required to obtain leave before further appeal is allowed.  The under-worked Immigration Review Tribunal could be used for this purpose.

 Such procedures are well known to the courts and frequently used to exclude cases  without substance as well as the vexatious.

 Thirdly, as previously foreshadowed by the Coalition, appeals beyond Australia's highly  regarded administrative procedures to the courts should clearly be excluded.

 It is quite possible to exclude appeals on administrative decisions by amendment to  the Administrative Decisions Judicial Review Act.

 The only court with inherent jurisdiction is the High Court of Australia and any  decision for it to be involved would also require leave.

 With more appropriately targeted resources, the manifestly unfounded cases dealt with  by immediate deportation and the elimination of unnecessary, time consuming and  costly further appeals, processing would be effectively expedited.

 This would go a long way to re-establishing control of Australia's national borders.

 20 January 1992 

 t COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

