---
title: "Immigration minister confirms 70 Cambodian boat people have their claims for refugee status rejected"
date: "1992-12-15"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126647
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008588%22
---

 M e d ia  Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, ACT2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 76/92 .

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER CONFIRMS 70 CAMBODIAN BOAT PEOPLE HAVE  THEIR CLAIMS FOR REFUGEE STATUS REJECTED

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today confirmed that a further 70  Cambodian boat people had completed the process of refugee  determination and had been formally rejected as refugees.

 Two other Cambodian boat people also completed the process  of refugee determination and were granted refugee status.

 "The claims of the applicants were examined individually and  on a case by case basis. The decisions have come at the end  of a necessarily lengthy and meticulous procedure designed  to ensure that the decision-making process is both fair and 

 lawful.

 "It should be noted that for those whose claims for refugee  status were rejected, this was the second time they have  had their claims examined and the second time their claims  have been rejected," said Mr Hand.

 Mr Hand said the decisions were part of a continuing process  that would see a number of asylum claimants receive final  decisions over the next few weeks.

 Failed refugee applicants who have no claim to remain in  Australia are required, by law, to be removed from Australia  as soon as practicable.

 "Australia has a strong commitment to refugees and a long  and proud record of humanitarian assistance, but I have  stated in the past, and I will state again, if you meet the  UN criteria for refugee status and are found to be a refugee  then you will be able to stay in Australia, if not, then  you will have to go," said Mr Hand.

 CANBERRA 15 December, 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

