---
title: "Reasons for the cuts in immigration"
date: "1992-11-19"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126153
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006717%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 REASONS FO R THE CUTS IN IMMIGRATION

 Attached is a copy of the formal address given by Mr Ruddock, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, to the Australian Chinese  Forum of NSW on November 18 1992, setting out the reasons for the cuts  in Australia's immigration program.

 19 November 1992

 PHTTJP RUDDOCK MP

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS  ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRAT JA N  CHINESE FORUM  OF NSW  "REASONS FOR THE CUTS IN IMMIGRATION"

 November 18 1992

 Alderman Au-Yong, distinguished guests, parliamentary colleagues, ladies  and gentleman.

 I am very happy to be here today to participate in this important seminar to  discuss the reasons why there was, and still is, a need to reduce Australia's  immigration program in the current economic climate.

 As you are all aware, the Government was persuaded by the Coalition's  arguments in regard to the necessity of reducing the immigration program  in the short term.

 Announcing the reduced program for 1992-93, the Minister said:

 "In planning the 1992-93 program, the Government was influenced by  community concerns about current high levels of unemployment,  especially among new entrants to the labour market, and the ability of  Government to provide effective services and infrastructure in a 

 climate of economic restraint. The Government was particularly  concerned over the implications of the increasing skill and language  requirements of the Australian workforce."

 The announcement has met with little resistance from ethnic communities,  in stark contrast to the response the Coalition received when it put forward  similar arguments, particularly with regard to the necessity for an English  language requirement in the Concessional family category.

 The Coalition's policy to reduce the immigration intake in the short term  does not reflect a lack of commitment to a continuing immigration program,  nor does it reflect a devaluation of our commitment to a multicultural  Australia.

 What it does reflect is a realistic appraisal of Australia's ability to  successfully settle a large number of new migrants in the middle of the worst  recession in sixty years.

 This does not mean that we believe that a reduction in the program will  solve Australia's economic problems, nor does it mean that we believe that  immigration has caused those problems.

 But we must recognise that in order to keep benefiting from our ethnic  diversity, we must ensure that we have the capacity to integrate, over time,

 the people who do arrive here to settle. We must consolidate the gains we  have made and build upon them.

 There is a dearth of employment and investment opportunities, even for the  most qualified of new migrants, in the current recessionary climate.

 The unemployment figures amongst migrants who arrived since the  beginning of last year are alarming. Amongst some groups the 

 unemployment rate is as high as 70% and the average of all groups is 35.4%  The human, social and financial costs which arise as a consequence of such  high rates of unemployment are enormous and will damage community  relations if allowed to persist for any length of time.

 In a study on immigrant workers commissioned by the BIR, the authors  concluded that during a time of economic contraction and rapid structural  adjustment, fewer training opportunities suggest that NESB immigrants will  be less able to adapt fast enough to changes in enterprises and the  economy. As economic restructuring continues in Australia, there is a strong  likelihood that NESB immigrants will continue to contribute 

 disproportionately to structural unemployment.

 To continue high levels of immigration in these circumstances is surely  irresponsible.

 It is equally irresponsible and against the national interest not to utilise fully  the skills and talents of migrants in Australia. This means better application  of resources to language programs, including teaching English as a second  language as well as translator and interpreter services. Other measures, such  as increased funding for ethnic schools, second language training as well as  measures to facilitate the recognition of comparable overseas-gained 

 qualifications, are positive and constructive responses to the considerable  and growing problem of unemployment amongst non-English speaking  migrants and the enormous social dislocation which it causes.

 Unless public policy measures are targeted to human resources development  and greater utilisation of existing, but unrecognised qualifications, many  migrants will continue to have dim employment and income prospects in the  emerging economy.

 This is what I mean by consolidating the gains we have already made. It  would be a tragedy, if, through neglect, we allowed a situation to develop  whereby those gains were lost.

 As I said earlier, cutting the immigration program will not fix our economic  problems. Fundamental structural reform is essential. The Coalition is firmly  of the view that the comprehensive reform package contained in Fightback! 

 will allow us to build upon our multicultural strengths and permit, in the  longer term, a larger immigration program backed by adequate and

 appropriate settlement and education services, training and re-training  f programs. -

 In the context of a smaller program, the Coalition remains firmly committed  to an immigration program which does not discriminate on the basis of race,  religion or country of origin.

 Reductions in the program will be achieved largely through a more stringent  application of current laws and regulations, along with some other proposals  to enhance bona-fides testing which the Coalition will introduce in  Government. These include:

 - English language testing in the Concessional family reunion  category;

 - Enhanced bona-fides testing in all categories, particularly  preferential family reunion and employer nomination;

 - restriction of welfare benefits in the first two years after entry  in the main to all but refugee and humanitarian entrants;

 - a clear skills focus with an emphasis upon relevance to 

 Australian labour market requirements.

 We believe these proposals will achieve an outcome which is more consistent  with Australia's national interest.

 The emphasis upon relevant skills and English language capacity will mean  that the high levels of unemployment amongst low-skilled, non-English  speaking migrants, currently being experienced, will be ameliorated over  time.

 Such an outcome will ensure continued community support for a larger  immigration program in the long term and allow us to build constructively  and positively on our remarkable ethnic diversity.

 I am more than happy to answer any questions you may have on matters of  detail.

 -  3 -

 Thank you.

