---
title: "Pressure mounts on Keating"
date: "1992-10-14"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214125558
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006852%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal M ember for D undas Electorate

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Tel: (02) 858 1011

 and Ethnic Affairs Fax: (02) 804 6739

 PRESSURE MOUNTS ON KEATING

 Prime Minister Keating will need to move quickly and back the Joint Standing Committee on  Migration Regulations recommendations dealing with the PRC nationals given 4-year  temporary entry permits.

 The Government's recent action to impose a mandatory terminating condition on PRC  temporary permit holders who travel to China has revealed that many individuals have  absolutely no need or requirement for the protection they were given and continue to seek.

 In May 1992 the Government issued guidelines to the Department of Immigration to cancel  PRC temporary entry permits Class 437 and visa Class 783 where the holder of the TEP or  visa has travelled to the PRC, contrary to a mandatory condition for these classes. "Officers  should note that the instruction emphasises that cancellation is to be the usual outcome where  the visa/entry permit holder has travelled to the PRC'.

 Despite a question on notice by the Opposition to the Government requesting further details  and background on the issuance of this instruction in May, it was not until the question was  asked again in Senate Estimates in September, again by the Opposition, that it was revealed  that at least two permit holders had travelled to China and returned to Australia.

 Neither had their visas cancelled as a result.

 As this occurred, clearly the regulations were defective and require amendment. Even so, the  new regulations still allow the spouses and dependent children of PRC temporary permit  holders to travel to China and return to Australia.

 The fact that travel is possible without penalty is the clearest indication that the Opposition's  approach to the PRC problem is not only correct in principle, but the only fair way to deal  with the issue. It further demonstrates that such a person could not possibly sustain a claim for  refugee status and continued protection. According to the United Nations Convention 

 definition, a refugee needs to demonstrate "a well-founded fear of persecution".

 This is the clearest evidence so far that the Opposition's insistence upon case-by-case  assessment of claims at the end of the four-year temporary entry permit is the only proper, fair  and defensible course to take.

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 14 October 1992

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M ICAH

