---
title: "Keating's flawed decision"
date: "1992-04-26"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214123101
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006778%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP 

 5cT<

 Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Electorate  Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Parliament House  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 KEATING'S FLAWED DECISION

 There are three issues which need to be addressed in the consideration of the Prime  Minister's decision to grant permanent entry to the 20,000 Chinese nationals here at the  time of the Tienanmen Square massacre, and their dependents.

 The first is the nature o f the decision itself. The decision to grant a group o f people  permanent residency, regardless o f their entitlement to protection, or their ability to  satisfy criteria for change o f status on the same basis available to any other visitor or  temporary resident, maintains a discriminatory approach which has undermined the  credibility o f this government's administration o f the immigration program.

 The example of the Chinese nationals decision is consistently raised by every other  interest group to cast aside effective control arrangements as to who should or should not  be able to enter and settle in Australia.

 It is only this week that Minister Hand has had to resist pressure to accommodate the  Khmer boat people on similar flawed and emotion charged grounds.

 The second issue relates to timing. There was no need to announce a decision in relation  to the future o f PRC nationals with 4-year temporary entry permits until the end of June

 However, the Prime Minister's announcement has no legal effect until the law is changed.  It is thus unfair to those involved to hold out the prospect o f permanency when there is  no law in place to support the announcement. Such an announcement cannot bind the 

 government or its successors. Neither Keating nor Hawke have attempted to change the  law to give effect to their undertakings.

 The third issue relates to how the announcement was made. It is always outrageous when  a decision is announced selectively. This decision was announced by a letter published  in the Chinese New Migrant Magazine's April edition. The letter was not made available  generally or the subject o f distribution to the mainstream media. One could be forgiven  for believing that the Prime Minister hoped nobody but those who read the New Migrant  Magazine would be aware o f this announcement.

 Not only does the Prime Minister cynically exploit the emotions o f the PRC nationals,  their friends and relatives, but he is also trying to exploit political advantage as an  advocate for a smaller immigration program while holding out the prospect to temporary  entrants for permanency.

 1994.

 26 April 1992

 Contact Philip Ruddock pager (02) 925 3911 #25589

 COMMONWEALTH 

 P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  LIBRARY   MICAH

