---
title: "Immigration Minister announces annual refugee, humanitarian and special assistance category migrants for 1992/93"
date: "1992-07-24"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124267
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008664%22
---

 M ed ia Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, AC T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860 -

 MPS 41/92

 IMMIGRATION MINISTER ANNOUNCES ANNUAL REFUGEE, HUMANITARIAN  AND SPECIAL ASSISTANCE CATEGORY MIGRANTS FOR 1992/93

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today announced the Refugee,  Humanitarian and Special Assistance Category allocations in  next year's migration program.

 Mr Hand said a total of 10,000 places had been allocated  under the Refugee, Humanitarian and Special Assistance  stream of the recently announced migration program for  1992/93. The sub category allocations would be:

 The Minister said that he was mindful of the strong  community support for humanitarian entry programs as well as  concerns about Australia's capacity to absorb new arrivals.   For this reason, the Refugee, Humanitarian and Special  Assistance allocations had increased as a proportion of the  total migration program although actual numbers are reduced.

 "The Refugee and Humanitarian categories will consist of  programs for the Middle East, Africa, Central America and  for Indochinese in camps in Southeast Asia as well as a  small program for other deserving cases. Numbers admitted  under the Central American and Indochinese programs will be 

 smaller than in recent years reflecting declining  resettlement needs.

 "While the number of refugees requiring resettlement as the  durable solution to their situation has reduced, there  remain those in need of resettlement and the program I have  announced reflects the government's continuing strong  commitment to a refugee and humanitarian program."

 Refugee and Humanitarian  Humanitarian [on shore]  Special Assistance

 4,800 1,500 3,700

 2

 "I have previously announced that the refugee and  humanitarian categories will take precedence in allocations  and, where demands are greater in those categories, Special  Assistance numbers will be reduced accordingly.

 Mr Hand said that up to 3,700 places would be made available  under the Special Assistance Category and would be  distributed among ethnic minorities of the former Soviet  Union, displaced persons from the former Socialist Federal  Republic of Yugoslavia, East Timorese in Portugal,  Sudanese 

 and Burmese.  .

 The Special Assistance Category, he said had been introduced  last year to give Australia flexibility in helping people  who had a special need to resettle here, but who did not fit  the United Nations definition of a refugee.

 "The current situations in those countries from which we  will accept people in 1992/93, deserve a humanitarian  response from Australia."

 "The programs for ethnic minorities from the former Soviet  Union, for citizens of the former Yugoslavia, and East  Timorese in Portugal,  will cater for those who have already  lodged applications and there will be little capacity to  accept new applications.

 "The new programs for Burmese and Sudanese will reach those  relatives of people here and those who face very difficult  circumstances in their homelands."

 The on shore program provides 1,500 places for those persons  remaining in the processing pipeline under the former  provisions for humanitarian residence criteria, he said.

 "In addition to these programs, it must also be recognised  that the government's policy in providing temporary refuge to  those in need represents a considerable humanitarian effort  by Australia. It is expected that about 1,500 persons will  be granted four year permits in 1992/1993."

 CANBERRA, 24 July 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams  Minister's Office  (06) 277 7860

 Laurie Bugden  DILGEA (06) 264 2296

