---
title: "Asylum seekers claims should be fully checked"
date: "1992-01-19"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122863
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006832%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP Federal Member for Dundas  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Electorate Parliament House 

 Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 ASYLUM SEEKERS CLAIMS SHOULD BE FULLY CHRCKRD

 It is not clear that the newest unauthorised arrivals on Australia's far north  shores are from the Peoples Republic of China or elsewhere in Asia.

 Their claims for protection need to be promptly and thoroughly checked.  There are established procedures for doing this but regrettably over time  they have been compromised by delay, inactivity and indecision on the part  of the Government.

 There are hundreds of people who have arrived in small craft in Australia  seeking asylum who are currently held in detention. Most of their claims  have not been determined and only a very small number of those screened  out have been returned.

 In addition there are now 23,000 claimants for refugee status within  Australia with considerable resources being put to the task of determining  their claims.

 There is a view that Australia is no longer able to adequately control and  supervise entry arrangements. The case of the most recently arrived asylum  seekers and all its attendant publicity will now be a case study for those off­ shore contemplating irregular and unauthorised entry to this country.

 Australia's north has always been inhospitable and dangerous even for those  properly equipped and experienced. The fact that any journey to and  landing in Australia is hazardous should not be used as a basis for discarding  proper refugee determination procedures and their consequences.

 Likewise the trauma of those who were victims of Pol Pots killing fields  should not be used as a basis for asserting that all Khmer have a need for  protection without proper scrutiny.

 The problems that we now face in the handling of the current situation are  a direct result of the messages we have already sent overseas.

 19 January 1992

 CO M M O N W EA LTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

