---
title: "Hill urges further Australian and international action on Burma"
date: "1992-12-03"
creators:
  - "Hill, Robert"
source: "Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126502
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006515%22
---

 I f f . 

 MEDIA RELEASE SENATOR ROBERT HILL LEA D E R  OF THE O PPO SITIO N IN THE SE N A T E   SH ADO W  M INISTER FO R  FO REIG N A FFA IR S

 â¦EMBARGOED UNTIL 2.30PM fOLD TIME! O N  THURSDAY. i:1ER 3. 1992»

 Thursday, December 3  112/92

 HILL URGES FURTHER AUSTRALIAN AND INTERNATIONAL ACTION ON BURMA

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Robert Hill,  today urged Australia and the international community to consider  immediate measures to encourage a return to democracy and an end  to human rights abuses in Burma.

 He made his comments in a speech prepared for a conference on 

 Burma at Griffith University in Bri s b a n e . The speech, entitled  "Burma: The Coalition's Perspective", was delivered by the  Liberal Member for Moncrieff, Mrs Kathy Sullivan.

 Senator Hill said the Coalition remained deeply concerned about  appalling human rights abuses in Burma, and there could be no  doubt the situation in the country required immediate attention.

 He said Amnesty International had said in a recent report that  human rights were being "grossly and persistently violated"  throughout Burma, and that the victims came from every section  of society and every ethnic and religious group.

 The State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), which came  to power in 1988 and held elections in 1990, had outlawed all but  seven of the 233 parties which contested the elections.

 Senator Hill said that despite Burma's parlous economic state,  the country had reportedly spent at least $600 million on arms  in the past two years.

 Burma was believed to be the world's largest heroin exporter, and  there was speculation that some of the drug money was being used  b y  the Burmese regime to fund arms purchases.

 Senator Hill said the Federal Opposition believed that further  measures must be taken to pressure the SLORC towards democracy  and the cessation of human rights a b u s e s .

 The Coalition believed that if efforts by the United Nations 

 General Assembly and the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR)  w ere unsuccessful by early next year, the issue of Burma should  become the subject of UN Security Council deliberation.

 He said an international arms embargo, which could be applied by  the Security Council, would have a considerable effect on Burma.

 CO M M O N W EA LTH   PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  M ICAH

 . . . 1 2

 2 .

 "The Coalition believes that the international community must  explore all measures to place pressure on Burma,H Senator Hill  said.

 "The Coalition also believes that the Australian Government has  been slow in its reactions to Burma.

 "It was slow in stopping Australia's aid to Burma, it was sloppy  in implementing the arms embargo, and it has been hesitant in 

 regional and international forums.

 "The Australian Government has criticised private sector trade  with Burma, but has kept open the Austrade office in R a n g o o n .

 "The Federal Opposition believes that the Australian Government  needs to make a greater effort to raise regional and wider 

 international awareness of what is happening in Burma."

 (ends)

 Enquiries* Senator Hill or  Mark Batistich on (06) 277 3170

 BURMA: THE COALITION’S PERSPECTIVE

 AN  ADDRESS BY SENATOR ROBERT HILL, SHADOW MINISTER

 FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TO A CONFERENCE ON T H E  

 STATE, ORDER AND PROSPECTS FOR CHANGE IN  BURMA",

 GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY.

 DELIVERED BY KATHY SULLIVAN, LIBERAL MEMBER FOR

 MONCRIEFF

 BRISBANE

 3 DECEMBER 1992

 The Federal Opposition remains deeply concerned about the appalling human rights  situation in Burma. We have consistently protested the fact that the democratically  elected representatives of the Burmese people have not been allowed to assume  power. We have protested the persecution of these representatives and their  supporters for the peaceful expression of their views. We have protested the total  lack of civil rights in Burma. And we have protested the continuing abuses  conducted against Burma's ethnic minorities.

 There can be no doubt that the situation in Burma requires immediate attention.  On virtually every front there is an urgent need for reform: with respect to political  instability and human rights abuses, refugees, the consequences of disastrous  economic mismanagement, narcotics, and Burma's contribution to regional  instability.

 Any one of these areas would be a major problem in itself. Yet put together we see  in Burma one of the most sustained and systematic examples of repression anywhere  in the world. Despite some welcome measures of liberalisation by the ruling regime  in the past few months, overall improvements have been minimal.

 If we examine human rights first, the seriousness and extent of the abuses are  shocking. Amnesty International has released six substantial reports on Burma in  just over one year. The latest report (October 1992) is aptly entitled "No law at all".  It commences with the lines:

 "Human rights are grossly and persistently violated throughout (Burma). The  victims come from every section o f society, and every ethnic and religious  group!'.

 Amnesty has based its reports on thousands of testimonies and eyewitness accounts  of abuses. Similar reports have been issued in the last few months by Asia Watch  and the Australian Council of Churches. To my office, I am sent large volumes of  information detailing human rights abuses against many individuals and groups.  These human rights abuses take virtually every form th at one can imagine.

 Many of the abuses are connected with suppressing political dissent. The State Law  and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) came to power in 1988. In May 1990, 233  political parties contested the elections. Twenty seven of these parties had  candidates who won seats. Yet according to Amnesty, currently, only seven remain 

 legal political parties - all the rest have been outlawed.

 Many of the elected representatives are in detention, some have died in detention.  Aung San Suu Kyi - who so deservingly was awarded the 1991 Nobel peace prize -  has been in detention for over three years. Amnesty has documented 1500 named 

 political prisoners, which may only represent a small proportion of the total.

 There is no right to a fair trial. Conditions in prisons are appalling. There are  documented reports of torture and cruel and inhuman treatment.

 2

 The suppression of dissent makes it impossible for political parties to operate.  Universities and schools are closed arbitrarily and have been closed for most of the  time since 1988. Universities have recently been permitted to reopen, yet controls  over students and teachers remain extensive.

 Religious persecution is increasing. Burma's people are predominantly Buddhist, yet  the religious crackdown is mainly directed against Buddhist clergy. It was only on  Monday that we received reports that a senior Buddhist monk - U Zaw-Tika - died  in detention.

 There are also gross human rights violations against Burma's ethnic minorities.  Over 30% of Burma's population is comprised of minority ethnic and religious  groups. We are now receiving reports of rape, pillage and murder by the SLORC  armed forces in connection with virtually all the ethnic minorities. Villagers are  forced to become porters or even human minesweepers in the SLORC's attempts to  crush resistance. In connection with this, there are reports of executions and  disappearances, and the SLORC is conducting forced relocations of large numbers  of people in the ethnic minority parts of the countiy.

 This is only a very brief outline of the many pages of reports of human rights abuses  in Burma. But it serves to sketch a picture of a horrific and sustained abuse of  power.

 These actions have also resulted in a significant regional refugee problem. Earlier  this year we saw the exodus of the ethnic Muslim Rohingyas from persecution in  Burma, to become refugees in poverty-stricken Bangladesh. There are now  estimated to be 265 000 Rohingya refugees living in camps on the border.

 Despite negotiations between the Burma and Bangladesh governments, along with  the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), very few of these  refugees have returned. Burma has refused to allow UNHCR supervision of their  return. As a result, Bangladesh has a huge and unstable refugee problem, with  which it is ill-equipped to cope. Persecution of this Muslim minority is continuing  in Burma and refugees are still finding their way into the camps.

 Refugees are also present on the Chinese side of the Burmese border - a reported  30 000 people, primarily Kachin, have been there for the last five years. Earlier this  year 1500 refugees fled to India to escape heavy fighting, to join an estimated 35 000  already there. In Thailand there are another 70 000 Karen refugees. Within Burma  itself there are a large number of internally displaced people. There are estimated  to be 250 000 to 300 000 internally displaced Karens alone.

 This not only presents the countries concerned and the international community  with much human misery and suffering, but represents a significant source of  friction between Burma and its neighbours.

 Burma has been isolated for many years. The results of this isolation are largely  seen in Burma's poor economic performance. Burma has Least Developed Countiy

 3

 status with GDP per capita now at a very low US$230. Food supplies are short  despite fertile conditions in Burma being ideal for food crops. The cost of rice, for  instance, is reported to have doubled in the last year. Inflation is running at 60%  and Burma is unable to service its foreign debt. Yet Burma's abundant natural  resources - oil, gas, precious gems, timber and fisheries reserves - remain virtually  untapped.

 The parlous state of Burma's economy is reflected in the health of Burma's people.  Ten percent of children under the age of three suffer severe malnutrition. The  infant mortality rate is ten percent per annum.

 Yet in contrast to these statistics, Burma has still managed to spend a reported  US$600 million, and possibly more, on arms purchases in the last two years. The  majority of these arms have been acquired from China, but purchases are reported  from Poland and the former Yugoslavia as well.

 Regional concern is growing regarding the arms build up which includes attack  helicopters, fighter warplanes, naval patrol boats, heavy artillery, tanks and anti­ aircraft guns. These arms purchases are accompanied by a build up of the armed  forces to 300 000 troops.

 Burma occupies a strategic position between China and India, and also shares  borders with Thailand, Laos and Bangladesh. The recent refugee flows and Burma's  attempts to control its insurgents have resulted in minor clashes between its armed  forces and those of Thailand and Bangladesh. Burma has shown little respect for  the territorial integrity of its neighbours in its attempts to crush the ethnic  insurgencies. There remains considerable potential for clashes between Burma and  its neighbours which contributes to wider instability in the region.

 In addition, the Coalition is very concerned by the involvement of Burma in the  international narcotics trade. The United States Drug Enforcement Agency  considers Burma to be the world's largest heroin exporter. Burma is believed to  account for sixty percent of the world's supply, with the 1991 harvest reported to be  double that of three years previously. Burma is possibly the most important heroin  refining centre in South Blast Asia. And the number of heroin addicts within  Burma is rapidly increasing.

 There is speculation that some of the drug money is being used by the Burmese  regime to fund arms purchases. What is clear is that drug production on this scale  m ust require either active or passive cooperation by the authorities. There is,  therefore, an urgent need to bring Burma within international measures to combat  the drug trade. Yet if there is official sanction of these activities, then the task  ahead is impossible.

 It is obvious by this brief outline that there is need for urgent regional and  international action to pressure Burma to initiate reform.

 The Federal Opposition has repeatedly called on the SLORC to hand over power to

 4

 the elected representatives of the Burmese people. A democratically elected  government, together with the assistance of the international community which the  achievement of democracy would bring, could rapidly move to overcome Burma's  problems.

 There are a few hopeful signs. We note that the SLORC appears to be making some  progress towards convening a national convention, which is supposed to outline the  principles for a new constitution. The SLORC has announced th at this will be  convened by 10 January 1993 - which will be almost three years since democratic  elections were held. Yet most of the democratically elected representatives of 1990  will not participate in this process. Instead the SLORC has controlled the selection  of those who will be part of the convention.

 The process of drafting the constitution does not have any time limits. There are  also no guarantees of elections after a constitution has been agreed to. In addition,  the SLORC has declared that the new constitution must ensure the "participation  o f the armed forces in the leading role o f national politics o f Idle state in the future?.

 This process does not give us great confidence given th at political parties are  disbanded and so many elected representatives are in detention, outlawed or, in  some cases, dead.

 The SLORC has also released about 500 political prisoners since April. Yet many  more remain in detention. The SLORC has announced the lifting of some aspects  of martial law, cessation of the use of military tribunals in civilian trials, and the  lifting of the curfew. We welcome these moves but there is still more which needs  to be done. Earlier this year, the SLORC also announced a ceasefire in relation to  its war against the Karen insurgents. However, information suggests that attacks  are continuing.

 On the other side of the equation, we commend the Burmese opposition groups for  their dedication in publicising the situation in Burma and taking their case to the  international community. In this respect, we were pleased to note the Manerplaw  agreement between Burma's opposition groups, including groups representing the  ethnic minorities, to work together to achieve democracy and human rights.

 The Federal Opposition believes th at further measures must be taken to pressure  the SLORC towards democracy and the cessation of human rights abuses. This can  be achieved through international, regional and unilateral action.

 With respect to international measures, we supported the action of the United  Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) in February this year. By passing  a consensus resolution condemning the SLORC and its human rights abuses,  appointing a special rapporteur, and moving the debate into its public sessions, the  UNCHR signalled its increased attention to Burma. Together, these are amongst  the strongest measures the UNCHR can take with respect to any m atter which is  before it.

 5

 «

 The UNCHR resolution was considerably stronger than the 1991 General Assembly  resolution. The UNCHR called on the Government of Burma to speed up the  transition to democracy, respect human rights, remove restrictions on political  prisoners and political parties, and reopen the universities. To date, only the last  of these has been implemented by the Burmese authorities.

 The resolution also required the special rapporteur to report to the 1992 General  Assembly and then to the next session of the UNCHR in 1993 with respect to  progress on improving human rights, the transfer of power to democratically elected  representatives, and the drafting of a new constitution.

 In this respect, the first public UN report on Burma, compiled by the special  rapporteur Professor Yozo Yokota, was released last week. It made clear that there  is a great deal of evidence that the military government is conducting widespread  abuses of human rights. It was announced that Professor Yokota is to visit Burma  from 7-15 December in an attempt to meet with detained political leaders and assess  the human rights and refugee situation.

 The report is a precursor to the General Assembly resolution on Burma which is  expected to take place next week. It is understood that this will be stronger and  more comprehensive than the 1991 General Assembly resolution. It is expected to  draw attention for the first time to the widespread abuse of the ethnic minorities.

 However, as this is to be a consensus resolution, the strength of its 

 recommendations will be determined by the more reluctant of Burma's critics. The  Coalition believes that a strong resolution is needed in order to send a clear signal  to the SLORC. It needs to unequivocally condemn human rights abuses and place  pressure on the SLORC for an immediate move to democracy.

 The SLORC, in its defence at the UN, has pointed to its recent actions - such as  releasing political prisoners, allowing visits by Aung San Suu Kyi's family and moves  towards a national convention - which have resulted in a number of changes in  Burma.

 Despite these actions, the evidence is th a t comprehensive human rights abuses are  continuing. This means that stronger international measures need to be considered  by the world community. Such measures would only work if states in the Asia-  Pacific region give support.

 The Coalition believes that if the General Assembly and the UNCHR efforts are  unsuccessful by the time the Commission next meets in early 1993, the issue of  Burma should become the subject of UN Security Council deliberation. At present,  the Security Council is acting with respect to Somalia and the former Yugoslavia.  In both these instances, the chronic internal problems have necessitated such an  approach. The principle of non-interference in domestic affairs of states must be  questioned when considering such examples of human suffering and miseiy. From  this perspective, it would be valid for the Security Council to also focus on Burma.

 6

 4

 The Coalition believes that one action which would have considerable effect is an  international arms embargo. Such an embargo would need to be applied by the  Security Council. There is already an arms embargo on Burma by Australia, the  United States and the European Community.

 In order for this to be imposed by the Security Council and for it to work, China  would have to give its support. China is Burma's main supplier of weapons and  military training and the Coalition would urge China to cease this support. China  claims that its position on Burma is based on non-interference in Burma's internal  affairs. However, the sale of arms not only facilitates Burma's human rights abuses,  but it also poses a danger to regional stability which must be of concern to China.

 An international aid embargo on Burma could also be considered by the Security  Council. As part of the UN Security Council measures against Iraq for instance,  bilateral aid was stopped, and this may prove to be a useful precedent in considering  the most effective course of action against Burma.

 Economic sanctions have been suggested as a further step which could be taken  against Burma. Although the United Nations resolutions are becoming stronger,  they have a long way to go before embracing sanctions. However, in 1991, the  United States unilaterally imposed limited economic sanctions against Burma by not  renewing a bilateral textile agreement which affected 40% of Burma's exports to the  US.

 Sanctions would only be an effective form of pressure if Burma's main economic  partners participated: that is, China and the ASEAN states. Australia was  interested in canvassing support for economic sanctions but was dissuaded by  ASEAN.

 The ASEAN states have pursued a path of "constructive engagement' with the  SLORC which they believe will encourage reform. Whilst Indonesia, Malaysia and  Brunei protested at the SLORC's persecution of the Muslim Rohingyas, ASEAN has  been reluctant to take further action. Burma was one of the main issues raised by 

 dialogue partners at the ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference in July of this year.  Yet ASEIAN refused to discuss the suggestions of stronger action against Burma.  Indeed, ASEIAN has pointed to the recent concessions made by the SLORC. Because  of these improvements - however small - there is unlikely to be regional support for 

 sanctions at this stage. And for sanctions to have any effect they must have this  support.

 The Coalition believes that the international community must explore all measures  to place pressure on Burma. We would hope to see substantial improvements in  Burma's transition to democracy and the human rights situation by the next session  o f the UN Commission on Human Rights, which is early in 1993.

 The Coalition also believes th at the Australian Government has been slow in its  reactions to Burma. It was slow in stopping Australia’s aid to Burma, it was sloppy  in implementing the arms embargo, and it has been hesitant in regional and

 7

 %

 international forums.

 The Australian Government has criticised private sector trade with Burma, but has  kept open the AUSTRADE office in Rangoon. It seems amazing that to apply  political pressure the Government ceased facilitating trade with South Africa, but  yet has kept open the AUSTRADE office in Burma. Closing the AUSTRADE office 

 would be considered by the Coalition if the situation does not improve by early next  year.

 The Federal Opposition believes that the Australian Government needs to make a  greater effort to raise regional and wider international awareness of what is  happening in Burma. Although we recognise that for some countries of our Asia-  Pacific region, human rights are associated with the right to development, Burma  is showing no attempt at development. Instead it is ignoring its economic potential,  engaging in sustained and indiscriminate abuses of human rights, creating an 

 enormous refugee problem of significance for the region, and its arms buildup will  inevitably affect regional stability.

 Yet effort also needs to be made to convince the authorities in Burma of the  advantages of a democratic state. Burma is a nation rich in natural and human  resources which could be harnessed to make Burma an economically secure nation  with a sound standard of living. The problems of internal instability could be  overcome with adherence to internationally recognised standards of human rights.  A democratic Burma would be able to participate in our dynamic and increasingly 

 important Asia-Pacific region and gain for itself those advantages which result from  growth and development.

 The Federal Opposition will both continue to press for change in Burma and to take  steps to encourage such change. We believe that the people of Burma have suffered  for too long and it is time that peace, democracy and human rights became an  inalienable part of their lives.

 8

