---
title: "The prime minister must act on W.A boat people"
date: "1992-01-20"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214122867
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02009354%22
---

 η

 20 January 1992  7/92

 THE PRIME MINISTER MUST ACT ON W.A. BOAT PEOPLE

 The Prime Minister needs to make a clear, unequivocal statement  about the Government's position concerning the refugees found  last week in the Kimberley region. He must set clear priorities  for re-establishing control of Australia's national borders.

 He must make it plain that he will not adopt the same emotional,  but arbitrary and inconsistent, response which the former  Prime Minister applied to the claims of 20,000 Chinese students  for permanent residence.

 In particular, Mr Keating must address two key issues.

 First, he must address the adequacy of Australia's coastal  surveillance procedures and determine how such a large group of  people could enter Australia and remain undetected for 7-10 days.  This assessment should be initiated as a matter of urgency.

 The review needs to go beyond the inquiry which will be 

 undertaken by the Australian Customs Service.  It should be a  senior inter-departmental inquiry on which the Prime Minister  will report promptly to the Parliament.

 Second, the Prime Minister must specify the principles on which  the boat people will have their claims to stay in Australia  processed.

 The principles he must reaffirm are clear. All the boat people  should have access to long-established procedures for determining  refugee status (the "DORS procedures"). Their applications  should be processed fully, properly and as expeditiously as  possible on a case-by-case basis and in accordance with 

 internationally recognised criteria.

 If the claims for refugee status are validated, the persons  concerned should be given all the rights and responsibilities  which that status entails.

 But, if their claims are not accepted, the position should be  made very clear to them that they cannot stay. Such a decision  must be enforced, by compulsory repatriation if necessary.

 Unless the Prime Minister is prepared in the current 

 circumstances to make a clear, hardline statement of Australia's  interests along these lines, and unless he makes clear his  preparedness to enforce such a statement, his Government will be  inviting those offshore who are currently contemplating  unauthorised and irregular entry into Australia.

 To achieve prompt, fair and effective processing of these and  other refugee claims, the Prime Minister needs to implement the  following changes:

 .  staffing priorities need to be adjusted, with departmental  officers, freed up by the decline in migration 

 applications, being redeployed to the task of refugee  assessment. (There are currently 23,000 applications for  refugee status backlogged in the system and over 300 boat  people in detention.)

 .  to ensure that obviously unfounded claims are dealt with  immediately, applicants should first be required to obtain  leave (possibly from the Immigration Review Tribunal)  before further appeal against the decision of departmental  officers is allowed

 .  to ensure that costly, unnecessary and time-consuming 

 appeals are avoided, the Government should follow the lead  of the Coalition in opposing appeals to the courts beyond  Australia's highly regarded administrative procedures. The  only exception should be appeal to the High Court of 

 Australia for which leave would also be required.

 The Coalition is not opposed to granting refugee status to the  boat people recently discovered in Western Australia or to any  other person provided they fulfil the internationally recognised  requirements for such status. Australia's long and proud record 

 of providing genuine refugees with safe haven is one based on  compassion and consistency. Arbitrary or delayed decisions only  encourage inconsistency and unfairness.

 For information - 06/277 4022

