---
title: "Immigration, local government and ethnic affairs: initiatives for the 1990s"
date: "1992-08-18"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008612%22
---

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 50/92

 BUDGET MEDIA RELEASE 1

 IMMIGRATION, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS: INITIATIVES  FOR THE 1990S

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand and the Minister for Local Government,   Mr David Simmons, announced today a 1992-93 Budget of $665m  for the Portfolio. This is an increase of $307m over 1991-92,  most of which is to assist local government.

 "The Government's Budget initiatives will ensure that  Immigration continues to produce a net benefit for Australia".  Mr Hand said. Employment-related measures announced in the  Budget complemented decisions to streamline the 1992-93  Migration Program with its increased emphasis on skills and 

 English proficiency while retaining priority for family re­  union and humanitarian entry.

 Key elements of the Budget will ensure that:

 . the critical role of English in Settlement is given greater effect, through increased emphasis on English in  migration selection and additional resources for ESL  training in Australia;

 . settlement services for migrants are better targeted, including a focus on established migrant communities who  have made such a tremendous contribution to Australia's  development. "Savings from a reduced migration program  are to be used in part to increase resources for services  to new migrants and to remove backlogs of need caused by  past policies", the Minister said;

 . arrangements for on-shore asylum seekers that are both  fair and compassionate; and

 . the capacity and willingness of local governments to  assist with the economic recovery is encouraged,  particularly in regions most affected by high levels of  unemployment.

 /2

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 / 

 Media Release Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, A C T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 CORRIGENDUM

 Please note the following production error in the media kit:

 The number of CBS registered job seekers should read 38 000  rather than 48 000.

 This figure appears on Page 2 of Release No 1. Immigration,  Local Government and Ethnic Affairs: Initiatives for the  1990s and on Page 1 of Release No 3. Increased resources for  ESLv ,  tuition.

 2

 "The vital role of Local Government in assisting a sustained  economic recovery is recognised in this Budget," the Ministers  said. The allocation of $250m in 1992-93 and $100m in 1993-94  for locally managed capital works programs in regions of  higher than average unemployment, many of which have a high 

 concentration of Australians of non English speaking  backgrounds, will be of lasting benefit to these regions  whilst overcoming short-term impediments to growth and  development.

 "Migrants from non-English speaking backgrounds are  increasingly disadvantaged. In the context of economic  restructuring many older migrants who came her 20 or 30 years  ago to help build Australia's industries are now feeling the  effects of lack of English language and employment skills. I  am working to ensure that as far as possible this should not  happen again".

 "The initiatives in the English Language area are designed to  overcome the legacy of policies over the past 30 years and to  prevent a recurrence of these mistakes in the future", the  Minister said.

 Initiatives the Minister referred to include:

 . entitlements for newly arrived migrants with less than  functional English to obtain up to 510 hours of English  Language tuition;

 . an additional $309m over 4 years (allocated to DEBT) to  help an estimated 48,000 jobseekers overcome the English  language barrier that stops them from getting work; and

 . introduction of limited user charging for new migrants  other than preferential family and refugees for their  English Language tuition (with the revenue to be used to  increase English Language tuition places in the AMEP).

 "Better targeting of settlement resources will help Australia  retain the long-term benefits from immigration", Mr Hand said.  The Minister emphasised that immigration should neither add to  net levels of unemployment nor push new arrivals into  dependency on government support beyond what other residents  can expect. Changes to automatic access to standard income 

 support payments for some newly arrived migrants had to be  seen in this light.

 /3

 3

 Other examples of measures to better target settlement  resources include:

 .  the sale of under-utilised migrant centres and flats with  some of the savings being used to lease better temporary  accommodation for refugees and other needy arrivals and  to develop community-based settlement support services;

 . additional funding of $1.77m in 1992-93 ($lm on-going)  for community organisations to meet the specific needs of  ethnic communities;

 . increased funding for interpreter services for the Courts  and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal;

 .  a pilot telephone typewriter relay services will be  conducted during 1992-93 to assist in meeting the needs  of the speech and hearing impaired; and

 . a Migrant Access package which upgrades the Department of  Social Security's language and information services and  consultation mechanisms.

 CANBERRA 18 August 1992

 MEDIA INQUIRIES Lynne Adams 

 Minister's Office  (06) 277 7860

 David Page  DILGEA (06) 264 2061

