---
title: "Health promotion and disease prevention key to second round of practice grants"
date: "1992-06-19"
creators:
  - "Howe, Brian"
source: "Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178452
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3102704%22
---

  Brian Howe 

  RE LEA . . Deputy Prime Minister Mmrnter for Health, Housing and Community Services  BH133/92 19 June 1992 

  HEALTH PROMOTION AHD DISEASE PRBVBRTIOH  KEY TO SECOND ROUHD OF PRAC'l'ICE GRAHTS 

  Asthma and diabetes management, HIV counselling, and health care  for Latin American migrants are among 59 health promotion and  disease prevention services being funded under the second round of  the Federal Government's $12 million Demonstration Practice Grants  program. 

  The Federal Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services,  Brian Howe, today announced a total of $950,000 worth of grants,  which have been chosen from 853 applications involving some 3,000  GPs nationwide. 

  New projects include: 

  . an extended hours service for Latin American migrants in  Springvale, Victoria. A Spanish interpreter will be contracted  to help a GP provide a specific service in medical care, patient  education, counselling and illness prevention strategies; 

  . two health assessment clinics for elderly people in the farming  community of Three Springs in Western Australia. Health education  and promotion will be provided in areas such as noise-induced  deafness, asthma, hypercholesterolaemia and diabetes; 

  . an eight month project to provide free education, counselling and  monitoring services for asthmatics at Raymond Terrace in New  South Wales; 

  . a counselling service for HIV patients at Annandale in Sydney; 

  . a counselling service for young people in Tumut, New South Wales,  to address a high youth suicide rate, large number of adolescent  pregnancies and high youth unemployment; and 

  . health education lectures on diet, smoking, exercise, obesity and  hypertension for residents in the Nubeena district in Tasmania. 

  "We are intending to fund a total of 300 projects under the $12  million program, ranging in cost from less than $5,000 to over  $70,000," Mr Howe said. 

  . . Mi~is~er Assisting the Prime Minister for Social Justice  Mm1ster Assistmg the Prime Minister for Commonwealth-State Relations 

  J!f'l /t 

  -2-

  "To date, 96 projects have been funded worth a total of $1.7  million. I hope to announce further grants in the next few months." 

  Mr Howe said the Demonstration Practice Grants program was launched  in response to the need for GPs to provide a wider range of  services and work more closely with other local health services. 

  "'I.i:.;;:;se examples illustrate the diverse role that practice grants  can play in the area of health promotion and education," he said. 

  "Although general practice is the focus of primary health care,  many GPs are working under increasingly difficult conditions. 

  "We need GPs to exert a much stronger influence in the health care  system and this program will help them do that. 

  "The innovative concepts being proposed by our GP population are  generating a lot of interest among the medical and allied health  professions and rightly so. 

  "This program is providing opportunity and incentives for a real  team approach to health promotion and education purposes." 

  Applications for Demonstration Practice Grants are being assessed  by a panel comprising Dr Geoff Martin, representing the Royal  Australian College of General Practitioners, Dr Jill Gordon, an  independent GP, and Ms Gail Batman from the Department of Health,  Housing and Community Services. 

  For further information:  Ross Gardiner, Mr Howe's Office (06) 277 7680  Leigh Wallace, DHHCS (06) 289 4048 

  [A list of grant recipients and their projects is attached.] 

  GRANT RECIPIENTS AND THEIR PROJECTS 

  Dr William Walker  Dr Walker will use a grant of $45,103 to provide antenatal and  post-natal care for mothers and babies.  A full-time community midwife will be employed to work with local 

  GPs to provide antenatal education and post-natal care to mothers  and babies through home visits. 

  It is anticipated that the grant will help women to be discharged  earlier from local hospitals after child birth and antenatal care  will be delivered in a more targeted way than is currently  available. 

  Dr Joseph Gambin  2/14 Darling Street  BOURKE NSW 2840  Phone (068) 723 222 

  A grant of $28,727 will be used by Dr Gambin to establish a  register of patients in Bourke who have particular health problems  such as hypertension; asthma; diabetes; ischaemic heart disease;  STDs; Pap smears; pregnancy; and UT!s in children. 

  Two local GPs will pool their efforts to establish the register as  there are a large number of people in the high risk groups  identified above who would benefit from either group or one to one  counselling. 

  A practice nurse will be employed to research and compile data for  the register, provide an extension of the existing services, take  responsibility for one to one patient education in the clinic and  the home, arrange group education activities and liaise with other  programs or other health providers involved in service delivery for 

  the asthma and diabetes groups. 

  Dr Ronald Dobson  Rutherglen Medical Centre  161 High Street  RUTHERGLEN VIC 3685 

  With a grant of $5,250, Dr Dobson will purchase some equipment to  set up a new general practice in a rural community which is  currently under serviced. 

  The practice will provide a high quality medical service for the  area, support for local geriatric services, liaise with local  groups to ascertain local health needs, and increase the range of  services by attracting allied health workers. 

  Dr Sylvia Bowden  135 Spensley Street  CLIFTON HILL VIC 3068  Phone (03) 387 6711 

  -2-

  Dr Bowden will use a grant of $21,000 for a six month project to  instigate a shared diabetes care program between Royal Melbourne  Hospital and the Brunswick Community Health Centre. 

  Shared care has been shown to be effective overseas, but is still  to gain widespread use in Australia. The regime has the potential  to deliver more effective patient care with reduced hospital costs.  Dr J. Michael Burgess  Goulburn Medical Clinic  McKell Place 

  GOULBURN NSW 2580  Phone (048) 21 8222 

  With a grant of $3,500 Dr Burgess will be able to equip a local 

  libary service with appropriate health education materials aimed to  assist patients with the self-management of medical conditions,  illness, and health promotion.  Dr Burgess will be able to provide patients and others with access  to health education materials including audio and video tapes.  Dr Chris Pearce 

  54 Downey Street  ALEXANDRA VIC 3714  Phone (057) 72 1444 

  With a grant of $22,026 Dr Pearce will establish a weekly dietitian  service in the rural community of Alexandra. 

  Dietitian services would be available free of charge, providing a  weekly service to the Shire through the Downey Street Clinic. The  dietitian will provide individual patient consultations, community  education, the co-ordination and creation of patient information 

  available through the clinic, and work in conjunction with the  practice for diabetes education.  Dr Christopher Kelly  15 Cadell Street  GOOLWA SA 5214  Phone (085) 552404 

  Dr Kelly will use a grant of $21,701 to encourage links with allied  health professionals (AHPs) in nearby Fleurieu. This will lead to  better patient management, allow better communication between the  practice and AHPs, and will utilise the services of a health  educator to provide assistance and counselling for diabetics. 

  -3-

  Presently, Dr Kelly's practice is in Goolwa - a small rural town  with no hospital. The nearby Southern Fleurieu Health Service  (SFHS) provides access to AHPs for the region, and therefore the  participation by practice GPs in regular case meetings would 

  facilitate better patient management.  The practice GPs will participate in the regular case meetings of  the SFHS, engage a sessional diabetes educator to provide advice  and counselling for diabetics, and conduct better health education  lectures.  Dr Andrew Mackie 

  85 Annandale Street  ANNANDALE NSW 2038  Phone (02) 569 5080 

  Dr Mackie will use a grant of $18,687 to provide a counselling  service to patients on HIV issues. 

  The service will assist HIV infected patients and those who are at  risk of HIV infection or transmission.  A counsellor will be employed to provide services free of charge to  cardholders. This will help resolve HIV/AIDS related psychological 

  problems in individual patients, and will improve pre and post HIV  test counselling.  Dr Adrian Jameson  53 Railway Avenue  KELMSCOTT WA 6111  Phone (09) 390 6288 

  A grant of $10,991 will help Dr Jameson provide colposcopy services  for follow up of abnormal pap smears for patients ref erred from  local general practices. The clinic will be located in the Health  Care Centre at Kelmscott, and will facilitate the early diagnosis 

  and hence treatment of cervical cancer. 

  Colposcopy services will be provided because many patients are  disadvantaged, hence poor compliance with recalls because they  cannot attend a return visit at a city specialist. By purchasing  the appropriate colposcopy equipment, an appropriately trained  doctor will perform colposcopes on patients whose pap smear showed 

  abnormalities and who have been referred to the colposcopist at the  Health Care Centre from local practices. 

  The grant will increase the quality and scope of practice's  preventative women's health medicine. 

  Dr Robert Scragg  297 Blaxcell Street  GRANVILLE NSW 2142  Phone (02) 682 1555 

  -4-

  Dr Scragg will use a grant of $28,802 to provide a physiotherapy  service to elderly, disadvantaged, and poor mobility patients. 

  The engagement of a physiotherapist will help treat patients who  are unable to travel large distances, as an alternative to  medication or surgery. The service will also enable the earlier  discharge of patients from hospital who need physiotherapy, and  provide this service to them as an outpatient. 

  Dr Hartin Robb  127 Chandler Road  NOBLE PARK VIC 3174  Phone (03) 791 1122 

  With a grant of $17,587 Dr Martin Robb will provide an extended  health service to ethnic and disadvantaged residents in the  district of Noble Park.  Due to the large numbers Inda-Chinese refugees in the  Springvale/Noble Park area, Dr Robb's practice will employ a  Vietnamese-speaking practice nurse to improve communication between  patients and GPs. It is also hoped that social integration of  ethnic groups will be encouraged through better insight into, and  communication about, problems confronting them. 

  Dr Stephen Ahern  With a grant of $9,824 a team of medical workers Dr Ahern will run  a weight reduction program for obese patients referred from the  health centre doctors. 

  The program will facilitate weight reduction and therefore reduce  the incidence of obesity related diseases, medical costs, and  dependence upon medication and utilisation of medical services. 

  The health centre will employ a dietitian, counsellor, and GP to  work as a team to provide dietary advice and monitor weight loss,  drug use, and other health status indicators of health centre  patients.  Dr Graeme Findlay  Maly Street 

  THREE SPRINGS WA 6519  Phone (099) 541 013 

  Dr Findlay plans to establish two health assessment clinics with a  grant of $26,123. Both centres will cater for rural people with  one clinic for males and one for females aged 50-70 years. 

  -5-

  Dr Findlay aims to identify people suffering from  hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, asthma, and noise induced deafness,  and also to enable the medical assessment of the elderly to be  undertaken in a safe, friendly, and non-threatening environment. 

  The practice will use the grant to employ a part-time practice  nurse. 

  Dr Stephen Mendick  Wynyard Street  TUMUT NSW 2720  Phone (069) 471 466 

  Dr Mendick will use a grant of $24,280 to provide a counselling  service for youth in the Tumut area that will involve local GPs and  youth. 

  The service is necessary because of the region's high youth suicide  rate, the large number of adolescent pregnancies, high youth  unemployment, and also because of the disadvantaged Aboriginal  youth population. 

  Dr Mendick will engage a counsellor with proven youth counselling  skills, and this person will work in conjunction with seven GPs in  the area of adolescent counselling.  Dr Sayeed. Khan 

  192 Heathcote Road  HAMMONDVILLE NSW 2170  Phone (02) 825 2222 

  Dr Sayeed Khan plans to use a grant of $21,366 to engage a practice  nurse who will provide improved patient education and counselling  regarding disease management. 

  Dr Khan will target diseases such as diabetes, asthma,  hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia. The grant will also allow  extended participation in a shared ante-natal program with  Liverpool Hospital, and assist with testing and minor medical  procedures. 

  Dr Peter Hartin  Dr Peter Martin will use a grant of $26,694 to enhance the  continuity of care for his patients by providing a greater range of  group and personal health promotion and disease prevention  services. 

  The practice is in a remote rural area with a large number of  retirees and unemployed. 

  -6-

  Due to the lack of allied health services in the area, a community  nurse will be employed to assess the needs of the chronically ill,  and to liaise with local services. In addition, the nurse will run  health promotion clinics. Allied health professionals will also be  engaged to provide a greater range of services at no cost to  cardholders. 

  Dr Hilton Hart  1244 North East Road  ST AGNES SA 5097  Phone (08) 264 3333 

  With a grant of $24,082 Dr Milton Hart plans to establish a  diabetic clinic in a general practice setting to improve the  management of diabetes, and hence the quality of patient care. 

  The clinic will offer education for diabetic patients, develop  protocols and management strategies for diabetic management, and  improve the knowledge and skills of general practitioners and  allied health professionals involved in diabetic maintenance.  Dr Hart's practice has approximately 300 diabetic patients, all of  whom would benefit from education regarding their condition, its 

  treatment, and the possible complications which can occur.  Therefore the clinic will engage a practice nurse, nurse educator,  dietitian, and podiatrist to work with the practice GPs.  Dr Sharon Grosskopf  Dr Sharon Grosskopf will use a grant of $10,972 to provide a  dietitian service for financially disadvantaged clients.  The dietitian will offer personalised advice to promote improved  health and prevent the onset of potential problems. This will be  done through the provision of a subsidy for cardholders attending,  because clients cannot usually afford to avail themselves of such a  service. 

  Dr Andrew Karamesinis  118 Mt Eliza Way  MT ELIZA VIC 3930 

  A grant of $6,615 will help Dr Karamesinis provide appropriate  counselling to patients who are experiencing stress related  disorders. 

  Dr Karamesinis will make the four-session courses available to  those patients within the practice who are experiencing stress and  stress related disorders. This will reduce patient reliance on  prescription drugs.  A counselling psychologist will be employed to provide six courses 

  in stress management and relaxation, for groups of up to ten  patients each course. 

  Dr Hany Hanna  268 Guildford Road  GUILDFORD NSW 2161  Phone (02) 681 5814 

  -7-

  A grant of $25,137 will allow Dr Hany Hanna to provide a more  comprehensive and personal health care service, targeted primarily  at Lebanese women.  An Arabic-speaking practice nurse will be engaged on a part-time 

  basis to conduct health education sessions, and assist with visits  to homes of Lebanese female patients. Dr Hanna also hopes that the  employment of a female nurse will create more opportunity for  conducting further home and nursing home visits, because cultural  barriers prevent many needed visits at present.  Dr Andrew Ramsay  512 Barry Road  COOLAROO VIC 3048  Phone (03) 347 7826 

  Dr Andrew Ramsay will provide a home visiting nurse service to  post-operative, post-hospital, and routine wound patients with a  grant of $24,960. The grant will help to co-ordinate dietary care,  including the provision of a diabetic clinic. It will also help  provide support for drug dependent patients, and will assist in  making visits to families with high GP usage. 

  A nurse will be employed on a part-time basis, helping to improve  patient control with chronic illnesses such as diabetes, lipid, and  asthma. 

  Dr Kaye Birks  Moe Medical Centre  5-7 Lloyd Street  MOE VIC 3825 

  Phone (051) 273 333 

  A grant of $3,168 will allow Dr Kaye Birks to cater for the health  needs of women in the Latrobe Valley. Dr Birks will concentrate on  preventive health measures in the areas of cervical and breast  cancer, hypertension, and obesity. 

  A practice nurse will be employed on a part-time basis to  participate in a women's health clinic. The clinic will be  established due to a large proportion of socially and economically  disadvantaged women in the area who are currently unable to access 

  such a service. 

  Dr Peter Baquie  97 Station Road  FOSTER VIC 3960  Phone (056) 822 088 

  -8-

  Dr Peter Baquie will provide patient access to psychological  counselling in the areas of marriage guidance, stress management,  and substance abuse, following his receipt of a grant for $6,988. 

  At present, isolation and financial constraints preclude the  availability of counselling to help overcome these problems.  Baquie will use the grant to engage a sessional psychologist  conduct one three-hour clinic per week for nine months. 

  ready  Dr  to 

  Counselling will be conducted primarily on a one-to-one basis for  cardholders, and group sessions will be held according to demand. 

  Dr Andrew Clarke  Main Road  EXETER TAS 7275  Phone (003) 944 247 

  With a grant of $12,764 Dr Andrew Clarke plans to make health  services more accessible to patients in his remote locality of  Exeter. 

  Dr Clarke's patients do not have ready access to adequate health  services at present. By engaging a part-time nurse, the doctor  plans to provide an extended diagnostic service to rural patients  with cardiovascular disease. He also intends to provide an 

  extended ante-natal service, educational lectures, and minor  testing within his clinic.  Dr Maurice Kohn  95 Droop Street  FOOTSCRAY VIC 3011  Phone (03) 687 6144 

  A grant of $18,472 will allow Dr Maurice Kohn to provide a  physiotherapy service to disadvantaged patients in need of  treatment. 

  These patients currently have limited access to such services  locally. A physiotherapist will be engaged to conduct four  sessions per week for six months. 

  Dr Brian .Morton  130 Mowbray Street  WILLOUGHBY NSW 2068  Phone (02) 958 8970 

  -9-

  A grant of $7,230 will allow Dr Brian Morton to create a detailed  health promotion and prevention program for practice patients,  specifically targeting the vaccination of children, females aged  40-70, and ethnic males. 

  Dr Morton will use the grant to monitor data on patients  accurately, and to facilitate a recall system. Targeted females  are in the high incidence age group for breast and cervical cancer,  while males are in the cardiovascular risk category. 

  A register of comprehensive medical history will be developed,  along with a full physical health review and the establishment of  an accurate patient recall system. 

  Dr Timothy Rose  50 Macarthy Road  MARSDEN QLD 4132  Phone (07) 200 6055 

  Dr Timothy Rose has received a grant of $22,040 to improve patient  health status by providing clients with the knowledge and skills  necessary to make lasting lifestyle changes. 

  Dr Rose will look specifically at weight loss, smoking cessation,  and better nutrition, aiming at raising awareness of the role of  lifestyle modification. A large proportion of the patients  attending the practice are socially and economically disadvantaged, 

  illustrating the need for targeted health counselling in the  Marsden district. 

  A health educator with knowledge and skills in the relevant areas  will be engaged on a sessional basis.  Dr Michael Berger  12 Leicester Street  CHESTER HILL NSW 2162  Phone (02) 644 4387 

  A grant of $2,654 will allow Dr Michael Berger to conduct health  promotion and education seminars on specific topics of interest and  need. 

  Dr Berger aims to better educate patients in preventive health  measures and in dealing with established problems, believing that  the seminars will help patients to act more positively. 

  The seminars will take place one night per month, and requirements  of the local community and patients within the practice will be  assessed in terms of topics to be covered. 

  Dr William Holley  Dowling Street  DUNGOG NSW 2420  Phone (049) 921 002 

  -10-

  A grant of $10,420 will be used to educate local GPs, hospital  staff, and community health workers in the early detection and  prevention of malignant skin diseases. 

  Dr William Holley believes the grant will assist GPs and health  workers to acquire the skills necessary to accurately diagnose and  treat skin cancers and lesions.  A free community clinic will be established at Dungog and District 

  Hospital, targeting "at risk" community members. It will operate  as a teaching clinic staffed by a teaching GP, a clinic nurse, a  secretary, and a rostered GP.  Dr Peter Davis  Medical Centre  Canada Street  LAKE CARGELLIGO NSW 2672 

  Phone (068) 981 003 

  Dr Peter Davis will receive a grant of $6,406 to establish a  database of all diabetes mellitus patients in the Lake Cargelligo  and Murrin Bridge area. 

  At present, there is no pre-exisitng database or co-ordinated  preventive health care of diabetics in the area. The establishment  of such information is considered important because 25 per cent of  the local population is Aboriginal, and the incidence of diabetes  among Aboriginal people has been well-documented. 

  Research and data collection will be undertaken at no extra cost to  the patients, either as part of a routine consultation or at one of  10 sessions dedicated to that purpose. 

  Dr Cornelius De Neef  118 Nicholson Street  Orbost VIC 3888  Phone (051) 541015 

  A grant of $25,000 will be used by the Orbost Medical Group to  improve the surgical skills of one of its general practitioners. 

  Many of the surgical procedures at Orbost District Hospital are  performed by the senior GP who will be retiring in two or three  years. The junior doctor will be able to take over this role 

  after undertaking additional surgical training. 

  -11-

  Under the project, Dr De Neef will complete a six month surgical  registrar training position at Gippsland Base Hospital in Sale.  The position will be funded by a hospital contribution and  subsidised by the grant. 

  Dr Stephen McKelvie  A $10,000 grant will help Dr McKelvie provide a more appropriate  form of medical care for practice patients over 70 years of age. 

  The practice caters to a population which has a high proportion  of elderly people. It wants to encourage enhanced patient  well-being among this group and reduce levels of morbidity by 

  providing domiciliary health care and preventive care monitoring. 

  A part-time domiciliary nurse will be employed over the term of  the grant to develop an appropriate monitoring and recall system  for patients over 70 and tailor care to their particular needs.  Dr Alison Creaqh 

  697 Beaufort Street  Mt Lawley WA 6050 

  Phone (09) 272 2455 

  Dr Creagh wants to establish communication, support and education  groups for women, and their partners, who are soon to have or  just had a child, for couples who have experienced the death of a  foetus or newborn, and for couples with problems of infertility. 

  Many people are unprepared for the changes that come with  parenthood and there is limited counselling available to those  who have experienced pregnancy loss. Similarly, access to  infertility counselling and support is also limited.  Dr Creagh will use a grant of $14,262, over 27 weeks, to employ a 

  nurse with counselling skills and midwifery experience for 15  hours a week. The nurse will run therapeutic and support groups,  provide individual counselling and home support, develop a  catalogue of relevant resources and work with GPs. 

  Dr Gavin Le Sueur  21-23 Maurice Avenue  Mallacoota VIC 3892  Phone (051) 580 777 

  Dr Le Sueur will use a grant of $11,272 to provide 24 hour 

  medical services and facilities to the Mallacoota Inlet region  via the water. 

  Patients living in isolated rural environments have a high demand  for expensive emergency medical services. The population in this  region has a high proportion of elderly and handicapped and many  of them have to be evacuated by air which is expensive. 

  -12-

  Dr Le Sueur will lease a power boat with stretcher facilities and  all weather performance to provide fast, cheaper access to his  patients in this region.  Dr David Bradford 

  115 Elgin Street  Carlton VIC 3050  Phone (03) 347 9422 

  Dr Bradford's practice has a high proportion of HIV patients and  the paramedical services they need require more time than a  standard medical consultation can provide. 

  Dr Bradford will use a grant of $25,174 to provide a  comprehensive range of paramedical services to HIV/AIDS patients.  This will include advice, counselling, disease monitoring,  promotion of better compliance, emotional support and education  on relevant subjects. 

  A nurse/counsellor will be employed for six months to complement  medical services provided by the clinic. He or she will provide  paramedical services and conduct home and hospital visits. 

  Dr Ian Cram  Corarnba Medical Centre  Lot 1, Gale Street  Corarnba NSW 2450 

  Phone (066) 54 4241 

  Over the six months of his project, Dr Cram will spend $3,247 on  enhancing local provision of eye care for a range of conditions  including emergency treatment. 

  Dr Cram, whose practice is in a rural area, wants to be able to 

  offer improved diagnosis, initial care and referrals. He wants  to improve links with other specialists to make the shared care  of patients more efficient. 

  Dr Cram will attend an Ophthalmic Basic Science Course at the  University of Sydney during June this year. He will undertake  fortnightly observation sessions with practising opthalmologists,  optometrists and allied health professionals. A database of 

  local health care providers involved in eye care will also be  developed. 

  Dr Ian Walker  88 Port Stephens Street  Raymond Terrace NSW 2324  Phone (049) 873 211 

  -13-

  A sum of $33,970 has been granted to Dr Walker to provide a free  education, counselling, monitoring and emergency contact service  for asthmatics.  A study carried out the University of Newcastle verified that 

  some asthmatics are using over-the-counter aerosols for  self-medication without referring to a GP. Dr Walker wants to  encourage these people to establish a relationship with a GP and  undertake informed self-monitoring. 

  Over the eight months of his project, asthmatics purchasing  over-the-counter aerosol brochodilators will be introduced by a  social worker to a new service which includes:  assignment to a medical support person 

  24 hour availability of telephone advice  written instructions on correct drug usage  spirometry and asthma status assessment  personal or group sessions, conducted out of hours by GPs, 

  to explain an asthma management plan, provide  medication/nebuliser, peak flow metre and diary to monitor  condition and explain how best to use these  follow up assessments. 

  Dr Walker will provide medical backup to the students and social  worker. He will also liaise extensively with local pharmacists  and GPs to brief them on the project. 

  Dr Alison Vickers  3/26 Ewos Parade  Cronulla NSW 2230  Phone (02) 523 5446 

  Dr Vickers will spend $16,126 over six months to provide group  health promotion programs, individual counselling and group  education programs for patients and people referred from local  schools, community centres and baby health centres. Single  mothers and unemployed people, in particular, will be targeted. 

  Dr Con Costa  859 New Canterbury Road  Hurlstone Park NSW 2193  Phone (02) 558 0218 

  Dr Costa wants to reduce the time devoted to fee-for-service  clinical and consultative time so that he can liaise with  community services, hospital outpatient preventative services and  specialist clinics. He also wants to undertake continuing  education and formalise patient statistics for monitoring  referrals, recall and screening. 

  -14-

  GPs have very little time for liaising with other health care  providers or to monitor outcomes of treatment and follow up  patients who have been referred to other services. Dr Costa also  has a high proportion of patients who come from a non-English 

  speaking background. 

  Dr Costa will use a grant of $19,778 over 26 weeks to liaise with  providers of community health services, specialist clinics and  child health centres. He will also employ a practice nurse  part-time to co-ordinate patient data on referrals and recalls,  provide health promotion and drug information and screen  patients' weight and blood pressure.  Dr Peter Macisaac  Dr Macisaac will use a grant of $13,815 to improve the management  and treatment of chronic disease in his practice. In particular  he will: 

  establish clinics for asthma and chronic lung disease  patients and promote and help these patients in self care  develop and apply appropriate management protocols for  these patients and facilitate the involvement of other  health professionals with GPs  establish protocols for setting up other chronic disease  clinics in the general practice environment (such as  diabetes)  establish the feasibility of employing a practice nurse.  Inadequate management of asthma leads to unnecessary hospital  admissions and, therefore, higher health care costs. As well,  there are no formal links between GPs and other community health  care workers and no register to follow up patients with chronic  disease. Dr Macisaac also believes that standard consultations  do not allow adequate time to cover all aspects of these  diseases. 

  Over the six months of this project Dr Macisaac will employ a  practice based community nurse for three sessions a week to set  up and manage the clinics. A disease register will be  established, literature reviewed, mangement protocols development 

  and a clinic operating system put into place. 

  Dr Peter Schattner  212 Murrembeena Road  Murrembeena VIC 3163  Phone (03) 569 5363 

  Dr Schattner will spend $7,603 over six months to provide a  weekly class for patients on subjects such as hypertension,  hyperlipidaemia, diabetes and chronic diseases such as asthma. 

  -15-

  Dr Schattner wants to help his patients i~crease their awareness  of the need for regular assessment of their condition and the  importance of surveillance for allied conditions. 

  Two hour classes will be held for six to eight people during  which a practice nurse will help demonstrate practical procedures  such as blood glucose monitoring, peak flow monitoring etc.  Discussion at these classes will be informal. 

  Dr Sue Crockett  154 Sackville Street  Collingwood VIC 3066  Phone (03) 419 6155 

  A sum of $8,921 has been granted to Dr Crockett to pilot a  diabetes shared care program. 

  Dr Crockett wants to trial a more patient oriented approach to  diabetes management, using nurse practitioners to provide most of  the education necessary for successful management. She also  wants to improve networking between treating practitioners. 

  As part of her six month project, Dr Crockett will develop the  role of the nurse practitioner, review other shared care  programs, and develop a practitioner network, protocols and  patient treatment cards. Dr Crockett will also liaise with the  Diabetes Foundation, health educators and ethnic health workers  to produce educational material.  Dr Robert Brownfield  Sebastopol Community Health Centre 

  107 Humf fray Street  Ballarat VIC 3350  Phone (053) 357 801 

  Dr Brownfield will use a grant of $35,145 to address the needs of  homeless and unemployed young people in the Ballarat area and  help them use mainstream general practices. Dr Brownfield will  also facilitate an increased knowledge of their health needs and  problems among GPs. 

  Over the 18 months of his project, Dr Brownfield will operate  dedicated GP clinics for homeless and unemployed youth for two  three-hour sessions each week at the Sebastopol Community Health  Centre Annexe satellite. Local GPs will be rostered to provide 

  services at the clinics and paid on a sessional basis.  Dr Moira .KcCaul  Elizabeth Women's Community Health Centre  Elizabeth Way  Elizabeth SA 5112  Phone (003) 252 3711 

  -16-

  Dr Mccaul has received a grant of $9,911 to enhance the quality  of care to women in the Elizabeth, Munno Park and Gawler area  through the development of an information kit on women's social  health resources in the area. 

  Dr Mccaul practices in a low socio-economic region with few  facilities and low GP:population ratio. Hospital admission rates  show that the health needs of women in the region are  particularly high.  Over the six months of her project, Dr Mccaul will employ a  community health worker to help develop the information kit and  distribute it to community health staff and GPs thoughout the  region. 

  Dr T Haggett  Martin Street  Raventhorpe WA  Phone (098) 381 

  6346  088 

  Dr Haggett will spend $25,950 on providing accommodation and  equipment for a visiting GP and allied health workers undertaking  surgery or clinics in Hopetoun. 

  These clinics are currently conducted in the local town hall.  There are no storage facilities so all drugs and equipment have  to carried around by car; there is no privacy and no hot running  water. 

  Dr Haggett's project involves equipping and fitting out a surgery  and consulting rooms in a new complex under construction in  Hopetoun. 

  Dr Bruce Menzies  145 Faulkner Street  Armidale NSW 2350  Phone (067) 722 355 

  Concerned about the low rate of immunisation in the local  community, Dr Menzies has devised a means of redressing this. He  will use a grant of $25,896 to establish a register of babies for  immunisation and follow up. 

  Dr Menzies will employ a project officer to establish a database.  Parents in the Armidale area will be encouraged to bring their  children to the clinic for immunisation. A management committee  will be set up within a Department of General Practice. This  committee will comprise local GPs, paediatricians, allied health  workers, hospital medical staff and staff from the University of  Armidale's Department of Nursing. 

  Dr Peter Heese  Middle Park Clinic  41 Armstrong Street  Middle Park VIC 3206 

  Phone (03) 699 4626 

  -17-

  Dr Meese will use a grant of $5,019 to provide a more extensive  health care service for HIV infected patients. 

  Middle Park Clinic has a significant number of HIV positive  patients, from the newly diagnosed to those with terminal  disease. Dr Meese will employ a social worker and dietitian for  six months to spend four hours each week in the clinic,  alternating weekly between social worker and dietitian.  Dr Marie Dandanis 

  118 Mt Eliza Way  Mt Eliza VIC 3930 

  Phone (03) 787 8033 

  Dr Dandanis will spend $5,449 over six months to run a series of  seminars. These will cover issues such as first aid, stopping  smoking, diabetes and asthma management, women's issues,  paediatric matters, stress management and nutrition.  At present services of this nature do not exist in the local 

  community. Dr Dandanis will run series of four topics presented  at six weekly intervals, each seminar lasting two hours.  Each seminar, which will be promoted well in advance, will be  held twice and any interested patient may attend. Patients with  specific disease or risk factor will be invited to attend  seminars of relevant topics. 

  Dr John Watermeyer  54 Avalon Parade  Avalon Beach NSW 2107  Phone (02) 918 3586 

  A grant of $3,850 is going to help Dr Watermeyer undertake the  preliminary work needed to consolidate a number of Avalon GPs  into one building and increase the range of services they  provide. 

  By sharing well equipped procedure and operating rooms, along  with a common room for meetings and educational activities, the  doctors will be able to increase their services for patients.  A practice manager experienced in this sort of arrangement, will 

  be employed to examine its feasibility in Avalon, co-ordinate  costings, research the range and practicalities of providing  various services and obtain agreement from all professionals  involved in the move. 

  Dr Bruce Wallace-Ingram  10 St James Avenue  Springvale VIC 3171  Phone (03) 547 7245 

  -18-

  With a grant of $8,800 Dr Wallace-Ingram will establish an  extended hours service on Sundays for Spanish patients, providing  general medical care, minor accident and emergency care, patient  education, counselling and preventive care. 

  Dr Wallace-Ingram will employ a Spanish intepreter to provide a  specific service catering to a large group of Latin American  migrants (including refugees) in the area. This group is poorly  catered for at present and many have significant health needs. 

  Dr Alice MacLennan  Dr MacLennan will use a grant of $40,290 to assess the  practicality of video counselling in surgery in general practice,  its impact on quality of service and patients' acceptance of  videos and their educational value. 

  Dr MacLennan wants to improve the extent and detail of health  education for patients to meet consumer demand without  lengthening consultation time. She also wants to increase GPs'  use of the good quality health education resources available. 

  During the 12 months of the project, Dr MacLennan will provide  video cassette recorders and a series of 12 health videos to 10  general practices. Videos will be shown to patients as an  adjunct to personal counselling. A project officer will be  employed, part time, to co-ordinate the project, distribute  equipment and compile study data. 

  Dr Jennifer Jobst  Southport Community Health Centre  7 Perrins Street  South Melbourne VIC 3205  Phone (03) 690 9144 

  Dr Jobst practices in a area with a high number of migrant women  who have a variety of problems from illiteracy in their native  language to unemployment. Dr Jobst will use a grant of $26,890  to provide a culturally relevant service for these women.  This service will not only address the health needs of the women,  but will also examine barriers which make it difficult for them  to access existing services. Dr Jobst will also establish a peer 

  support system. 

  -19-

  Local women from non-English speaking backgrounds will be  approached through their community groups. The GP will work with  interpreters and centres such as the Multicultural Department of  the Mercy Hospital to advise these women of their rights to  medical services and the ways in which they can access them.  Other GPs will be briefed on ways in which they can make their 

  services more accessible for this group of women.  Dr Russell Gibbs  Medical Director  YMCA, Hobart 

  Dr Gibbs will use a grant of $22,363 to provided enhanced  continuity of care for patients with established cardio-vascular  disease. 

  Dr Gibbs wants to help this client group establish and maintain  appropriate lifestyles after illness and provide support when  needed. He will set up a cardiac rehabilitation service through  a series of YMCA co-ordinated lectures on exercise and health,  targeted to patients with cardio-vascular disease; an exercise  program involving nurse educators and instructors; and access to  social work and vocational rehabilitation services.  Dr Marjorie Cross 

  42 Ellendon Street  Bundendore NSW 2621  Phone (06) 238 1417 

  Over a 12 month period, Dr Cross will spend $10,594 to extend the  existing physiotherapist service by one session per week to allow  free physiotherapy for pensioners and card holders.  Dr Cross' practice is in a rural area, 26 kilometres from the  nearest hospital which limits pensioners' and card holders'  access to physiotherapy services. 

  Dr Stephen Ireland  Medical Centre, Tasman Nursing Horne  Nubeena TAS 7184  Phone (002) 502 202  Dr Ireland will use a grant of $7,317 to enhance local health  care services in three ways: 

  he will employ a locurn every three weeks to extend  continuity of care over the weekend.  practice receptionists will attend RACGP courses, in  Hobart, on preventive medicine to broaden their roles in  the practice 

  -20-

  a series of public health education lectures will be held  to educate the local, rural population about preventive  health care. Six lectures will be held on a monthly basis  on topics such as cholesterol and healthy eating, smoking  and how to give it up, the benefit of exercise, risk 

  factors in a rural population, and prevention of obesity  and hypertension. 

  Dr Kevin HcEntee  16 Crouch Street  Mt Gambier SA 5290 

  Phone (087) 231155 

  Dr McEntee will use a grant of $6,298 to extend the hours of two  part-time registered nurses so that they can give advice to  patients on minor health matters.  Dr McEntee wants to maximise the clinical efficiency of the  practice by reducing administrative tasks during consulting  hours. During the GP's absence from the practice, the RNs will  prvide advice to patients, ensure that pathology/x-ray and  patient surveillance records are updated in the medical files and 

  administrative duties are completed outside consulting times.  This will allow the nurses to be wholly available for clinical  duties.  Dr Andrew Ba.tty 

  867 Centre Road  East Bentleigh VIc 3165  Phone (03) 579 2077 

  Dr Batty wants to improve relations between the GPs and the local  community centre to improve overall quality of health care in the  area. 

  With a grant of $10,719 he will attend the East Bentleigh  community health centre for one session per week to provide the  following services: 

  attendance at weekly case conferences and staff meetings at  the health centre  educational talks to self help groups  teaching medical students as part of their community  medicine attachments  co-ordinate meetings of local GPs and the community health  centre  explore possiblities for future longer term co-ordinated 

  local health care activities. 

  Dr Bruce Steley  409 Great North Road  Abbotsford VIC 3067  Phone (03) 713 7988 

  -21-

  Dr Bruce Steley will use a grant of $14,208 to employ a practice  based community nurse to undertake community assessment and care  of elderly, disabled and housebound patients. 

  The nurse will perform some basic medical procedures, monitor  acutely ill patients, provide health education and promotion  services to the chronically ill and, in liaison with practice  doctors, promote preventive health in a general practice setting. 

  Dr Staley's aim is to improve the quality and availability of  medical care and health education and streamline care for these  particular patients.  Dr John Entwistle  Dr John Entwistle has received a grant of $26,190 to employ a  practice nurse to help him with tasks such as taking blood,  dressings, ECGs, routine vaccinations and home visits. 

  By employing a practice nurse, Dr Entwistle, who runs a rural  practice, will be able to provide a more continuous management of  patients who have difficulty reaching the surgery. 



