---
title: "Mr Keating avouds reality again - don't change the flag, change the government"
date: "1992-11-13"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126093
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR01001352%22
---

 300/92 13 November 1992

 MR KEATING AVOIDS REALITY AGAIN - DONT CHANGE THE FLAG, CHANGE THE GOVERNMENT

 The day after the worst unemployment figures since the Great Depression, the Prime  Minister chose to emphasise his obsession with changing the Australian flag and  making Australia a republic.

 The one million unemployed Australians and the many more in fear of losing their jobs  will find these priorities of the Prime Minister absolutely incomprehensible.

 It shows just how out of touch the Prime Minister is with the concerns of Australians,  just how devoid he is of any plan to respond to the jobs crisis, and just how 

 consumed he is with trying to distract people from the disastrous consequences of  his failed economic policies.

 Whenever the Prime Minister feels cornered by the realities of his economic failure, he  tries to run a distraction - usually the flag and the republic. Such attempts have failed  abysmally in the past, and they will fail again now.

 No number of phoney distractions will save Mr Keating from the reality of the pain and  the misery that his recession is inflicting on millions of Australians.

 Mr Keating's speech today to the National Immigration Outlook Conference was partly  a self-serving re-write of his economic record and partly just plain self-delusion about  Australia's economic prospects under his policies.

 The Conference would have been interested in what the Prime Minister is going to do  about the high level of unemployment in the migrant community, particularly among  recently arrived migrants; it would have been interested in how he is going to adjust  the size and composition of the immigration program to the harsh realities of  Australia's current labour market; it would have been interested to hear how he is 

 going to fix the disgraceful state of Australia's refugee determination system.

 But it heard nothing from the Prime Minister on any of these issues.

 Mr Keating was more interested in trying to conceal the realities of his policy failure.  He may delude himself. But he w o n t delude the millions of Australians enduring the  consequences of his recession.

 We d o n t need to change our flag or change to a republic - we need a change of  Government.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: (06) 277 402?

