---
title: "Changes to refugee determination"
date: "1992-07-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124169
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02006743%22
---

 MEDIA STATEMENT Philip Ruddock MP Federal M ember for D undas  Shadow M inister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 ________ MICAHElectorate Tel: (02) 858 1011  Fax: (02) 804 6739

 Z%.

 Parliam ent H ouse  Tel: (06) 277 4343  Fax: (06) 277 2062

 CHANGES TO REFUGEE DETERMINATION

 The Minister's announcement today of proposed changes to the refugee determination process and  immigration review mechanisms have been received with caution by the Coalition.

 Speaking from Port Hedland this evening, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Philip  Ruddock said, "The refugee determination system has been out of control for some time. Testimony to this  is the enormous backlog of 23,000 cases still in the system and the changes announced by the Minister today  will do nothing to address that backlog. They are too late and do not go far enough.

 For example, the proposal to limit appeals to the Federal Court do not go as far as the Opposition was  suggesting. I have not yet seen the details, but it seems to me that the Government is simply substituting a  number of additional grounds upon which appeals might be launched, rather than a general right of appeal  under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act.

 It appears that the way in which it has been structured means that the Government can wash its hands of  review matters and put them in the hands of an independent tribunal. Unless it is very carefully structured  and very clear instructions are given to the tribunal as to how it is to deal with these matters, it has the  potential for decision-makers to extend protection beyond the scope provided under the International  agreements to which Australia is a party.

 This was one of the unforseen outcomes of the ad-hoc judicial decision making accommodated under the  previous judicial review arrangements.

 W hether this, and other changes to the system will be adequate remain to be seen.

 The improvements foreshadowed by the Minister do not indicate how the Government will handle the  backlog of over 23,000 refugee applications already in the system. There is no indication that the government  is approaching this m atter with the sense of urgency required to bring the refugee determination system  under effective control. The Opposition has consistently argued for:

 - Staffing priorities need to be adjusted. According to a statement by the Secretary of the  Department at last month's refugee conference in Sydney, processing of refugee claims is  proceeding at only 1500 per year. At this rate it will take 20 years to clear the backlog.

 - Manifestly unfounded claims need to be dealt with immediately. The Minister does not appear  to have put in place a mechanism to deal effectively with this problem.

 - Appeals to the Federal Court should require leave to exclude frivolous and vexatious claims  and delaying tactics.

 The Minister has wasted the opportunity to regain control of Australia's national borders.

 15 July 1992 Contact Philip Ruddock at Port Hedland on (091) 731 044 or pager (02) 925 3911 #25589

