---
title: "New controls for entering and remaining lawfully in Australia"
date: "1992-07-17"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124195
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008666%22
---

 M edia Release 4Wk Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, AC T2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 39/92

 NEW CONTROLS FOR ENTERING AND REMAINING LAWFULLY IN  AUSTRALIA

 Fundamental reforms to Australia's current migration laws  will simplify procedures and strengthen controls in relation  to people entering and remaining in the country lawfully.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said today the changes were designed  to enhance the Government's ability to determine just who  could enter and remain here.

 At the same time they would ensure that Australia remained an  attractive travel destination.

 A major change,  Mr Hand said, would be the introduction of a  single document —  a visa —  to travel to, enter and remain  in Australia. This would replace the current confusing  mixture of forms of authority.

 The existing visa system would be simplified considerably,  making travel and entry documentation easier to use, with  benefits for clients and other users of immigration 

 documentation, such as airlines.

 In other proposed changes outlined by the Minister:

 . there will be a clear legal requirement for all people who  want to enter Australia to present themselves for  immigration clearance;

 .  Australian citizens will be required to use their . __Australian passports when- entering- and leaving'the " country.  This would further streamline entry processing  and remove opportunities for abuse of the entry system;

 .  the various forms of "status" for non-citizens included in  current immigration law will be reduced to two —  lawful  and unlawful;

 - 2 -

 .  a person who enters Australia unlawfully or who allows  himself to become unlawful by overstaying or breaching  the condition of his or her visa will be subject to  detention and removal (see associated media release 

 "Uniform Power of Detention to be Introduced").

 Mr Hand said the reforms also proposed a tax on unlawful  non-citizens other than successful refugee applicants.

 "People who remain unlawfully in the Australian community  for more than 12 months will be required to pay a tax before  they can be granted a visa in most circumstances," he said.

 "The tax will be on a sliding scale.

 "The reforms will also address the provision in the  Migration Act for 1  pre-clearance1  of international flights.

 "This is an important travel facilitation measure which will  mean that Australia is able to provide levels of passenger  facilitation equal to that of any other country,  while  retaining our effective entry controls."

 In other changes,  Mr Hand said the range of people allowed  to enter or remain in Australia for law enforcement purposes  would be widened.

 "There is an important national interest in ensuring that  people can be brought to Australia or allowed to remain here  in order to be tried for offences they have committed, or to  give evidence at the trials of other people," he said.

 "These reforms will ensure that such people can be allowed  to enter and remain and that clear arrangements can be made  for the costs of their maintenance while here and for their  ultimate removal from the country."

 CANBERRA 17 July, 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office  (06) 277.7860

 John Moorhouse  DILGEA (06) 264.2662

