---
title: "Australia and its mining industry in a changing world"
date: "1992-05-07"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211178144
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2947234%22
---

  No. Date 

  M73 7 May 1992 

  AUSTRALIA AND ITS MINING INDUSTRY IN A CHANGING WORLD 

  The following is the text of an address by Senator Gareth 

  Evans, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, to the 

  Australian Mining Industry Council's Annual Minerals Seminar,  Canberra, 7 May 1992. 

  * * 

  CANBERRA 

  * 

  C0:'.1MOf'.JWEALTH  PARUA/AENT,L.,RY LIBRARY  MiCAH 

  AUSTRALIA AND ITS MINING INDUSTRY IN A CHANGING WORLD 

  Address by Senator Gareth Evans, Minister for Foreign Affairs  and Trade, to the Australian Mining Industry Council's Annual  Minerals Seminar, Canberra, 7 May 1992. 

  Since I last addressed this seminar seven years ago as, then,  Minister for Resources and Energy, the world has changed 

  dramatically. The challenge confronting us all is to 

  understand the implications of these changes and, as 

  government or industry, to sustain and advance Australia's  place in this new world. I want to focus today on three 

  dimensions of that change that are of particular importance  for both government and the mining industry. 

  The end of the tensions of the Cold War has been important not  just in military terms. The reduction in super power rivalry  has seen a revival of the spirit and the mechanisms of 

  international and regional cooperation. A number of new 

  issues have been added to the agenda of cooperation in recent  years: the so-called "transnational" issues, those involving  problems beyond the capacity of any single nation state to 

  solve. Such issues include refugees, narcotics and health 

  issues like AIDS, but the most prominent has unquestionably  been the protection of the environment. We are now squarely  confronting, in the context of the forthcoming Rio Earth 

  Summit, a number of issues of immense importance for this 

  industry as well as for Australians generally. 

  A second major change has been the renewed push for trade 

  liberalisation and new regional trade alignments. The 

  discrediting of central economic planning has helped produce  at the domestic level a world-wide wave of economic 

  deregulation and liberalisation. Trade liberalisation at the  regional level is also now squarely on the agenda; but 

  IX/92 

  2 

  liberalisation at the global level, vital though it is for the  success of domestic economic restructuring, not least in 

  Australia, is proving harder to achieve. There are few more 

  important issues for this country than ensuring that it is 

  achieved. 

  The collapse of the Cold War, and all the stereotypes that 

  went with it, had a number of impacts in addition to those I 

  have mentioned. One was certainly in South Africa, where it  contributed to the spectacular process now under way to 

  dismantle apartheid. Trade patterns are already being 

  reshaped as a result of this, and old familiar commercial 

  groupings elsewhere are breaking down. There are more 

  countries competing actively for investment funds and export  markets, and as a result this industry faces more 

  international competition than it ever has. 

  I 

  At the head of the agenda of urgent global environmental 

  issues is climate change. In a number of matters of degree -

  the timing, magnitude and regional patterns of climate change  the scientific jury is still out. But we do know that 

  dramatic changes have occurred in the pattern of gases emitted  into the earth's atmosphere. By the time the jury finally 

  returns its verdict, the damage to our planet may be 

  irreversible. So there is every reason for the international  community to act now on the basis of that emerging consensus  embracing at least that scientific opinion. After all, 

  governments and companies are prepared to commit themselves to  programs and expenses on the far less reliable basis of the 

  forecasts of economists! 

  Australia has been active in the international effort to 

  prepare for presentation to governments at next month's United  Nations Conference on the Environment and Development - UNCED  a framework Convention on Climate Change. We want a 

  convention that allows practicable, sustainable and cost-

  3 

  effective responses to the threat of greenhouse warming, and  one that shares fairly the costs of action. 

  I want to emphasize strongly that climate change is a global  problem that requires global action. We have economic 

  interests of our own, and we are not going to put them at risk 

  by unilateral action. To do so would be simply Quixotic, and  would certainly contribute very little to the resolution of  the total problem. So we have constantly said that we will 

  not proceed with the adoption of response measures which have  net adverse impacts nationally or on Australia's trade 

  competitiveness in the absence of similar action by major 

  greenhouse gas producing countries. 

  You will be aware that we have been supporting an agreement  based on a target that would stabilise the emission of 

  greenhouse gases by the year 2000 and reduce them by 20 per 

  cent by 2005. 

  We are all aware that implementation of such a target could 

  have significant implications for Australia, given our 

  dependence on fossil fuels that produce greenhouse gases. Our  objectives in the negotiations for a convention have been to  move the emphasis away from carbon dioxide - where the impact  could fall heavily on Australia - to include .al.l. greenhouse  gases. 

  We are also working for agreement that subsidies and other 

  price support schemes that encourage higher emissions of 

  greenhouse gases be removed. This is of considerable interest  to Australia. There is no reason why the Australian industry,  an efficient producer of relatively clean, low-sulphur coal,  should be put on the same level as the heavily subsidised 

  industries of other countries. 

  We have also taken the strong view that the convention should 

  eventually include all countries, not simply the developed and  industrialised. Even if developed countries stabilised and 

  4 

  reduced their emissions of greenhouse gases, the reductions  would soon be made up by the rapid increase in emissions from  the industrialising developing countries. At some stage, 

  developing countries will have to participate in global 

  controls on emissions of these gases. 

  The Interim Negotiating Committee completes its deliberations  on the convention tomorrow. The issues I have mentioned and  others have made the negotiations for a convention on climate  change a difficult and complicated exercise. The exact nature  of the agreed convention, even on the central question of 

  targets, is still not finalised even at this late stage. The 

  uncertainty I and my ministerial colleagues have sometimes met  in business and industry about the implications is 

  understandable. But I can perhaps give you at least some 

  ground for comfort by saying that UNCED seems likely to find  itself considering a rather less far-reaching and more 

  realistic climate change convention than some of the more 

  outspoken critics have predicted. 

  With regard to other issues being considered for UNCED, the  major concern within Australian industry has been that the  Biodiversity Convention will contain a provision for global  lists, which will have the effect of locking areas away from  economic development. The intention of such lists is not to  produce a lock-up effect, but simply a mechanism for effective  communication and understanding of the nature of the problems,  country by country. Other forms of review mechanism may serve 

  this purpose just as well, and present indications are that 

  consensus about the list concept is not likely to prove 

  practically attainable. 

  Finally, there is confusion between the conventions, which  will be legally binding, and other documents to be considered  by the Rio conference, which will not. UNCED will agree on a  Declaration on Environment and Development (formerly the 

  'Earth Charter', but now given a less striking label, 

  reflecting its increasingly less dramatic content) and an 

  5 

  'Agenda 21'. The Declaration will set out the principle and  goals of sustainable development. 'Agenda 21' will contain a  program for action to implement those goals, involving trade,  aid and related policy. These two documents should not be 

  read like statutes or binding treaties where every word 

  counts. They are there to signpost directions, and should be  seen not so much as the architect's fixed plans as the 

  client's general specifications. 

  I don't want to convey the impression that there will be no 

  tension between long-term environmental goals, the achievement  of which are in the interests of us all, and the immediate 

  demands of economic efficiency. Government, acting in 

  consultation with industry, must do what it can to ensure the  best possible terms for Australia in any global action. To 

  this end, we have included business representatives in our  negotiating delegations and in briefings. On present 

  planning, Australia will be represented at UNCED itself by Ros  Kelly, John Kerin and Alan Griffiths, covering between them a  range of portfolio interests - economic and industry-based as  well as environmental. 

  II 

  Almost every world leader has underlined the vital importance  of trade liberalisation for global growth and prosperity. It  is the object of intensive diplomatic activity. Yet the 

  leadership of the major economic powers still remain unwilling  to take the decisions that are necessary to take the next 

  major leap forward. 

  For Australia, the centre-piece of our trade liberalisation  strategy must be the maintenance and strengthening of the 

  relatively fair and liberal rules of the General Agreement on  Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Without the weight to force other  economies to open their markets to us, we rely heavily on the  GATT. And we are relying heavily on the Uruguay Round of 

  multilateral trade negotiations to deliver some major new 

  6 

  export opportunities through root and branch amendment of the  present GATT regime. 

  The full importance to Australia of the Round has been a 

  little obscured by the overwhelming attention paid to 

  agriculture. This is certainly the area of world trade most 

  corrupted by production and export subsidies and barriers  against imports, and a breakthrough  impasse on agriculture remains, as it  to unlocking the Round as a whole. 

  in the present EC-US 

  always has been, the key  But it is not the only 

  area where Australia could reap large benefits. 

  The Uruguay Round aims to achieve, and has made good progress  towards, a one-third cut in all tariffs and the significantly  reduced use of non-tariff measures. Natural resource-based  industries, including mining and steel, should benefit greatly 

  from this. We are, for instance, pressing the European 

  Community to reduce its coal production subsidies. In the 

  case of Germany alone, subsidies amount to almost one and a 

  half times the value of Australia's total coal exports. 

  Success would mean an increase in Germany's demand for 

  imported coal by the late 1990s of some $1.8 billion a year. 

  Tariffs on natural resource-based products tend to increase  with the degree of processing involved. This works against  the adding of value in Australia to our mineral commodities.  So we have a strong interest in the negotiations to eliminate  trade barriers in areas such as steel and non-ferrous metals. 

  It is not the case, despite periodic claims to the contrary by  people who ought to know better, that all our efforts are 

  focussed on the Uruguay Round. Regional and bilateral trade  policy strategies are, and always have been, just as crucial. 

  We know very well that integration with the economic dynamism 

  of Asia is the key to Australia's future economic prosperity.  The Asia Pacific region as a whole accounted for 74 per cent 

  of Australia's total exports last year, including 66 per cent 

  7 

  of our exports of minerals and metals. And North-East and 

  South-East Asia alone accounted for 57 per cent of our exports  and 62 per cent of our minerals and metals exports. 

  At the regional level, Australia is pushing for regional trade  liberalisation through APEC, the Asia Pacific Economic 

  Cooperation process that we pioneered in 1989. APEC is not,  and should not become, a trading bloc building discriminatory  barriers against the rest of the world. We want to see 

  barriers to trade within the region removed in a way that does  not discriminate against Europe or anyone else. 

  There are sectors where the overwhelming proportion of the  Asia Pacific's trade takes place within the region. Trade in  minerals and metals is increasingly moving in this direction,  with steel being perhaps the most conspicuous example. Non­ discriminatory liberalisation of trade in these areas would  clearly benefit the region and those particular industries.  Success in reducing barriers to trade in one or two sectors 

  could then build the confidence necessary to tackle a more 

  ambitious project of wider regional trade liberalisation. We  shall continue to push for action on this issue whatever the  outcome of the Uruguay Round. 

  The APEC process also gives us an opportunity to integrate  Australia further with the region through sectoral cooperation  strategies. Its wide-ranging program of work projects is 

  starting to produce practical results which will facilitate  business activity throughout the whole region. The work of  the Australian-chaired energy work project is a good example.  This project could increase Australia's share of the Asia 

  Pacific energy market with its emphasis on the sort of 

  environmentally sound practices, such as 

  technology, which we have already developed.  clean coal 

  In the case of minerals and energy, APEC builds on the studies  undertaken by the Minerals and Energy Forum of the Pacific  Economic Cooperation Committee. The Forum has the advantage 

  8 

  of participation from government, business and academe, and  with its secretariat funded almost wholly by Australia, it has  made a very helpful contribution to the national interest. 

  Australia's multilateral and regional trade strategies 

  complement our efforts to improve market access at the 

  bilateral level. The business of bilateral negotiations and  trade and investment promotion, helped along by ministerial  visits and high-level trade missions, continues. In March,  for example, I visited Chile, Argentina and Brazil following  up on earlier visits to Latin America by separate trade 

  delegations led by Alan Griffiths and Neal Blewett. One 

  follow-up, in turn, to those visits has been the decision by 

  Austrade to post a mining and energy specialist to our embassy  in Chile later this year with a brief covering this sector in 

  the Americas as a whole. 

  III 

  The active pursuit of market access at the multilateral, 

  regional and bilateral levels is all the more important for 

  Australia in view of the likelihood of increased competition  for our traditional exports, including minerals. The 

  political and economic changes sweeping the world will result  in the emergence of such competition, and we need to pay close  attention to it. 

  In the first place, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the 

  move, however unsteady, towards the economic reform of Russia,  could bring about the long-heralded development of the 

  enormous mineral resources of the Russian Far East. The most  likely source for the necessary capital would be Japan. This  raises the prospect of Australia's losing some share of 

  Japan's imports of minerals to Russia. 

  We should not be complacent, nor should we exaggerate the 

  threat. Political uncertainty, administrative confusion and  infrastructural deficiencies in Russia will combine with the 

  9 

  technological lead and efficiency of the Australian mining  industry to make that prospect a remote one. It does, 

  however, mean that we should not allow either our external 

  policy and promotion efforts, or our internal program of 

  micro-economic reform, to slacken. The bottom line-best way  to retain and expand our export markets, here as elsewhere, is  simply to further improve our competitive efficiency. 

  Another post-Cold War policy area where we have needed to 

  maintain our footwork is the European Energy Charter, a 

  process designed to achieve freer trade and investment in 

  energy products within Europe. Australia fought long, hard  and successfully for the right to participate in the process  as the world's largest exporter of coal. Participation will  enable us to protect our interest in the European energy 

  market and to provide Australian companies with the 

  opportunity to compete on equal terms in the energy projects  envisaged for Eastern Europe and the Commonweal th of 

  Independent States. 

  We shall need to watch other developments. South Africa is 

  well on the way to being re-integrated into the world economy  as the dismantling of apartheid produces in due course the 

  complete dismantling of trade and financial sanctions. 

  Lurid pictures have been painted of the possible threat from  South African commodity exports to those of Australia. But,  despite all the efforts of Commonweal th and other countries,  trade sanctions have not, on the whole, prevented South Africa 

  from increasing the volume of its exports. South African coal  and iron ore exporters managed by and large to maintain sales  through a variety of stratagems, albeit at the cost of reduced  prices. The crucial question is that of efficiency, in which  Australia does retain a clear advantage over South Africa. 

  Financial sanctions have had over the years a much greater 

  impact than trade sanctions on capital-hungry South Africa,  and the removal of those sanctions could see South Africa 

  10 

  increase its investment in the production and export of, say,  coal, iron ore and steel. South Africa could become a more 

  serious competitor to Australia in those areas after it has  put its economic house in order. There should be ample 

  warning of this, given the lead time for large coal mining and  export projects. We are ourselves becoming steadily more 

  efficient, but we are going to have to work hard to stay ahead  of the game. 

  In Latin America economic reform is attracting greater 

  investment in the mining industry. The same is true of South­ East Asia, where enormously increased domestic and regional  demand for energy and minerals is providing an added spur. 

  Australian investment and technology are playing an important  role in the development of the mining industry in both these  regions. We can expect to see the efficiency of mining in 

  both those regions improve. 

  Increased competition and the changing nature of the global  trading system are essentially a reflection of the previous  weaknesses of the global economic order. We are now working  these weaknesses out of the global system and moving slowly  towards a more open and comprehensive system. 

  The global economic environment is becoming ever more dynamic.  The lesson we must learn and repeat to ourselves over and 

  again - and it is one that this Government and this industry 

  has certainly absorbed - is that we cannot afford to stand 

  still in this dynamic world. 

  The best way for Australia and the Australian mining industry  to take advantage of change is to develop a comprehensive 

  strategy to meet the growing competition. At the heart of any  such strategy internally will be the need to pursue greater  efficiency through economic, and particularly micro-economic  reform. This has been and will remain one of the chief 

  priorities of this Government. 

  11 

  Externally, it is a matter of continued trade policy effort at  all levels international, regional and bilateral to 

  improve access, and a sensibly coordinated national promotion  effort. The National Trade Strategy that we are presently 

  developing in consultation with industry is seeking to do this  by coordinating Commonwealth and State government trade  promotion activities and providing a forum for business to  deal with government effectively on the whole range of trade  enhancement issues. 

  However far we may still have to travel in these areas, I 

  think that we, and certainly your industry, can take pride in  the progress that has been made so far. 

  * * * * 

