---
title: "Improvements in refugee determination system and changes to immigration review mechanisms"
date: "1992-07-15"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214124176
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02008670%22
---

 .

 M e d ia  Release #4

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 35/92

 IMPROVEMENTS IN REFUGEE DETERMINATION SYSTEM AND CHANGES TO  IMMIGRATION REVIEW MECHANISMS

 A new independent refugee review tribunal is to be  established.

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic  Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, said today the Government's decision  completed the evaluation of the refugee determination system  begun earlier this year.

 "The Government is determined to continue its streamlining  of the system to make it quick, fair and credible," Mr Hand  said.

 "Recent experience has shown that the system, and  particularly the review phase, must deliver decisions which  are seen to be impartial and well grounded."

 The new body, to be known as the Refugee Review Tribunal,  will replace the existing Refugee Status Review Committee in  1993. Legislation to establish the Tribunal will be  introduced into the Parliament in the Budget Sittings.

 "The existing review procedures for refugee decisions are  administratively based. They have served as an important  interim phase," Mr Hand said.

 "It is now timely to put the review of refugee decisions on  the same footing as the review of other migration decisions,  through access to an appeals Tribunal."

 The Refugee Review Tribunal will be completely independent.  It will provide hearings for applicants, assess applications  on their merits, and will have the power to decide appeals. .

 The Tribunal will operate on a non-adversarial basis along  guidelines similar to those of the existing Immigration  Review Tribunal.  The new system will have a statutory base,  and its procedures will be set out in regulations, to ensure  predictable processes and consistency in decision-making.

 ...f2

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MIC AH

 Members of the Tribunal would be appointed by the  Governor-General on the recommendation of the Immigration  Minister, after consultation with the Attorney-General.

 The Tribunal would sit as single member panels and would  offer a hearing to all appellants, in camera if necessary.

 "Lawyers and other representatives may be present as  advisers," the Minister said.

 Mr Hand said that together with amendments to his  Department's procedures for the assessment of refugee  applications announced in February this year, the complete  refugee processing system would have the following features:

 .  a statutory base

 .  time limits for the lodgement of applications and  subsequent processing

 .  quick assessment by the Department of all new applications

 .  in the case of a negative decision by the Department,  access to merits review by the Refugee Review Tribunal.

 "While new costs will fall to the Department from these  changes, the new system will be less expensive to the  taxpayer than the existing committee system," Mr Hand said.

 "This is because the system will be simplified and its  elements set out clearly in legislation.

 "In this way, we will have a credible and independent  determination system, which should help keep to a minimum  appeals to the courts. In addition, the grounds upon which  rejected applicants will be able to appeal to the courts  will be defined in the new legislation."

 Mr Hand said that until the Tribunal begins operation, the  existing Refugee Status Review Committee would continue in  its current form. He said that no refugee applicant would be  disadvantaged by these changes, and decisions would continue  to be based on the United Nations definition of a refugee.

 .. ./3

 Other changes to review mechanisms

 In other changes to current review mechanisms, Mr Hand said  the Immigration Review Tribunal would be given jurisdiction  to review decisions on all valid applications lodged in  Australia, except for those lodged at the border and those  relating to refugee status.

 This meant that independent determinative merits review  would be available for applications by people unlawfully in  Australia, and applicants in Australia for visa classes which  did not require Australian support.

 These new arrangements would provide a right of review which  was both independent and determinative over almost all  migration applications made in Australia. The arrangements  for review of decisions made overseas would not be changed.

 The Minister said other changes —  the codification of  procedures and the placing of restrictions on appeals to the  Federal Court —  would address the pressing need to simplify  decision-making procedures so that all applicants could be 

 assured of fair and quick decisions on their applications.

 "Specific decision-making procedures, reflecting the  principles of natural justice, will be set out in migration  legislation," he said.

 "These procedures will bind decision-makers at all levels,  including within the Refugee Review Tribunal and the  Immigration Review Tribunal.

 "The extension of a right of independent merits review to  almost all migration decision applicants in Australia and  the prescription of statutory decision-making procedures  will be accompanied by a move towards a system of judicial  review contained within the Migration Act. This will provide 

 an integrated review system for all decisions under the  Migration Act."

 "Therefore the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act will no longer apply to Migration Act decisions, while a  right to apply to the Federal Court, based on specific  grounds, will be provided in the Migration Act".

 Mr Hand said the grounds of judicial review would be settled  with the Attorney-General. However these were expected to  include grounds such as:

 - that procedures which were required by the Migration Act to  be observed in connection with the making of a decision  were not observed (this would replace the ground that the  rules of natural justice were not observed);

 - fraud and actual bias;

 - an improper exercise of power, such as exercising a  personal discretionary power at the direction of another  person or following policy without regard to the merits of  a particular case; and

 - there was an error of law, where the error involved a  wrong interpretation of the applicable law or an incorrect  application of the law to the fact.

 CANBERRA 15 July, 1992

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams  Minister's office  (06) 277.7860

 Dario Gastello (refugee matters)  DILGEA (06) 264.3014

 John Bloomfield (other review matters)  DILGEA (06) 264.3142

