---
title: "Are we fair dinkum?"
date: "1993-01-29"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214126989
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08024435%22
---

 --

 MEDIA RELEASE

 SENATOR SID SPINDLER  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRAT  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA · T H E  S E N A T E

 2 9  J a n u a r y  1 9 9 3 93/34

 Are we fair dinkum?

 The treatment of Cambodian asylum seekers remains a blot on  Australia's human rights record,, according to the Australian  Democrats.  .

 Law and Justice and Ethnic Affairs Spokesperson, Senator Sid  Spindler, in Perth for the Democrats National Executive Meeting,  flew in a day early for, consultations with Archbishop Barry.  

 Hickey and leaders of WA community support groups, including Ms  Tholla Chan, President of the WA Khmer Association.

 "In part the issue is humanitarian: as a country priding itself  on the "fair go", we should not imprison and forcibly repatriate  people asking for asylum due to war like conditions in their home  country. ·

 "The second issue is that the determination of refugee status  must be by due legal process and not by executive decree and all  people must have equal rights before Australian courts.

 "This is a principle of concern to all Australians because our  courts are the essential guarantee of democratic rights if these  are attacked by power mad governments. .  .  .

 "In the Senate the Democrats have strongly opposed legislation  limiting the rights of appeal of asylum seekers before Australian  courts and will continue to dp so with every means at our 

 disposal.

 "My discussions with Archbishop Hickey were particularly useful.  Once again we can be grateful that Australian churches are  prepared to raise their voices on issues of social justice and  human rights. As a community we would ignore these principles  at our peril", Senator Spindler concluded.

 For further information: Contact Senator Spindler - (09) 221 2388 (w), or  Stephen Merrylees - (06) 277*3640 (wj, (06) 285 2285 (h).

 COMMONWEALTH .  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

