---
title: "Chinese student decision reinforces humanitarian nature of the immigration program"
date: "1993-11-01"
creators:
  - "Theophanous, Andrew"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183585
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1709053%22
---

 COP MONWEALTH

 P, UAM NTARY LIBRARY MICAH D ' 1 i i1td U I NJ] 1`

 Parliamentary Secretary to

 The Hon Brian Howe, Minister for Housing, Local Government and Community Services, . and to Senator the Hon Graham. Richardson, Minister for Health

 N0 .19 3

 CHINESE STUDENT DECISION REINFORCES HUMANITARIAN NATURE OF T$8

 IMMIGRATION PROGRAX. . .

 The decision of the Federal Cabinet to grant permanent residence status to all the Chinese students who came to Australia before the Tianamenn Square incident, - as well as to -others holding four year permits - is a great breakthrough for

 those who have worked to reinforce the humanitarian side of Australia's immigration program.'"

 "Also to be welcomed -is the decision to grant permanent residence to a significant number of Chinese students -who arrived after the Tianamenn Square incident and who pass the, requirements of a special category.,,

 "The Government is to be congratulated for maintaining the commitment made to.the students by. the former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, a commitment reaffirmed by the Prime Minister Paul Keating." .'

 "It would have been unacceptable from the point of view of Australia's international obligations to force these people to return China."

 "The Government is correct to grant these people -permanent residence rather than indefinite temporary entry permits, as was advised, by some. To leave these people in limbo for another four years would have been inhumane and counter productive to the

 interests of Australia."

 "By granting them permanent residence, the Government has given them the opportunity to get on with living their lives and making what I am certain will be a substantial contribution to Australia."

 Dr Theophanous said that the decision vindicated the position he had adopted as Chairman of the ,  Standing Committee on Migration Regulations, when he prouced a dissenting report from the majority in September last year.

 In that document entitled Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian System, Dr. Theophanous argued for a course of action very similar to that adopted by the Government.

 "The Minister for Immigration, and the Government generally, are to be applauded for their courage in taking this difficult, but just decision."

 "I hope that the Federal Opposition, which has shown a systematic prejudice- against the Chinese students will now accept that this decision is the best for'.the country and the only possible one consistent with our international obligations."

 For further information contact Dr. Andrew Theophanous, NP (018) 548 509

 Telephone Melbourne: (03) 302 1114 Telephone Canberra: (06) 277 4270

