---
title: "Refugee Review Tribunal commences operation"
date: "1993-07-01"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182019
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706930%22
---

 /7

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B19/93

 REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL COMMENCES OPERATION

 A new phase in the determination of onshore applications for refugee status starts today with the advent of the Refugee Review Tribunal, according to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus.

 The 26-member tribunal, with members drawn from many areas of the community, is fully independent and will re-examine cases where the initial decision by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is disputed.

 It has full power to overturn refusal decisions. Strict time limits apply for the lodgement of applications and applicants will have the opportunity for oral hearings. Operating on non-adversarial guidelines similar to those for the Immigration Review Tribunal, it replaces the Refugee Status Review Committee.

 "It will be fair, just, economical, informal and quick," Senator Bolkus said.

 The tribunal, sitting in single-member panels, will operate from Sydney and Melbourne, travelling to other centres as required, with members conducting reviews in informal hearings.

 The new tribunal begins with a backlog of some 5,500 review cases, which will be considered as a priority.

 Senator Bolkus said that legislation expected to come before Parliament in the next session would deem all applicants which have not been considered by the existing Refugee Status Review Committee at 1 July 1993 to be applications before the Tribunal.

 "Pending this legislative change, the members of the Tribunal will use my powers, as my delegates, to review such decisions," Senator Bolkus said. "Decisions made by such delegates under this authority will be final. In exceptional

 circumstances I may determine that it would be in the public interest to substitute a more favourable decision for the applicant.

 "The members shall, when acting as my delegates on backlog cases, follow the same procedures as set down in the Migration Reform Act 1992 for proceedings before the Refugee Review Tribunal."

 CANBERRA l JULY 1993 Media Inquiries: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860/(018) 624 847

 COi+,f MICAH

 MICAH

