---
title: "Industry Commission inquiry into charitable organisations"
date: "1993-12-16"
creators:
  - "Gear, George"
source: "ASSISTANT TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184123
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3032517%22
---

  PRESS NO. ASSISTANT TREASURER RELEASE  STATEMENT BY THE ASSISTANT TREASURER, THE HON GEORGE GEAR MP 

  INDUSTRY COMMISSION INQUIRY INTO CHARITABLE ORGANISATIONS 

  After extensive consultations with State Governments and Commonwealth Ministers, I am  pleased to announce that the Industry Commission is commencing an inquiry into Charitable  Organisations. 

  The terms of reference for this inquiry are attached. 

  This reference is included in the Commission's 1992-94 Forward Work Program, which was  announced by the Treasurer on 20 September 1992. The inquiry will begin immediately and  will report in fifteen months. 

  There are very few areas of Australian life which are not affected in some way by charitable  organisations. Charities provide an enormous range of services from traditional welfare and  community assistance, to development and emergency aid. The charity sector controls billions  of dollars and plays an integral role in the functioning of the Australian economy. Yet there  has never been a comprehensive review of this sector of the economy. This inquiry will take as  its fundamental premise the social goals of the charities and the Government, and will ask  whether current financial, institutional and legislative arrangements are effectively meeting  those goals. 

  Because of their community base, charities are often able to provide comfort, encouragement,  counselling and other personal support in a way that government organisations may be unable  to do. In recognition of this expertise, I am pleased to announce that Sister Margaret  McGovern, AO, has accepted an appointment as Associate Commissioner for this inquiry.  Sister McGovern has wide experience in the delivery of care and services to the Australian  community. She has served on the Board of the Mater Misericordiae Hospital, the Australian  National Council on AIDS, the St Vincent de Paul Inner City Homelessness Programs, the  Independent Commssion Against Corruption, and numerous other projects involving refugee  camps, the aged and Aboriginal people. I am confident she will bring to the inquiry a wealth of  academic expertise, and a special sensitivity to social issues. 

  In this inquiry, the Industry Commission will examine the funding sources of charitable  organisations, including Government assistance. I must emphasise that the Government has no  underlying agenda to abolish the tax deductibility of gifts to charitable organisations, but is  aware that there may be anomalies across the sector. The Government is concerned that the  public has confidence that their donations are being used effectively, and that tax dollars are  efficiently and appropriately directed. 

  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH 

  55 

  The Commission will also look closely at the interaction of Government and charitable  services, with regard to unnecessary duplication and ineffective meshing. In my consultations  before concluding these terms of reference, I have been made aware of the charities' concern  that Governments often hinder the work they do. Accordingly the Commission will examine  the appropriateness of regulations and legislation which affect their operation. 

  The Commission will carry out an extensive public inquiry process, visiting regional centres  throughout Australia to hear the views of charities, their clients, and different levels of  government. Procedures will be flexible, so that the inquiry is accessible to all people. 

  The Commission has commenced preliminary work on this inquiry. It will shortly release an  Issues Paper to facilitate discussion and to highlight areas individuals and organisations may  wish to address in their submissions. Notices will be placed in newspapers in each capital city  inviting involvement from interested participants. 

  16 December 1993 

  For further information: 

  Margot Marshall (Media Adviser, Assistant Treasurer) 06 277 7360 

  Bill Scales (Industry Commission) 03 653 2100 

  Charitable Organisations 

  INDUSTRY COMMISSION ACT 1989 

  I, GEORGE GEAR, Assistant Treasurer, under Part 2 of the Industry Commission Act 1989 hereby: 

  I. refer charitable organisations in Australia to the Commission for inquiry and report within  fifteen months of the date of receipt of this reference; 

  2. specify that for the purposes of this inquiry, charitable organisations be defined as: 

  (a) non-government establishments, organisations, associations or trusts that are primarily  established otheiwise than for the purpose of profit or benefit to the individual members  of the organisations, and the principal objects or purposes of which are charitable or  benevolent, and which provide any of the following: 

  (i) welfare services, including income support and the provision of clothing, goods  and food; 

  (ii) community services, such as care in people's homes or community centres provided  to frail older people, younger people with a disability, and those requiring post  acute or palliative care; 

  (iii) accommodation services, such as emergency shelters and hostels, and homes for  children, frail older people, or people with disabilities; 

  (iv) nursing or convalescent homes, drug referral and rehabilitation, and blood  transfusion services; 

  (v) employment and training services for the unemployed and people with disabilities; 

  (vi) advocacy, referral, counselling, and legal services; and 

  (vii) emergency and development assistance overseas; 

  (b) any businesses owned by those organisations covered in paragraph 2 (a) above; 

  (c) any peak bodies which represent organisations covered in paragraph 2 (a) above; and 

  (d) any establishments or companies which provide fund raising services for welfare or  charitable purposes; 

  3. specify that the Commission examine and report on: 

  (a) the size, scope, efficiency, and effectiveness of the services provided in Australia by  charitable organisations; 

  (b) the size and scope of, and funding arrangements for, those services delivered overseas by  charitable organisations; and 

  (c) the administrative efficiency of charitable organisations; 

  4. without limiting the scope of this reference, request that the Commission report on: 

  (a) the nature and appropriateness of the interaction between assistance and services  provided in Australia by charitable organisations and those provided by government  programs; 

  (b) the extent to which any assistance currently provided in Australia by any of governments,  charitable organisations, or the private sector, could more effectively be provided by  either of the others, having due regard to client confidentiality, comparability of eligibility  conditions and entitlements across the nation and accountability of public funds and for  services provided; 

  (c) the role of charitable organisations in the provision of goods and services to or on behalf  of governments and competition between charitable organisations and business  enterprises; 

  ( d) the appropriateness of any legislation or regulations governing the activities of charitable  organisations; 

  (e) the effect on charitable organisations of relevant industrial agreements and arrangements; 

  (f) the appropriateness of the present taxation treatment of charitable organisations; 

  (g) the effectiveness of current government financial or other assistance to charitable  organisations, including any measures which could be taken to maximise the benefits of  such assistance; and 

  (h) current funding sources of charitable organisations and any impediments to their capacity  to raise funds or.attract voluntary labour; 

  5. specify that in considering the effectiveness of the provision of services by charitable  organisations and the appropriateness of their interaction with Government programs, the  Commission have regard to the objectives of the organisations and the objectives of particular  programs under which specific activities are funded; 

  6. specify that the Commission take account of any recent substantive studies undertaken  elsewhere; and 

  7. specify that the Commission have regard to the established economic, social, industrial  relations and environmental objectives of governments. 

  1 6 lJ i:: c 1993 

