---
title: "Boat people receive refugee appeal decisions"
date: "1993-03-30"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180959
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706991%22
---

 Media

 Release •

 Minister for -Immigration and Etbnio Affairs parliamait House, Csnbsrra, ACT 2600

 82/93

 AT EOP E CEI FU EAI^DEC ISI Q T^5

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, announced today that the refugee claims of 24 boat people had been accepters .

 The decisions follow consideration of appeals to the Refugee Status Review Committee (RSRC) against earlier decisions covering 23 Vietnamese and a Cambodian who is the wife of one of the principal applicants.,

 Senator Bolkus said the decisions related to some of the Vietnamese who arrived on six boats in northern Australia between November 1989 and May 1991.

 The approvals announced today were among final decisions on refugee claims by 34 boat people.

 As well as accepting the claims by the 24 vietnamese, the decisions upheld earlier efusals by the Departmebt'of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs on claims by 10 other boat people,. comprising three from Cambodia, two from the Peoples Republic of China and five from Vietnam.

 The appeals to the RSRC were the second stage of a two-tier examination of refugee claims against criteria developed by the United Nations.

 The four members of the RSRC include a community representative nominated by the Refugee Council of Australia, and officials from the Attorney General's Department, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,

 and the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (chair). A representative of the United Rations High Commissioner for Refugees attends as an observer.

 Under Migration law, those refused refugee status are required to leave Australia if they have no further. legal basis to remain.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 CANBERRA 30 March 1993

 M^CAH

 J

 )iEDIA INQUIRING: Adam , K lgout_ or . Bronwen HcN^tughton - Paul Windsor -"Minister *; Office :" DILaEA

 (06)- 277 7600. Qr 019- 487 941 (06). 24 4324

 E.

 DEPARTMENT OF 1MMIGRATION,l LOCAL GOVERNMENT ANDETHNIC AFFAIRSBOAT PEOPLESince November 1989, 65- peoplo have a,irived LnAustralia by small boat. This Fact Shtct canvasses someof the issues associated with their arrival.How did they travel to Australia?Early arrivals sailcd about 1,000lan from the,KompongSom region. of Cambodia to Singapore and then to In-dotesia and Australia, taking between 20 - 30 daysaboard boats about 20 metres-in length.Letcr artival4 came from locations in the southern provinces of China, such as Bebai,Nanning and Oin2hnuin Guangxi Province, taking around 30 days to sail via Indonesia.Who are the boat people?The people have come from a variety of backgrounds including dcrikal workers and mechanics. In addition,some were self employed while others were under- employed. Most said they paid money for the right tomake the boat trip.Why have they been detained?Norte of the boat people had authority to enter Australia.In most rases, they carried no formal idtnti{catioadocuments. Under the Migration Act, people detected entering Australia without authority arc required to be detained while any claim to stay is assessed.The legality of detentionA High Court judgement in December 1992 upheld thevalidity of holding boat people Irt custody until their status has been determined. There is a question that people held before speeifle.legislation was passed mayhave been held illegally; some boat people are currentlyseeking damages based on this claim.Where are they housed?Temporary accommodation was provided to house boat people until the Port Hedland  eeprinn and Process-ing Centre was comnsisstoned In October 1991. The, PortHedland facility, formerly a minin g company's singlepersons quarters, was selected because of its proximity to boat arrival points, the quality of its accommodation,and because its location allowed a low steutity euvieon.meat to be established without compromising custody Tissues As a temporary measure, one group hss heen

 housed at the Westbridge mi&,rant centre in Sydney pending the finalisation of their refugee claims. Part of this centre was commissioned in August 1991.

 What are the conditions for boat people?

 At each of the centres, families are grouped together, usually is one-bed or two-bed rooms. Food is provided cod bout people, aalst in its preparation and Serving„ to encourage food preparation and presentation that is

 culturally appropriate to the particular group.

 Medical facilities include an on-site nurse for immediate medical care, with normal medical, dental and phar-maceutical services provided by professionals at no cost to the residents. Where a medical practitioner recom-

 men& counselling  or  trtatment not readily available

 locally, the servile is arranged usually by transferring the person to a city where it is available.

 Education facilities include pre-primary, primary and secondary classes provided under contract at both facilities at no cost to the residents; English classes for adults are provided by voluntary groups. Some vocation-al classes have been offered.

 Counsellors are made available on an ad hoc bn is. A welfare officer is also provided most of the time.

 Recreation facilities at Fort Hedlaud include gardening. ball sports, pool facilities (snooker), some gymnasium equipment and sewing.

 Legal assistance Is Government-funded and is available to all boat people to help them with their claims for refugec status. This assistance  in

 c l udes preparation of

 initial c!aini and application* fqr review under the two-stage refugee determination process. Applicants are, of course, free to obtain assistance from other sources such as private solicitors or community groups.

 Interpreting facilities are provided at both Port Hed-land and Westbridgc.

 What are the costs?

 The cost of providing facilities for boat people seeking refugee status has been almost $16 million. In addition, providing legal assistance during the 1991-92 financial year was almost $786,000. Costs associated with litiga-tion outside the refugee process are additional.

 What is the reftig• r process?

 Austraila is a party to the 1951 United Natioas Conven-tion and the 1967 Protocol relating to refugees. Under the Conv ention, Australia has an obligation not to return

 someone to a country where they have a well-founded fear of persecution.

 People who arrive in Australia and then seek recognition as refugees must meet the UN crite ria on refugees; this Ls the only standard for assessing claims. The assess meets are based on a ptrson's present circumstances.

 Fast events, even though they may have been trauwatic, may or may not be relevant; what 4 be ing assessed is whether the person would face persecution if they returned to their homeland. '

 Giving refugee status is designed to give protection to those who aced it ratbtr than be an alternate way of migrating to Australia.

 The refugee dctormivation process and the crite ria used by Au$trafian dccLslon makers is based on United Na-tion-sguidelines and has been developed in close consult-ation with Australian rcprestntatives of the UN High

 Commissioner for Rtf igteg (UNHCR).

 Initially, a boat person will be interviewed by a refugee officer of the Department of Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, who will either rccacn. mend acceptance or rejection of a refugee claim. If a person's claim is not accepted, they can appeal the

 decision to the RcfugcC Statu Review Committee. The Cornmittce has representatives from DILGEA, Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Attorney-General's Depart-ments, a community representative ngminatcd by the Refugee Council of Australia, and a UNTICR observer. The Cornmitttcc reviews an applicant's case and makes recommendations to a final decision maker. This decision maker is a DILGEA officer. (This appeal process will be replaced on 1 July 1993 by a statutory body, the Refugee Review Tribunal).

 What does getting refugee status meat?

 Boat people getting refugee status are given authori ty to Jive in Aus tralia for tow years, and usually move from the processing centre into the community within about 24 hours.

 Initially they may get accommodation in self-contained DILGEA flats, or they may establlsb themselves in the community with the help of support groups. The Depart-went r f Social Security treats refugees the same as other

 Australian residents when deesding their eligibili ty for benefits. As tcmporety residents, they can sponsor im-mediate family me,ubers to Australia. At the cud of four years, they may be given perumanent residency.

 What happe if refuge. status is refused?

 Under the Migration Act, a person refused refugee status and with no further legal claim to remain in Australia must leave,

 Wheat has happended to the boat people?

 Some 652 people have arrived by boat since November 1989, and 25 children were subsequently born in Australia, mating a total of 677. Of these, 216 have left Australia eithtr to return home or to travel to other

 countries, 92 have been approved to remain in Australia, and the remaining 369 are either awaiting decisions or are chaliengi.o,g decisions in Australian courts.

 Who are the boat people who have left?

 Of the 216 who have left, 140 have been returned to Chin; 40 to Cambodia, 14 to Macau, 13 to Europe, 2 to Indonesia, I to Hong Kong and 1 to Bangladesh. Five were accepted for migration to other countries • three to

 Canada, one to the US and one to NZ.

 What has happened to returning Chinese?

 The Chinese Government has given assurances that returning boat people will not be persecuted and not mistreated. Under Chinese law, returnees may be detained for a short time while their idcntitics arc con-

 firmed and enquiries made about any criminal action$ involved in arranging their departure from China. Of the 140 who have been returned to China, 113 were people on  one boat who arrived with an expectation of being

 allowed entry, eigbt were returned after their refugee applications and appeals were rejected, and 19withdrew their refugee applications and asked for repatriation.

 How have returning Cambodians fared?

 Forty Cambodian boat people have withdrawn their refugee applications and returned home voluntarily. Air travel has been provided, and they have bees met in Phnom Penh by an officer of the Australian P rmaneot

 Mission and by representatives of the V,^1 High Commis-tioner for Refugees and the Cambodian Red Cross.

 Reintegration assistance consisting of an initial lump sum and 12 monthly payments is given, consistent with--. UN practice. Apart from the diffic ulty of finding work, returnccs report they have had no undue problems with

 tbcir return and have not experienced harassment by authorities.

 Produced by the Media Lialsion and Public Informa-tion Section, Department or Immigration and Ethnle Af fairs, Canberra, 30 March 1993.

