---
title: "New national fund for mental health reform"
date: "1993-07-05"
creators:
  - "Howe, Brian"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOUSING, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182078
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1681817%22
---

 Brian Howe Deputy Prime Minister Minister for Housing, Local Government and Community Services

 BH238/93 5 July 1993

 NEW NATIONAL FUND FOR MENTAL HEALTH REFORM

 The Federal Government intends to play a strong role in assisting the States to reform services to people with a psychiatric disability, Deputy Prime Minister Brian Howe said today, announcing a package of new national initiatives under the $135 million National Mental Health Strategy.

 "I am providing more than $700,000 this financial year, as part of a $17 million national fund, to support and promote best practice in mental health at the national level over the next five years", Mr Howe said.

 "This year we will fund for the first time, national research into the attitudes held by Australians towards people with a mental illness. $150,000 will be provided to conduct the research and to recommend appropriate mechanisms to change negative attitudes".

 Mr Howe also announced funding of $100,000 to develop a national approach to training people who work in co mmunity services, that deal with clients who have a psychiatric

 history.

 "The majority of people with mental illness are cared for in the community now, and this has placed demands on the full range of health, disability, aged care and supported accommodation services. To meet the needs of people with a psychiatric disability, workers in these services need the right training," he said.

 "A national training strategy will be developed for workers in health, disability, aged care and supported acco mmodation services to better qualify them to assess, refer, and provide direct services to clients with a mental illness.

 "Increasingly, these services will have to work together drawing together the skills of a range of professionals -the hospital will need to interact with the local SAAP (Supported Accommodation Assistance Program) service and the CRS (Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service) may need to work with the psychiatrist at the local co mmunity mental health centre. A consistent approach to training workers can only benefit this approach."

 As part of the overall package, Mr Howe announced $120,000 for a national conference on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mental health and $50,000 to address the mental health needs of people from a non-English speaking background.

 C0^t t . 0 4V J C E'.:^. J i H

 2.

 "Studies have shown that the effects of migration can impact negatively on the mental health of migrants - in both moving to Australia and in settling in," he said.

 "The isolation experienced by newly arrived migrants can often lead to depression. If people have left their homes under traumatic circumstances, such as the plight of refugees, serious mental health problems can result which need to be dealt with".

 The package announced a further $200,000 to improve the quality of mental health data that is collected at the national level; $10,000 to assist consumer involvement in the national fund and $100,000 to look at how Governments fund the mental health workforce and what effect this has on service provision and the broader aims of the National Mental Health Strategy.

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: Ross Gardiner, Mr Howe's office, Phone: (06) 277 7680

