---
title: "Emergency relief and rehabilitation assistance to Mozambique and Mozambican refugees"
date: "1993-12-16"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184126
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650148%22
---

 M 177

 16 December 1993

 EMERGENCY RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE

 TO MOZAMBIQUE AND MOZAMBICAN REFUGEES

 Australia will provide food aid and other relief and rehabilitation assistance worth about $7.2 million for displaced people and returnees in Mozambique, and for Mozambican refugees in Malawi and Zimbabwe, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Gareth Evans, said today.

 "Mozambique's priority need is now for rehabilitation programs, particularly in the agriculture sector and the reconstruction of infrastructure," Senator Evans said.

 "At the same time there is still a considerable call for food aid and other relief assistance to meet the needs of returning refugees and displaced people until they can start growing their own food again.

 "The Australian Government through AIDAB, Australia's official aid agency, will channel the assistance through Australian non-government organisations (NGOs) and United Nations agencies, which have considerable experience in the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance in the region," Senator Evans said.

 The Australian NGOs involved are World Vision Australia, AUSTCARE, Community Aid Abroad and CARE Australia. The United Nations agencies who will receive support under this contribution are UNICEF Australia, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the World Food Programme (WFP).

 Assistance channelled through these agencies will consist of Australian food aid and cash grants.

 The largest contribution will be made to World Vision Australia in the form of a cash grant and Australian food aid worth $3.95 million. The food aid includes wheat, rice, beans and high energy biscuits. The cash grant will support relief and rehabilitation programs, including the provision of seeds and tools for agricultural recovery activities and primary health programs.

 Australian yellow split peas, worth approximately $1.1 million, will be provided to the World Food Programme for its feeding program for returning refugees and displaced people.

 Cash grants to other agencies will be used to support a range of activities, including the rehabilitation and construction of health posts, schools, water tanks, bridges and roads; the provision of household equipment and clothing; and the distribution of tools and seeds.

 In addition, funds to UNHCR will support programs to raise awareness of land mines in areas where Mozambican refugees will be returning.

 Australia has provided significant levels of emergency assistance to Mozambique and Mozambican refugees for a number of years. A total of $9.5 million worth of assistance was provided in the last financial year.

 CANBERRA 

 COMMONWEALT'H

 For further information contact: PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 Kate Wall (Minister's office) 06 277 7500 MICAH

 David Jones (AIDAB) 06 276 4967

