---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 21 April 1993: Cambodia"
date: "1993-04-21"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Cambodia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181046
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1619921%22
---

 PRESS CONFERENCE ON CAMBODIA WITH THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN

 AFFAIRS, SENATOR GARETH EVANS, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 21

 APRIL 1993

 A number of you have sought reactions on recent developments in Cambodia and in particular to reports coming out of there from Lindsay Murdoch in this morning's Sydney Morning Herald and Age. I am happy to oblige. I think it's appropriate that I do so more fully than is workable in a doorstop context; thus this full—scale press conference.

 I want to say at the outset that the Cambodian situation remains one of the most complex of all international problems, with the exception, I guess, of the former Yugoslavia. And it is

 important to understand the history and the dynamics of the problem, not simply to rush to judgement on the basis of individual reports, or indeed for that matter on the basis of media reporting generally which as long as I can remember has been more or less uniformly gloomy about the situation there. I also want to say at the outset that it is important to maintain a

 sense of overall balance in dealing with the Cambodian question. I think we have to frankly acknowledge that very few solutions to this kind of problem are perfect. What we're pushing for is really very often the least worst solution, and we have to constantly ask ourselves what are the alternatives to a course of action at any given time before rushing to judgement about

 the hopelessness or otherwise of a particular course of action that is being pursued. The UN peace plan has certainly been less than perfect in its practical implementation. But it does remain the only game in town if any kind of durable, viable peace is to be secured for the

 Cambodian people.

 As to the overall status of the peace process at the moment, let me say this. It is obviously

 fragile, but it remains on track. The elections for the Constituent Assembly are scheduled to be held from the 23-28 May and the international community, including Australia, remains

 absolutely determined that that timetable will go ahead despite the non—cooperation of the Khmer Rouge, which has been a fact of life there since last June. The refusal of access to Khmer Rouge areas means that the election will only go ahead in 80 to 85 per cent of the land area of Cambodia, not the last 15 to 20 per cent. It will only involve some 95 per cent of the

 population rather than the 5 per cent or so that are under Khmer Rouge control. But it will,

 putting it the other way around, obviously involve most of the country and most people. The

 most current expression of the international community's determination to go ahead with this is expected to come out of New York tonight, where a meeting has been going on for a couple of days involving representatives from all the Paris Peace Conference countries who are

 working on a joint statement which will express the determination that I have just articulated.

 E

 OMMONWEALTH

 I AM 

 NT

 CAH LIBRARY

 2

 The logistics are very much in place, or coming into place for this election: 4.6 million Cambodians have after all been registered to vote with very few significant incidents along the way inhibiting that process, and that represents more than in fact 100 per cent of the number that were initially estimated to be eligible to vote (the question mark was about, obviously, the number of people in the country in the absence of a census in recent years).

 Many hundreds of election observers have been recruited from abroad, including some 80

 from Australia who are expected to arrive there in mid—May. More than 50,000 electoral officers are in the process of being recruited and trained for the polling period by UNTAC

 personnel.

 The question of course with which you are all concerned, and I`m certainly concerned, is whether the security situation in Cambodia is such that it will be possible for that election, with all these logistics notwithstanding, to actually proceed. There are four kinds of security

 problem in Cambodia at the moment which, putting them in growing order of seriousness, can be defined as follows. First of all there is the problem of banditry and just general criminality.

 It has been a significant phenomenon and is on the increase, but certainly does not in itself amount to any kind of cause for even contemplating the abandonment of the election.

 Secondly, there have been the very serious series of attacks on Vietnamese and Cambodians by, unquestionably, the Khmer Rouge. That's been a deeply disturbing situation, a thoroughly outrageous situation. But again, even though the death toll is now into the hundreds as a result of those attacks, it is not being anywhere seriously suggested that either the nature or the scale of these attacks should be regarded as such to put a question mark over the peace process as a whole and the elections in particular. It is a problem that has to be addressed in

 other ways, but it is a very serious one.

 Thirdly, there's the general question of political violence and intimidation by really all of the parties against each other. There are no major political groupings that are without blame in this respect, and indeed the Cambodian People's Party, or the SOC administration in Phnom Penh, certainly deserves a very conspicuous amount of the blame for the violence which has

 resulted, in total, in something over a hundred deaths so far. UN military and civilian police resources have to some extent been redeployed to deal with this problem, through the guarding of political offices and so on. What one can say here I think is that the situation,

 although it is not good, has not deteriorated to the point where it will seriously threaten the viability of the election process. We can only hope that the state of affairs will continue: I

 believe, on the evidence available to me, that's a reasonable hope.

 3

 Fourthly and most seriously, we have the problem of the Khmer Rouge, the DK - the Party of Democratic Kampuchea. DK military capability is less than is sometimes asserted, but there is no doubt that they do have the capacity, they've always had this capacity, to launch attacks on the peace process of a nature and on a scale that would put that process in jeopardy. A number of serious incidents have occurred in the last weeks involving the killing of a number of UNTAC personnel which have led to fears that the Khmer Rouge might be about to launch

 the kind of full frontal assault that would force all of us in the international community to reconsider the position. But the point is that the incidents which have occurred so far remain just that - incidents. Serious enough, but sporadic and isolated in character. I'll come back to describe some of them, and the stuff that has been reported this morning in this context, in just

 a moment.

 There is still no evidence of a centrally directed, Khmer Rouge military offensive, either generally or specifically directed against UNTAC military forces or other UN personnel.

 There are plenty of reasons to think that the DK wants to discredit the election process: there are plenty of reasons to think that it wants to create a climate of instability, of tension, of fear,

 that will in fact deter people from going to the polls and enable it to claim after the event that the election was lacking in credibility. But there's also plenty of reason to think that it is in the UK's longer--term self-interest not to push the opposition to the elections much further than that. I'll come back later on if you want me to to all the various reasons, positive and negative, which lie behind that calculation, that continuing calculation of Khmer Rouge self-

 interest.

 As to the particular incidents which have occurred and which have resulted in the deaths of UN personnel, I think it's important to understand just what has occurred, when and how, in relation to all these so you can appreciate the force of what I'm saying - that I refer to them as

 isolated, sporadic, serious enough, yes, but nonetheless not constituting evidence of a full-scale assault. There have been two Bangladeshi soldiers that have been killed. One was on 27 March in a shelling incident: a shell was apparently directed towards the CPAF (that is,

 the SOC arm of the military)and which almost certainly went astray. A second Bangladeshi was killed by a SOC police officer in what I understand was an off-duty kind of brawl situation. One Indonesian soldier has been killed, shot accidentally during a change of guard

 in circumstances which have not been described by anyone as involving, or possibly involving, the Khmer Rouge. Four Bulgarian officers have been killed in two separate incidents, three of them in a very outrageous affair widely reported at the time on 2 April,

 when they were shot in cold blood in their own quarters by a visiting group of Khmer Rouge soldiers that had been invited to dinner: there is no doubt about the nature of what happened

 on that occasion. More recently, on 19 April, just a day or so ago, a second Bulgarian soldier

 4

 was killed in an armoured personnel carrier containing Bulgarian soldiers who went to the assistance of some CPAF forces that were again being shelled or attacked by Khmer Rouge forces in one part of the country.

 As to the civilian personnel that have been killed, two women were, you may recall, killed near Siem Reap in January in circumstances which are believed not to have any political significance at all: it was a local imbroglio involving personal issues and not one that has any larger significance. The more alarming situation on the face of it was the killing of a Japanese

 UN volunteer just a couple of weeks ago, on 8 April, with his Khmer interpreter, that was widely reported at the time to be the Khmer Rouge action. The Iatest information I have, that has not been made public, is that the current UN civilian police investigation now is leading them to believe that it was more likely to be again a non-political, personal action, possibly by a disgruntled job applicant, rather than by a member of the Khmer Rouge for political purposes. If so, of course that is extremely significant, and a significant reassurance for those who were alarmed at the possibility that what was involved here was the first of possibly a

 series of attacks on UN civilian personnel.

 Coming to the specific reports which appeared in this morning's press, courtesy of Mr Murdoch, let me describe the situation there, first of all the so-called withdrawals from locations in Kompong Thom province. What was involved here was a minor operational

 redeployment, withdrawing UN military observers - UNMOS for short - from in fact three locations: a place called Kraya, 50 kms north-west of Kompong Thom; Pokok, 60 kms north-west of Kompong Thom, nearby; and a little place called Bos Thom, 5 kms north of Kraya, only a very minor outpost. In all, only some ten UN military observers were involved in this redeployment exercise, with only one Australian among them: there is another Australian in the general area in a place called Stoung, but only one Australian was involved

 in this particular exercise. Two Indonesian platoons, in fact involving some 50 troops, remain

 at Kraya, which is the largest area of the three places I've mentioned, in order to maintain liaison with the local DK forces. They were there in the first place because this was identified as a DK cantonment area: that's why there are Indonesians in the area. There is no suggestion accordingly that UNTAC is withdrawing completely from the area. The reason for the redeployment was to husband scarce UNTAC resources in the difficult conditions which prevail in Kompong Thom province, and in particular to establish a reserve in case it proved necessary to use the UNTAC military to staff a polling booth in dangerous parts of this

 province. If the significance of this redeployment is to be suggested that it represents the UN abandoning areas and not proceeding with elections, or its capacity to give security for them in areas where that was always previously intended to be the case - that's not so.

 Li

 The situation is as follows. Kraya has always been a DK town, of some 2,500 people. It's in the area unequivocally identified as in DK control and as such it has never, since the DK refused to cooperate in the process, been identified as an area where elections would have been able to take place. Pokok is notionally an ANKI territory — ANKI being the armed

 forces of FUNCINPEC, Prince Rannaridh, formerly Prince Sihanouk's party. That whole area is a patchwork of different factions. It was originally intended, certainly, to hold elections

 there, but electoral staff have not in fact been able to visit that site since July last year because

 of the security situation and it was effectively completely abandoned by UNTAC as a possible polling site long before the withdrawal that has just occurred. So in other words, the redeployment itself conducted for reasons that I've explained represents no setback at all to

 the elections in those areas. Might I just add further that the conduct of the elections in Kompong Thom province is intended to proceed as follows. In phase one, the polling will be conducted out of three hubs which are the most secure areas of the province and where the majority of the population reside. In the second phase, polling is to be conducted in the higher risk areas, in remote areas, including those adjoining places I've just mentioned. There are also some no—go areas including the ones I've just mentioned where it's not intended to conduct polling. Those areas do include as I just said Pokok and Kraya.

 So far as the report about Pailin is concerned — this is a place over on the north—west part of the country near the Thai border — the report in the press about the proposed withdrawal from there is accurate, although it won't occur until for some days, until after 29 April. There are currently five UNTAC personnel there, two UN military observers and three Australian communicators. It needs to be understood that Pailin is squarely within Khmer Rouge territory, and always has been, and as such there has never been really, since last June, been any thought of being able to conduct elections in that area in the absence of DK cooperation.

 The withdrawal of this very small detachment in that area has been under consideration for quite some time because of the security situation and the manifest inability of the election

 being able to take place there, and really what's going to happen there in the next few days simply represents the working out of that.

 As to the other matter reported this morning — the alleged existence of pamphlets specifically targetting Australians — there's no confirmation of that. The only thing we can say is that a couple of weeks ago someone in the Khmer Rouge reportedly told an UNTAC patrol in Kompong Cham province, which is about 100 kms north—east of Phnom Penh, that Australian and French military personnel should not enter KR territory. It's not clear why that KR person specifically singled out Australians for reference there. The only suggestion that's been made is that because the force commander, General Sanderson, does have a high profile as an

 Australian: that might just have been something that was well known to them and led them to

 0

 express this in those terms. But there is nothing more or less sinister than that about that

 particular exchange.

 The final things I want to say are about Australian policy in all of this. We are wholly committed to seeing this process through. We will hold our nerve, as we're urging the whole international community to do and we will only act in full concert with the UN and with the

 international community. There is no question of Australia taking any unilateral action to withdraw, however much the situation might deteriorate. I have said on literally scores of occasions -- inside and outside Parliament, inside and outside Australia — and I said again on the "Sunday" program a few days ago, and I'll say it now, that if there were to be a basic

 change in the security environment of a kind that made it impossible in practise for the election to proceed — involving widespread, that is to say frontal assaults on UNTAC, UN personnel, not merely sporadic and isolated incidents — then in those circumstances of course we and the international community generally would have to reconsider our position. The

 options would be stark, and unattractive. It would be either to pull out the whole UN operation or, alternatively, to fundamentally revise, or seek a revision of, the UN mandate from being a peacekeeping operation involving the merely supervision and monitoring the situation, so that it became a Chapter 7 UN Charter enforcement operation involving troops, standing there, going out and shooting it out. And that of course would involve a quite different nature and scale of military involvement from what is there at the moment. Now they have always been the kind of choices available if the present situation were to be pushed to the point of impossibility in terms of the conduct of the elections and the continuation of the UN presence. And there's no secret about my statement of that position. I've said it on innumerable occasions. I've repeated it on innumerable occasions. If someone has over-reacted to a misreporting of that statement then I'm afraid I simply can't help that.

 It's worth just saying a couple of last sentences on what has actually been achieved by the peace plan and what will remain achieved by it even in the unhappy event of a worse—case scenario developing and the election being aborted, which we all hope won't occur — and, as I said, at the moment there's no expectation that it will. What has been achieved among other things is this: the return of 360,000 refugees and displaced people from a hopeless situation confronting them in those Thai border camps, and moreover a return in circumstances of complete freedom of choice: it is worth noting that only 2,500 of those 360,000 have in fact

 gone back into Khmer Rouge areas, notwithstanding the almost universal scepticism that that

 sort of result would be possible when this process started a year ago. Secondly, you've had a situation where the conditions have been created for financial support — rehabilitation,

 reconstruction assistance — to flow into the country in a way that was simply impossible

 before the exercise became internationalised and when the only government of the country

 VA

 was the Vietnamese—installed Hun Sen SOC regime which had no international legitimacy at

 all. But thirdly, and most importantly, what's been achieved -- and this is spelt out very effectively by Greg Sheridan in his disembowling of the egregious Mr Pilger in The Australian this morning — has been the disengagement from the Cambodian scene of the external supporters of the internal parties: in particular the total isolation that has been achieved of the Khmer Rouge from its main international patron, China, the country which supported it with arms, material, financial and political support through all the darkest days of the Khmer Rouge operations in that country. So we may or may not face a situation of continuing insurgency in Cambodia, whether or not the elections proceed, whatever the outcome of the current course of events. But even if there were to be a continuation of such a difficult internal situation, it would be occurring in a very different context from that which was the case previously — through the disappearance from the scene, which I have every reason to believe will be permanent, of those external patrons.

 So, I'm sorry that's been a long briefing, but it is one that I think has been necessary to cover all the ground, and I'm happy to respond to your questions.

 Q: These people in Pailin. How would you actually get them out?

 GE: It is a straight helicopter operation or land exit. I have no doubt that DK would be only too happy to see them go, and it is a reasonable expectation that they would allow them to go without any further military difficulties being caused.

 Q: It would have to be a negotiated situation and the choppers are not allowed to go into that area.

 GE: Well, it may well have to be negotiated but that is not seen in any of the reporting that I am aware of as creating any kind of particular problem. One of the difficult problems has been to supply these people for the some months that they have in fact

 been operating as an isolated detachment.

 Q. And is one of the reasons you want to get them out concern for their own safety.

 GE: Well I'm not making any judgement about this. This is a military operational

 judgement that is being made by the UNTAC people on the ground. I do not think their safety is any more at risk than it has been up until now, and I'm not sure to what extent considerations of that kind have been crucial in the present judgement. It may

 well be a matter of husbanding, pulling back resources to where they can be more

 8

 usefully deployed in the immediate context of the election campaign. The particular point that deserves emphasis, though, is that what it is all about at the moment is not

 trying to maintain a UN presence in DK areas which has been the case up until now, or on the edges of those areas in places like Kraya where they have been there as part of the original UN deployment to deal with the hoped for cantonment and demobilisation: the point is to redeploy, rearrange your UN resources so they can be most effective where they are most needed, that is to say in creating a measure of security at the ballot boxes.

 Q: Could it become another Vietnam, with the UN, the Australian troops bogged down in

 Cambodia?

 GE: No I do not think that follows at all. There is a firm timetable that has been set for the withdrawal of the UN forces, that is to say some three months after the election in

 August.

 Q: (inaudible)

 GE: Well, that is a totally different situation and it is one where there was a head on assault on the election process. The kinds of reasons which have made me up until now believe that that would not be in the KR's interest to sustain, are exactly the same set of reasons that would continue to apply after the election is held, and I will spell them out if you would like. On the positive side, what the KR has gained by this attitude, by non—cooperation so far, from their point of view has been: the retention of a significant chunk of territory — some 15 or 20 per cent depending on how you count the leopard skin areas; secondly, the retention of some 3 to 5 per cent of the

 population — that is only a few hundred thousand people, but it is control in those territories which it would have not otherwise have been able to maintain had it cooperated; thirdly, the retention of its armed forces front line troops — maybe some 12,000, plus a significant tail behind them; plus it has also had the virtue, from its

 point of view, of not exposing itself to a demonstration of its own impotence at the ballot box — nobody suggests that they would be getting anything more than 10 or 15 per cent, at an absolute maximum, of the vote had they contested the election.

 On the negative side, from their point of view, is the judgement that they will undoubtedly have been, I believe, making that they would put very much at risk their

 remaining economic lifeblood across the border into Thailand were they to become once again comprehensive international pariahs as a result of, in effect, forcing the

 0

 collapse of the election process and maybe the withdrawal of the UN. They would also confront the possibility of a major military assault upon them by the Phnom Penh forces, but this time with those forces, it can reasonably be presumed, getting some degree of significant support either directly or indirectly from the international community, and in a situation where the DK would have absolutely no basis to assume

 it could rely on any support from China. Now I think they have made all those calculations and so far at least, the balance of those calculations has led them to take no more serious action than they have. I am not suggesting that what they have done

 is not serious or trivial in any way, manifestly it is not, but it is still falling short of the kind of centrally directed full frontal assault on the process on a scale that would really put it at risk. I could be proven wrong, of course — I could be proven wrong within

 the next 24 hours — but so far it has not happened although they have had ample opportunities to do this at any time since last June. The international community

 keeps on expressing its determination to hold firm on this, and I think the balance will hold in the way that I have described.

 What will happen after the election remains highly problematic — in terms of whether or not it will be possible to put together a durable government, and whether or not it might even be possible to put together what Prince Sihanouk manifestly is interested in doing, and that is some kind of government of national reconciliation which the KR would become a participant in notwithstanding non—involvement in the elections.

 That would depend on the reaction of other parties and it is just impossible to speculate about that at this stage. But even if the worst case continued and the KR were to, after the election, maintain some kind of active or semi—active guerilla—type insurgency, that would really be no different from the situation that has prevailed in

 scores of other countries (including on a continuing basis in the United Kingdom, it might reasonably be acknowledged) without the international community feeling the need to be in there en masse for that reason. Whether or not there is any point in the

 UN maintaining some limited military presence, as observers or something, to play a role in that situation is an issue about which there is active debate at the moment. I personally would be sceptical about the utility of that. But I add the further point that if there were to be some resumption, in a horror case, or some threatened resumption

 of full scale KR genocidal activity (assuming that were to be possible without its external supply lines intact and that is highly dubious) then of course I think the international community would be very responsive to its responsibility in that situation to do something about it. But just to suggest that there is some sort of inevitability or necessity about there being a permanent UN or other troop presence

 there just does not hold up to any kind of close analysis, with respect.

 10

 Q: Do you agree with the report this morning that involves accounts that individual soldiers are feeling themselves in serious peril? How much jeopardy do you think they are in and at what level of casualties would you decide that there had been a full

 frontal assault?

 GE: Well my understanding of the situation in so far as Corporal Green from Horsham is concerned that he was involved with the withdrawal from these areas from Kompong Thom and there was some episode that occurred where, with some breakdown of guard duty arrangements, some armed Cambodian wandered into the middle of the

 Indonesian compound and some issue arose of someone leaping upon him with guns being waved around but nothing actually happening in that particular context: people were responding, as was here recorded,"if someone aims at gun at me I will shoot them". Well they are entitled to under the self—defence rules that are applicable to UN

 personnel. But this particular bit of local colour injected into the rest of the story I do not think does much for our understanding of the larger currents that are at work, nor does it have any particular implications for Australia's or anyone else's policy response.

 Q: At what level of peril do you think the Australian troops are in there in this situation and at what level of casualties would you decide there had been a full frontal assault

 on them?

 GE: Well I do not propose to try and quantify that, except to say that obviously something widespread and more systematic that what has occurred at the moment, either directed against military personnel or against UN election observers. Nobody has been in any

 real doubt, as I have already said, that the DK has the capacity to mount such an

 assault should it choose. It would be foolish to deny that. But whether it has the will to, whether it sees any point in doing so, is a matter for judgement and analysis, and I have explained why there is still, despite all these press reports, a quite high level of confidence in Phnom Penh and in UN headquarters and among all the countries that are most closely involved in this, that we will be able to maintain the election process.

 Q: Is there any point in Mr Muto's suggestion of a new international conference?

 GE: I think there may be. But I think the basic point there is to demonstrate the firmness of the international community's resolve to proceed with this and to get a clear cut

 11

 statement of the international community's disgust at the kind of violence that is being perpetrated in the various ways that I have mentioned, and I think that can probably be regarded as having been achieved by the meeting that is now taking place in New York of the representatives of all the Paris Conference countries which will, as I understand it - I think they are doing the final drafting now, or are about to tonight

 our time - will result in a very strong and unanimous statement of this kind. Whether there is any point in trying to drag together foreign ministers at this kind of notice is something that I think needs a bit of further discussion.

 Q: Who is that message directed to? Why have another international reaffirmation of the peace process?

 GE: Its directed at all the internal parties. It's directed against the CPP, the SOC, to the extent that it is minded to secure its election result by foul play of one kind of another - just to remind them that the international community is watching this very closely and that the circumstances in which the election is conducted will not be without

 relevance in determining the international community's reaction when it comes to aid and everything else after the process is complete. That is a useful message to give that side of the equation. So far as the KR is concerned, it really goes to the kind of calculus that I mentioned previously: that I think (assuming that the KR are capable of acting rationally, and I acknowledge that is a large assumption) consideration of how the international community will react economically and militarily if they were to push this to the brink and over the brink, it is a very important message to get to them - that there is a limit to the tolerance, there is a limit to the patience. I do not want to go into any more detail about the Thai border and what might be involved in terms of

 international action to close that and so on. But considerations of this kind are very

 closely related to demonstrations of the resolve of the international community,

 communicated through mechanisms like this.

 Q: The limits of tolerance, with respect, are extraordinary high in that other great area of genocidal activity, in Bosnia, how do you expect the international community to be so

 much more responsive to the KR it becomes genocidal again?

 GE: These are two totally different situations. In the former Yugoslavia and Bosnia you have an active shooting war in a terrain which pinned down something like 20 German divisions, as I recall it, during the Second World War without producing a conclusive military result in a situation where, as a result, decisive military action is

 not ever going to be easy to contemplate being successful

 12

 Q: South—East Asia has not been all that ... either

 GE: I am sorry: I am not going to get into a general philosophical exchange with you on wars present and past around the international landscape. I just make the point that

 there is a humanitarian relief exercise going on under UN auspices in former Yugoslavia at the moment, where one of the matters in issue is whether any more robust a military response would actually prejudice the capacity to handle that, and that is obviously a crucially relevant consideration. None of those things are applying

 in the same way in Cambodia. What we are seeing in Cambodia is a classic UN peacekeeping operation, with additions — the addition being the civilian administration role that the UN has been playing in order to manage through the transitional period. Some aspects of that process have obviously broken down, and

 obviously there are risks to all the participants flowing from the increased level of violence of various kinds I have described. But there is nothing resembling the

 situation of ongoing full scale war that you have in former Yugoslavia.

 Q: With the Khmer Rouge pulling out of Phnom Penh and with the UN deciding to pull out of Pailin as well, is there not a danger that basically all links between UNTAC and the Khmer Rouge will be severed, with no hope of further talks?

 GE: I do not think that there is any difficulty about establishing lines of communication with them. Notwithstanding the pull—out, there is still contact occurring at a number of other locations around the country. The messages can certainly be sent backwards and forwards, even if there is no easy direct communication with the leadership. But I think at the moment, in terms of at least of the period between now and the election, it is not clear that even a breakdown in communication of the kind you describe would

 be in itself crucial. For all practical purposes, it has long been clear that the Khmer Rouge were not going to participate, not going to cooperate, in the election process and were going to remain politically very hostile to it. That is not news. There will

 obviously need to be, hopefully, some form of communication after the election in order to try to recreate some stability for the longer term. But I do not think that we need to worry about the logistics of that at this stage.

 Q: Are there any other Khmer Rouge strongholds apart from Pailin that the UN are withdrawing from at the moment?

 13

 GE: Not that I am aware of, no. Pailin is a special case. The Kompong Thom exercise has long been one of the most volatile and difficult security areas, and it is quite possible that as part of this process of redeployment, husbanding of resources and redirection of

 resources into assisting the polling process and to providing added degrees of security for it, that in some of the other more volatile areas of the country, that some similar process of this kind will occur. I am not privy to the detailed planning that is going on in UNTAC Headquarters at the moment, although I sought, obviously, detailed

 information on these particular movements in order to be able to respond to this morning's report.

 Q: Would you expect that by the time of the elections that all UN troops would have been moved out of KR territory?

 GE: No, I can make no statement or judgment about that. While there were no UN troops deployed into DK heartland areas up in the north—west and so on (apart from the rather odd situation in Pailin) there were a number of UN forces deployed in more ambiguous areas, of which Kraya was one: as I mentioned, we had a couple of Indonesian platoons there in what had originally been identified as a DK cantonment site, not in a part of the country unequivocally in DK control — they were able to move in and out of that area and have been, it being right on the border of a contested area, that particular one. But I am not sure how many other such locations there are to withdraw from. There may not be very many.

 Q: To clarify this, once these troops have been moved out of Pailin, there will be no UN troops in uncontested Khmer Rouge territory.

 GE: I did not say that. I said I am not briefed. I have not sought information on that and I do not know. I am just saying that it is my understanding that in terms of clear cut areas of DK control which have been that way unequivocally since last June, I am not personally aware of any other examples of deployment in heartland territory. I think

 that is right, but I will have to take that on notice, if you want a further respnse on that.

 Q: Assuming there is no war and the elections go ahead, and so forth, and we pull out in three months, Cambodia is going to be in a pretty dreadful state unless the international community provides money to keep the place going. $780 million was promised last year and very little of that has got through. Is Australia putting any pressure on the international community in any way at the moment.

 `.'

 14

 GE: Well certainly that is the theme that I have been harping on with monotonous regularity in my contacts with other countries and across conference tables whenever I have had the opportunity to do so, including most recently in New York a few days ago when I met with representatives, including the ambassadors of the P5 countries.

 And this necessity for money to flow, resources to flow, not only from bilateral donors but from the international financial institutions, is something that I regard as absolutely crucial not just in some future zone of peace and tranquility that might be

 established in umpteen months time, but right now in order to assist that very process.

 I believe that message has been received and certainly if the elections proceed and something barely in the nature of a satisfactory result emerges from that in the sense of some process that gives the prospect of some kind of viability, durability, for an

 elected government, then there will be no difficulty at all about those resources flowing.

 The UN must retain, obviously, an on—going presence in Cambodia through the specialised agencies — UNDP (hopefully not the UNHCR, I think their High Commissioner for Refugees job is largely complete), but the food program and things

 of that kind. Similarly the UN human rights machinery must remain an active presence on the ground and there has already been agreement in Geneva a few weeks ago that there be a special Secretary—General's Representative appointed for on—going monitoring of the human rights situation. Equally I think everybody agrees at the very least that there needs to be some kind of trigger mechanism in place on an on—going basis if the UN military and UNTAC pulls out on schedule, to ensure that any deterioration of the situation in a way that would justify or require UN reinvolvement

 can get very quickly to the Security Council. That might involve a mechanism bringing together the P5 plus Core Group that is there operating in this way as a

 political sounding board in Cambodia or it might involve some exercise with the Japanese and Indonesian Co—Chairmen of the Paris Conference. I think people are looking for things like that, in the sense of demonstrating a resolve not to simply walk

 away from the situation.

 But at the same time the UN has to know not only how to get into these peacekeeping situations but how to get out of them. It can't be part of the general UN brief to stay around as long as it takes to produce absolute stability, absolute tranquility in the countries in question: I mean, necessarily, UN resources are going to have to be

 redeployed before that millenium can be achieved.

