---
title: "Australia broadens its participation in Middle East peace process multilateral groups"
date: "1993-10-27"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183501
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650066%22
---

 M156 27 October 1993

 1/3

 AUSTRALIA BROADENS ITS PARTICIPATION IN MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS MULTILATERAL GROUPS

 Australia will continue its participation in the next round of multilateral working group meetings which form part of the Middle East peace process, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Evans, announced today.

 Senator Evans said that Australia has sent an expert delegation to participate in the Water Resources working group in Beijing from 26-29 October, and will send a similar delegation to the Arms Control and Regional Security working group which is to meet in Moscow from 3-4 November 1993.

 "For the first time, Australia's official delegation to the Water Resources working group will include a technical expert", said Senator Evans.

 "Mr Brian Sadler, Director of Water Resources of the Water Authority of Western Australia, and an internationally recognised authority on water conservation and utilisation, will be providing technical advice to the delegation", he said.

 Senator Evans said that Australia shared many similar climatic and hydrologic characteristics with the countries of the Middle East region. Australia would be looking to identify specific areas where it could make a contribution to the advancement of the objectives of the working group.

 "Water resources will continue to play a crucial role in the search for peace and stability in the Middle East. Australia recognises the relevance of developing and applying appropriate strategies in the field of water conservation and in enhancing water supply to the durability of any comprehensive peace settlement in the region", said Senator Evans.

 Recalling Australia's pledge of assistance of $15 million to help secure lasting peace in the Middle East, following the agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) on Palestinian interim self-government, Senator Evans said that the Government was willing to look at the option of allocating some of these funds for activities proposed by Australia within the framework of the Water

 Resources working group, and endorsed by the group.

 In the Arms Control and Regional Security working group, Senator Evans said that Australia would continue its role of encouraging agreement on a range of confidence building measures and in promoting regional dialogue and agreement on genuine arms control and security issues.

 COMMONWEALTH I 

 P ARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH j

 "Australia is now a well-established member of this group, and the Australian

 delegation will be going to the Moscow meeting with a number of practical ideas to enhance regional cooperation in arms control and security", Senator Evans said.

 Senator Evans said that the recent lsraeVPLO agreement on Palestinian interim self-government had given new impetus to the multilateral arm of the peace process. Despite Syria's and Lebanon's continuing absence from the multilateral working groups, there were good prospects that significant developments in some of the working groups would shortly occur.

 Australia participated in the Refugees working group meeting held in Tunis earlier this month, and was currently giving consideration to sending representatives to the Economic Development and Environment working groups to be held in Copenhagen

 and Cairo in the next few weeks.

 Senator Evans said that the Australian delegation to the Water Resources working group meeting would be led by Mr Michael Landale, Assistant Secretary, Middle East and Africa Branch, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The Leader of the Australian delegation to the Arms Control and Regional Security working group would be Mr Richard Starr, Assistant Secretary, Peace, Arms Control and

 Disarmament Branch, also of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

 CANBERRA

