---
title: "Deferment of introduction of Migration Reform Act"
date: "1993-05-28"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211181459
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706944%22
---

 t

 t

 CANBERRA, 28 MAY 1993

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 CONTACT. Ruth Dewsbury

 06 277 7860/018 624 847

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 DEFERMENT OF INTRODUCTION OF MIGRATION REFORM ACT

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, today announced that the Government had decided to defer to 1 September 1994 the introduction of those parts of the Migration Reform Act which were due to come into effect on 1 November 1993.

 The Government will be introducing a legislative amendment in the Budget sittings of Parliament to defer the introduction.

 "The decision to defer the introduction was made following,a review, which I initiated in April, of the planning for the Act's implementation," Senator Bolkus said.

 The Migration Reform Act, passed by Parliament in December 1992, simplifies the legal basis for administration of entry to and stay in Australia. It expands merits review by the Migration Internal Review Office and the Immigration Review Tribunal, establishes the Refugee Review Tribunal, and modifies appeal rights to the courts. It also establishes a detailed Code of Procedures for the processing of visa applications and revises and clarifies the procedures in relation to cancellation of visas.

 The Minister emphasised that the introduction of the Refugee Review Tribunal, a body independent of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, established to review onshore refugee decisions, will not be affected by the deferment of the implementation of the Migration Reform Act. The Refugee Review Tribunal will be established on 1 July

 1993 as originally proposed.

 "It is clear from the advice I have received from the Department that, in order to assure smooth and trouble-free implementation of the Reform Act, the introduction should be deferred," Senator Bolkus said.

 "The review has also highlighted a number of minor amendments, predominantly of a technical nature, that need to be made to the legislation to ensure such trouble-free implementation. Those further amendments will be introduced in the Autumn sittings of the Parliament."

 "The Migration Reform Act involves far reaching changes to the administration of migration law and to administrative processes. These include substantial drafting of subordinate legislation and procedures, major and complex changes to ADP and administrative systems, very significant training of departmental officers and a major information program to enable the Department's clients to understand the changes which will occur."

 I

