---
title: "Immigration Minister announces appointments to Refugee Review Tribunal"
date: "1993-02-04"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180105
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1698072%22
---

 Media Release

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MPParliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600Telephone: (06) 277 7860MPS 6/93IMMIGRATION MINISTER ANNOUNCES APPOINTMENTS TO REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNALThe Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today announced the appointment of the Principal Member and a Member to the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT).Mr Hand said the Principal Member would be Professor Leroy Certoma of Sydney, and the first Member appointed would be Mr Maurice William Gerkens of Melbourne. hProfessor Certoma was previously the Senior Member of the Immigration Review Tribunal in NSW. He is currently a Visiting Professor, Faculty of Law, University of NSW, and Professorial Fellow, Faculty of Law, University of Wollongong.Mr Gerkens has been a Victorian magistrate for 16 years. He has also held positions with the Metropolitan Fire Brigades Tribunal and the Country Fire Authority Appeal Tribunal.Mr Hand said the RRT had been established by the Government following its evaluation of the refugee determination system undertaken last year.It would begin operations on 1 July 1993, to independently review decisions to not grant refugee status.Mr Hand said the RRT would be a statutory body with Members appointed by the Governor-General. It would take a non-adversarial approach in hearing and assessing claims, and would have the power to make decisions.The appointments of additional full and part-time members are expected to be announced during the first half of the year. Mr Hand said he was confident that the RRT will provide a quick, fair and credible system of review..../2• COMMONWEALTHPARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 -2-

 "Recent experience has shown that the refugee system, and particularly the review phase, must deliver decisions which are seen by the community to be impartial and well-grounded," he said.

 Mr Hand said the newly-appointed Members, together with additional Members and Registrars, would work to ensure that the necessary arrangements were made to allow the Tribunal to fulfil its charter.

 This would include setting up RRT registries in Sydney and Melbourne, recruiting staff, and establishing operational procedures which would be fair, economical, informal and quick.

 "I have no doubt that every person who seeks a review of a refugee decision will be well served by the new Tribunal," Mr Hand said.

 CANBERRA 4 February, 1993

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office (06) 277.7860

 Libby Lloyd DILGEA (06) 264.4332

 Professor Leroy Certoma (02) 289.0222

 Mr Maurice Gerkens (018) 172 612

