---
title: "Kerin deplores situation in war-torn Sudan"
date: "1993-03-07"
creators:
  - "Kerin, John"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE AND OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180750
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1713484%22
---

 No.

  MTAI 11 Date: 10 March 1993

 Kerin deplores situation in war-torn Sudan

 "The situation in war-torn Sudan represents a textbook case of how to ruin a promising country," the Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, John Kerin, said today. "Once it was hoped Sudan would become the breadbasket of Africa and the Arab world; now it's a basketcase.

 Mr Kerin was commenting on recent reports of massive starvation and illness in Sudan, Africa's largest country.

 "A decade of bloody civil war has brought development to a standstill in what was already one of the world's poorest nations. Clean water, access to education and health care, religious freedom, equal opportunities for women - these are luxuries for the majority of the 26 million Sudanese.

 "In the south of the country, only the major towns remain under government control. In both the government areas and in areas held by the Sudanese Peoples Liberation Army, access to food and services is at best intermittent and at worst non existent

 "Although some relief has got through to the south, due to the efforts of the United Nations and non government organisations, smooth operations have continually been hampered by the intransigence of both parties. To make matters worse, the few existing roads are in poor repair and aid delivery by plane is both risky and costly.

 "Amnesty International and Africa Watch report widespread alleged human rights abuses and torture. Three million people have fled to the north where they live a precarious life in shanty dwellings on the edge of town with little access to services or employment.

 "The economy is in a shambles, there is massive inflation and Sudanese living in all parts of the country are having difficulty making ends meet.

 "Australia has provided nearly $7 million to the UN and NGOs since 1991/92 in an attempt to alleviate the human suffering in Sudan. We have also provided assistance in the form of food aid to Sudanese refugees living in camps in Ethiopia.

 "Our aid officials are monitoring the situation closely and will recommend appropriate action as the situation develops."

 Australian assistance to needy people in Sudan is administered by AIDAB, Australia's overseas aid agency.

 CANBERRA For further information contact AIDAB Public Affairs: Wendy Levy - (06) 276 4966 or ah (06) 247 8920 Cathy Walker - (06) 276 4960

 Mr Kerin's office: Peter Vardos - (06) 277 7420 COMMONWEALTH

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

