---
title: "Mr Keating wrong on immigration levels"
date: "1993-03-09"
creators:
  - "Hewson, John"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180803
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1754030%22
---

 IN

 John Hewson 

 MEDIA RELEASE Leader of the Opposition

 42/93 9 March 1993

 MR KEATING WRONG ON IMMIGRATION LEVELS

 Mr Keating today ruled out any change in the level of immigration under Labor. He is wrong.

 Fairness demands reduction until there are jobs available, both for people in Australia as well as those intending to come here.

 As I have said, while immigration has made a phenomenal contribution for years, it is not fair to bring people out so they end up on the dole queues.

 It is not fair on job seekers in Australia, whether they are school leaver's, women, middle aged fathers or those fearing loss of their job.

 It is not fair on the taxpayer to be asked to provide more over and above the $400 million it is costing now to support new arrivals who sadly go straight into the welfare system.

 This morning Mr Keating has highlighted his Government's position that there will be no reduction in immigration numbers below 80,000.

 This makes no sense in Australia's current economic circumstances.

 As I have consistently pointed out for over eighteen months, our immigration program during previous recessions has fallen to intakes as low as 50,000 net.

 Mr Keating has totally failed to explain why in this recession, which is worse than previous ones, the immigration program should continue to remain so relatively high.

 We believe it should fall dramatically and immediately and only be increased when our economic recovery is clear and sustainable.

 We have said so consistently over the past eighteen months.

 In contrast to the Government, we have spelt out reforms to the immigration program which are non-discriminatory, which will restore the integrity of entry criteria, and which we believe

 will result in a dramatic and immediate reduction in the migrant intake,

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 2.

 Those reforms include better labour market testing of applicants, more rigorous, bona f ides testing (e.g...for fiances and spouse$), denial of social security benefits 'for the first two years (except for refugees and special hardship cases), and an

 increased emphasis on english language proficiency.

 The number one issue in this election is that jobs of Australians must be restored. Within that, the level of immigration is but one of very many aspects to be tackled. I ask Mr Keating to

 reconsider his approach to immigration so that what I believe to be the commonsense views of the community, including the union movement, or addressed.

 000OOO000

