---
title: "Law and the decent society"
date: "1993-02-23"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Australian Democrats"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214127094
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08024423%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE

 SENATOR SID SPINDLER  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRAT  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA

 P A R L I A M E N T  O F  A U S T R A L I A  · THE SENATE

 2 3  F e b r u a r y  1 9 9 2 9 3 /9 8

 LAW AND THE DECENT SOCIETY

 The law should be a positive force for achieving social justice and a decent society, according to  the Australian Democrats.

 "The legal system should protect the weak and provide easy access for people who have to turn to  it to resolve a dispute or right an injustice", Law and Justice Spokesperson, Senator Sid Spindler,  said today.

 "Instead, the legal system has become a tool of enrichment for many who use it including some of  its practitioners. Rising costs are excluding most Australians with legal aid now rejecting more  than 50% of applications."

 Senator Sid Spindler today released an extensive program of law reform with a Bill of Rights as  its centre piece. Proposed measures include:

 â–º  independent complaints tribunals for the legal profession and judges to deal with  allegations of misconduct and bias; â–º  independent tribunals with consumer representation to fix lawyers fees and court  charges; â–º  increased legal aid funding, all interest from solicitors trust funds to go to Legal 

 Aid;

 â–º  in the new Parliament an exposure draft Bill of Rights for public consultation; â–º  improved settlement of access, custody and property disputes through increased  use of mediation and better enforcement of court decisions; â–º  more rigorous criminal prosecution of corporate crooks; â–º  tighter gun control laws; â–º  a code of conduct for police and demonstrators to facilitate the peaceful conduct of 

 political demonstrations and rallies; â–º  comprehensive prison reform with emphasis on rehabilitation; â–º  regular audits of Government Department procedures to protect the personal  privacy of Australian citizens; â–º  reforming the criminal law, particularly the draconian provisions affecting 

 indigenous peoples and juveniles; and â–º  ensuring that Australia meets its obligations under international treaties,  particularly in relation to asylum seekers and their rights before the courts.

 "The legal system must be a guardian of the rule of law to protect citizens from criminal  elements, white collar bandits, high handed action by Government or the bureaucracy and other  individuals no matter how rich or powerful.

 "To achieve this, people coming before the courts must be able to do so on a basis of genuine  equality and these reforms are designed to move Australia closer to this ideal," Senator Spindler  concluded. .

 For further information: Contact Senator Spindler - 03 416 1880 (w), 03 869 6607 (h).

 COMMONWEALTH 

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY  MICAH

 ,A -U ;-S (r;T-R'-^A â–   L 1 /A^N 

 DEMOCRATS $  0 -

 LAW AND JUSTICE

 1993 FEDERAL ELECTION ACTION PLAN

 OBJECTIVE

 To use the law as an important means of achieving a more fair, just and  democratic society.

 PRINCIPLE

 Constant scrutiny and reform is needed to maximise individual freedom and  initiative while ensuring social justice, environmental protection and a stable  legal system with access to all.

 ACTION PLAN

 Cost o f justice

 The Australian Democrats will reduce the cost of justice for the Australian  community and improve accessibility to the legal system.

 The Democrats propose that: * independent tribunals fix lawyers' fees and court charges; * the Trade Practices Commission and or the Prices Surveillance Authority 

 oversee the legal profession; * advertising of Barristers' fees be permitted; * Queen's Counsel appointments be abolished; * contingency fees be introduced; * comprehensive mediation programs provide an alternative to the court process; * user-pays court be introduced for corporations and tax disputes over $5 million; * legislation to be produced in clear and simple English; and, * interlocutory stages and pleadings in trials be simplified.

 S e lf regula tion

 The legal profession's self regulation has not been adequate. Independent  complaints tribunals are to be established for the legal profession and judges to  deal with allegations of misconduct and bias.

 Legal Aid

 Legal aid funding to be increased. Recent cuts to legal aid funding are attacking  the basic democratic principle that access to justice must not be dependent upon  an individual's ability to pay.

 The Australian Democrat will continue to call on both the Federal and State  Governments to accept their responsibilities to legal aid funding by ensuring that  their grants meet any shortfall at a level which is fair and equitable for people  caught up in the legal system.

 Interest from solicitors' trust fund accounts will be channelled to legal aid funds  and not be diverted by the legal profession.

 Legal aid will be provided for all environmental cases upon meeting set criteria. 

 Bill o f Rights

 A draft Bill of Rights will be introduced after the election and widely circulated  for public debate. The need for such a Bill of Rights arises from the fact that  certain fundamental rights, for example, the right to freedom of speech and  assembly, legal representation and compensation for compulsory acquisition of  property are not protected by the Constitution. The High Court's role to fill the  gaps is uncertain and intermittent and subject to long delays.

 Illustrations of the need for such a Bill are blatant breaches of human rights in  many areas including our prisons, the draconian Western Australian juvenile  justice legislation and the disclosure of Aidex demonstrators' names by the  Australian Federal Police to the Department of Social Security.

 An Australian Bill of Rights will eventually be entrenched in the Constitution  and would reflect the democratic ideals of contemporary Australian society,  declaring and protecting the fundamental rights and freedoms of all people,  including political, civil, legal, economic, environmental and social rights. A Bill  of Rights would also provide protection for our children and youth from 

 homelessness, unemployment, lack of education and child abuse.

 Family Law

 Family Law reform to receive immediate attention. The Democrats support the  120 recommendations recently made by the Family Law Committee which are  designed to improve the settlement of access, custody and property disputes, to  reduce costs and to increase the use of mediation.

 We will also provide for separate legal representation for children in family and  custody disputes and for gay and lesbian defacto couples to be included within  the Family Court's jurisdiction over property disputes.

 The Australian Democrats stopped increases in Family Law Court fees and will  continue to resist any change in this position.

 Corporate Law

 Corporate law prosecutions will be more rigorously pursued with an emphasis on  criminal prosecution to be used as a deterrent for white collar crime.

 In the new Parliament the Democrats will move to establish at Commonwealth  level a Commission to investigate corruption in the corporate and public sectors.

 Gun Control

 Tighter gun control laws to be uniformly introduced across Australia. The  Democrats will establish a gun control authority to ensure that all guns are  stored and used with safety. Only persons who can demonstrate professional or  personal need will be permitted to use automatic weapons and to store guns at  home.

 Sporting shooters will need to comply with storage requirements to become and  retain the status of licensed shooters. In general, gun ownership will be  restricted to those who need guns for vermin control, competitive shooting at  government recognised ranges and those who collect antique guns.

 ' >

 Code o f Conduct

 A Code of Conduct for police and demonstrators to be introduced to ensure that  police are able to deal with political demonstrations in a peaceful manner; police  training to be reviewed to improve police capacity to do so.

 Prison Reform .

 The reform of the prison system will be made a priority. There is an urgent need  to give legislative effect to international conventions prohibiting the inhumane  treatment of prisoners.

 The Democrats will provide: * on the job training of prison officers through tied grants to the States with the  aim of placing greater emphasis on rehabilitation and education of prisoners; * a review of existing curricula of training courses for prison officers and  establish new courses with the aim of substantially upgrading threshold  qualifications for the employment of prison officers;

 * funding for increased vocational training and general education of prisoners; * a transition program, including counselling to assist in coping with conditions  outside, and in finding subsequent employment, education, housing, social  contacts, and so on; and,

 * funding to prisoner aid groups to enable them to establish Half Way Houses for  ex-prisoners and to increase assistance to prisoners after their release, and to  their families before and after release.

 Equality before the legal system

 Equality before the law and courts will be pursued for all persons - 

 discrimination on grounds of sex, race or sexual preference will be removed.

 «.·'·â–  ·' '

 Criminal Law

 The Australian Democrats will review criminal law in Australia as a matter of  priority, particularly draconian provisions affecting indigenous peoples and  juveniles.

 We will fully implement the recommendations of the Royal Commission into  Aboriginal deaths in custody.

 The Democrats will abolish legislation for incarceration of 'repeat1  juvenile  offenders such as the present Juvenile Justice legislation in Western Australia.

 We will repeal all laws related to vagrancy and public drunkenness.

 All gender differences will be removed from the age of consent across Australia.

 Privacy

 The Australian Democrats will continue to protect the personal privacy of  Australian citizens. Measures will include strengthened legislation prohibiting  the wrongful disclosure or communication of confidential information, a strict 

 code of conduct for all Government Departments, and the carrying out of regular  external audits on the use of confidential information.

 We will continue to oppose the introduction of a universal identification card or  number.

 International obligations

 Australia's obligations under international treaties to be enforced, particularly in  relation to asylum seekers and their rights to equality before the courts. The  Democrats will continue to strongly oppose the attempts by the Federal  Government to interfere with current court cases and to limit grounds of appeal  for asylum seekers, thus creating a class of people with severely reduced rights 

 before Australian courts.

 Policy Stream: Democratic Reform Issues; Policy Code: PSA.

 For further information or comment contact:  Australian Democrats National Secretariat  3rd Floor, 10-12 Brisbane Avenue  CANBERRA 2600 

 Phone: (06)273.1059  Facsimile: (06)273.1251

