---
title: "Diplomatic appointment: Malaysia"
date: "1993-03-26"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211180937
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1619892%22
---

 No.

 Date..

 M58 26 March 1993

 DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT: MALAYSIA

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Gareth Evans, today announced the appontment of Mr John Dauth as Australia's next High Commissioner to Malaysia.

 Mr Dauth, who has headed the International Security Division of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade since 1991, will succeed Mr Frank Murray.

 Senator Evans said that Mr Dauth would be taking up his appointment at a time when Malaysia was becoming an even more important regional partner for Australia.

 "We enjoy constructive and wide—ranging bilateral ties whose potential for development will be further reinforced by the Australian Government's commitment to become engaged even more actively with the South East Asian region," Senator Evans said.

 Our bilateral economic links are maturing quickly as the result of growth in trade, investment and technology exchange, while in the multilateral sphere we share a commitment to a fair and open international trading system."

 Senator Evans said that Australia and Malaysia were also working together on the development of Regional Security dialogue, a common interest reinforced by the practical experience of bilateral and multilateral cooperation, including under the Five Power Defence Arrangements.

 Other areas of close cooperation include aviation, education and tourism, refugee settlement and narcotics control.

 Before his current assignment in the Department, Mr Dauth was Senior Adviser to the Minister for Foreign affairs and Trade from 1989-1991. He joined the Australian Public Service in 1969 and has served in Lagos, Islamabad and London. He was Charge d'Affaires in Tehran from 1983-1985 and Consul—

 General in Noumea from 1986-1987.

 Mr Dauth will take up his position.in May. COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 CANBERRA MICAH

