---
title: "Government strengthens Australia's humanitarian commitment"
date: "1993-01-20"
creators:
  - "Hand, Gerry"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211179816
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1698074%22
---

 Media Release 

 ___

 Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon. Gerry Hand, MP

 Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600 Telephone: (06) 277 7860

 MPS 3/93

 GOVERNMENT STRENGTHENS AUSTRALIA'S HUMANITARIAN COMMITMENT

 The Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Gerry Hand, today announced a package of measures designed to strengthen Australia's humanitarian commitment. The package includes:

 • the separation of the humanitarian entry program from the regular migration program;

 • an increase in the number of entrants under the humanitarian categories by 2,000 within the overall migration program of 80,000 for 1992-93; and

 • the establishment of an enhanced co-ordination mechanism between Government agencies responsible for Australia's international humanitarian efforts in order to deliver a comprehensive response.

 Mr Hand said there were now an estimated 40 million-refugees or displaced people worldwide, with turbulent events in Eastern Europe and Africa, for example, leading to increased refugee numbers and creating millions of displaced persons.

 "Australia has acted swiftly to implement the Special Assistance Category within the Refugee and Humanitarian Program to help deal with the crisis in . the Balkans and to help ethnic minorities in the former Soviet Union," Mr Hand

 said.

 "However, considering the rapidly changing global environment, the Government has decided to increase the humanitarian entry program from 10,000 to 12,000 persons for the 1992-93 program year.

 "This increase will be absorbed within the overall migration program of 80,000 places.

 .../2

 COMMONWEALTH I PARLIAMEN TARY  LIBRARY MICAH

 -2-

 "The increased commitment of 2000 additional places in Australia's humanitarian program will enable Australia to play a greater role in resettling people displaced from Bosnia and other trouble spots.

 "I will be requesting Australia's representative at this week's meeting of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees executive committee to announce this further Australian response to these critical situations of human distress".

 Mr Hand said that to keep Australian humanitarian policies flexible, the Government had decided to separate the humanitarian entry programs from those of the regular migration program.

 "Domestic social and economic circumstances guide the setting of the size of the annual migration program, and these need to be balanced carefully against the demands on Australia's international humanitarian programs.

 "From the beginning of the next financial year, the .< Government will consider, in two separate submissions, proposals for the size and composition of both the migration and the humanitarian programs," he said.

 Mr Hand said the Government had also taken steps to enhance co-ordination to ensure that all humanitarian efforts which impact on refugees or displaced persons are considered by the three agencies which have responsibilities -;the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau, and the Immigration Department.

 "Such an approach will ensure that Australia delivers a more comprehensive humanitarian response," said Mr Hand.

 CANBERRA 20 January, 1993

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES: Lynne Adams Minister's Office (06) 277.7860

 Ursula Doyle DILGEA 264.2296

