---
title: "Speech: Multiculturalism and the republic"
date: "1993-11-19"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183806
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1698063%22
---

 UNDER EMBARGO UNTIL 8PM, 19 NOVEMBER 1993

 Multiculturalism and the Republic

 Address by

 Senator Nick Bolkus, Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

 SYDNEY NOVEMBER 19 1993

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 MULTICULTURALISM AND THE REPUBLIC

 Tonight, I wish to argue the inevitability of Australia becoming a republic. That the real question facing Australians is "when", not "if". That this is so because of changes to the fundamental structure of Australian society, as well as to our international context.

 The topic of an after dinner address like this in Sydney a hundred years ago would probably have been nationalism, and how to achieve Federation by the year 1901.

 The audience would have been white and male, and there would have been much talk of loyalty to the Empire, of protection against foreign competition, and of the right to exclude on the basis of

 race.

 In the 1990s, I find myself one of a host of after dinner speakers on the subject of why the year 2001 seems the appropriate time to turn Australia into a republic. On how, as we approach a new millennium, we seek to redefine our national

 identity. On how we can affirm our independence as a nation our unity and uniqueness as a people. On the development of a new patriotism based not on ethnic singularity but a sense of common purpose defined by our very diversity.

 The question of how we become a republic is part of a broader process - that of redefining ourselves as a nation.

 As such, it is really a question of whether we bring about this change together - with a new sense of inclusive, popular citizenry and our social and economic development in mind - or whether we are slowly dragged into it and miss out on unprecedented opportunities to establish ourselves strategically

 in the meantime.

 It is about recognising the special relationship of our indigenous people with the land, of their native title to it, of the multicultural nature of their society, both pre and post-settlement, and of the special role they have as we redefine our national identity - both in the process and in the outcome.

 It is also a question of recognising that migrants not only have a role to play in this debate - but that to a large extent, they have already shaped the context of the debate.

 Changing world environment

 An Australian republic is made inevitable by a combination of factors - some external and international, some internal and domestic.

 Our world has opened up. It is experiencing an era of uncertainty.

 2

 Communications today know k no boundaries. In the smart global

 village of the late 20th Century, international flows of people, money and information are at historic and irreversible levels. This has meant that the traditional control of states over their geographical areas, economies and societies is being dramatically

 reduced.

 Politically, the dominance of the superpowers has broken down, weakening reliance on the old concept of Western and Eastern blocs.

 As global consciousness and interaction increases, Australia is not the only country needing, and seeking to define more sharply its sense of national identity.

 To survive, the United Kingdom and Australia have each had to look to their own regions for our respective economic, political and cultural development.

 While the UK finds its place in the European Community, we now send two thirds of our exports to east-Asia. Three quarters of all Australian exports go to the Asia-Pacific region.

 Economically, through these massive trade links, through formal avenues such as APEC, and socially, with our large Asian-born population, we find ourselves well placed to become part of the world's fastest-developing region.

 Australia has already had to change to establish itself in a new world environment. For instance, we are no longer State and Territory economies competing domestically, but one national economy competing internationally.

 Against this shifting international backdrop, however, a more fundamental change has taken place. We have been experiencing a• social revolution within our own boundaries, bringing about changes which link us very directly to these international movements.

 Immigration

 One major cause of this change is immigration.

 Immigration has been the central focus of our development over the past 100 years.

 It is how most of us find ourselves here.

 We can be thankful for humane elements of our policies which have allowed and continue to allow refugees and displaced persons to settle here - particularly after the horrors of the Second World War. We can be thankful that families could be reunited and could prosper in a democratic society, a society which upheld

 fundamental egalitarian values.

 3

 But we have to be honest about our past. Immigration policy was liberal for some, but discriminatory and unjust for many others.

 The radically discriminatory aspect was exhibited both in the White Australia Policy, and in our attitudes to minority cultures in our own society.

 It infused our attitudes to our original inhabitants, who still seek the civil,, political and economic rights that most of us take for granted.

 The founding fathers sought to establish a fair and just society, but they, and most of the citizens of Australia, feared diversity.

 Dominated by its relationship with Britain, Australia's immigration policy was exclusive and its ethnic orientation more or less singularly linked to the British Empire.

 The arrival in Australia since the post-War period of a great variety of peoples, and the replacement of a policy of assimilation - which sought to homogenise immigrants and Aboriginal people and minimise their differences - with a policy which values and celebrates diversity, has completely

 transformed the character of Australian society.

 In the 1990s, our immigration policy has become one of our greatest assets.

 It has enriched our population and cultural base, and added new dimensions not only to who we are, but to how we see ourselves and the world around us.

 Multiculturalism

 We are indeed a multicultural society, with a multicultural identity. Today, well over 20 per cent of all Australians were born in another country.

 More-than half of them have come to Australia from non-English speaking countries in Europe, the Middle-East, Asia and South America.

 Combined with their Australian-born children, they constitute 40 per cent of our population, and together, Australians have links with more than 150 different cultures, religions, traditions.

 As we can and do celebrate the achievement of a harmonious and outstandingly successful multicultural society,  we should recognise how fundamental it is to our national redefinition.

 Our social, political, cultural and economic growth are based on our resources as a multicultural society.

 4

 Looking inwards, we can see the potential in multiculturalism for both our domestic growth and our personal interaction with each other.

 And looking outwards, we can see that our diversity is eminently exportable and immensely productive. We are just beginning to understand, for 'example, how important it is to have Australians who know their way around a potential market for Australia - be

 it a market for tourism, engineering, rice, opera or even sport, as the Australian soccer team and our success in winning the Olympics have shown.

 The Empire

 One direct and immensely logical result is that we do not approach our "search for identity" as a white, anglo-Saxon nation embedded in the commitment to the Empire.

 Thirty 30 years ago - or more - when I was at primary school in Adelaide, the Empire seemed an irrelevant concept.

 Not long before Donald Horne wrote in "The Lucky Country" that "in a sense, Australia is a republic already", we used to celebrate Empire Day. The teacher would get up with a bunch of bright red pencils and talk to us about the strength of the

 Empire.

 Without too much effort she showed us how easily one red pencil could be broken in two. That one pencil was Australia alone. But if you kept that one pencil in a bunch of pencils -Australia as part of a united British Empire - you couldn't break it.

 It seemed outdated then, and it is even more irrelevant to the primary school children of today, to have the strength of Australia defined in terms of our historical relationship with the Empire.

 We still value our membership of the British Commonwealth of Nations. That remains. But multiculturalism has helped us grow out of our psychological dependence on a distant part of the world. We had grown out of our economic and security dependence

 long ago.

 Nationalism

 While other countries cling to the myth of "ethnic singularity" in their search for national identity, Australians have a proliferation of links and allegiances. But they are all united by loyalty to Australia.

 What we don't have is that ethnic singularity which is the foundation of the traditional concept of Nationalism, a concept which divides nations from each other. With the fundamental shift in our society, we find that the concepts which underpin

 such nationalism are becoming increasingly anachronistic and irrelevant.

 5

 What we do have is patriotism reflected in the shared loyalty to Australia.

 As Mary Kalantzis, Director of the Centre for Workplace Communication and Culture at the University of Technology, Sydney has put it; this patriotism takes us into an exciting future, with enhanced opportunities for all of us. As she says:

 To live and work effectively with a global and local diversity we need what might be called a postnationalist sense of common purpose. In fact ... both immigration and our global and regional vulnerability have taken us in a very practical way further down this path than any other country in the world.

 Citizenship

 These changes in Australian society have already had formal recognition by legal structure, most recently by the change to the Australian Citizenship Act 1948.

 It is in recognition of this diversity - and to emphasise this sense of common purpose - that the Government has amended the Act so that migrants becoming Australian citizens will take a Pledge of Commitment to Australia, the nation and its people.

 This replaces the present oath of affirmation or allegiance, which is made to a sovereign by a subject and has its origin in feudal times.

 The Australian Citizenship Act 1948 has also been amended by the addition of a preamble to the Act, explaining that Australian citizenship is a unifying factor in our diverse society.

 The preamble makes it clear that citizenship involves both rights and obligations, which are enshrined in the Constitution and our laws.

 Its language is that of inclusion.

 The 'concept of Citizenship in a nation of subtleties and diversities means rights and responsibilities are based on mutual respect and tolerance of differences. It means that all have the opportunity to participate in key decisions about the future.

 It means that no one should be excluded from the debate about our constitutional arrangements and the issue of the republic.

 Republic Advisory Committee

 You will all be aware of work of the Republic Advisory Committee, established by the Prime Minister in April.

 Its task was to develop options describing the minimum constitutional change necessary to achieve a viable Federal Republic of Australia, maintaining the effect of our current

 conventions and principles of government.

 6

 Tonight, I want to mention one factor which has emerged in the process of the debate which has surrounded the Advisory Committee's deliberations and much of the subsequent discussion.

 It is simply this: that people don't have enough knowledge about the issue to be able to cast an informed vote; that there is a need to inform and involve all Australians - our youth, our indigenous community and our ethnic communities.

 There is a need for Australians for non-English speaking backgrounds both to be informed and to inform each other - to seize this opportunity to contribute to the debate, as the

 inclusive nature of our society demands.  And to contribute equally wtih all other parts of our society, from business to community groups - alias equal "stake holders" in the debate's impact on our national development.

 We have enough time to allow for a thoroughgoing debate and ensure that we get it right.

 Conclusion

 The Republic of Australia is a logical outcome of our development over the past 100 years.

 It presents us with the opportunity incorporate our unique and ancient past into our social, political, cultural and economic development as a newly defined nation.

 At a time of great international change, as new blocs and alliances ar(p forged, it presents an opportunity for Australia to define itself in the region and in the world - to establish itself strategially for our future.

 We must seize these opportunities together, with a common voice, recognising that our strength rests in our diversity and where we have been - and in our united hopes for where we are going.

