---
title: "The United Nations: new challenges: opening address to the 1993 National Conference of the United Nations Association of Australia"
date: "1993-08-27"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211182723
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2116823%22
---

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA

 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR KOOYONG SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 TEL. (06) 277 4045, 277 4419

 FAX. (06) 277 4990

 LEVEL 16 90 COLLINS STREET MELBOURNE, V/C. 3000 TEL. (03) 650 3455

 FAX. (03) 650 5115

 10

 ' •

 HON. ANDREW PEACOCK MP

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 THE UNITED NATIONS:

 NEW CHALLENGES

 OPENING ADDRESS TO THE 1993 NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA

 27 August 1993

 CANBERRA

 COMMONWEALTH I

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 MICAH

 Ladies and Gentlemen,

 There are unprecedented challenges facing the UN system today and many different thoughts and ideas on how the system should best be adapted to respond to them.

 Expectations of what the UN can and should achieve are changing radically and rapidly. These changes are driven, of course, by the passing of the Cold War era; by the demise of the Soviet bloc and by the consequent wider consensus on democracy and market orientation.

 The changes are also driven by the greater potential instability arising from today's greater diversity of political and economic interests between nations. They are driven by the fact that international conflict is now generally beyond the capacity of any one country to handle.  And by the hope that the international community might, through the UN, be able to do more to solve the world's problems.

 I want to take this opportunity to outline some of my own thoughts on two major themes which I think have critical relevance to this conference. And which I believe lie at the heart of the international community's attention for the 48th UN General Assembly, the Opening Session of which I shall attend in New York next month.

 The first of these two broad issues is peace and security. The second is international development.

 In my view these two issues are ultimately inseparable. A comprehensive assessment of where the UN should be heading requires detailed attention to both.

 The UN Secretary-General has focussed to date on the UN's changing role in peace and security. Just over a year ago, he issued an Agenda for Peace outlining his own proposals for change in this area. Let me quickly run through some background.

 Under Chapter VI of the UN Charter, the Security Council can assist in a variety of ways in the settling of international disputes that threaten to endanger the peace. Under Chapter VII, the Council has a range of powers to deal with actual threats to, or breaches of the peace. The Security Council can call, for example, for a ceasefire, it can impose economic sanctions, it can threaten or actually use military forces placed at its

 disposal by Member states. Although Article 2.7 of Chapter I of the UN Charter prohibits intervention in essentially internal State matters, this can in effect be overridden in emergency situations under Chapter VII.

 But, for a long time during the Cold War, and I had personal experience of this in the 1960s, 70s and 80s, the Security Council was more an impotent bystander than a central actor. It had little real deterrent value and was rarely in a position to carry out its mandate.

 1

 The permanent members never actually agreed on any specific

 arrangements under which Member states would supply armed forces to the UN. And the Council was rarely able to agree when international peace or security was under threat. It was effectively paralysed by the permanent members' use of the power of veto.

 In the forty five years from the day the UN was created to the start of this decade, there were only five cases in which the Security Council managed to agree that international peace was threatened or breached - Palestine in 1948, Korea in 1950, Southern Rhodesia and South Africa in the 1960s and 1970s and the Falklands in 1982. The Council permitted the use of force only three times - in Korea and Southern Rhodesia and in the Congo in

 1961. The deployment of unarmed UN observers and peacekeeping forces, which could only use force in self-defence, nearly always in those days took place with the permission of the host country.

 All this has suddenly changed. Improved relations between the permanent members of the Security Council now allow it to play a more active role and to use a wider range of its powers. And our understanding of what is meant by a threat to international

 security has broadened. It now includes international terrorism, humanitarian concerns and even environmental degradation.

 Since 1988, the Security Council has mounted as many as 15 peacekeeping operations and more recently these have involved police and civilians as well as military personnel.

 Especially in some of the most recent cases, military forces operating under UN auspices have had the power to use force in circumstances other than self-defence. And the new types of operation have sometimes involved internal disputes within a State. These are both very important and controversial new trends.

 Our changed understanding of what constitutes a threat to peace and security, together with our increased acceptance that the UN should act to relieve global human suffering, allows the Security

 Council to intervene more often in internal state affairs. This has the potential to impinge on the sovereignty of the domestic government concerned.

 It is sometimes difficult to know when conflicts count as international or internal - for example, in the perhaps extreme case of the former Yugoslavia, both definitions have applied at different times and at this moment, in Bosnia, are hopelessly entangled.

 No matter how difficult it is to decide, we must have as clear as possible a basis for when the UN should or should not become involved in internal conflicts and when it should or should not be able to intervene, especially militarily, without that government's consent. So we need to review the UN mandate, and very carefully.

 2

 And we need to be sure that the composition of the Security

 Council is such that non-members can have full confidence in its decisions.

 Calls for reform of the Security Council are gaining momentum. I would agree that the current composition simply does not reflect current global power realities and therefore needs to be expanded. But we musn't lose sight of the fact that the Security Council must, and I stress MUST, remain relatively small if it

 is to work effectively and be capable of rapid decision-making.

 I believe that Japan has a strong claim for permanent membership. The claims of Germany and a range of other countries including Brazil, India, Nigeria, Egypt, Mexico and Indonesia, will also need to be considered.

 A critical question is whether the veto for permanent members should remain and whether any new members should also have the power of veto.

 We also need to ask other questions. Such as, has the UN adequate resources to undertake the expanded role expected of it in these areas? Is it in a proper financial or military position to do so? Obviously the answer to both these questions at the present time is a very definite NO.

 The cost of peacekeeping operations has risen at an extraordinary pace to nearly $4 billion in 1992/93, from $800 million two years earlier. And the number of UN peacekeeping troops has increased

 even more dramatically. The cost of peacekeeping alone now exceeds the UN's regular budget. Australia's domestic Budget for this year shows us poised to contribute a total of $70 million; over 70 per cent more this year than in the previous year; $40 million for Somalia, $15 million for Croatia, Bosnia and

 Herzegovina and $411 million for Mozambique.  And the budget papers make it clear that domestic outlays on UN peacekeeping operations could now remain high for the foreseeable future.

 With governments all around the world facing budget constraints, there is very considerable pressure on the UN to lift the overall efficiency of all its operations. This, at last, has really brought home the urgent need for radical system-wide reform of the UN and its Secretariat.

 The Australian Government, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Gareth Evans, and leading Australian bureaucrats, notably Dr Peter Wilenski, former head of DFAT and our former Ambassador to the UN, have been visibly active in generating and promoting new

 ideas,for reform of the UN. And I look forward to seeing the so-called "blue book" on peace and security matters which I understand the Minister is shortly to issue.

 I want to emphasise today the Coalition's own recognition of the importance to Australia of the multilateral system and our commitment to multilateral diplomacy. I'd now like to outline some of my own views on peace and security issues.

 3

 The Secretary-General focused in his Agenda for Peace on the need

 for preventive diplomacy.  I agree that this is an extremely important activity and I agree that the UN Secretary-General needs to have ready access to the best possible early warning information. And I agree that there is scope for regional organisations to do more in this area, in partnership with the UN.

 In our own region, where no comprehensive treaty-based regional organisation yet exists, we will need to think especially creatively about how the UN can undertake and assist with preventive diplomacy in the Asian Pacific region.

 I believe it is important to establish early warning mechanisms wherever possible, including through, and with the assistance of, UN offices already based in the region. It may, for example, be constructive to pursue some kind of security-oriented discussion

 in ESCAP. And we will need to establish new UN coordination offices in known trouble spots, for example, in Cambodia on withdrawal in coming weeks of the UN Transitional Authority.

 I would also stress the importance of promoting the efforts of Governments in the region to work towards collective confidence-building mechanisms.  I very much welcome the discussions on security issues at the recent ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference -the inclusion in that forum of Vietnam, Laos and the Russian Federation. I hope this practice can be repeated.

 I see these regional mechanisms as complementing, rather than substituting for, the network of existing security alliances of individual countries in the region.

 Important regional security work has also been undertaken by Indonesia, again with ASEAN support, in sponsoring a series of unofficial workshops on the rival claims for territory, resources and control of the sea lanes around the Spratly and Paracel

 Islands in the South China Sea. This is another good example of preventive diplomacy on a potential flash point in the region.

 These issues should be a matter of priority for Government policy making as we seek to consolidate our interests in the Asian Pacific region.

 I also believe it is worth exploring more fully the Secretary-General's idea of sometimes deploying UN troops and even creating de-militarised zones where this might assist in preventing conflict.  And I fully support and applaud UN efforts at

 peacemaking and the associated construction of political settlements, as we have witnessed, for example, in Cambodia.

 Regarding peacekeeping operations themselves, it remains very important, in my view, that the parties directly concerned themselves request the UN intervention. Of course there will always be grey areas.

 4

 The most difficult grey areas relate to whether the UN should

 intervene militarily to alleviate human suffering, either for humanitarian reasons or to prevent abuse of internationally agreed fundamental human rights.

 Current UN operations in these areas reflect ad hoc decision making, including whether the UN can intervene without the consent of the host government. The UN intervened, for example, in response to the emergency situation in Somalia, but it has not

 necessarily intervened in other possibly similar emergency situations. So we need to work towards internationally agreed guiding principles.

 In Bosnia, for example, UN intervention originally took place to protect the delivery of humanitarian aid. But the mandate has shifted, in a rather piece-meal fashion, with the circumstances. The distinction between peacemaking, peacekeeping and humanitarian relief has effectively been lost.

 Strictly there has never been any peace to keep in a traditional sense. The UN role in Bosnia now includes attempts to negotiate peace, to police "safe-havens" and to provide an umbrella for possible military action. The situation is enormously

 frustrating.

 Any clear differentiation between internal and international conflict has become quite impossible. There is unlikely to be any consensus in favour of massive military intervention and the only viable option seems to be to continue to negotiate.

 This example drives home how important it is for the UN to embark on military actions only where there is a clear objective and a reasonable chance of success. And where Member states have sufficient political will to remain engaged on a potentially prolonged basis.

 The Coalition believes that in such situations, Australia must stand ready to assist in making these UN operations effective. We should, as we do, ensure that our payments are timely. And we must also make best endeavours to provide appropriate levels

 of military resources, commensurate with our capacity.

 As I indicated earlier, it was originally intended under Article 43 of the UN Charter, that Member states would make armed forces available for enforcement of Security Council action under Chapter VII. In his Agenda for Peace, the Secretary-General has asked that such provision be made on some kind of permanent basis. I believe that Australia should ensure that we have appropriately trained troops within our armed forces and we

 should stand ready to provide them in appropriate circumstances, subject of course to our priority being the defence of Australia. In my view, the idea of a permanent UN force or a ready reaction force is deserving of detailed scrutiny as to its practicality.

 5

 As you are all aware, the largest combined military, police and

 civilian operation in UN history has recently taken place in Cambodia. Consistent with normal UN practice, the UN troops in Cambodia had no mandate forcibly to stop the repeated outbreaks of fighting among the parties to the ceasefire agreed in Paris.

 The resulting frustrations and consequent threat of danger to UN personnel led to calls for more forceful UN military action, sometimes described as peace "enforcement".

 This is a complex area for debate. And we need to avoid getting too caught up in definitions. I would simply point out that traditional peacekeeping is a neutral activity and is based on consent of the parties. Peace "enforcement" cannot by its very nature be based on consent. But as I mentioned earlier, UN military intervention for emergency humanitarian reasons already verges on the area of "enforcement". And in Cambodia, the move

 by UNTAC to give UN civil police the power to arrest and detain those suspected of political violence, was in its own way a step I would support towards a somewhat more interventionist approach on the part of the UN.

 I'd like now to look quickly at international development cooperation. I believe that for the UN's development assistance effort to be truly effective, which it currently is not, we need to put as much effort as has been put into peacekeeping, into reform of the UN's economic and social sectors. And reform of the UN Development Agencies.

 This is a matter to which the Australian Government and our mission in New York has not to date given anything like commensurate attention. Which is unfortunate. Because, although there have been some achievements such as reform of the Economic

 and Social Council (ECOSOC), efforts to reform the Economic and Social Committees of the General Assembly are running badly into the sand.

 In my view, reform of these sectors is critical. Critical to the UN's advocacy role on socio-economic policy issues such as women in development, health or education.  Critical to successful operation of the Sustainable Development Commission recently established in response to the UN Conference on the Environment

 and Development (UNCED). Critical to success of the UN Conference on Population and Development next year and to any sustained outcome from the Social Summit in 1995. And critical

 also to the effectiveness with which the General Assembly can direct and guide the UN's operational activities.

 6

 Just as the UN faces new challenges on the collective security

 front, so it also faces new demands in development. The end of the Cold War has seen the emergence of some new ideas on what constitutes development and on how it can be achieved. Of course, the imperatives for sustained and broad based economic growth remain paramount. But the democratic transition in many developing countries has brought with it an increased interest in participatory economic development. There are new pressures

 for development cooperation to focus more closely on people.

 It is my view, for example, that investment in education and training should be given higher priority within the development effort. So should health and family planning and the provision of other social services.

 Of course, the private sector has a major role to play and there is still an urgent need for freer trade, liberalised market access and deregulation of private enterprise. There is a particular need to encourage small-scale enterprises and to

 increase the scope for informal employment. And there is a need to bring the developing countries more fully into the global trading system and to attract to these countries a greater proportion of global investment.

 I also believe that reform of the public sector is vital, both reducing its size and ensuring its efficiency. And open and democratic institutional and administrative structures are simply essential.

 While growth is imperative if poverty is to be reduced, we clearly must learn to be less wasteful of natural resources. And, in my view, the "silent (environmental) emergencies", as UNDP describes them, of water pollution or land degradation

 should be given much greater attention.

 We need, again, to ask whether the UN is responding effectively to these new challenges. And whether its institutions are properly equipped to handle them.

 We must remember the enormity of this challenge. We must remember that 1.3 billion of the world's population live in absolute poverty. According to the UNDP, 34,000 young children still die every day from malnutrition or disease.  Nearly 1 billion people are still illiterate. Two thirds of these people are women. Women still earn only half as much as men and have great difficulty in securing even 10% representation in parliaments. Many ethnic minorities still live in effective

 isolation within their own nations. 35 million people are refugees or displaced persons.

 These few stark statistics clearly show the size and nature of the task.

 7

 It is extremely important for the UN Development Agencies to

 continue to play a strong advocacy role in the area of women in development. Women's health, education and employment should be central to the human development effort. We have made such very limited progress to date.

 The reality that women still have unequal access to education and health services increases, for example, their risk of exposure to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. We must, if we are to deal effectively with this epidemic in developing countries, shift the role of women from the periphery to the centre of our development policy thinking. Let me remind you this is not just a matter of human development. It is a matter of human survival. Even within the UNDP, the role of women in development is still under-resourced and under-funded.

 There isn't time to dwell in detail on the other development issues I have raised. But you can be confident that what I have said in relation to women applies equally, within the UN, to

 other new priorities such as the environment or population or public sector reform.

 I would hope therefore that the UN Secretary-General can complete his vision for the future by issuing, as recently promised, an Agenda for Development.

 I believe that human development issues are closely related to peace and security issues. Indeed they are closely linked in the Secretary-General's own concept of peace "building", i.e. the provision of UN technical assistance to help create the economic and social conditions for ongoing international peace.

 While the Secretary-General's original Agenda for Peace called for peace "building" as a post conflict activity designed to prevent recurrences of conflict, I have always believed that development assistance plays a much broader and very important role in enhancing global security.

 One of the best long term solutions to global security lies in faster socio-economic development. That, to me, is stating the obvious and yet it needs re-stating.

 In his recent review "An Agenda for Peace: One Year Later", the UN Secretary-General also draws attention to the complex relationship between peace, democracy and development. He accepts, and I quote, that "Development at this moment may be the most compelling challenge we face."

 Let's.look at the case of Cambodia. The UN troops are on the point of departure. With all its frailty and uncertainty, we do nevertheless have a political settlement.  We have a democratically elected Parliament.

 8

 But the UN leaves behind it an economic basketcase. Very limited

 and ramshackle infrastructure; few decent roads, no decent public utilities. Frightful conditions in hospitals. Major law and order problems. Indeed, virtually no law and order. No secure

 sense of wellbeing among the people.

 What is the solution?

 Part of the solution obviously lies in international development cooperation.

 And in private investment.

 In infrastructure lending through the multilateral development banks.

 And in technical assistance from UNDP and the many other UN development agencies. All of which need to direct their energy and resources effectively. Without the constraints of inefficient bureaucracy. Without the constraints of resources tied up in low priority out of date activities. And with clearer and greatly simplified direction from, and reporting requirements to ECOSOC and the General Assembly.

 Before I leave the subject of Cambodia, I must just add that Australian exporters have benefited to the tune of $120 million from sales to UNTAC over the last year. But in other parts of

 the UN, our procurement record is not so good. This is something the UNAA has actively been seeking to change and I strongly applaud your efforts. The UN is, after all, one of the world's biggest customers and even though its procedures are complicated, and they are complicated, it's a market we simply can't afford to neglect.

 It follows from what I have said that the UN Secretariat and all its institutions need to be reorganised. The Secretariat has long and rightly been criticised as an expensive and unwieldy bureaucracy. With urgent new priorities and high expectations

 of what should be achieved, we simply can't afford continued large scale inefficiencies. The Secretary-General has already abolished a number of offices and cut some top positions. But

 much more comprehensive reform is needed.

 Staff needs to be redeployed to the new high priority activities. We need to increase the UN's capacity for preventive diplomacy, human rights and humanitarian affairs. We need to improve its

 capacity for policy dialogue and technical assistance for critical obstacles to development. All of these areas are currently under-resourced including appropriately trained staff.

 The UN Charter says that "the paramount consideration in the

 employment of staff ... shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity." But more than merely "due regard" is clearly also being given to the geographical basis of recruitment. By that I mean that people

 are being appointed solely because they represent a particular country and not because of their ability. In my view, reform of staff recruitment practices is likely to prove fundamental to

 success of the reform effort.

 Like any large institution, there are, in the UN, internal structural and procedural obstacles to reform particularly on budget and work program issues. For the reform effort to work, these institutional obstacles will also need to be addressed in detail and with great persistence.

 It is also more than time for the UN and its Member states to return the organisation's finances to good order. This must involve the payment in full of the massive backlog of arrears -which for 1993 amounts, from previous years, to nearly half, the

 1993 budget. It must involve a more orderly system for the collection of national contributions and it must involve new methodology for determining the scale of those contributions.

 It really is time for the UN to get its house in order. It's time to look closely at all UN institutions, including its sacred cows.

 It's time to get our priorities right and to focus with persistence on those priorities.

 I believe the priorities, as set out in the purposes of the UN's original Charter, are still largely correct. We now, at last, have a chance to bring the expectations embodied in the Charter to fruition.

 That, Ladies and Gentlemen, is our task.

 10

