---
title: "Reference of detainee problem to Parliamentary Committee"
date: "1993-05-27"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "Shadow Minister for Multicultural Australia, Immigration and Citizenship"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214127352
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR08023350%22
---

 Senator Jim Short Shadow Minister for Multicultural Australia,  Immigration & Citizenship  & Assisting the Leader on Ethnic Affairs

 MAIC10/93

 REFERENCE OF DETAINEE PROBLEM TO  PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE

 The Coalition welcomes the motion (attached) passed by the Senate today to refer  m atters relating to the detaining in custody people who arrive from overseas without  a valid entry perm it to the Joint Standing Committee on Migration.

 While this is- not the full inquiry called for by the Coalition, I am pleased th at the  Parliam ent will nevertheless have the opportunity to examine these issues.

 The Government's handling of the Cambodian boatpeople has resulted in the  unacceptable situation where several hundred boat people have been held in  detention camps on Australian soil for periods of more than three years without  resolution - one way or the other - of their situation.

 This is a serious m atter to which the Government has so far failed to respond,  despite increasing dissatisfaction not only from the Coalition, but as well from many  experts in the area.

 It represents an im portant test of the Government's responsibility and sensitivity in  handling immigration issues.

 So far, the signs are not promising. The new Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Bolkus, rejected my call in my first media release, on 28 April, as  Shadow Minister for M ulticultural Australia, Immigration and Citizenship, for an  open inquiry into the Cambodian detainees. The Government has as yet failed to 

 respond to the im portant Joint Standing Committee report into Australia's Refugee  and H um anitarian system, tabled in August last year.

 Recent events and examination of the Departm ent of Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs at recent Senate Estimates Committee hearings, indicate major problems in  the Government's administration of its migration program.

 I therefore again call on the Government to establish a full public inquiry into the  operations of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the 

 implementation of the migration program and the Department's capacity to handle  in the future the tasks for which it is responsible.

 Canberra, 27 May 1993

 For further information, contact Senator Short on 06/277 31iy

 The Senate­

 Having, regard to the passage of the Migration Amendment Act 1992 and the Migration  Reform A ct 1992 and the support of the major parties for the revised refugee determination  process provided for by these jaws., requests that the Joint Standing, Committee on Migration  examine and report on:

 whether the policy of detaining in custody persons who arrive from overseas without  a valid entry permit is the most appropriate available,

 b. whether the Bridging Vita system, by which non-citizens apprehended after the  expiry of their entry visa, may be released from detention for a period of lilno while  their claims to stay in Australia are determined, should .be extended to non-citizens at  the border without an entry vlsa.who make: a claim to remain in Australia,

 c. whether other alternatives to detention such as the use of bonding systems, including  the use of community based sponsorships or parole arrangements, as have been  triidled and which operate overseas could be appropriately applied ih Australia,

 d. what possible enforcement of such bonds or assurances could effectively be pursued, 

 And further, that the Committee report not later than the first sitting day of December 1993.

