---
title: "Government decision on PRC nationals"
date: "1993-11-01"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211183584
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1706997%22
---

 3cI

 1I MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC

 AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Senator Nick Bolkus w Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 GOVERNMENT DECISION ON PRC NATIONALS

 The Federal Government has moved to grant permanent residence to several nationalities including nationals of the Peoples' Republic of China (PRC), the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, announced today.

 The main points of the Government decision are:

 to provide access to permanent residence to about 19,000 PRC nationals who had arrived in Australia before 20 June 1989 and those members of their families who have joined them since.

 to provide access to permanent residence to all current holders of a Domestic Protection Temporary Entry Permit (DPTEP), and to provide permanent residence to all future successful refugee applicants.

 - this will replace the arrangement introduced in 1990 for successful onshore asylum seekers by which they only received a temporary entry permit

 to provide a one-off onshore permanent residence category for better qualified asylum-seekers and holders of concessional temporary entry permits providing humanitarian extensions of stay for people from Sri Lanka and the former Yugoslavia.

 "Australia's immigration policy has two fundamental objectives. They are: to continue to enhance Australia's economic and social aims and to accommodate humanitarian concerns and family considerations," Senator Bolkus said.

 "Today's decision is consistent with those fundamental objectives. It will mean stability and certainty for these people who will now be able to plan for the future with confidence."

 Application forms for permanent residence for those affected by the decision will be available from Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs offices from 1 March 1994. In the meantime, regulations will be developed and administrative procedures put in place.

 PRC NATIONALS

 Under the first of the measures announced today, permanent residence will be made available to nationals of the PRC who were in Australia on 20 June 1989, subject to health and character checks. Most of this group hold four year temporary entry permits which expire on 30 June 1994.

 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH

 "These people received a clear commitment that none would be returned against their

 will to the PRC, unless they broke the law. During their stay they have been entitled to some of the rights and benefits associated with permanent residence, such as permission to work and access to Medicare. But they have not been able to plan their lives beyond June next year," Senator Bolkus said.

 "They have integrated well in Australia. They are mainly young, with high labour force participation and relatively little reliance on welfare. Because of the benefits they already enjoy, and given the length of time they have been in Australia, they will not be counted as part of the Migration Program."

 There are about 19,000 PRC nationals in Australia who were here at the time of Tienanmen Square in June 1989. They have since been joined by about 9,500 spouses and dependent children. All would be eligible to seek permanent residence under this program.

 "Australia's response is consistent with international practice," the Minister said.

 "Western democracies such as Canada, the United States and New Zealand have all provided temporary and permanent residence to those PRC nationals in their countries at the time of Tienanmen Square."

 PEOPLE GRANTED ON-SHORE REFUGEE STATUS

 In the second measure, permanent residence is to be made available to all future successful on-shore refugee applicants. (Those accepted in Australia's off-shore refugee program are already granted permanent residence.)

 Permanent residence will also be available to people holding a current Domestic Protection Temporary Entry Permit (DPTEP). These are people granted refugee status while in Australia since 1990. About 1,100 people are expected to be immediately affected.

 DPTEP holders already have permission to work, and a range of benefits such as Medicare.

 "Again we are looking at the issue of providing certainty to people and in this instance these are people who have been through our refugee determination process and have been found to require Australia's protection," said Senator Bolkus.

 Those who have been granted on-shore refugee status since 1990 and who will now receive permanent residence will not be counted against Australia's humanitarian program. Henceforth successful on-shore applicants will be counted.

 RESIDENCE FOR SOME ASYLUM SEEKERS, HUMANITARIAN CASES

 The third measure will institute a new onshore permanent residence category for people regardless of their nationality who:

 • y r

 r . s.

 (i) wherever they resided at the time, were granted a visa before 12 March 1992 - the date tighter visitor bona fides testing became operative - and

 (ii) have, -before today, applied for determination of refugee status or before today were granted the humanitarian temporary entry concessions available to Sri Lankans and nationals of the former Yugoslavia, or have applied for and apparently meet the requirements for the Sri Lankan and Yugoslav concessions.

 The criteria for the new category are:

 age less than 45;

 possession of vocational English and;

 possession of a post-secondary qualification in Australia of at least two years' duration, or;

 . current enrolment (subject to a satisfactory performance) in an accredited ,tertiary course which will lead to an associate diploma, diploma, bachelor or higher degree; or

 current enrolment in a TAFE certificate course undertaken in conjunction with an indentured apprenticeship; or

 possession of an overseas degree, diploma, associate diploma or trade certificate which is recognised as having Australian equivalence; or I ownership of an established legal business which has been operating in

 Australia during the 12 months to today's date, and which has employed the equivalent of three full-time staff (excluding family members) for at least the past six months.

 Successful applicants will be encompassed within Australia's normal migration program.

 "This new category is a one-off exercise," Senator Bolkus said. "It recognises that many of these people have been living in Australia in uncertain circumstances for years - and that it is unreasonable to expect them to continue in this situation.

 "Nonetheless the national interest had to be considered, and in doing that we looked at the contribution these people are making and will continue to make to Australia.

 "There are many well qualified people among those who have applied for the different forms of humanitarian status. This, coupled with the fact that many are also well integrated and already in employment, means that they can be expected to make a positive contribution to Australia."

 There are about 20,000 people presently seeking refugee status or who are nationals

 of Sri Lanka or the former Yugoslavia currently in Australia on humanitarian temporary entry concessions. About 1200' ,d  of these are PRC nationals who arrived in Australia after June 20 1989. 1

 Senator Bolkus said that the precise cost of processing PRC nationals who arrived, in

 Australia before 20 June 1989, and the new on-shore residence category had not yet been determined, but that such costs would be covered by application fees. There would also be some offsets in asylum seeker processing costs.

 CANBERRA NOVEMBER 1, 1993

 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860, (018) 624 847

 C: PRCFIN

