---
title: "Winter aid for the former Yugoslavia"
date: "1994-12-21"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "Minister for Development Cooperation"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214168989
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR05004721%22
---

 $

 Minister ior Development Cooperetion · Minister for Pacific Island Affairs  Gordon Bilney MP MDC 110 21 December 1994

 WINTER AID FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA

 Australia will provide a further $500,000 for emergency relief programs for more than two  million refugees and displaced people in the former Yugoslavia, the Minister for Development  Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, said today.

 "People in the former Yugoslavia are now about to begin the third winter in this conflict which  has uprooted millions 'and in which the victims have borne indescribable suffering," Mr Bilney  said. '

 "While some regions o f Bosnia and Herzegovina are benefiting from a cessation o f hostilities,  civilians in other areas are the victims of harassment and insecurity, and are subject to ethnic  expulsion and continuing tension.

 "I am pleased to announce that the government's overseas aid agency, AIDAB, will provide  cash grants to two key international agencies with bases in the region."

 The United Nations High Commissioner for refugees (UNHCR) will receive $300,000 for the  provision o f shelter, heating oil and other essential household items, transport, health and  medical programs. UNHCR is the lead agency in the former Yugoslavia and is also concerned  with issues such as arbitrary detention, expulsion, minority rights, and freedom o f movement.

 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) will receive $200,000 to assist in its  work in seeking access to all detainees, restoring family links through its tracing service, and  providing medical care.

 Mr Bilney said it was essential the international community continue providing meaningful and  comprehensive donations for emergency support activities designed to help children, women  and men survive through the winter months into 1995.

 "Australia's contribution will provide emergency assistance for refugees and displaced people  by supporting the provision o f basic and supplementary food, agricultural projects, and the  supply o f winter clothing, domestic and hygiene items," he said.

 Today's announcement brings the Australian government's assistance for people in the former  Yugoslavia to $4.35 million since the conflict began.

 Media contact: Allen Mawer . (Minister's Office) 06 277 7660  Maree Flynn (AIDAB) 06 276 4967

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 Release

