---
title: "Speech [at the] Regional Consultations on Illegal Migration, Lakeside Hotel, Canberra"
date: "1994-04-11"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "at the"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184735
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3AP10%22
---

 REGIONAL CONSULTATIONS ON ILLEGAL MIGRATION  LAKESIDE HOTEL CANBERRA 11-12 APRIL 1994

 SPEECH BY SENATOR THE HON NICK BOLKUS,  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS --  -----

 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you here today. Even at  this early stage, I can say that the Regional Consultations have  achieved part of what they set out to do.

 They have brought together senior policy makers from our region  who deal with the issues and problems associated with the 

 movement of large numbers of people across borders - particularly  those who do so illegally or become illegal migrants following  their legal entry into a country.

 I am extremely pleased that all 17 countries"1 "  -invited to  participate have been able to send representatives, as have the  UNHCR and the International Organisation for Migration.

 Illegal migration undermines the sovereign rights of Governments  to determine who can enter and remain in their territory. It brings with it security and health problems, as well as 

 creating social tensions in the community.

 In a country like Australia, planned migration has enabled the  development of a culturally diverse and tolerant society.  Domestically, illegal migration has the potential to seriously  undermine the community acceptance of migration, and its 

 widespread acceptance of a multicultural society.

 Internationally, illegal flows of people can also create 

 tensions and problems between countries.

 A  meeting like this enables a better understanding of how 

 countries in the region deal with the problem of illegal 

 migration and provides a basis for countries to work together to  address the problem that we all face.

 It also allows countries in the region the scope to develop 

 policies and approaches which complement and integrate with each  other and thereby tackle the problem of illegal migration in a  regional context.

 I have no doubt that the next day and a half will provide all of  us with opportunities to learn from each other and to further  increase our awareness and knowledge of the issues surrounding  illegal migration.

 I would also hope that as result of these consultations that the  process of being able to exchange information and work co­ operatively in the region is given further impetus.

 I regret that I will not be able to participate personally in the  full program of the Regional Consultations due to my visit to  several countries in the region.  My duties and the current 

 Parliamentary timetable make it necessary to schedule my visit  at this time.

 Over the next two weeks I will be visiting Thailand, Cambodia,  Laos and Vietnam to discuss a broad range of immigration issues  with Governments and International Organisations with an active  involvement in migration and humanitarian activities.

 This visit will be my second to the region since becoming 

 Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and it reflects not  only the strong interest I and my portfolio have in regional  affairs, but the interest of the Australian Government and people  in forging closer links with our neighbours through dialogue and 

 the development of better mutual understanding.

 It is in keeping with this spirit of constructive dialogue and  better understanding that the Regional Consultations were  conceived and developed.

 Today more people are seeking to move from one count by-bo-' another  than at any other time in history. The United Nations Population  Fund, in its World Population Report for 1993, estimated that  some 100 million people around the world are on the m ove.

 While this number gives us some idea of the magnitude of 

 movements of people, it does not differentiate between different  patterns of movements.

 It is important at the outset to establish the context for any  discussion of illegal migration.

 Not too long ago, the difficulty and cost of travelling meant  that most migratory movements were for the purpose of permanent  migration and long-term settlement in the country of destination.

 Today temporary migration is increasingly important, as huge  numbers of people travel legally for reasons of tourism, 

 business, education and skill transfer.

 Improvements in technology and the globalisation of information  have created a new class of consumer who demands easier, less  costly and more flexible travel services.

 The benefits of this are being felt worldwide through the rapid  exchange of ideas, goods and skills. As traditional industries and markets disappear, or are 

 restructured, sectors such as tourism are proving to be crucial  for the creation of employment and wealth. We all welcome this  increase in mobility and seek new ways of facilitating regular  movements of bona fide travellers.

 At the same time, the dramatic political changes of the last few  years have put into motion a series of social, civil and economic  disturbances which have all increased the pressure on migratory  movements, both regular and irregular.

 These developments have been most acutely felt in the northern  hemisphere, but they have had global consequences.

 Our own region has experienced fundamental change of a different  nature which has brought with it new challenges. One of the 

 most significant dynamics for people movements - both regular and  irregular - has been the remarkable pace of economic growth and  industrialisation in Asia and the subsequent development of  economic opportunities.

 In the late 1970s and most of the 1980s, the prime focus of 

 attention was on mass movements of people through Southeast Asia  as a result of civil disturbance and political instability.

 Although some populations are currently displaced for those  reasons, people are largely on the move throughout the region  today in response to demand for labour in the manufacturing and  service sectors. The movement of labour is expected to become  an increasingly important factor in the success of economic  development policies aimed at integrating local ecppojaies into -  ~  the global o n e .

 At a time of rapid economic growth, it is not uncommon to see the  use of illegal migrants to fill gaps in the labour force because  they cannot be filled locally.

 Illegal migrants are a readily available resource in such 

 circumstances, but the short term economic benefits rarely  outweigh the longer term social and political costs.

 For example illegal migrants are often used by employers to  undermine the employment conditions of the local workforce, which  leads in turn to social tensions in the domestic population.

 When an economic downturn occurs and more strenuous efforts are  made to remove illegal migrants, tensions could occur with the  country of origin particularly if they are themselves going  through difficult economic times.

 It is inevitable that with the numbers of people on the move far  exceeding the finite opportunities for regular migration,  governments all over the world are facing the challenge of 

 increasing numbers of people seeking to move by illegal channels.

 The methods and routes of clandestine travel are diverse and  involve varying degrees of organisation and sophistication. One  of the aims of the Regional Consultations is to increase the  level of knowledge amongst participants of the ways in which 

 illegal migration operates.

 The first challenge for Governments and policy makers is to  facilitate the entry of people while controlling or at least  minimising the impact of illegal movements. In this regard  Australia is proud of its planned migration program which allows  migrants to enter legally and which has enriched the fabric of 

 our society.

 Planned legal migration removes many of the justifications  illegal migrants put forward for wanting to remain in Australia  and provides a firm but fair basis for dealing with illegal 

 migrants in Australia.

 Not having a land border makes Australia less likely to have  direct arrivals by illegal migrants, although these do occur.

 Our visa system - which places the control of entry to Australia  offshore - facilitates the entry of those who are assessed as  having legitimate reasons to travel to Australia and prevents the  entry of those who are assessed as likely to become illegal  migrants.

 While the visa system does not stop Australia having illegal  migrants, it has contributed significantly to reducing the  problem.

 The second major challenge is to ensure that migrant entry 

 requirements are not so restricted that genuine asylum seekers  are denied protection.

 Australia tries to deal with this problem by having a large 

 offshore humanitarian program and ensuring that onshore cases are  dealt with quickly in the asylum system with protection for those  found to be refugees and the return to their country of origin  for those who are not.

 The illegal movement of people today is rapidly becoming one of  the world's most pressing issues.  Australia shares the concerns  of governments who are trying to deal with the many problems it  presents and is pleased to be hosting these Regional 

 Consultations.

 We acknowledge the valuable role of other forums that have 

 considered aspects of illegal migration. Australia has 

 participated in many of them, including the annual seminars on  immigration organised by Japan, and I would like to put on 

 record Australia's appreciation for the opportunity to take part  in such activities.

 I believe these Regional Consultations have great promise in  fostering a cooperative approach to a serious regional and  international problem. I hope they can help us all establish a  continuing process where information can be shared and views  exchanged.

 I wish you well in your deliberations over the next few days.

