---
title: "Diplomatic appointment: Ambassador to Thailand"
date: "1994-08-31"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186108
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KOU10%22
---



The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Gareth Evans, today announced that
Mr Cavan Hogue officially assumed his duties as Australia's new Ambassador
to the Kingdom of Thailand on 25 August, when he presented his credentials
to His Majesty King Bhumiphol Aduiyadej. Mr Hogue replaces Mr John
McCarthy.

 Australia's relations with Thailand are
long-standing, close and cordial. The bilateral relationship is
wide-ranging, including commerce, defence cooperation, tourism, narcotics
control, refugee resettlement, development cooperation, and education.
Australia and Thailand maintain a productive and constructive dialogue on a
range of regional and international economic and political matters,
including APEC, multilateral trade and the Cairns Group, Burma, Cambodia and
regional security issues. Reflecting the depth and breadth of the bilateral
relationship, our Embassy in Bangkok is one of our largest overseas
missions.

 A major focus is two way trade and investment between
Australia and Thailand. Thailand's rapidly expanding industrial base and
average GDP growth of 10 per cent over the past five years make it one of
Australia's fastest growing export markets, with merchandise exports
reaching $1.25 billion in 1993. Energy, minerals and primary commodities
continue to dominate our exports to Thailand, but exports of manufactures
are growing rapidly.

 Mr Hogue is a senior career officer of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. He joined the Department of
External Affairs in January 1960 and subsequently served in Seoul, Rome,
Mexico City, Santiago, Manila and Jakarta. From 1983 to 1984 he was
Ambassador to Mexico, from 1985 to 1987 Ambassador and Deputy Permanent
Representative to the UN, New York, and from 1983 to 1990 High Commissioner
to Malaysia. From 1990 to 1991 Mr Hogue was First Assistant Secretary, Asia
North East and South East Division, and from 1991 until his current
appointment he was Ambassador to the Russian Federation.

 Mr
Hogue holds a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Sydney and studied at
the Centre for International Affairs in Harvard, USA, during 1975 and 1976.
He is a graduate of the Australian Joint Services Staff College.

 CANBERRA

