---
title: "Australia trebles relief for Rwanda"
date: "1994-05-03"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184871
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DJ120%22
---

 NEWS RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SENATOR GARETH EVANS

 I

 M47 3 MAY 1994

 AUSTRALIA TREBLES RELIEF FOR RWANDA L ^ cxcsl ) Australia is providing an additional $1 million for emergency relief for Rwandan  refugees, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Gareth Evans, said today.

 “The tragic slaughter of over 200,000 people in fighting in Rwanda is one of the  greatest horrors of our generation,” Senator Evans said.

 “In just over three weeks over 300,000 refugees have fled the fighting to save their  lives, in the process creating one of the most rapid and desperate refugee movements in  history.

 “The influx of refugees is providing additional pressure on neighbouring countries, such  as Zaire and Tanzania which are already struggling to cope with earlier refugee  pressures and other factors such as drought.

 “Australia is increasing its support for international efforts to help the survivors of the  conflict, while negotiations to find a peaceful solution continue.

 “In view of the urgency of the situation the Australian emergency relief will be  provided immediately to agencies with existing operational capacity in the region.

 “The Australian funds will be used to help meet the immediate needs of clean water,  food, basic sanitation and shelter.

 “Apart from bringing a halt to the fighting our greatest concern now is to avoid further  loss of life through diseases such as cholera and dysentery,” Senator Evans said.

 Australia is providing $700,000 to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  which is coordinating the international relief effort.

 A further $200,000 is being provided for World Vision Australia towards a regional  program providing relief kits for families.

 Community Aid Abroad will receive $100,000 to provide water, sanitation and shelter  for refugees who have fled into Zaire. The program will be implemented by CAA’s  partner agency, Oxfam International, which has been operating in the region for years.

 In April, Australia provided $500,000 for relief efforts of the International Committee  of the Red Cross (ICRC) and AUSTCARE for use by its partner agency, Medecins Sans  Frontieres (MSF). Red Cross and MSF are the only two aid agencies currently operating 

 in Rwanda.

 Also, 13 tonnes of AIDAB-funded Australian-made high energy biscuits are being  provided through CARE Australia for distribution by the ICRC and MSF.

 The emergency relief funds are being provided through AIDAB, Australia’s overseas  aid agency.

 CANBERRA

