---
title: "Budget initiatives in citizenship and settlement assistance"
date: "1994-05-10"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184951
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IGQ10%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

 Î›

 Senator Nick Bolkus Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B23/94 

 E M / S A  / U s 0 * 7 ) U rJ T U L · 3 - 3 °

 BUDGET INITIATIVES IN CITIZENSHIP AND SETTLEMENT ASSISTANCE

 Citizenship and settlement assistance activities have received a boost in the 1994/95  Budget, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus,  announced today.

 "Australian citizenship is a central symbol of Australian identity and the Government  believes that increased importance should be attached to it," Senator Bolkus said.

 "I am pleased to announce that my Department has been allocated $3.25 million for  1994/95 and $0.454 million for each year for the next three years to undertake a major  promotional campaign to encourage the taking up of Australian citizenship and to  enhance its profile and significance among all Australians."

 Senator Bolkus said the citizenship promotion complemented his announcement last  November that the Joint Standing Committee on Migration would conduct a wide  ranging review of Australian citizenship.

 The Committee is examining ways of making Citizenship carry more meaning for all  Australians. It is also examining the provisions of the Australian Citizenship Act 1948  to ensure that they are consistent with the needs of multicultural Australia. The  Committee is due to report in September this year.

 Senator Bolkus said the settlement activities were directed towards addressing the  problems of migrant job seekers, with a special focus on newly arrived groups of  people with little or no community-based support in Australia.

 "$1.25 million will fund 25 grants to community organisations so they can employ  social/welfare workers to assist individuals and small groups access mainstream  services, such as training and related activities, to improve their marketability and  chances of finding work," he said.

 "An additional $0.75 million will be provided to help people arriving under the  Government's humanitarian program." This money will fund 15 grants to help meet  the needs of new refugee groups.

 "There is a need to strengthen the coordination of settlement services provided  through non-Government agencies and to improve the focus of these services on  the needs of people arriving under the humanitarian program," Senator Bolkus said.

 "Many of the newer refugee groups, such as those from Africa and the Middle East,  do not have large or well established communities in Australia to provide support to  new arrivals. These people need special assistahce when they first arrive and also  as they settle in to the Australian community."

 Senator Bolkus said $0,625 million had also been provided in the Budget to improve  the coordination and delivery of services offered to people arriving under the  humanitarian program.

 He said improvements would include: more detailed information about what people  can expect on arrival in Australia; providing settlement services with more detailed  profiles of people coming to Australia; enhancing the Community Refugee Settlement 

 Scheme and improving reception services.

 "These measures would lead to a more planned and effective settlement program,"  he said.

 "They also address the settlement issues arising from the changing character of the  humanitarian program - with a trend to smaller and more diverse groups, and an  increase in more difficult to settle cases which required intensive levels of settlement  service.

 Senator Bolkus said that to help fund these Budget initiatives, immigration fees would  be indexed in line with the Consumer Price Index.

 CANBERRA 10 May 1994

 MEDIA CONTACT Ruth Dewsbury (06) 2777860

