---
title: "Australia moves to stop boat arrivals"
date: "1994-12-30"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211549990
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B2220%22
---

 Senator Nick Bolkus B93/94

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860

 AUSTRALIA MOVES TO STOP BOAT ARRIVALS

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, today announced  a series of measures to prevent any people without claims on Australia from abusing our  processes and tying up considerable public resources.

 He made this announcement after reviewing with other Ministers Australia’s arrangements  in response to the recent increase in direct boat arrivals. These recent arrivals are largely  ethnic Chinese-Victnamese who have been the object of extensive resettlement efforts in  China by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees over the past fifteen years.

 Senator Bolkus said these new measures are aimed at stopping illegal arrivals imposing  themselves on Australia’s open society and undermining the integrity of both our  migration and humanitarian programs.

 The Minister said that we must ensure that nur legal arrangements are effective to meet  the tests that are now being placed on them. He said the Government is not prepared to  stand by and be prevented from taking immediate action to stem this flow of people  making for Australia by those who may attempt to exploit our legal system.

 "The Government will introduce in Parliament’s next session which commences on 31  January, legislation designed to ensure that with effect from today unauthorised arrivals  are not able rn abuse our system," Senator Bolkus said. " A number of initiatives will be  taken to deal with repeat applications, persons subject to prior protection, and other  manifestly unfounded claims for refugee status. The Government will amend the 

 legislation to ensure that claims for refugee status cannot be made on the basis of China’s "  one child policy. These changes will apply to all illegal arrivals and asylum claimants  and, because they will rake effect from today’s date, will apply equally tu recent boat  arrivals."

 The Minister said that achieving a speedy return of any people without valid claims to  enter Australia to their place of residence was as important as the introduction of the  legislation. .

 "Senior level discussions between Australia and China are continuing", said the Minister  "It would not be productive to go into the detail of the discussions. I can say, however,  that they are proceeding in a cooperative framework, and are covering the full range of  issues relating to the illegal movement of people to Australia, with a particular focus on 

 streamlining as far as possible return arrangements."

 n In the meantime, unauthorised arrivals will continue to be detained in accordance with  the law," Senator Bolkus said.

 "Although there is evidence that Chinese authorities have had success in stopping boat  departures and in making arrests, it is not possible to be definitive about future arrivals",  said the Minister. "It can take 3-0 weeks for vessels to reach Australia from China, so it  would be prudent to expect that a number of vessels may already be on the sea. Whether 

 ur how many fresh departures from China take place will depend in large part on  perceptions there about the fortunes of those who have already departed."

 None of the changes will compromise the Australian finvernmemf’s commitment to  provide protection to genuine refugees. Indeed, they strengthen it because they protect  Australia's capacity to offer humanitarian protection to many people around the world  who need access to Australia for resettlement under our normal programs. Over the past 

 year some 13,000 have been accepted in Australia, including some 2,350 from camps in  the Indo-China region. The measures we are taking are aimed at doing away with costly  abuse of our system and its proper processes.

 Surveillance of the Australian coast is also important to the Government. Officials of  DIEA and Coastwatch have been in close liaison over the need for surveillance of our  northern approaches. Coastwatch success in locating vessels well out to sea is welcomed.  This effort will be maintained over the coming weeks.

 "Although the increase in arrivals has placed significant strain on the detention facilities at  Fort Hedland, detention will remain a central part of our processing, " the Minister said.  "With over 700 people in the Port Hedland Centre it is essential that further facilities be  identified to cater for both the immediate and medium term outlook". A Task Force 

 including DIEA, Defence and the Australian Property Group has therefore been ·  established to identify and commission additional accommodation. Relevant authorities  will be consulted.

 Senator Bolkus said he had made arrangements for the Opposition spokesperson on  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Short, to be briefed on developments, A  briefing will also be provided to the Governments of the Northern Territory and Western  Australia as they are more directly affected in an immediate sense than other 

 states/territories.

 CONTACT: Ruth Dewsbmy (018) 624 847  Stewart Foster (06) 264 2176

 30 December 1994

