---
title: "Transcript ... [of interview], doorstop, Parliament House, Canberra"
date: "1994-07-25"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "of interview"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OVS10%22
---

  PRIME MINISTER 

  TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HOI{  DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA ""''  f, ';l!H!fe.'fl\l'.'ltet  f }~~,~:s:,,!}~.~\ 

  E&EO PROOF COPY 

  PM: Well, as you know the Government has today considered, among other  things at Cabinet, level the crisis in Rwanda, and it is the 

  Government's view that the nature of this crisis is such that the  Australian people would want Australia to show all the compassion that  Australians would believe was appropriate to help the people of  Rwanda, particularly the refugees in the straitened circumstances, sad, 

  deprived circumstances they find themselves in. So the Government  today decided to meet the two challenges of Rwanda. The first is  immediate humanitarian relief for those on the borders, in the refugee  camps, and secondly, taking measures to encourage the refugees 

  back home - back to their villages in Rwanda so that the deprivation  and the malnutrition and the deaths can be stemmed - and we can see  a resettlement of people back into their country. 

  As a consequence of this, the Cabinet has decided today to dispatch a  force of 300, over 300, people as part of the United Nations UNAMIR  commitment, which will enable a return to the peaceful resettlement of  people back into Rwanda, wherein the Australian contingent will 

  manage the medical servicing of the United Nations contingent, and  support the assistance to Rwandan civilians with medical assistance  and to non-Government organisations in doing it. 

  Secondly, the Government decided to provide an additional $6.Sm  package today in addition to the $3.Sm already announced which will  bring the Australian financial commitment - Government commitment -to $1 Om. That additional spending will be by way of $3.25m to be  provided to the Australian Aid Agencies working in the field. Of this,  $1.75m will go to public appeals conducted by the Australian Aid  Agencies, with the remaining $1.5m going directly to specific relief 

  programs. $3m will be provided to the UN Consolidated Appeal  announced la~t Friday. As well as this, we are arranging for the  immediate dispatch of urgently needed medical supplies and re­ hydration kits, vitamins and anti-malarial drugs on the first aircraft we 

  2 

  can place them on leaving Australia and, in addition to that, we'll be  dispatching as soon as possible two C-130 Hercules aircraft to take  water purification equipment to Rwanda - because it is water purity  which is one of the problems - and also other aid equipment which can 

  be medical supplies and food aid. 

  As a consequence of this, the force which Australia will send will be  based at Kigali Central Hospital, and the deployment will be for a  period of six months with an option for a second six month deployment.  So, Australians will be staying there a comparatively long time,  whether the second six month option is taken up or not. As well as  that, while at the Kigali Hospital, Australian Medical Support Forces  will also be able to provide assistance to Rw.andan civilians at the 

  nearby King Faisel Hospital and, as well, for the civilians which will  then begin to mass around any military medical facility, we will be  arranging with Australian non-government organisations, and other  non-government organisations, for the management of such people 

  around the hospitals and also providing medical assistance to the  NGO's and giving them some security support as well. 

  The force, the first force, will leave on the 6th of August - the advance  party - and two weeks later when the innoculation program is  completed, or as soon as it's completed, the balance of the force will  leave as well. In all of this, I think the Australian response will be  appropriate, in the relative scale of assistance to Rwanda, greater than  most, probably as great as any, but commensurate with the degree of 

  care, I think, compassion which the Australian community believes  should be shown, particularly in the face of such distressing footage as  we've seen over the last couple of days. So I'll leave it at that. Thank  you. 

  J: Mr Keating, will the funds be coming out of other aid projects or will it 

  PM: Well, that hasn't been decided yet. But, if you remember, the  Government has given a very healthy additional commitment to aid in  the Budget just a couple of months ago - about $100 million - and  there will be some supplementation for the defence forces. We will be 

  committing $25 million for full supplementation, in fact, for the defence  force. Now, some of that will be rebated by the United Nations, but  that comes back, only a part of it, later say 12 or 15 months from now  and the cost of that is $25 million and the aid, the humanitarian aid, 

  some may be met from additional budgetary appropriations, the  balance may be met from the aid vote. 

  J: So the defence money will be new? 

  PM: New money. 

  3 

  J: What happened between last Thursday and today to ... the tripling of  the aid? 

  PM: Well, last Thursday, I had discussions with various offices including  the Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister and myself to agree that  we would actually start the inoculation program last week in lieu of a  Cabinet decision today being taken so we could get logistics started. I  think, with the opening of the UN appeal last Friday and the better 

  understanding of the scale of the problem later in the week and over  the weekend, I think, now is the time to make this response and make  it quickly. 

  J: Prime Minister, has the UN guaranteed ... for our troops .. ? 

  PM: We cover the costs of the logistics and the full commitment, the UN  rebates forces which are part of UNAMIR at some point down the  track, a couple of years down the track. 

  J: Will this silence the critics? 

  PM: Well, I don't know whether it will be the biggest national effort  anywhere, but it probably will be. And if not, it will be very close to  being. 

  J: Did Malcolm Fraser's remarks ... ? 

  PM: No, but I thought Mr Fraser made sensible, I mean, we have been  discussing this now for weeks. As you know we sent a task force to  look at the prospect of the success of the UN-sponsored mission - a  month ago - so, we've had this very much under notice, but, I think, Mr  Fraser's comments were apposite. I think, as along with most  Australians, reflect the need that, I think, we all feel to do something  right here. 

  J: Do you leave open the possiblity of more financial aid? 

  PM: Well, that's always open, but I think there is a large problem there and,  I think, the notion is let's try and deal with it with a large commitment at  the front. 

  J: How safe will our personnel be? 

  PM: I think, in Kigali, the assessm·ents are that they will be ... there is only a  sort of moderate risk. Because what's happened there is, of course,  there has been a, well, let me put it this way, much more safe now than  a few weeks ago when the political stability was not guaranteed. This 

  is more likely to be guaranteed now that the patriotic front have  succeeded there and that there is some political stability and as well  as that we are starting to see moderate Hutus appointed to prominent 

  4 

  positions within the government and this, I think, should generally  make the strategic environment better. But, there would probably be a  greater risk away from Kigali than at Kigali. 

  J: Is that guarantee of stability been a factor in this decision? 

  PM: I'm not with you. 

  J: Well, does the guarantee ... 

  PM: Well, I think, that it has made any assessment by the ADF of the  contingent risk of such a commitment better for the Australian forces  now, than say, a couple of months ago. 

  J: If the situation did break down there, is that six month commitment  absolute? 

  PM: It's six with an option of six. 

  J: But, ... 

  PM: Well, I think it is six with a contingent twelve months. Ours would be,  again, amongst the longest commitments there and, I mean, these are  always options that the Government can consider. But, I think, that  that kind of commitment would essentially see Australian forces out of  Rwanda and by that stage the UN organising another force to replace 

  it. Can I just remind you that most of the forces there are African  forces, there is the support of other OECD countries - the Canadian  Defence Force for instance - will provide communications. The  Australian Defence Force will be providing the medical support for the 

  commitment which will be about 5,500 troops. 

  J: The French example? 

  PM: I think, it has been important, but that mandate is now coming to an  end. The UN mandate is taking up and the important thing from our  point of view is to make sure that when we made the commitment, or  as certain as we could, that the environment within which Australian 

  troops would operate would be one where there was a diminished risk  to them and the changed political environment and the examination by  our reconnaissance group of the UN plans means, I think, now that we  can make this with relative safety. 

  J: Prime Minister, did Gary Gray do the right thing ... 

  PM: Well, I told you that when I did this I would address it exclusively to  Rwanda. Thank you 

  ends 

