---
title: "People of non-English speaking backgrounds deserve a fair go in Australia's legal system"
date: "1994-12-06"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
  - "Crean, Simon"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211549747
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WW020%22
---

 JOINT STATEMENT By

 the Minister for Employment. Education and Training, Simon Crean. and 

 the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs, 

 Senator Nick Bolkus.

 C l60/94 6 December 1994

 P E O P L E  O F N O N -E N G L IS H  SPEA K IN G  B A CK G R O U N D S D E S E R V E  A FA IR  GO

 IN A U STR A LIA 'S LEGAL SY STEM

 The Federal Government is encouraging law schools in Australian universities to develop cross- 

 cultural training courses for their students so that the legal profession is able to serve the needs of all 

 Australians, regardless of their backgrounds.

 The Minister for Employment Education and Training, Simon Crean, said today that $100,000 from 

 die National Priority (Reserve) Fund would be set aside in 1995.

 "Law students need to be aware of the difficulties faced by people of non-English speaking 

 backgrounds (NESB) in gaining legal assistance and a 'fair go' in Australia's legal system," Mr 

 Crean said. ·

 The Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said about 

 one in four Australians are from non-English speaking backgrounds and therefore it was important 

 for the legal profession to serve the needs of all Australians.

 The Ministers have written to Australian universities seeking their co-operation and commitment to 

 making cross-cultural education a core component of undergraduate law courses.

 "There have been many repons over the past few years which have highlighted the problems and the 

 need for action." the Ministers said.

 The recent 'Access to Justice' and 'Barriers to Access to Legal Services for Migrant W omen' reports 

 show that significant sections of Australia's multicultural society find it more difficult to gain help 

 from the legal system due to language and cultural differences.

 "People of Non-English Speaking Backgrounds (NESB), particularly newly arrived migrants, 

 refugees and NESB women face a daunting task in gaining information, advice and equitable and 

 sensitive treatment in police investigation, court processes and from legal advisers," Senator Bolkus 

 said.

 "It is important that the legal profession in general appreciates the barrier which lack of English and 

 cultural differences can create, are aware of interpreting and translating services that are available, 

 recognise when an interpreter should be used and know how to use an interpreter."

 Mr Crean said that while the Reserve Fund had previously been used to initiate the development of 

 multicultural courses in higher education, none had targeted law students specifically.

 The Department of Employment, Education and Training and the Office of Multicultural Affairs are 

 currently working on guidelines to attract high quality proposals and advice will be circulated to 

 institutions in the New Year.

 Contacts: Catherine Payne, Simon Crean's Office (06) 277 7460.

 Ruth Dewsbury, Senator Bolkus' Office (06) 277 7860.

