---
title: "Immigration fee rise takes effect"
date: "1994-06-30"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185488
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RTR10%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE rSenator Nick Bolkusl

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 B40/94 ·

 CL i ÎŠ~Î¹ 2_Î²Î½Î“\ S ^x/V/p>  1 IMMIGRATION FEE RISE TAKES EFFECT

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said today that  consistent with the Government's Budget announcement, immigration and citizenship fees  will be increased in line with inflation from 1 July 1994.

 Senator Bolkus said that the Government's Budget decision to index fees means that  clients and the Government will continue to share the same percentage of processing  costs.

 The Minister noted that consistent with the Government's Access to Justice initiatives,  fees charged by the Migration Internal Review Office (MIRO) and the Immigration Review  Tribunal (IRT) will not be increased. In addition, people who are successful in having a  departmental decision set aside by MIRO or the IRT will continue to have their fees fully 

 refunded.

 Senator Bolkus also said the Government would continue its policy of not charging people  seeking to come to Australia under the Government's refugee or humanitarian programs.

 "The Government takes its international obligations very seriously and will not compromise  its humanitarian commitments," the Minister said.

 Senator Bolkus said that consistent with the Government's cost recovery policy existing  fees will be increased tomorrow (July 1) in line with inflation from the time they were last  increased. As a result, some fees will rise by up to 15 per cent while others will not rise  until next year. The average increase is about six per cent.

 Senator Bolkus said it was difficult to equate the average fee increase with the effect on  applicants. He said some fees were not paid often while others were paid frequently.

 The Minister said a better indicator of the effect of the new rates on clients was that the  portfolio's receipts are expected to increase by about three per cent meaning an increase  in revenue of about $3 million.

 Senator Bolkus also foreshadowed that fees for Migration Agents and the Adult Migrant  English Program may be increased later in the year.

 CANBERRA: 30 JUNE 1994

 MEDIA CONTACT: RUTH DEWSBURY (06) 277 7860

 NB: A schedule of the new fees can be obtained by contacting the nearest office of the  Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs or by ringing (06) 264 2 1 8 3 .

