---
title: "Ray misses the mark on Rwanda"
date: "1994-07-22"
creators:
  - "Reith, Peter"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211185687
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2243414%22
---

 PETER REITH MP

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

 RAY MISSES THE MARK ON RWANDA

 "Australia's proposed contribution of a military field hospital to support United Nations troops operating in and around Kigali entirely misses the mark of the tragedy in Rwanda. The Coalition supports any Australian action to help alleviate the plight of the people of Central Africa, but our resources are finite and they must be directed to the area of greatest

 and most pressing need."

 Shadow Minister for Defence, Peter Reith, speaking today whilst opening the third annual scientific meeting of the Australian Military Medical Association questioned why the Australian Medical team for Rwanda was being sent to the capital city Kigali to service UN troops but not to the worst refugee camps which are the centre of the tragedy. Mr Reith

 also noted that the Government has still to make a decision despite the daily mounting of evidence of the tragedy.

 Commenting on a report in today's Australian that the Government is expected to send a field hospital together with a company sized protection force (in total around 300 personnel) early next month, he said that the contribution was not only small and late but also misdirected.

 "The greatest need is not to provide medical services to healthy and well fed United Nations troops but to provide immediate relief assistance to the hundreds and thousands of Rwandans who have fled their nation and are now facing starvation and illness in overcrowded refugee camps. The immediate needs of these refugees are food, water, shelter and medicines. We should be directing our assistance to relieving the plight of refugees, not to UN troops.

 "It is clear that the civil aid organisations will not be able to cope on their own. They will need the logistical capability of the defence forces to assist. There are a number of things Australia could be doing to help.

 "Australia has the capacity to provide air transport support for food relief and air head control and management to ensure quick unloading and turn around of aircraft. We have the capacity to collect and purify water and to generate electricity for emergency medical installations as well as an ability to provide a field hospital to treat severely sick and wounded. Surely this should be the area in which our Government should be focussing.

 "The Government has been alternatively wringing its hands or sitting on them since the Rwanda tragedy broke in April this year. The majority of fighting has stopped. The Government must now act quickly to focus our assistance on the area where it is most needed. That clearly is on the tragic condition of the refugees and not on the lesser medical needs of United Nations peace keeping forces."

 Note: Mr Reith will be addressing the Military Medicine Association meeting at Sheraton Southgate, Melbourne at 1.30 pm. He will be available for a doorstop interview at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices, 90 Collins Street, Melbourne at 3.30 pm.

 IL/

 (06) 277 4221 (015) 265 091

 For further information: Michael Hughes July 22, 1994

 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH



