---
title: "Approach to aid policy a disgrace"
date: "1994-05-02"
creators:
  - "Peacock, Andrew"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184856
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2553010%22
---

 .41F

 . 1 10, PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 11 4:4 )1/.. ' ,., HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES , HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, M.P. MEMBER FOR KOOYONG SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. 2600 TEL. (06) 277 4048. 277 4419 FAX. (06) 277 4990

 LEVEL 16 90 COLLINS STREET MELBOURNE, VIC. 3000 TEL. (03) 650 3455

 FAX. (03) 650 5115

 PRESS RELEASE BY HON. ANDREW PEACOCK, MP

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 APPROACH TO AID POLICY A DISGRACE

 The Expenditure Review Committee is expected to meet again this week to consider the aid budget for the coming year. Its task -will be significant.

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hon. Andrew Peacock, said it appears there will be no real increase in the aid budget to be announced next week, at least not unless the Prime Minister personally lends his own support to this cause. Mr Peacock said that Labor's track record on foreign aid was a disgrace.

 Unless Mr Keating takes strong action this week, this Government will have presided over a fall in the aid/GNP ratio from more than 0.5% when it came to power to a record low likely to approach 0.33% for 1994195. Australia's ranking among other aid

 donors will have declined from among the top five to well below average.

 The Labor Party clearly does not care about the fact that it made an unequivocal promise to the electorate to return the aid budget to 0.4% of GNP by 1994. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Evans, has even gone so far as to deny, in Senate Estimates Committee A, that there ever was any such promise. The

 fact is that Labor intends to go on breaking this promise. And clearly it never intended to do anything other than break it.

 Mr Peacock noted that the Prime Minister had recently announced a doubling of the aid program for Vietnam. But, Mx Peacock asked, where will the funds come from? The reality now is, Mr Peacock said, that if the Government goes ahead with the proposed new $100m Mekong Delta Bridge, for which a feasibility study is being commissioned, this will mean fewer funds for poverty

 alleviation in this impoverished region. With no real increase in the aid budget, the proposed bridge will divert badly needed funds from community oriented basic needs such as basic education, water supply and sanitation. The balance, Mx Peacock

 said, just isn't right.

 COMMONWEALTH 1 PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY MICAH / 2

 2.

 Mr Peacock said that before the Coalition could lend its support to the proposed bridge over the lower Mekong, the Coalition would want to be assured on a number of matters.

 First, the Government would need to demonstrate that there is a high likelihood of continued flow-on commercial benefits to Australian business from construction of yet another bridge. Second, an Environmental Impact assessment would need to be

 undertaken and to reveal no major adverse effect. Third, the Government would need clearly to spell out how it reconciles its expressed concern regarding the human rights situation in Vietnam with its ambitious aid program.

 Mr Peacock also said the Coalition remained very wary about reported administrative inefficiencies in the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB). There are ongoing reports, Mr Peacock said, about markedly excessive AIDAB use of consultants. And, worse still, inadequate AIDAB oversight of consultants' work. Especially when the Government is running down the aid/GNP ratio, there is no excuse, Mr Peacock said, for wastage of declining overall resources.

 Mx Peacock also said there was too little room for flexibility in the current aid program. Immediate emergency assistance is required, Mr Peacock said, to assist UNHCR and Non-Government Organisations to alleviate the suffering of refugees now pouring out of Rwanda as well as those remaining in the country. Rwanda has in recent weeks been wracked by horrific violence and the movement of refugees seeking to escape this slaughter is one of

 the largest such outflows in recent times. The Government has an urgent humanitarian duty to help aid and relief agencies provide what succour they could.

 Canberra, 2 May 1994

 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT JANE DRAKE-BROCKMAN ON (06) 277 4419

