---
title: "Menadue Report recommends new directions for Bureau of Immigration and Population Research"
date: "1994-10-28"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186675
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A7Y10%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE'  . Senator Nick Bolkus

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06)  277 7860

 B72/94

 MENADUE REPORT RECOMMENDS NEW DIRECTIONS FOR BUREAU OF  IMMIGRATION AND POPULATION RESEARCH

 The first evaluation of the Bureau of Immigration and Population  Research since its establishment five years ago has recommended  a series of new directions for the Bureau.

 The report released in Melbourne today by the Minister for 

 Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, was prepared  by a Committee chaired by former Immigration Department head and  former Ambassador to Japan, Mr John Menadue.

 The Committee, established by Senator Bolkus late last yea r ,   surveyed government agencies, research institutes and community  organisations around the country to assess the impact of the  Bureau and how it might be able to improve its scope and 

 effectiveness.

 "When you consider the social and economic pace of change in  Australia today - and the historic rate at which information,  money and people are moving around the world - it's clear that  the demand for guality research and informed debate has never 

 been greater," Senator Bolkus said.

 "The Menadue report has found that the Bureau has successfully  established itself as a source of comprehensive, independent and  objective information and analysis.

 "It has generated more balanced and informed community debate,  and built up a body of high quality research studies.

 "Having successfully completed the inception stage, the committee  has suggested a number of directions for a new phase in the 

 Bureau's development."

 They include:

 . the development of a three-year strategic plan, to be

 reviewed annually with the input of key stakeholders;

 .  the establishment of more effective links and better

 dialogue with the community;

 .  the amendment of the Bureau's charter to include policy 

 development;

 .  replacement of the BIRR Advisory Board with a similar Board which would assist the Bureau in the development of a 

 strategic plan.

 The Committee has also identified the following six broad themes  for future research directions:

 . International .  and regional trends and their impact on 

 Australia, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region; .  Citizenship,  identity and community relations; .  Population, the environment and urban infrastructure; . The labour market and unemployment; . Settlement and social issues; and . Refugees.

 "The Committee has produced a thorough and far-reaching report, and I congratulate its members and chair for the contribution  they have made," Senator Bolkus said.

 "I will take their recommendations seriously in responding fully  to the report over the next few months."

 The Bureau was established by the Government as the Bureau of  Immigration Research in 1989. Located in the Department of  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  its charter was to provide  systematic, well-resourced and independent research on 

 immigration issues.

 It broadened its charter in May 1993 to include population issues  in both its field of inquiry and its title.

 CANBERRA OCTOBER 28 1994

 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860

