---
title: "Opposition lumps tax payer with boat people 'compensation'"
date: "1994-08-30"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186097
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OLV10%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS MEDIA RELEASE

 Senator Nick Bolkus B60/94

 Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 (06) 277 7860

 OPPOSITION LUMPS TAX PAYER WITH BOAT PEOPLE 'COMPENSATION'

 The Government will proceed with the Migration Legislation  Amendment Bill (No 2) ,  despite Coalition opposition announced  today.

 The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  Senator Nick  Bolkus, said tonight that the Opposition's refusal to support the  Bill potentially puts at risk tens of millions of dollars of tax 

 payers^ money.

 "Any payment of compensation to boat people would amount to a  windfall for people who arrived here without authority," Senator  Bolkus said.

 "In 1992 the Opposition supported the principle that boat people  should not receive a windfall in compensation and supported  legislation limiting the payout of any damages to the nominal  amount of a dollar a day. That legislation applies 

 retrospectively and selectively to only a number of boat people.

 "Yet today the Opposition refuses to support legislation aimed  at further supporting the Commonwealth in any claim by the boat  people. It is a nonsense to distinguish the current Bill from  the earlier provisions on the grounds of retrospectivity.

 "It is a further nonsense to suggest that the Government should  negotiate with the boat people now when the Opposition supported  capping any windfall in the past."

 According to one refugee advocate, claims for compensation could  amount to up to $100 million.

 "The Opposition clearly finds this acceptable," Senator Bolkus  said. "The Government finds it unequivocally unacceptable.

 "The Opposition's stance is grossly irresponsible and, given  their support for earlier legislation, totally hypocritical.

 "The Opposition claims that their legal advice is that the Bill  would be constitutionally invalid. The Government's legal  advice, based on recent High Court decisions and made available  to the Opposition, is strongly to the contrary.  The Government  would not have introduced the Bill otherwise."

 Senator Bolkus said the purpose of the Bill is simply to return  the law to what the Parliament, the Department and all other  parties thought it to be.

 "The Opposition knows that curative legislation such as this has  precedents in both Australia and the United States," he said.  CANBERRA AUGUST 30 1994

 ill  waft

