---
title: "International humanitarian law: a time for action"
date: "1994-05-12"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211184978
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4O120%22
---

 AOf~ Attached is Senatnrjp.van's opening address to the Australian Defence Force Academy and University College, University of NSW, Conference "Prisoners of War, Prisoners of History: Captivity and Internment in Recent Conflicts 1939 to the Present", Canberra, 12 May 1994

 INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW: A TIME FOR ACTION

 Opening Address by Senator the Hon Gareth Evans QC, Minister for Foreign Affairs,  at the Australian Defence Force Academy and University College, University of NSW,  Conference "Prisoners Of War, Prisoners Of History: Captivity and Internment in  Recent Conflicts 1939 to the Present", Canberra, 12 May 1994.

 Like millions of other news viewers around the world a few months ago, I watched as  two soldiers emerged from a burning, shell-ravaged building in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  Clearly without weapons and their arms held high in the air, they walked towards their  waiting captors when, without warning, a volley of shots rang out -  and the two 

 surrendering soldiers fell dead.

 This was a chilling, brutal and extreme incident, but sadly, similar events are becoming  increasingly part of the murderous conflicts occurring across the globe, whether in the  former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Burundi, Somalia, Angola or Tajikistan. And for every  execution of a prisoner of war or civilian, there are countless other acts of violence,  torture, starvation, deprivation and rape, many of which go unreported.

 The international community in fact has no way of knowing just how many of these  crimes are being committed, but we do know that, in the troubled aftermath of the Cold  War, they are alarmingly on the rise. There are thousands of pages of testimony from  governments, aid organisations and individuals on war crimes or crimes against  humanity committed in Bosnia alone. The upsurge in nationalist, ethnic, religious and 

 political divisions that have characterised this post-Cold War era have created  disturbing and persistent habits of violence which are changing, in fundamental ways,  the nature and dimension of armed conflicts. Most of the inhumane acts being 

 committed are not committed in the heat of hostilities, but are outright acts of hatred  and revenge. Regrettably, they are more often than not being perpetrated by the armed  forces of states or agents of states which have an obligation to uphold the principles of  international humanitarian law. ·

 Even bloody war has its rules. And those rules exist, and have existed, across  civilisations for thousands of years. To quote the former Director of the Henri Dunant  Institute, M. Meurant (February 1983):

 [XV/94]

 2

 Each civilisation of our planet throughout history has shown that the rules of  international humanitarian law exist -  in Islam, the African traditions and in  Asian civilisations and religions ... this is a very basic truth that we should  keep in mind: whatever their race, uniform, religious belief or political 

 creed, victims everywhere are equal in their sufferings and undergo exactly  the same pains. They all need mercy, help and care. Thus, whatever the  language used to express them, the needs are the same, and so are the  answers to these needs."

 The Article on War (or "Yi Bin Pian) by Master Xun in the third century BC indicates  that it was established custom in Ancient China to hold prisoners of war without harm  until the cessation of war or until the conclusion of peace, when they were to be  released. The Article also provides evidence of the custom of mutual release of  prisoners of war, exchange of prisoners or release on payment of ransom. Other 

 sources, such as the Zuo Commentary and the Code of Si Ma Rang Ju, suggest that  these practices go back to the eighth century BC. Other civilisations had similar rules,  although history teaches us that, sadly, they were often honoured more in the breach  than in the observance.

 In the modem world, since the beginning of the nineteenth century, however, it has  been a clear rule of international law that combatants are entitled to protection when  captured by an adversary. This and other humanitarian principles evolved into law as a  direct result of the chaos and cruelty that typified armed conflict during the French 

 Revolution and Napoleonic wars. The most recent precedents for the humanitarian  treatment of prisoners were set at the trials of major war criminals in Nuremberg and  Tokyo after World War II. The underlying principles were endorsed by the United  Nations General Assembly and the United Nations International Law Commission and 

 codified in the first three Geneva Conventions of 1949, (most specifically in Geneva  Convention III governing the treatment of prisoners of war) and in Additional Protocol  I of 1977. These instruments are widely regarded as encapsulating customary  international law and, as such, apply regardless of whether or not an individual state  has actually become party to the conventions or protocols.

 Geneva Convention III imposes an obligation on the detaining power to keep prisoners  of war alive and in good health, to treat them humanely, and to keep them protected  against acts of violence, intimidation or insults. Under the Geneva Conventions and  Additional Protocol I, this responsibility rests equally with the individual soldier who  captures the adversary and the detaining power.

 3

 It follows that if a soldier who has surrendered, or is attempting to surrender, is killed  or mistreated by the soldiers of a state, that state is responsible under international law  regardless of whether or not the atrocity was committed in the heat of battle, without  orders, or in contravention of orders. The group of soldiers who murdered the two 

 surrendering combatants I mentioned at the outset, and the state they served, were thus  guilty of a gross violation of international law. The soldiers can best be characterised  as war criminals; the state, as a sponsor of atrocities.

 Tragically, their actions highlight the recent disturbing decline in the effectiveness of,  and respect for, the principles of international humanitarian law, particularly those  governing the treatment of prisoners of war. This intolerable state of affairs represents  a serious threat which the international community must redress, not simply because  the credibility and integrity of international humanitarian law requires it, but because  humanity demands it. Traditionally, international humanitarian law has provided at  least a measure of compassion and decency in the honor and chaos of war. Without it,  we cannot hope to build a more humane world.

 The obscene acts we are witnessing in the world's all too many zones of conflict are  crimes of universal jurisdiction and yet, in most instances, they are crimes without  punishment. There is thus a glaringly urgent need for the international community to 

 rethink its approach to the enforcement of international humanitarian law. The present  definition of a war crime and the concept of individual responsibility for grave  breaches of international humanitarian law, are firmly established in international law, 

 but the crucial tasks of enforcing compliance and determining penal sanctions are left  to individual states. The simple and sad fact of the matter is, however, that in past and  present conflicts, states have consistently shown a lack of preparedness to take such 

 responsibility or to hold their troops accountable for war crimes, even when those  violations have been as obvious and as flagrant as those we have seen in Uganda, Iraq  and the former Yugoslavia. The record since 1939 illustrates that the key issues of  captivity and internment have never been dealt with adequately.

 The deliberate and systematic nature of many of the breaches we are presently seeing  demands that every member of the international community cooperate in the  development of mechanisms to provide a solution. The United Nations Security  Council's decision to establish an ad hoc International Tribunal for the Prosecution of  Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law  Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia, represents one positive and

 4

 practical response. But everyone would do well to bear constantly in mind that crimes  against humanity are an ugly, and growing, phenomenon occurring in territories across  the globe, not just in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

 To be credible and effective in dealing with crimes against humanity, the international  community must now consider rather more seriously than it has over the decades since  Nuremberg, the establishment of an international court with universal jurisdiction to  try war crimes, as well as a supporting independent prosecuting authority. The 

 International Criminal Court presently being proposed by the International Law  Commission could take on this function. The Australian Government for one supports  the establishment of such a single international criminal court over the creation of a  multiplicity of ad hoc tribunals, even though it could be some time before offenders  can be brought before such a court. And we will be working with the International 

 Law Commission to ensure the early adoption of a Statute for the Court and to ensure  wide adherence to it.

 But there are, of course, other and more immediate steps that can be taken to breathe  new life into the international humanitarian law regime and build greater recognition  of the laws of war. One such necessary step was taken recently when the international  community convened the International Conference for the Protection of War Victims 

 in Geneva last August, which was attended by 160 states, including Australia. In our  assessment, the conference achieved its key objectives of raising the level of  consciousness of the suffering caused by violations of international humanitarian law,  and reiterating the need to respect, and, where necessary, strengthen that law.

 On the last day of the Conference, the delegates issued a final declaration reminding all  belligerents of their obligation to adhere scrupulously to international humanitarian  law, condemning the torture and execution of prisoners of war, and reaffirming that the  mistreatment of prisoners of war represents a grave breach of international 

 humanitarian law. The declaration also called on the Swiss Government to convene an  open-ended group of experts to study ways to promote respect for, and compliance  with, international humanitarian law and to prepare a report for submission to states in 

 the context of the 1995 International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent  Societies.

 At the War Victims Conference, Australia and a number of other countries argued that  unless there was effective follow-up, the declaration's capacity to promote and  enhance international humanitarian law could be lost. The Swiss Government and the

 5

 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have subsequently begun a  campaign to sensitise governments to the importance of alleviating the suffering of war  victims. This campaign will include efforts to encourage states to provide 

 humanitarian educational programs and courses for armed forces personnel and to do  more to bring their domestic laws into line with international humanitarian law. The  Swiss Government and the ICRC hope that the campaign will serve to maintain the  international community's focus on the plight of war victims in preparation for the first  meeting of the open-ended group of experts, which will be held in Geneva in  September.

 I personally reaffirmed to ICRC President Sommaruga, when I met him last  September, the Australian Government's willingness to support this follow-up, and I  have also made my position known on many occasions about various aspects of  humanitarian law, most recently at a Conference on Landmines here in Canberra last  November, and at a conference of the Medical Association for the Prevention of War  in March.

 My response flows naturally from Australia's long and committed support for  international humanitarian law. This support is illustrated by our early ratification of  all four Geneva Conventions of 1949 as well as the two Additional Protocols, and by  our enactment of legislation to give domestic legal effect to Australia's obligations  under them. The most important piece of legislation is the Geneva Conventions Act 

 1957 which provides, in part, for life imprisonment as the maximum penalty where an  offence involves the wilful killing of a person protected by the Geneva Conventions or  Additional Protocol I. Offences involving other grave breaches of the Convention are  punishable by 14 years imprisonment.

 This commitment to international humanitarian law is further demonstrated by the  Australian Defence Force's recent decision to extend training in international  humanitarian law to all members of the Force. I understand that this training will  focus on the treatment of prisoners and relations with civilians in a zone of occupation.

 In addition, the Australian Government has actively pursued specific issues raised by  the Declaration of the War Victims Conference, such as the problems posed by the  indiscriminate use of anti-personnel mines and attacks on peace-keeping forces. We  are a party to the 1980 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (more  commonly referred to as the Inhumane Weapons Convention), which imposes limited  restrictions on the use of land mines. At the 48th Session of the United Nations

 6

 General Assembly last year, we co-sponsored a resolution endorsing the holding of a  conference to review that Convention, and we have made extensive representations in  South East Asia and the Pacific to encourage governments to accede to it. An  Australian delegation also recently travelled to Geneva to attend the second meeting of 

 the group of experts which will consider possible amendments to strengthen the  Convention.

 Similarly, we supported a New Zealand initiative in the United Nations for the  development of an international convention to require parties to co-operate in the  protection of United Nations peace-keeping personnel.

 Australia has in fact sought ways not only to maintain the momentum of the  Declaration of the War Victims Conference, but to extend its impact by encouraging a  consistent and comprehensive international response to the breaches of international  humanitarian law identified at the Conference. Unless we can enhance respect for, and 

 strengthen observance of, international humanitarian law around the globe, we will  continue to have a weak and grossly imperfect system. In recognition of this, we have  been working towards achieving a comprehensive Asia Pacific response to the  Declaration of the War Victims Conference.

 Last year, my Department convened a round table meeting in Canberra to discuss a  regional follow-up to the Conference. This resulted in a decision by the Australian  Red Cross and the Australian Defence Studies Centre to convene what is being  described as a Second Regional Conference on Humanitarian Law to reflect the fact 

 that the first such conference or seminar of its type was held in Canberra, at the ANU,  in 1983. The second regional conference will be held here at the Australian Defence  Force Academy from 12 to 14 December 1994. The Swiss Government and the ICRC  have already supported the concept and have agreed to present papers, and we would  of course, be encouraging as wide attendance as possible from regional countries.

 The second regional conference will use the Declaration of the War Victims  Conference as its reference, and identify and explore fundamental issues in the field of  international humanitarian law such as the question of enforcement; the contribution of  international humanitarian law to peace keeping and peace enforcement; the  relationship between the various international humanitarian law conventions and the  existing norms of international humanitarian law; the problem of sexual violence and  crimes against women and children in armed conflict situations; the protection of  cultural property and the environment; the establishment of mechanisms for improving

 7

 the plight of prisoners of war and refugees; and the removal of mines from post-war  zones.

 Another aim of the regional conference will be to develop a corpus of ideas and  recommendations which can be linked to the work of similar conferences in other  regions and fed into the open-ended group of experts to be established pursuant to the  Declaration of the War Victim's Conference. Ultimately, the results of this process 

 will be brought to the 1995 International Conference of the Red Cross and Red  Crescent Societies and then, possibly, lead to formal treaty-making procedures.

 Our own regional conference will also consider a proposal for the establishment of  ongoing, part-time regional working groups (with both government and non­ government representation) to concentrate on the application of international 

 humanitarian law to a particular issue or set of issues raised at the War Victims  Conference. In this way, the regional conference could provide an additional long­ term framework for the promotion of international humanitarian law in the Asia  Pacific and internationally.

 I have outlined in some detail our hopes for the regional conference because we see it  as an important further step in the pattern of global and regional activity which we are  all trying to encourage as a means of furthering the development of international  humanitarian law. This particular conference which I am opening today is yet another 

 important stepping stone along that same pathway, and although it deals with one  particular aspect of humanitarian law, many of the issues -  and lessons -  nevertheless  apply across the whole spectrum.

 The inclusion of eminent international speakers to give an account of American,  British, German and Italian war experiences, will be of immense value to our study of  the most recent abuses of the rights of prisoners of war and related political, legal and  moral issues. History has shown that the exploitation of prisoners of war is a recurring  feature, although a most unhappy one, of armed conflicts, and will continue to be so in  the future unless the international community is better able to deal with imperfections 

 in the current international legal and moral framework.

 We should thus all be grateful to the University College of the University of NSW and  the Australian Defence Force Academy for their decision to host this conference today  and tomorrow. By providing a broader contextual focus for the consideration of  problems such as the capture and internment of prisoners of war than has previously

 8

 been the case in Australia, this conference will be an excellent complement to the  important role that AD FA and the University College, in conjunction with the  Australian Defence Studies Centre, have already played to date in focusing national  and -  in many ways more importantly -  international attention on other key 

 humanitarian law issues such as landmines and peacekeeping.

 I have no doubt that your combined and committed efforts will substantially strengthen  the international community's capacity to see that prisoners of war and all other  victims of the madness and suffering of war, are afforded the dignity and protection  that international law must continue to provide in the name of humanity.

 *  * * *

