---
title: "Senator Evans' hypocrisy over East Timor asylum seekers"
date: "1995-10-15"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211194418
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2985504%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  ALEXANDER DOWNER MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  MEMBER FOR MAYO 

  SENATOR EVANS' HYPOCRISY OVER EAST TIMORESE ASYLUM SEEKERS 

  In seeking to avoid a diplomatic difficulty Senator Evans has made a mockery of the Government's own policy  and exposed Australia to international ridicule. 

  Senator Evans has compounded his earlier hypocrisy over the nationality of East Timorese asylum seekers by  today dismissing as "a quick top of the head exercise" the considered opinion of not just the Department of  Immigration but also his own Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. . .  Both Departments have previously advised that refugee applicants from East Timor are Indonesian and not  Portuguese citizens. 

  That is the problem for Senator Evans. 

  His own Department has consistently argued that East Timorese are Indonesian. 

  It has argued this before the International Court of Justice. 

  It has consistently advised the Immigration Department that this is the case. 

  It has taken this position with regards to over two-hundred asylum cases from East Timor over the past five  years. 

  There can be absolutely no doubt that the Department was carrying out the Ministers will. 

  In short, this hardly sounds like "a quick top of the head exercise". Unless of course five years is merely thinking  time for Senator Evans. 

  Senator Evans should now release the advice given by his Department on this issue prior to this year. 

  Senator Evans might also consider the fact that by his logic over half the citizens of East Timor would be  Portuguese. 

  In the end Gareth Evans' tortured logic has created a situation which is unsatisfactiry to all three Governments  involved, to the applicants themselves and to the common sense and fair play of Australians everywhere. 

  ENDS 

  15 October, 1995  Further Information Greg Hunt Ph: 06 277 4885 or 06 257 2773 

  COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRAR; 

