---
title: "Feeding the world: Australian support for the World Food Programme"
date: "1995-04-12"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187765
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VM720%22
---

 Minister lor Development Cooperation · Minister for Pacilic Island Affairs  Cordon Bilney MP MDC33  12 April 1995

 FEEDING THE WORLD - AUSTRALIAN SUPPORT  FOR THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME

 Australia will pledge about $105 million over two years for the vital work of the United  Nations World Food Programme (WFP), the Minister for Development Cooperation, Gordon  Bilney, said today.

 "WFP plays a crucial and largely unsung role in coordinating and delivering massive  quantities of food to emergency situations around the world," Mr Bilney said.

 "It is one of the largest UN agencies, with a total budget of US$1.5 billion. It is best known  for its emergency and refugee feeding programs.

 "WFP is also active in the use of food aid for development purposes, targeting poor and  vulnerable communities through food for work projects. ^

 Australia has been a major supporter of WFP since its inception in 1963. It is the delivery  agent for much of AusAID's bilateral emergency and refugee relief food aid.

 We are the fourth largest donor to WFP on a regular basis and play an active role in the  organisation's governance, as is appropriate for a major efficent grain producing country.

 Australians have filled many key posts in WFP in the past, including that of the Executive  Director.

 "Sadly, there is no sign of a reduction in the strong global demand for food aid," Mr Bilney  said.

 AusAID's pledge will be used to purchase wheat, wheat flour, rice, vegetable oil and other  commodities at market prices from Australian farmers, to be shipped across the globe to help  needy people around the world.

 Media contact: Allen Mawer (Minister's Office) 06-277 7660 Wendy Levy (AusAID) 06-276 4968 06-247 8920ah

