---
title: "Australia contributes to international humanitarian aid"
date: "1995-03-01"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187192
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H3520%22
---

 M inister for Development Cooperation · M inister for Pacific Island A ffairs   Gordon Bilney MPMDC 15 1 March 1995 AUSTRALIA CONTRIBUTES TO INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN AID

 "There are more than 18 million refugees in the world today and some 24 million are displaced  within the borders o f their own countries. Humanitarian assistance is an increasingly important  aspect of protection - the majority of refugees come from, and seek refuge in, developing  countries which lack the capacity to feed and shelter them," the Minister for Development 

 Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, said.

 Mr Bilney was announcing that Australia is to provide a total o f approximately $12 million in  core contributions to United Nations and international humanitarian agencies.

 "Australia has been a consistent supporter o f these agencies through annual contributions to  their core budgets and in response to their emergency appeals," Mr Bilney said.

 The United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) will receive $2.8 million.  UNRWA began operations in 1950 with its objective to assist Palestinian refugees by  providing education, health, relief and social services. It helps over 2.7 million people in the  West Bank, Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.

 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) will receive $7.7 million.  UNHCR provides protection for refugees and helps solve the problem o f refugees through  voluntary repatriation, local integration, settlement abroad, and meeting material needs. The  current crisis in Rwanda is a typical example o f their involvement in refugee situations.

 The International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) will receive $670,000. The ICRC  operates in areas which Australia's aid program may not otherwise reach. It has a proven  track record in providing protection and assistance to victims of conflict through services  which are delivered in an independent, neutral and impartial manner.

 The World Food Programme (WFP) will receive $600,000 as a core contribution to its  Immediate Response Account. This fund is a cash reserve established by WFP to enable it to  mount prompt responses to emergency situations. Australia has contributed to the fund each 

 year since 1992.

 All of this funding will be provided through the government's aid agency, AIDAB.

 Media contact: Minister's Office (Allen Mawer)  AIDAB (Maree Flynn)

 06 277 7660  06 276 4967

