---
title: "Australian foreign policy and regional security: address to the Australian Institute of International Affairs, Canberra"
date: "1995-04-04"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187656
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2985449%22
---

  ADDRESS TO THE 

  AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF INTERNA.TIONAL  AFFAIRS 

  AUSTRALIAN FOREIGN POLICY AND  REGIONAL SECURITY 

  by 

  ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

  Tuesday 1 August 1995  Canberra· 



  2 

  2. AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN POLICY OBJECTIVES 

  Australia has two overriding foreign policy interests: the maintenance of national 

  security so as to provide a peaceful environment in which to live; and enhancement of 

  national prosperity, so as to provide the material base from which people may best 

  pursue their own objectives. 

  The two concepts are inevitably linked. Neither security nor prosperity are ultimately 

  realisable without the other. However, security is not a guarantee of prosperity as is 

  all too clear in the case of North Korea, nor is prosperity ofitself a guarantee of 

  security as the world witnessed yet again when Iraq invaded Kuwait. 

  In Australia's case, I want to define national security in very simple terms. National 

  security means 'freedom from conflict or from a significant threat of conflict'. 

  Direct hostility against Australia in the existing regional order is, I believe, a remote 

  scenario although one which we must always guard against. Similarly, I am confident 

  that there is no country which considers Australia to be a threat - New Zealand aside 

  ·during the Trans-Tasman Test Series or the Bledisloe Cup. 

  In that respect I agree wholeheartedly with the sentiments expressed by Senator Ray 

  when he tabled the Defence White Paper, Defending Australia, in November 1994: 

  "We do not believe that any country has an intention to use force against 

  Australia. We have no disputes with other countries which might be expected to 

  1. SECURITY AND AUSTRALIAN FOREIGN POLICY 

  The 'Island Continent' is an evermore inappropriate pseudonym for Australia. If it was 

  ever true that the 'tyranny of distance' separated us from the concerns of our region 

  and the world, then those days have long passed. 

  Regional forces, be they economic, strategic or cultural affect us, and generally do so 

  almost immediately. If the Nikkei plummets then Australian investors know and 

  respond not merely within hours but within minutes. If there is an outbreak of conflict 

  in any Asian or Pacific country then the Australian Government is expected to provide 

  a response within the same news cycle. And if there are new technological 

  developments in Seoul then it will only be a matter of time before they begin to affect 

  the lives of Australians in the city and country alike. 

  We are of the Asia-Pacific region and its challenges are our challenges. I say this 

  because it means that issues of regional security are therefore issues of Australian 

  security. 

  Iri a sense, that has been so for sixty years, but never have we had to confront those 

  . issues before through our own creative diplomacy. We have, until the end of the Cold 

  War been ·able to do .so hand in -hand with our 'Great and Powerful' -friends. 

  In this address, I want to outline what I consider to be the security objectives of 

  Australian foreign policy, the general strategies for contributing to regional stability 

  and some of the specific challenges facing the region and therefore Australia. 

  4 

  " The end of the Cold War structures which used to dominate the 

  regional strategic environment. Defence planners used to assume a degree of 

  predictability; .now the strategic context is seen to be more complex and 

  changeable, requiring policy to encompass a wider range of possible outcomes; 

  and secondly 

  Regional economic growth and expanding military capabilities which 

  means that the scale of forces which could be brought to bear against Australia 

  will increase steadily over the next fifteen years" 

  The issue of preparedness for uncertain or unexpected events is one for defence 

  analysts. But I am bound to say, anyone who thinks Australia can somehow pocket a 

  peace dividend by slashing the Defence Force has no understanding whatsoever of the 

  difficult post Cold War regional environment Australia confronts. It is at the prior 

  stage though of trying to prevent regional insecurity from spilling over into genuine 

  conflicts, that Australian foreign policy first steps in. 

  The question then is how should Australian foreign policy be structured in order to 

  minimise risks to regional security, be they interstate or intrastate. 

  3. REGIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY 

  If Australia is to contribute to a stable East-Asian region then it must do so through 

  involvement at the bilateral , regional and global multilateral levels. These three 

  avenues are genuinely complimentary and provide alternative methods for helping to 

  3 

  give rise to the use of force, and there is also no reason to expect one to 

  develop" 

  Therefore in its direct relationships with other countries, Australia can be said to have 

  a secure environment. 

  Beyond our bilateral relationships however, regional stability is also indispensable to 

  guaranteeing long term security not just for Australia but also for our neighbours. 

  Even if our bilateral relationships throughout the region are strong, Australia will not 

  be fully secure if our neighbours in the region are in turmoil or conflict. 

  There are two types of regional insecurity which are of natural concern to Australia 

  and Australian policy makers. The first is conflict between States, and the second is 

  conflict within States which can lead to the fragmentation of borders, refugee flows 

  and polarisation of the region. 

  There is an element of unpredictability which characterises our region today, in part 

  because of development processes such as economic modernisation and with it 

  increasing force capabilities, and in part because of the end of the rigid lines of control 

  which characterised Cold War relations. 

  The Defence White Paper declared the new regional challenges to Australia's security 

  to be: 

  6 

  From a security perspective, there are two overriding goals which we must pursue 

  bilaterally. The first is to create a climate of trust and the second a sense of shared 

  interests. 

  Trust in diplomacy may sound like an oxymoron to the cynical. A classical realist 

  assessment would rule out trust as the foundation for State to State relations, relying 

  more on Lord Palmerston's famous dictum 'There are no permanent alliances, only 

  permanent interests.' However, I am firmly convinced that consistency of action and 

  repeated show of good faith in diplomatic dealings, can contribute to a relationship in 

  which national decision-makers come to rely upon the integrity of their opposite 

  numbers. In tum this confidence percolates through the bureaucracy and the various 

  arms of government. 

  In short, there is no substitute in regional diplomacy for personal contact, for 

  ministerial meetings which enable decision-makers to meet and to have a personal 

  understanding of their opposites. It is one reason why the Coalition in Australia must 

  keep building contacts within the region not just after the election but before it -

  because of a natural uncertainty as to intention amongst those who have become 

  familiar with a particular person or style of Government. 

  If Australia is to have an influence in the regional security debate there must be more 

  than that though, there must be respect. I have spoken .elsewhere of the fact that 

  respect within East Asia is in part dependent upon economic performance. Our 

  declining trade share and our relative investment performance in East Asia, means that 

  5 

  resolve specific problems. For example, an Australian offer to mediate in the 

  Bougainville dispute might not prove to be acceptable to all parties, but an Australian 

  presence in the South Pacific Peacekeeping Force, such as occurred briefly last year, 

  may prove to be a highly effective contribution. 

  Similarly, whereas a regional presence in Cambodia may have inflamed longstanding 

  enmities, a multilateral force under the United Nations was probably the most 

  acceptable and successful of the options for bringing some semblance of order back to 

  this most war tom of countries. 

  By contrast, diplomacy on a one to one basis was always going to be less likely to 

  reignite divisions in post-coup Fiji than a misplaced show of force by regional powers 

  or the multilateral system. 

  So there are clear choices available in the policy larder for approaching regional 

  security issues, the challenge being which approach or combination of approaches to 

  use in any particular case. 

  Bilateral Approaches to Security 

  I believe enhancing bilateral relationships must be the cornerstone of Australia's 

  approach to achieving regional security. 

  8 

  That must inevitably make Australia less relevant in our one on one dealings and in our 

  regional involvement. It is a security imperative then as well as an economic 

  imperative to establish shared economic interests. 

  Shared interests also take the form of values, and I am unapologetic about my 

  acceptance oflmmanual Kant's thesis, recently given contemporary force by Yale's 

  Bruce Russett, that shared democratic institutions are ultimately the best guarantee of 

  peace between States. I believe that it is in Australia's long term security interests to 

  actively promote and encourage democratic reform and consolidation. 

  These issues of trust, respect and shared interests at the bilateral level lead into the 

  regional level approaches to East Asian and Pacific security. 

  Regional Approaches 

  The principal regional based strategy for promoting coexistence between the nations of 

  East Asia and the Pacific must be a broad security dialogue. Force and the threat of 

  force are by their nature destructive approaches which shatter trust, common identity 

  . and represent the failure of diplomacy. 

  The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is at present proving to be the most 

  comprehensive framework for such dialogue and the Coalition strongly supports 

  further growth in the functions of the ARF. 

  7 

  our standing must inevitably be challenged - and with that the seriousness of our 

  initiatives and capacity to act as a facilitator. 

  Comments made by leaders and opinion-makers in a number of ASEAN countries over 

  the last few years bear out the observation that Australia is suffering from a deficit of 

  respect, and that our capacity to influence regional events is accordingly limited. In 

  order to deal with this problem of economic performance and respect there must be 

  reforms to domestic competitiveness which address the problems inhibiting our 

  regional economic performance: inadequate national savings caused by loose fiscal 

  policy, outdated and inflexible labour market structures, and the desperate need for 

  serious microeconomic reform in the waterfront, transportation and communications 

  sectors amongst others. In essence, our economic failings compromise our power and 

  our standing within the region in security matters. 

  There must also be a more clear cut commitment to the region by our business 

  community: still, they prefer to invest in Europe and North America, and while for 

  example Europe's share of the East Asian market is growing, ours is shrinking. 

  A further object of bilateral diplomacy must be to guarantee security through a sense 

  of shared interests. Common goals and mutual dependence provide the most solid of 

  foundations for stable relations between countries. 

  Therefore an additional concern which flows.from our declining trade share and 

  relative investment performance in East Asia is that other nations are less reliant upon 

  our resources and our capital and that as such relatively less engaged with Australia. 

  10 

  "APEC has enhanced regional stability by establishing a process of informal 

  multilateral consultation and dialogue, absent at a region-wide government level 

  until 1989. Whilst focussing on economic and trade issues, APEC has 

  contributed to security by enabling governments with widely different political 

  agendas to exchange views; thus establishing a custom of consulting on 

  important issues" 

  An allied concept is that there is a psychological impact which flows from economic 

  co-operation. As nations become more closely engaged they are more likely to identify 

  common interests. 

  China's decision to keep the Spratly Islands off the ARF agenda shows that the ARF 

  and any culture of discussion still have a long way to go though before becoming a 

  widely accepted approach to regional problem solving. It should be made clear that 

  the ARF will take many years to become truly effective, that it is not intended to be a 

  security alliance and that it would be wrong to become dewy-eyed about its prospects 

  for crisis resolution. It is at present a useful talking shop with great potential, but 

  limited current capacity for dispute resolution. 

  In the meantime however, ARF dialogue, however imperfect, certainly beats the 

  alternative of a network of competing alliances. 

  Global Multilateral Approaches to Security 

  9 

  The involvement of the ASEAN countries, China, Japan, and the United States is the 

  critical element in the ARF's structure. This structure encourages regional security in 

  two ways. First, it provides an opportunity for transparent discussion of security 

  issues. Secondly, the fact that the ARF is region-wide in its inclusion of almost all of 

  the relevant East Asian countries and the United States creates a security structure 

  which is inclusive rather than exclusive. Thus it is a direct counterweight to the 

  development of any divisive inter-regional balance of power structure. 

  So I am a strong supporter of the dialogue role of the ARF as a means of confidence­

  building. The Chairman of the 1994 inaugural ARF Meeting said that the Forum: 

  " .... enabled the countries of the Asia-Pacific region to foster the habit of 

  constructive dialogue and consultation on political and security issues of 

  common interest and concern. In this respect, the ARF would be in a position to 

  make significant contributions to efforts towards confidence-building and 

  preventive diplomacy in the Asia-Pacific region" 

  The ARF is not the only brick in the regional security architecture, but I do believe it 

  will increasingly come to underpin region-wide discussions and approaches to security 

  matters. 

  In addition to the ARF, as the ANU's Jenelle Bonner has argued, APEC itself has an 

  inevitable impact on regional security through its role in developing a practice and a 

  structure for consultation: 

  12 

  Rapid growth, whilst desirable of itself undoubtedly leads to power shifts both between 

  and within countries. 

  Phenomenal economic growth is a particular challenge for North East Asia, where the 

  Spratlys dispute, PRC-Taiwan relations and North Korea are all issues which have an 

  element of urgency about them. 

  In this, I disagree with Senator Evans' rosy assessment that there is a powerful 

  convergence within the region. I similarly reject the Huntington thesis of clashing 

  civilisations. 

  The dominant reality continues to be the State. And the paradigm upon which conflict 

  is most generally founded is State versus State. National interest continues to be the 

  basic force in regional affairs, rather than divisive cultural realms or homogenising 

  theories of convergence. 

  In that context, I want to turn now to some of the specific regional security issues 

  which challenge Australia. 

  There are four particular regional security challenges which I want to re-examine 

  briefly: although they are by no means exclusive. 

  first, there is uncertainty regarding the future regional role of China. The challenge 

  which this poses for Australia is to ensure that China is able to view its own interests 

  11 

  In dealing with the UN Security Council and UN Peacekeeping operations in this 

  speech, I want to confine myself to a few brief observations of principle. 

  First, the Coalition fully supports Australia's bid for a seat on the Security Council in 

  1997-98 and will pursue that outcome in Government. 

  Secondly, there are circumstances in which UN Peacekeeping Forces may be 

  appropriate for use in the region. However, the clear message which flows from UN 

  Peacekeeping efforts in the former Yugoslavia, Somalia and Angola, is that there must 

  be an absolutely clear mandate, that the duration and scope of the mission must be 

  clearly specified and that troop contingents must be adequately resources. 

  Within the regional context, I think, however, that the primary UN role is as an 

  alternative forum for dialogue betWeen parties. Serious dialogue is I believe one of the 

  great challenges facing a region which although largely free of formal conflicts at 

  present, does have a history of disputes which make reconciliation between many of 

  the parties difficult. In this, there is no substitute for the hardwork of bilateral 

  relationships, but regional and UN fora may provide an environment in which the seeds 

  of trust and confidence can be sown. 

  4. SPECIFIC REGIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES 

  There is an overriding challenge ~o regional security which I believe underpins many of 

  the difficulties within the region. It is the problem of ensuring that rapid economic 

  growth actually delivers a more secure environment. 

  14 

  Our objectives should be to aim for a web of bilateral defence relationships within our 

  immediate region, rather than trying to create a formal sub-regional security 

  arrangement which could be seen to be in juxtaposition to China. 

  In this I outrightly reject Senator Evans' view that there should be promotion of a 

  balance of power arrangement in the East Asian region. In a speech to the Asia­

  Australia Institute on 20 March 1995, the Foreign Minister declared: 

  "In a region where the idea of power balarice retains considerable resonance, 

  there may be much to be said, moreover, for working over time to unite the 

  lesser sized countries in the region, including those of South East Asia, 

  Indochina and Australasia, into a more cohesive grouping of their own" 

  This sounds like code for a policy of containment towards China. 

  Australia does not have an interest, contrary to the Government's view, in promoting a 

  balance of power arrangement which could divide South East Asia and Indochina from 

  China itself This is particularly so now with Vietnam's entrance into ASEAN. 

  Ultimately, this strategy would isolate China and, in a sense, be a self-fulfilling policy 

  of containment which would undermine internal regional confidence rather than create 

  trust. As one senior American said recently: "If you treat China as an enemy, China 

  will become an enemy. 

  13 

  as being in harmony with that of the region, rather than in conflict with wider regional 

  security interests. 

  There is no doubt that many in the region and even beyond it fear China and they cite 

  the Chinese approach to the Spratlys as well as recent sabre rattling towards Taiwan as 

  evidence that a growing China will throw its weight around. 

  Paul Dibb has argued that China has a desire to become the dominant power in the 

  region. The extent of its claims in the Spratly dispute indicates that there are those 

  within China who favour force over other forms· of dispute resolution. In that situation 

  it is vital to encourage Chinese acceptance of multilateral concepts of security. There 

  must be a sustained approach to building multilateral concepts of security, rather than 

  retreating into a strategy of containment before the regional architecture is even in 

  place. 

  In order to discourage development of an exclusionary and divisive balance of power 

  structure within East Asia, which divides rather than unites the countries of the region, 

  Australia needs to build constructive security arrangements with other countries of the 

  hemisphere. Already, Australia is party to the Five Power Defence Arrangements with 

  Malaysia and Singapore, which provides a strong foundation for links between 

  Australia and South East Asia. In addition, Australia must develop closer defence 

  links with Indonesia, as well as Thailand, the Philippines, Brunei and others. These are 

  all countries in Australia's own immediate region, and interaction between the 

  Australian Defence Force and the defence forces of those countries will be an 

  important part of confidence building within the region. 

  16 

  From the perspective of regional security this issue cannot be ignored and should be 

  the subject of dialogue aimed at helping to limit the pace of force and capability 

  expansion. 

  A fourth regional issue of importance is Australia's relationship with Papua New 

  Guinea. The Labor Government has neglected an important relationship and relegated 

  PNG to secondary diplomatic status. Papua New Guinea is a country with a delicate 

  security balance and the need for high level diplomatic support and engagement to 

  assist in stability. 

  Australia clearly needs to recognise then the very great importance to its interest in a 

  stable Papua New Guinea. 

  Australian foreign policy must give a significantly higher priority to ensuring that 

  Papua New Guinea is able to overcome its current difficulties. The Government of 

  Papua New Guinea has already indicated that it looks to Australia for this support. 

  Accordingly, as was demonstrated by the work of the Australian Parliamentary 

  Delegation to Bougainville in April 1994, there is a very constructive role which can be 

  played by high level Australian diplomatic support and initiative in Papua New Guinea. 

  This will be a Coalition priority in order to assist with security in our immediate region. 

  Australia's approach to these regional security challenges should therefore be threefold. 

  First, there must be a clear rejection of any support for an internal East Asia balance· of 

  15 

  A second and related issue for Australia is the growing possibility of American 

  withdrawal from the East Asian security sphere, which in tum would challenge the 

  existing and relatively secure strategic relationship between the major countries within 

  the region. The challenge for Australia is to encourage and provide incentives for the 

  United States to remain fully engaged within the regional security architecture, and 

  failing that, to ensure that any withdrawal is limited in nature. 

  It is critical that Australia recognises and emphasises the important role of the United 

  States, and in particular the United States/Japan security alliance. This alliance locks 

  the United States firmly into the region, and above all, through its presence in Japan, 

  gives it significant regional responsibility for overseeing security. This role is 

  heightened through its security treaties with Thailand and the Philippines, and through 

  the ANZUS Alliance. 

  One issue for concern is that the US President's spokesman recently suggested that the 

  Japan-US trade dispute could have an impact on the security relationship between the 

  two countries. Although the statement was subsequently clarified, it was a troubling 

  sign at a time when the US should be bedding down its security interests within the 

  region. 

  A third regional security issue is that of weapons proliferation and an emerging arms 

  race. North Korea's nuclear program was a profound concern to all States within the 

  region. However, it is only part of a region-wide process of arms acquisition. As 

  States become more economically powerful, they are upgrading their military hardware 

  and their force projection capability. 

  17 

  power arrangement. Second, we must actively encourage the United States to remain 

  engaged within the region. Third, we must emphasise the importance of the ASEAN 

  Regional Forum as a basis for regional security dialogue. 

  5. CONCLUSION 

  In the end, I believe that the most pressing risk to Australian security is from the 

  spillover of conflicts between other parties. I also believe however that regional 

  security is manageable. 

  The golden thread which must underpin our management approach is the emphasis on 

  trust and confidence-building, be it at the bilateral, regional or global levels of 

  diplomacy. As a middle power our capacity to influence events is naturally 

  circumscribed, but we do have a special reservoir of good faith on the basis of a history 

  of non.:.aggression. 

  This good faith is an asset which allows Australia to contribute to regional security, 

  and therefore enhance our own security. 

  Good faith alone will not guarantee us economic security and respect though. 

  Ultimately, those tools of Australian foreign policy will be crafted by our domestic 

  competitiveness and economic engagement within the region. Which in short can be 

  summarised as meaning that unless we get our own house in order we will have only a. 

  limited role in the regional house. 

  ** ** ** ** 



