---
title: "China one-child Bill seriously flawed"
date: "1995-03-29"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Office of SPINDLER, SEN SID"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187582
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2908111%22
---

 29th March, 1995 95/151

 China one-child Bill seriously flawed Democrat Announced:Tody . , a . 

 There are three serious flaws in the Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 4) requiring amendment according to the Australian Democrats.

 1. First, the government's Bill excludes entirely China's fertility control policies as ai-possible criterion for refugee status.

 "This flies in the face of evidence that the policies are implemented in an extremely repressive manner in certain parts of China," said the Democrats Law and Justice Spokesperson Sid Spindler.

 The Democrats do not support making China's one-child policies an automatic criterion for refugee status. This is confirmed in the Democrat amendment which will enable individual cases of persecution due to the repressive implementation of China's fertility control policies to be decided on their merits.

 2. Second, the Bill attempts to intervene in a case that is presently before the Full Court of the Federal Court.

 "This is a disgraceful breach of the separation of powers, that would make the Stuart Kings and Jeff Kennett proud

 "We will therefore be moving an amendment to ensure that the Bill does not have retrospective effect, but applies to all applications lodged after the date of assent.

 3. The third flaw in the Bill is that it bars repeat applications in all cases except where the Minister makes a special exception.

 The Democrats believe that this is moving back to the days when refugee status was determined on the basis of a nod and a wink. We say it is better to have an independent arbiter make decisions about people's refugee status on an objective basis.

 "We will therefore be moving an amendment to provide that repeat applications for a protection visa may be made where new facts have come to light, or where the interests of justice require it, Senator Spindler concluded.

 For more information call Senator Spindler in Canberra on (06) 277 3643 or (06) 295 2111 after hours.

 Australian Democrat Spokesperson on Law and Justice, Trade and Customs, COMMONWEALTH Industry and Regional Development and Ethnic Affairs PARLIAIVLENTAR of 1

 YLE3RARy

