---
title: "Government hypocrisy on Migration Bill [and] Letter from Sen. Nick Bolkus"
date: "1995-06-06"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188590
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2994687%22
---

  Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  IMEA44/95 

  GOVERNMENT HYPOCRISY ON MIGRATION BILL 

  The Government's decision to delete consideration of Migration Legislation  Amendment Bill (No. 4) 1995 has exposed the Government's hypocrisy on the Bill. 

  Only last week I wrote to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator  Bolkus, suggesting that consideration of the Bill be deferred until the full Federal  Court's decision on the Minister's appeal against Justice Sackville's "One Child Polici'  decision of 1994 has been brought down, given that the decision was expected in the  relatively near future. 

  ' 

  The Minister replied to me on 31 May strongly rejecting this suggestion on several  grounds. He argued that "the Bill forms a key plank in the Government's actions to  maintain the integrity of Australia's onshore refugee determination processes" and that  "The Parliament must show leadership on this issue. We cannot place ourselves on the  timetable of the Courts ..... " 

  The Minister said that the Government would continue "to seek urgent passage of the  Bill..." and "For these reasons the Government remains committed to early  consideration of the Bill." 

  A copy of Senator Bolkus' letter to me is attached. 

  Just two sitting days later, on 5 June, the Leader of Government Business in the  Senate, Senator Faulkner, announced that the Government had decided not to proceed  with consideration of Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No.4) 1995 this session.  In justification of this he said (see Hansard 5 June page 825) that "we anticipate that  by the time we return, the full Bench of the Federal Court will have delivered its  judgment on the appeal which is the subject of this legislation. That decision will 

  either make the legislation unnecessary or put the Parliament in a better position  to debate its merits." (My emphasis)  COMMONWEALm  cARI.IAMENTARY LIBRAR)' 

  -2-

  Senator Faulkner's statement is totally inconsistent with Senator Balkus' letter to me,  both as to the need for the Bill to be considered this session and as to the future of the  Bill in the light of whatever the Federal Court decision is. 

  This cynical, opportunistic and hypocritical approach to important legislation is  appalling. It not only exposes the Government's lack of integrity. It also shows its  complete contempt for Parliamentary processes and the role of the Parliament in our  democratic political system. 

  6 June 1995  Canberra 

  For further information contact Senator Short on (06) 277 3119. 

  SENATOR NICK BOLKUS  Ministerfor Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs 

  Senator Jim Short  Senator for Victoria  Parliament House  CANBERRA ACT 2600 

  Dear Senator Short 

  Parliament House  CanberraACT2600  Telephone: (06) 277 7860  Facsimile: (06) 273 4144 

  3 1 MAY 1995 

  I refer to your letter of 30 May 1995 concerning the Migration Legislation  Amendment Bill (No. 4) 1995. You have suggested that the Senate's 

  consideration of the Bill should be deferred until after the Full Federal Court  decision is handed down. 

  I cannot agree with this suggestion. As you are aware, the Bill forms a key plank  in the Government's actions to maintain the integrity of Australia's onshore refugee  determination processes. The legislation remains as important now as when I  originally foreshadowed the measures on 30 December last year. 

  The Parliament must show leadership on this issue. We cannot place ourselves on  the timetable of the Courts. Only the Parliament can quickly, and clearly, return  the law to the commonsense position that existed before Justice Sackville' s  judgement. 

  On the basis of our experience, it would be highly unlikely to expect that the Full  Court decision could be handed down within the next few weeks. The timing of  the decision is a matter for the Court. It could be that the process goes well  beyond the end of the Winter sittings of Parliament. Of course, depending upon  the decision of the Full Court, there could well be an appeal to the High Court,  delaying significantly the ultimate resolution of the matter. 

  Another factor in the Government continuing to seek urgent passage of the Bill is  that the decision of the Full Court may not assist in clarifying the law. The  outcome could turn on particular facts, or be limited in some particular way. The  result may be lack of clarity, with the result that the precedential nature of Justice 

  Sackville's judgement remains in place. As I believe you are aware, a number of  RRT cases have now been decided on the precedent that case provides - which in  the view of the Government is bad law. 

  . ' 

  2 

  For these reasons the Government remains committed to the early consideration  of the Bill. 

  Yours sincerely 

  NI 

