---
title: "Speech to the Fifth Asialink lecture: Australia's links with Asia: realising opportunities in our region, Myer Mural Hall, Melbourne"
date: "1995-04-12"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187771
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J6M20%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 JOHN HOWARD 

 Australia's links with Asia: realising opportunities in our region: fifth Asialink lecture,  Myer Mural Hall, Melbourne, Wednesday 12 April 1995 

 Ladies and gentlemen, it was with great pleasure that I learned of your invitation to address  Asialink on your fifth anniversary, I was pleased to accept, and I am particularly pleased that my  first address on foreign policy since becoming Leader is to such a distinguished forum concerned  with such an important relationship for the future of our country. 

 An economic revolution has transformed the Asia-Pacific region over recent decades and that  reality has itself transformed the relationships between that region and the rest of the world. 

 These changes have been a major watershed in the evolution of Australian foreign policy. In my  lifetime, they have been dwarfed only by the extraordinary implosion of communism, which  represented the most decisive victory of one set of ideas over another seen this century. 

 New forms of competition and cooperation are emerging, both within and beyond our own region,  new balances of power and influence are being forged, new dimensions of technology and national  wealth are being created. 

 We are living through one of those periods of history when a country's capacity to adapt and  respond sensibly to rapid international change will determine its prospects for many years to  come: these are exciting, but demanding times, they call for innovation and vision, they also call  for a clear and constant assertion of Australia's national interest. 

 Responding creatively to these realities, and fulfilling our real potential in the world's most  dynamic economic region, constitute the foremost challenges of Australian foreign policy in the  1990s. 

 They are challenges which we in the Coalition Parties welcome and to which we look forward, and  we have great confidence in the capacity of Australians to meet them and benefit from them. 

 We have a clear agenda of priorities designed to assist the enhancement of regional co- operation  and Australia's interests within it, and I am delighted to have the opportunity this evening to  outline our purpose and resolve in pursuing them. 

 Respecting the Facts of History 

 It has been said that those who seek to control the future first try to control the past, that is, they  try to distort it for their own particular narrow purposes. 

 Over recent years, Australia's past has been subjected to a great deal of attempted control and  distortion, and a great deal of self-centred delusion as well. 

 As far as our relations with the countries of our region are concerned, Mr Keating and Senator  Evans would have people believe that nothing of real substance was achieved until they arrived on  the scene: this is simply a case of history with the facts left out, it is wishful thinking, but not what  actually happened. 

 History that is written with a chip on the shoulder tends to be very poorly balanced. 

 This is particularly regrettable in terms of Australia's relations with the Asia-Pacific region because  improving and extending those relations has been a bi- partisan objective in Australia 

 for many years and both sides of politics have contributed significantly to that goal. 

 I am proud to address you tonight as Leader of a Party which has always been committed to  developing the range and depth of Australia's relations with the countries of the Asia- - Pacific  region: a Party with a long and proud record not only in policy achievement but also in leading the  debate within the Australian community on Asia-Pacific issues. 

 It was, after all, the Liberal Party in government which took the critical and often contentious,  decisions that laid the basis for the modern relationship between Australia and our region: 

 . it was the Coalition which helped to design the architecture of post-war regional security  arrangements, and in particular the ANZUS Treaty and the Five Power Defence Arrangements  which, to this day, continue to enhance the stability of the region; 

 . it was the Coalition which developed a wide range of educational links with Asian countries, and  in particular initiated the Colombo Plan; 

 . it was the Coalition and the leadership of Jack McEwen which negotiated the 1957 Australia-Japan Trade Agreement; 

 . it was the Coalition under Malcolm Fraser which instituted one of the most compassionate and  generous responses of any government in the world to the Indochinese refugee crisis; 

 . it was the Coalition which took a range of important initiatives from the 1960s on to help build a  greater sense of regional awareness and to realise the possibilities of greater regional economic  cooperation, and it was the Coalition which finally put an end to the White Australia Policy. 

 Liberal Prime Ministers, from Sir Robert Menzies through to Malcolm Fraser, together with Liberal  Foreign Ministers, from Richard Casey and Percy Spender through to Andrew Peacock developed a  framework of policy that greatly enhanced and enriched Australia's relations with our region, and  no self- serving, partisan re-writing of history will obscure or diminish their achievement. 

 So when next you hear Mr Keating and Senator Evans re- writing the history of Australia's  relations with our region in their own self-image, my advice would be to take it all with a grain of  salt, knowing that their agenda and the facts of history are often very different. 

 The fact is that over recent decades all Australian Governments, both Coalition and Labor, have  made very important contributions to expanding Australia's economic and political interaction with  the Asia-Pacific region: I acknowledge all their achievements, I diminish none of them, and I am  committed to building further on them. 

 Dynamics of Change in the Asia-Pacific Region 

 Tonight, however, my real focus is on the future, not the past, on Australia's future in fulfilling its  potential in the Asia- Pacific region. 

 The trends in regional development to which Australian policy must respond are clear. 

 First, competitive enterprise and open trading arrangements have been the driving forces of the  Asia-Pacific region's extraordinary economic transformation: the technology and communications  revolutions have driven economies towards 

 greater internationalisation, greater competitiveness and greater export-driven economic growth. 

 The fact is that it has been the economies of the Asia- Pacific region that have harnessed these  forces of change and met these challenges more successfully than any others: their economic  success has in large measure been a direct product of the openness of the world trading system  and the relatively easy access to large markets such as that of the United States. 

 Second, the momentum towards expanded forms of economic regionalism and sub- regionalism  among Asia-Pacific countries is building, and is set to continue. 

 At a regional level, the focus, of course, is APEC and the great potential it holds for the further  liberalisation of regional trade and for procedures to resolve bilateral trade disputes: 

 and I shall return to address APEC in further detail later in my remarks. 

 But, in addition to APEC, there are other regional economic initiatives that are also important, such  as the ongoing development of an ASEAN Free Trade Zone. 

 There is also increasing interaction at a sub-regional level: 

 . this takes place in a way which often lacks many formal structures but which is the deliberate  outcome of policy operation; 

 . sometimes, economic sub- regionalism is apparent in particular 'growth triangles' or in specific  initiatives such as those being pursued by the Northern Territory Government and Indonesia, or by  the littoral states of the Sea of Japan; 

 . sometimes economic sub- regionalism is centred on one particular country in which others see  special opportunities as a dynamic growth market, a situation which now applies to many countries  in respect of India. 

 Third, it is clear that there are a number of core relationships that vitally affect the regions future  prospects: 

 . there is the Japan/United States relationship, and the ongoing trade and economic pressures in  both countries to which it is subject; 

 . there is the China/United States relationship, and the ongoing debate over the appropriate  interaction between economic policies and human rights concerns; 

 . there is the China/Japan relationship, with its bitter historical legacies but great potential for  future co-operation; 

 . there are the various relationships which China and Japan have with other regional countries;  and 

 . there are, of course, the more recently dynamic, high growth economies of South Korea,  Singapore, Indonesia and others and the regional significance of their new status. 

 A fourth dynamic of change in the Asia-Pacific region is the increasing awareness of a shared  security interest as well as developing security dialogue among Asia-Pacific countries. 

 This development is not a substitute for the longstanding regional network of defence alliances,  and nor should it be, but initiatives such as the ASEAN Regional Forum are important means  through which confidence can be built and differences of view narrowed. 

 These hopeful signs co-exist, however, with counter-pressures which are seeing the re- emergence  of some nationalist territorial claims and political tension within the region: the ongoing dispute  over the territorial claims of a number of regional states in the South China Sea is just one  example, and I will return to that issue later. 

 Another dynamic of change within the Asia-Pacific region is the fact that the processes of economic  liberalisation in the region, broadly speaking, are being accompanied by forces making for political  liberalisation, although the two processes are far from synchronised. 

 Governments of the region adopt a variety of forms, with different degrees of democratisation and  differing approaches on individual rights. 

 There is an ongoing debate in the region, as well as beyond it, between those governments and  societies which promote the observance of minimum internationally recognised standards of  human rights, and those who maintain that the transition to democracy in developing or  industrialising states needs to be preceded by a period of sustained economic growth overseen by  a strong central government committed to market-based economic reforms. It is also the case  some nations show little or no enthusiasm for the ultimate transition to democracy. 

 This debate has been a continuing one over many years in the past, and it will continue into the  future. 

 The challenge for Australia is to manage it on the basis of mutual respect, in a way that is  consistent with our values and our obligations, and in the context of enhancing the overall  framework of bilateral relationships and the interests of the region as a whole. 

 Coalition Priorities for Developing With, and In, the Asia- Pacific Region 

 Within this regional environment of dynamic change and a developing sense of common concerns,  the Coalition Parties have a clear set of priorities to advance Australia's long-term interests. 

 First, we do not believe that Australia faces some kind of exclusive choice between our past and  our future, between our history and our geography: we see such a choice as a phoney and  irrelevant one proposed by those with ulterior motives. 

 Australia must meet the regional challenges of the future, in Asia and elsewhere, with the  flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances but with pride in our history, our values and our  institutions. 

 The dynamically successful economies of East Asia have done precisely that in terms of their own  national histories, values and institutions. 

 Once we start disavowing our history, or disowning our values or changing our institutions simply  because we think regional countries will respect us more for doing so, then we will be badly  mistaken. 

 Future constitutional arrangements or national symbols are exclusively a matter for Australians. It  both trivialises relations with the region and is an unwarranted act of national self-abasement to  believe particular changes can win or lose friends in the region. 

 There may be reasons for change in all these areas, but they must be reasons of substance in  their own right and not mistaken beliefs about what other countries may think of us or what  supposed economic benefits others will bestow if only we made such changes. 

 There is no 'quick fix' to earning respect and building economic advantage in an increasingly  competitive world that comes only through making our own economy internationally competitive  and through developing long-term political relationships on the basis of trust and honesty. 

 The choice is not between our history and our geography, not between disowning our past and  embracing the challenges of the future: the task is to take with us into the future what is best in  our past as well as to maximise the potential benefits of our geographic position. Anything less  than both these priorities is a one-eyed view of Australia's national interests. 

 Second, just as the choice between our history and our geography is a phoney and irrelevant  choice, so too is the choice which some people pose between pursuing Australia's interests in Asia  and pursuing those outside it. 

 The Asia-Pacific region offers Australian businesses extraordinary opportunities in terms of two-  way investment and trade. 

 This is the case not just because of the region's dynamic growth pattern but also because its  demands for particular goods and services match Australia's comparative advantage in terms of  our capacity to produce than. 

 Australia confronts an historic challenge in terms of realising the full potential of its economic  interaction with the Asia- Pacific region, and a Coalition Government will be totally committed to  providing the policy framework in which we can meet that challenge. 

 But it is important to remember that Australia's political and economic interests also extend well  beyond the confines of our own region. 

 We must pursue Australia's national interests at all levels, through multilateral institutions;  through regional and sub- regional groups; and through bilateral contacts within and beyond the  Asia-Pacific region. 

 To take just one example, let me cite the current economic opportunities in India. 

 These potentially offer the most dramatic growth prospects outside of China. Many countries are  now pursuing economic opportunities in India very actively: Australian policy is very belatedly  becoming aware of this potential but there are very real Australian interests at stake. 

 I firmly believe that all these trade and investment opportunities for Australia at a bilateral,  regional and wider international level are complementary, and not exclusive. 

 Third, a Coalition Government will work to ensure that the tyranny of distance works in reverse -  in favour of our national interests. 

 The tyranny was imposed on us for much of our history because of our distance from the world's  major centres of trade and finance. 

 Now, far from being at the periphery, we find ourselves on the edge of the world's fastest growing  and most dynamic economic region. 

 This fact opens up enormous opportunities - but they are not opportunities for us alone. 

 Geographic proximity of itself assures us of us nothing in terms of political or economic  relationships. The late twentieth century revolutions in transport, technology and communications  have globalised business and markets. 

 Opportunities in Asia exist as much for value- adding exporters in Canada, France, South Africa  and the United States as they do for those in Australia. 

 When our great potential for trade, investment and political co-operation in the Asia-Pacific region  is fully realised, it will not be because of our geography but because our economic structures are  world competitive, and we are producing the goods and services that the Asia-Pacific market needs  at a price it accepts. It will also be because we are attuned to the requirements for building  effective political relationships. 

 Fourth, it will be a major priority of a Coalition Government to respond actively, creatively and co-operatively to the momentum that is building in the direction of greater economic regionalism and  sub- regionalism in the Asia-Pacific. 

 A key focus of our attention, of course, is APEC. 

 The Coalition Parties strongly support the APEC process. 

 We see it as underpinning the strengths which have inspired the region's economic dynamism:  namely, market-based competitive enterprise, interactive economies and non-discriminatory trade. 

 We also see APEC as an important mechanism for keeping the United States constructively and  cooperatively involved in the region's economic evolution. 

 We have long been concerned, and we remain concerned, that the structural weaknesses of the  Australian economy, which are the result of policy mismanagement, are preventing Australians  from fully realising the extraordinary potential that exists in expanding our economic relations with  the dynamic economies of Asia. 

 We need to be able to take advantage of the things Australians do well, and utilise the natural and  geographic benefits Australia has. 

 There is no doubt - with our relatively clean environment and our natural advantages of space,  plus the efficiency of our primary producers and proximity to the huge Asian markets - give us  tremendous trading opportunities. Apart from being a supplier of food and raw materials, there are  also tremendous opportunities in services generally, particularly: in education; in tourism; in  medicine; in finance; in processed food; in manufacturing; in construction; in science and  technology; in transport; in fact, across the board in terms of our value-adding industries. 

 All of that means jobs. Not just in cities, but it is one of the real hopes for many of our regional  centres. 

 But, in my view, we are only scratching the surface of our potential in all these areas, and we have  lost our share of some vital markets in the Asian region over recent years. 

 The volume and value of our regional exports are rising as we are pulled along in the slipstream of  the region's phenomenal growth, 

 but our performance in terms of market share is of concern. 

 The fact is that until Australia has a national government that is prepared to address our  underlying economic problems, the economic potential of developments within APEC will remain  unfulfilled for Australia. 

 Put bluntly, the great opportunities open to Australia in the Asia-Pacific region will never be fully  realised and, indeed, will be stillborn unless Australia gets her own domestic economic house in  order. 

 That means addressing the inefficiencies in our economic infrastructure like our waterfront and  freight and transport systems, which we need to reach those markets. 

 Lowering transport costs is central to Australia's competitiveness in Asian markets; for exports and  inputs to domestic production and for restraining inflation. 

 Transport costs account for 16% of the value of BHP's steel exports; and contribute 18% to the  cost of Australian consumer items. 

 The benefits to the economy should not be underestimated. For every dollar we save in transport  costs, output in the economy increases by around two dollars. That is why comprehensive reform  of all sectors of the transport infrastructure must remain such a high priority. 

 Ports are very much at the interface of our involvement with Asia. We are too easily judged and  dismissed by Asians over that performance. 

 I have no truck with those who argue: "Look how far we have come in port reform in recent  years!" 

 I do not begrudge those reforms but do not forget that the world is not standing still waiting for  Australia to catch up. 

 Efficiency and productivity in our ports remains well below best practice. 

 A recent productivity survey, by an international shipping operator, of 46 ports throughout the  world has shown that since 1992: Sydney has dropped from 24th place to 31st, and Melbourne  has fallen from 28th to 37th. 

 The survey reveals that Melbourne port is operating at only 66% of the productivity of Auckland or  39% of the top-rating port - Antwerp. 

 The Tasman Pulp and Paper Company have found that stevedoring charges in Australian ports are  averaging three times that of their home port of Tauranga, New Zealand. 

 It is not exciting or glamorous work - microeconomic reform - but it is the bread and butter of  faster, sustainable economic growth and higher living standards. It is the guarantee of success in  Asia's tough domestic markets. Structural rigidities are effectively a tax on exports - exporters  who cannot pass on excessive costs to their overseas customers pay the price of such  inflexibilities. We need that extra edge to overcome the residual loyalties, cosy arrangements and  tightly knit networks which dominate distribution lines in many countries. 

 There are many other areas government must address if we are to be in a position to be truly  competitive in these regional markets. 

 It means reforming the labour market to promote genuine enterprise agreements. 

 It means fixing our historic low in national savings. 

 It means implementing a responsible fiscal policy. 

 It means tackling our massive foreign debt and current account problems. 

 And it means ensuring that Australia is at the forefront of the science and technology revolutions. 

 All these underlying domestic economic problems make it difficult to translate developments within  APEC into maximum advantage for Australia, and only a Coalition Government will address those  problems. 

 The progress achieved within APEC over recent years is something which we in the Coalition  Parties welcome and which we are committed to taking forward: the annual APEC Leaders Summit,  in particular, is a vital breakthrough in regional diplomacy. 

 The Bogor Declaration at last year's Summit was a milestone in the regional process of trade  liberalisation. 

 There are differences of perspective within the region as to how the free trade vision of Bogor  should be realised, and, in particular, whether it should be on an open or discriminatory basis, and  which industry sectors will be involved. 

 I should note that there is a remarkable confusion and indecision within the Australian Government  on both these issues. 

 As for the Coalition Parties, let me make those points clear. 

 We believe that the economic benefits of non-discriminatory trade far outweigh the outcomes from  discriminatory arrangements. 

 We believe it would be a major mistake for APEC to develop into a discriminatory trading bloc. 

 We strongly support regional attempts to facilitate trade through the mutual recognition of  standards, streamlined dispute settlement procedures, and similar initiatives. 

 We believe that the most productive path towards APEC's long- term free trade objectives is one of  practical, incremental steps that deliver commensurate benefits to Australia as well as other  countries. 

 These practical, incremental steps are the fundamental building blocks of genuine progress  towards APEC's long term goal of mutually beneficial free trade. 

 The goal of APEC must always be a practical one of benefiting all the people of the region. 

 This will be facilitated if all countries recognise that, ultimately the costs of domestic protection  and structural rigidities are a tax on those least able to pass them on like exporters involved in  increasingly competitive world markets. 

 This mutual recognition will make it easier for all of us to sell the benefits of APEC to the various  domestic stakeholders. 

 Under a Howard Government, we will negotiate to achieve an outcome in which all APEC countries  live up to their commitment to free and open trade and investment on a comprehensive and  mutually beneficial basis: to the forefront of our negotiations will obviously be what is in Australia's  best interests. 

 The Coalition Parties also believe that there should be a stronger, more direct, higher profile and  permanent mechanism for dialogue between the region's business and political leaders. 

 We welcome the initiatives taken over recent years to build a stronger network of association  among regional business, and to encourage their input into the development of APEC priorities. 

 In my view, these initiatives could be taken further to enhance the involvement of the private  sector on which the region's economic dynamism is, after all built. 

 I believe that a permanent, higher level forum of regional business leaders should be established  as the apex of existing regional business networks. 

 Such a forum should be established and run by the regional business community, and not by  governments. 

 It should be part of the formal official decision-making process within APEC and there would be  great benefits in it having annual meetings with regional Heads of Government following their  Summit. 

 It is vital for the future of APEC that the business sector be involved at both the highest political  level and at a formal working level with APEC initiatives. 

 Another major priority for a Coalition Government will be to expand the scope and closeness of our  political relationships with regional countries, over and above the continuing dialogue on APEC. 

 This political interaction takes place at a number of levels. 

 At a bilateral level, there are always a wide range of mutual interests to be pursued. 

 And a Coalition Government will work to ensure that the channels of communication and exchange  with regional governments are as close and as constant as possible, from Head of Government  level, to Ministerial contact and to non-government exchanges. 

 As an indication of the priority I give to these exchanges, you may have noticed that my Deputy,  Peter Costello, was in Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta last week and that Tim Fischer is currently in  Jakarta. 

 I want to see our bilateral relations with the countries of the Asia-Pacific flourish and grow in as  broad a way as possible. 

 Our relationships with countries such as Japan, China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, South Korea  and all the others of our region are critical in terms of both our foreign and domestic policies. 

 Taking these bilateral relationships forward is not just a matter of what governments do:  government leadership and encouragement are important, and a Coalition Government will give  both. 

 But an increasingly vital part of our bilateral relations lies in the independent contact that is  already developing between chambers of commerce, professional associations, cities, schools,  universities, communities and people in Australia and in the other countries of our region. 

 These non-government contacts have the potential to transform the nature of Australia's regional  relationships, and a Coalition Government will be encouraging them as much as we can. 

 In terms of regional security, there are important initiatives to build on: the ASEAN Regional  Forum is a particularly significant undertaking for confidence building and holds out important  prospects for expanding cooperation on issues such as maritime security, industry joint ventures  and exchanges of information. 

 I believe it can be an important complement to the existing network of regional arrangements, in  many of which Australia is directly involved. 

 Along with many others, I am especially concerned by the recent escalation of tensions between a  number of regional countries over territorial and resource claims in the South China Sea, and over  the Spratly Islands in particular. 

 In the post- Cold War world, regional tensions of this kind can develop their own momentum and  regional countries must develop their own crisis-management mechanisms, either through existing  multilateral or new regional dispute settlement procedures. 

 I very much hope that the tensions in the South China Sea can be resolved in the near future  through such mechanisms. 

 I am also very concerned, of course, about the ongoing level of instability and violence in  Cambodia, the nuclear brinkmanship of North Korea, and other regional security problems. 

 And I hope that multilateral and expanding regional security cooperative mechanisms can assist in  resolving them. 

 The issue of human rights is also relevant to developing our regional relationships. 

 Australia has long upheld the significance of internationally recognised minimum standards of  human rights and the need for them to be respected and that commitment will continue. 

 Where there are clear violations of these universal standards, a Coalition Government will take  them up directly with the government concerned. 

 What is also clear is that, to be effective, a concern for human rights cannot be pursued in a  narrow, legalistic way or as an end in itself. 

 In this area, as in so many others in foreign policy, the need is one of balance and integration with  other concerns and interests that together constitute Australia's vital national and international  interests. 

 That balance and integration, built on mutual respect, will be a goal of a Coalition Government  because it offers the best prospects for advancing the broad range of Australia's international  interests. 

 Another important link with Asian countries - in fact all countries - is the approach to immigration.  We will follow a completely non-discriminatory immigration policy. Within that umbrella approach,  the total number of migrants as well as the level within specific categories must be geared to  Australia's national interest, and there should always be an allowance made for genuine refugees. 

 I wish to touch on one final priority for a Coalition Government in respect of its Asia- Pacific policy. 

 The success we have in meeting our regional aspirations will not be a measure of action by our  government, but action by our people; people in businesses, large and small, people involved in  expanding cultural, educational, tourist and other ties, people in fact from every walk of life. 

 A major priority for a Coalition Government will be to liberate the talents of our people in  expanding interaction with our regional neighbours. 

 And we have extraordinary community resources, both already existing and potential, to help  achieve that goal. 

 We have many Australians able to contribute with special language, cultural and trade expertise in  respect of our region. 

 This is a vital national resource and one which is often overlooked. An admittedly partisan example  here is Andrew Thomson, who was so resoundingly elected at the weekend as the Liberal Member  for Wentworth. Andrew is fluent in both Japanese and Mandarin and has lived and worked for a  number of years in Japan. He is part of the new generation of Liberal Members now coming into  Parliament. 

 And we have great potential to build on these resources in the future through Asian language  training in our schools and through greater awareness within our community generally of the rich  potential that exists for greater interaction between our societies. 

 A Coalition Government will be committed to expanding and realising the full potential of these  vital community resources. 

 Conversely, of course, I was concerned to read this week of an Australian Government study which  showed that there is still a very outdated image of Australia's economic capacities among a  majority of Asian business leaders. 

 A Coalition Government will be committed to encouraging throughout Asia a realistic  understanding of the extraordinarily broad capacities of Australia's value- adding industries. 

 Conclusion 

 Over recent years a new era of international relations has begun. 

 The Cold War has ended; economic globalisation has accelerated; 'borderless economies' have  grown from theoretical concepts into realities in many respects; and regional cooperation has  taken on a new momentum. 

 Australia's prospects in this new era are bright and dynamic. 

 We have natural and human resources to more than match the challenges ahead. 

 Our relations with Asia will be the fulcrum of our foreign policy for many years to come, and the  potential two- way benefits are greater than they have ever been. 

 I give you an assurance tonight that a Coalition Government has the vision, the resolve and the  priorities to realise those benefits, to enhance our regional relations and to advance 

 

