---
title: "Speech ... [at the] 1995 National Refugee week summit: Canberra, 21 June 1995"
date: "1995-06-21"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "at the"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188808
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X7B20%22
---

  " 

  Speech by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Hon Senator Nick 

  Bolkus for 

  Mr Chairman, 

  1995 NATIONAL REFUGEE WEEK SUl\ll\HT 

  CANBERRA, 21 JUNE 1995 

  I would like to thank AUSTCARE and the Refugee Council of Australia for this invitation  to speak on "Australia and the 1951 Convention". 

  It is particularly timely to focus on this topic, for the demands on Australia's provision of  humanitarian migration have never been greater nor more complex. 

  Unprecedented numbers of people are currently displaced and in need of assistance.  Although the majority of these are not refugees according to the 1951 Convention, the very  pressure of the numbers involved calls for global perspective. 

  I wish to contend that the Government and the Australian People are meeting the challenges  in this area. 

  We are meeting them through our offshore humanitarian program, by assisting refugees and  others in need of resettlement. 

  We are meeting them through our onshore procedures, by providing fair and speedy  processing for persons seeking asylum. 

  Through our Aid and diplomacy we help to address the root causes of many of the problems  which precipitate mass mo vements of people. 

  And our efforts do not stop at the international level or at visa issue; our comprehensive  settlement strategy for those people seeking to reestablish their lives in Australia is a model  of which we are justifiably proud. 

  In saying this I acknowledge that the problem is not "under control" -it probably never will  be. What I am saying is that the International Community holds Australia is high standing  in this area, because of our record. 

  We must deliver our humanitarian migration program from this global perspective , extending  compassion and assistance within our domestic constraints to the displaced, responding  quickly to changed world conditions , while participating, as part of the world community,  in addressing the root causes of such massive human displacement. 

  I hope that the presentations and debate today will lead to a greater understanding in the  wider Australian community of the scope of the issues we ~ace. 

  L 

  I hope we will ensure that Australians can better understand our international obligations and  the tasks before us as a regional leader - indeed a world leader - in human rights advocacy  and refugee resettlement. 

  In particular, I hope that increased community understanding will provide balance to the  debate on humanitarian migration. 

  There has, however, been a tendency in recent years for media coverage of refugee issues  to focus almost exclusively on the issue of illegal boat arrivals and Australia's policies and  legislation introduced to assist in determining their status. These are important issues, and  issues of legitimate debate. 

  But they are issues which can't properly be understood without an appreciation of the "big  picture" . 

  Refugee Week is always a welcome opportunity to raise our consciousness of this broader  context. 

  My colleague Senator Evans, represented by Gordon Bilney, has addressed Australia's  accession to the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees -which I shall refer to as the Refugee Convention -and our international obligations which  flow from it. 

  "" . 

  I will confine myself to outlining the resettlement role Australia offers, and the context in  which our Refugee Convention obligations are put into practice by Australia, both overseas  and "onshore". 

  The Convention Definition 

  This audience is better versed than most in the content and application of the Convention  definition of refugee. -

  As you know, it is quite precise. A refugee is a person outside their country of nationality  who is unable or unwilling to return because of  'a well founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,  membership of particular social group or political opinion. ' 

  The Refugee Convention remains the foundation for the definition and resettlement of  refugees by Australia. I will touch later on this Government's recent efforts to ensure that  the Convention definition is applied effectively by Australia -but I would like now to move  on to the definition's relevance to our intakes. 

  Offshore Humanitarian Program 

  Australia has a long tradition of resettling refugees and other displaced people - in the 50  years since the foundation of the United Nations more than half a million have made new  lives here. 

  > 

  ., 

  Before World War II around 7,000 people, many of them Jewish, who had been displaced  by events in Germany and German-occupied territories, were resettled in Australia. Post " World War II, Australia made a conscious decision to become a significant major resettler  of refugees as part of our population drive. Between 1947 and 1953 more than 170 000  people, mostly from Eastern Europe were encouraged to resettle here. 14000 refugees from  Hungary were resettled here in 1956/57, and in 1968 Australia also accepted 5 000  Czechoslovakian refugees. 

  In the 1970s, war and displacement in South East Asia prompted Australia to refocus its  Humanitarian program on that region. As a result, since 1975 over 136 000 Indo-Chinese,  from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, have been accepted for resettlement in Australia. 

  The events of the last few years have demanded a focus on the former Yugoslavia and the  Middle East. 

  Other newly arrived humanitarian groups include South and Central Americans, Africans,  Afghans, East Timorese, Burmese and Soviet minorities. 

  We should not forget that Australia is one of only a handful of countries that offers an annual  allocation of resettlement places in a program which is quite separate from the Migration  Program. The UNHCR has recently commended this approach, and appreciates our  continuing efforts. 

  As you will be aware, the Humanitarian Program for 1995/96 will offer 13,000 places -the  highest per capita program in the world. 

  Among them will be 4,000 refugees, including 500 women and their dependents under the  Woman at Risk Program. 

  I'd like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the Government's commitment to addressing the  needs of refugee women. Their gender often puts them at particular risk. 

  Of course, our response does not stop at those who meet the UN Convention definition. 

  Australia has also instituted programs for displaced people that go beyond those obligations. 

  The first of these programs, the Special Humanitarian Program, is for people with links to  Australia who, while not Convention refugees, have suffered gross violation of their human  rights. 

  The other is the Special Assistance Category, for those with close links to Australia, who are  displaced or otherwise in situations of hardship and special need -and who have the support  of family or an existing community in Australia . There are currently eight SACs in place -they are reviewed annually to ensure that we are targeting those in need. 

  At present we also offer a humanitarian extension of temporary visas to two groups in  Australia - citizens of Sri Lanka and of the former Yugoslavia - with the eventual aim of  their safe return to their own countries. 

  All of these initiatives are part of a comprehensive approach to humanitarian migration, to  making sure we proviae optimal assistance within our domestic constraints. 

  \Vho is a refugee? 

  And this is why we must have the courage to take what some in the community see as hard  decisions. 

  We are committed to providing maximum assistance to refugees and those not refugees but  most in need. To do this we must sometimes make the decision that applicants are not  eligible for humanitarian migration. 

  For to target assistance to those in genuine refugee circumstances, we need to identify those  who are not, or those who have already received protection. 

  Let's tum to some of the mechanisms, international and national, that assist in that objective. 

  Comprehensive Plan of Action 

  In the regional context of Australia's humanitarian resettlement, Australia has played a  significant role in resettling Indo-Chinese refugees prior to and under the Comprehensive  Plan of Action (CPA). 

  As part of what has become known as international burden sharing, since 1989 over 17,000  Vietnamese have migrated to Australia from Vietnam under our migration program, with  over 1,500 more "screened in", as they are known, being resettled here this program year. 

  The CPA has shown that regional solutions , guided by UNHCR, can be an effective way  with which to deal with the mass influx of people into a region. 

  We are now moving into the concluding stages of the CPA: 

  the refugee determination screening process is now completed; and 

  CPA member countries have set the end of this year for the repatriation back to  Vietnam of all "screened out" persons. This represents a major challenge, as CPA  camps in the region currently house about 44,000 Vietnamese, of whom 41,000 have  been determined, through a comprehensive screening process, not to be refugees. 

  Australia fully supports the CPA and is committed to maintaining its integrity. 

  Determination of Refugee Status within Australia 

  If Australia is to continue to protect genuine refugees, we must maintain the integrity of our  onshore refugee determination system. 

  Despite the fact that media attention is stimulated by boat arrivals, some 90 per cent of  asylum seekers in Australia make their claims for Australia's protection after travelling here  on a valid visa. 

  Claims by people, whether they are in Australia lawfully or unlawfully, are examined against  the definition set out in the Convention by officers of my department. The claimant is  interviewed with an interpreter where necessary and assessments are made on an individual  basis using all available and relevant information concerning the human rights situation in  the applicant's home country. 

  There is a significant variation in processing time, with priority given to: 

  people who are in detention  who are identified as torture or trauma victims, or  who are recipients of Asylum Seeker Assistance. 

  Where an onshore application is refused at the primary stage, the applicant can appeal to the  independent Refugee Review Tribunal which may affirm or set aside the Department's  decision. 

  In some cases, claimants appeal to the Federal Court challenging the legality of the  . Department's decision. 

  In this context, it should be noted that when people talk about 'prolonged detention' and  "unacceptable delays', they do not appreciate the changes of the last few years. ' 

  The system is now as speedy and effective as justice will allow. 

  Of the 852 people currently detained in Australian centres, less than 50 have been detained  for more than 12 months - and they remain not because they are still waiting for primary  assessment, or review, but because they are pursuing action in the courts. The vast majority  of detainees have arrived in the last nine months. 

  It should also be remembered that there is a further safety net in the determination process. 

  If, after full consideration of claims for refugee status by the Refugee Review Tribunal, a  person is found not to be a refugee but his or her circumstances are such that there are strong  humanitarian reasons for not wanting to return, the Minister has the discretion under the Act  to substitute a more favourable decision where it is in the public interest to do so. 

  People granted residence after lodging a claim for refugee status in Australia are not included  under the annual Humanitarian Program allocation. In the 1994-95 financial year more than  1,400 people are expected to be recognised as refugees as part of the above process, allowing  them to stay in Australia permanently. 

  These people are immediately eligible for permanent residence in Australia, and are granted  access to the wide range of support and settlement services that I will outline shortly. 

  Another important reform in our domestic process is the production of a set of detailed  operational guidelines on refugee law for use by Departmental officers in the decision making  process. They are the first Australian text of its kind on the topic of refugee law. 

  The guidelines provide a comprehensive legal analysis of the relevant Australian case-law on  refugees which is binding on Australian decision makers. 

  Where there is no Australian case law on a particular refugee issue, the guidelines provide  an analysis of international Court or Tribunal decisions or expert commentary in  recommending a reasonable approach to its interpretation . 

  The determination process is an exhaustive and complex one, and every effort has been made  to ensure that it is speedy, just and accurate. . 

  Recent legislative amendments 

  As I said earlier, if the Australian Government is to continue to protect genuine refugees,  we must maintain the integrity of our system. 

  The Government has amended the law to recognise that for persons covered by the CPA and  persons who have effective protection in another country (referred to as a "safe third  country") , access to Australia's refugee determination system will not be granted. 

  The legislation to which I refer is generally known as  the "number 4 Act" of 15 November 1994; and  the "number 2 Act"of 17 February 1995. 

  No.4 Act 

  .... ' 

  The No 4 Act facilitates the return of these persons to the safe third country, or the country  in which the CPA agreement is being implemented. By doing so, it ensures that Australia's  refugee determination system is not open to the abuse of forum shopping by asylum seekers  who have been denied refugee status in, or have access to protection in, another country.  As a result of this legislation being enacted, 102 unauthorised boat arrivals from five boats  have been returned to Galang Island in Indonesia, where the CPA applies. 

  The legislation does provide protection for any specific cases that may warrant it. I need to  be reminded of this to talk to the department. Where the Minister thinks it is in the public  interest to do so, he or she has the power to allow an application or applications to be  lodged. The Minister is required to table a statement in Parliament setting out his or her  reasons for determining this decision is in the public interest. 

  No.2 Act 

  The Number 2 Act made speci fie reference to recent unauthorised boat arrivals . Since  October 1994, over 900 people from southern China have arrived by boat in Australia. The  arrivals are mostly Vietnamese refugees who have been resettled and given effective  protection in the People's Republic of China since the late 1970s, with the assistance of the  UNHCR. 

  The legislation provided that any agreement with the PRC regarding the Vietnamese refugees  would apply to applications made on or after 30 December 1994. An agreement in the form  of a Memorandum Of Understanding which gives effect to these measures was reached with  the PRC on 27 January 1995, and two groups of people have been returned to the PRC under  these arrangements. 

  No.4 Bill 

  I announced on 30 December 1994 a series of legislative measures to prevent people without  claims on Australia's refugee determination system abusing those processes and  disadvantaging those most in need. The Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (no.4) 1995  (the "number 4 Bill"), if passed by the Parliament, will prevent repeat applications by people  already found not to be refugees. 

  The Bill was drafted with the close involvement of the Attorney-General's Department, and  a specific objective has been to ensure that the Bill accords with our international obligations. 

  If Australia returns persons who are ineligible to remain here, we will only do so in  conditions of safety and dignity. 

  The number 4 Bill also provides a commonsense approach to the definition of "particular  social group" contained in the Refugee Convention. 

  The Government's position on the definition has been completely vindicated by a recent  decision of the full Federal Court, which affirms that parents in China with one child do not  constitute a "particular social group" under the Convention. We welcome the Court's  decision to this effect. 

  Obviously, the Federal Court's decision has implications for the Number 4 Bill, and we will  be carefully considering these implications, and the complex legal issues that the Court's  decision raises. 

  Settlement 

  Regardless of whether refugees are approved on shore or off, the application of the UN  Convention is only the beginning of Australia's response to humanitarian entrants . . 

  Because whether people have family and community support in Australia or not, anyone who  arrives here to rebuild a Ii fe torn apart by war or persecution must have access to well " coordinated, comprehensive and culturally sensitive services. 

  And they must be confident that this is a country which both give them security and will not  discriminate against them because of their race, religion, or particular social group. 

  Over the last half century, this challenge has demanded not only Federal Government  support, but the commitment of all levels of government, of non-Government organisations -and of the wider Australian community. 

  It has demanded an inclusive, non-discriminatory approach to citizenship policies, so that all  new arrivals are eligible to participate fully in Australian life after only two years. 

  For its part, the Federal Government has achieved major reforms settlement of refugees and  humanitarian entrants in the last few years - involving not only my own department, but  other key portfolios like health, social security, employment and education. 

  We are introducing case-co-ordination, so that nothing will be left to chance in terms of  identifying someone's individual needs, and ensllring that they are met -not just in the early  days but. with appropriate follow up. 

  We have done away with the waiting period for benefits for refugees. 

  Humanitarian entrants are now entitled to seek Social Security benefits on arrival, as they  are Medicare coverage and employment assistance from the Commonwealth Employment  Service. 

  As well, humanitarian entrants are offered: 

  on arrival accommodation assistance, both directly and through the Community  Refugee Resettlement Scheme 

  free language tuition under the Adult Migrant English Program; 

  free translation of personal documents required to help with their settlement into the  community; and 

  free use of the Telephone interpreter service. 

  For refugee minors with no close relatives in Australia, the Government provides a  maintenance allowance, and with the State Governments provides care, welfare supervision  and counselling. 

  We now have a Program of Assistance for SLlrvivors and Torture and Trauma - a $5.2  million, four year program for which the Minister for Health, Carmen Lawrence, announced  $1.4 million in funding for 1995/96 just this month. 

  And the 1995 Budget increased Federal. funding for our national network of Migrant  Resource Centres by $2 million to $7.6 million, with an emphasis on services to recent  arrivals, particularly refugees. 

  An additional $420,000 is being allocated In the Budget to improve the delivery of  settlement-related information. 

  Conclusion 

  Our work together has made Australia an outstandingly successful multicultural nation. To  maintain this demands and will continue to demand a combined effort - internationally, and  at home. 

  It demands an ongoing commitment to the family reunion component of our Migration  Program as well as a tlexible and responsive Humanitarian Program. 

  Most importantly it demands a commitment to social justice strategies, with the principle of  'inclusiveness' the driving force of our migration, humanitarian, citizenship, and settlement  policies. 

  If we are to continue to meet the global challenges being discussed today, we must ensure  that we continue to make the urgent needs of refugees our firs~ priority. 

  For the part this Summit may play in contributing to that mission, I wish you well in your  deliberations for this National Refugee Week. 

  ~ .. 

