---
title: "Senate must relieve student concerns by debating Bill"
date: "1995-11-28"
creators:
  - "Free, Ross"
source: "MINISTER FOR SCHOOLS, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211196374
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/N5N20%22
---

 The Hon. Ross Free MP Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training

 SEN A TE M U ST R EL IEV E STUDENT CO NCERN S BY D EBA TING  B IL L

 Z8 November, 1995

 Tens of thousands of students may face the risk of protracted uncertainty about AUSTUDY  eligibility arrangements for the 1996 academic year unless vital Budget legislation is decided  in the Senate this week, the Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training, Ross  Free, said today.

 The Student and Youth Amendment (Budget Measures) Bill 1995 was scheduled for Senate  consideration earlier this week but has been deferred because of minor parties' concerns about  some of its proposals.

 "This is Budget legislation", the Minister said. "That alone should warrant its urgent  consideration. Without decisions on the Bill this week, however, students applying now for  AUSTUDY and ABSTUDY in 1996 will not know what rules will be used to assess them,  making immediate agreement to consider the Bill absolutely essential.

 "I accept that there are concerns about some of the proposals contained in the legislation. The  Government is simply seeking an opportunity to deal quickly with those concerns through full  Senate consideration of the Bill."

 Mr Free said that some recent media coverage had contributed to confusion about the Bill, in  particular the accusation that it was anti-family.

 “The legislation w-ould save some $19 million in all, which is committed to the Government’s  $200 million assistance package for families.

 "The Government is happy to look at ways to resolve concerns about the individual elements  of the Bill. Discussions with other parties in the Senate have indicated that some progress is  possible towards allaying those concerns.”

 “The most important point is that they can only be termed anti-family if they are  misunderstood. Unfortunately there have been some misunderstandings.”

 Mr Free said one concern had been that basic student payments (for families with income too  high for AUSTUDY but below about $60,000) would be paid to the teenage student.

 “This is not correct, nor was it ever our intention. The payments will go to the parent,” Mr  Free said.

 There was also concern that, because the payment is controlled by regulation, it could be  removed completely b> regulation.

 "A regulation cannot be used to take the main point out of legislation."

 A major allegation was that the Basic Student Payment could cost 100,000 families $741 a  year. Mr Free said this was not correct.

 "The argument here was that a family with four children, receiving $741 a year now, would  receive nothing because any payment would go to the student children - which is an incorrect  premise.

 “Most families qualify not for the $741 but for $564 a year, and all families will continue to  receive $500, indexed for inflation. There is an advantage to them, however, in receiving a  $250 payment at the beginning of each semester, instead of fortnightly payments. This means  they have the cash when they need it, to buy their children’s school requisites.

 "As well, some 3,000 families who were receiving no payments at all - whose children are  studying secondary subjects at TAFE institutions - will now be eligible for the $500 a year  payment."

 Another area of concern has been the proposal to no longer pay AUSTUDY to non-citizens. It has been argued that this will restrict access to tertiary education for refugees and other  permanent residents.

 Mr Free said there was a three-year period during which refugees and other migrants could  consider whether they wanted to become citizens of Australia.

 “Since they are not permitted to apply for citizenship until they have been here two years, it  would not be right to prevent people from applying for AUSTUDY in that period. We  believe, however, that three years is ample for people to decide whether they can make that  long-term commitment to Australia.

 “The Government also rejects suggestions that the decision limits access to education.  Permanent residents are able to attend university and pay HECS rather than full fees. This  decision concerns whether they should receive financial support from the Australian taxpayer  when they take the option of studying in Australia."

 Media contact: John Miner, Mr Free's office (06) 277 7540

