---
title: "Major new aid package for Ethiopia: Ethiopia sends message of thanks"
date: "1995-01-25"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211186816
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M8320%22
---

 Minister for Development Cooperation · Minister for Pacific Island Attains  Gordon Bilney MP M DC 5 25 January 1995

 MAJOR NEW ADD PACKAGE FOR ETHIOPIA  - Ethiopia sends message of thanks

 Australia's overseas aid program will provide $8.5 million for refugee and relief activities in Ethiopia  during this financial year, the Minister for Development Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, said today.

 "Australian support for agricultural, health and water supply activities will be used to improve living  conditions in several areas of the country which have yet to overcome the effects of prolonged civil war  and drought," Mr Bilney said.

 Mr Bilney said $4.6 million would be provided for the purchase and distribution of approximately  10,500 tonnes of Australian wheat by the Emergency Food Security Reserve for emergency feeding  and food programs throughout the country and by World Vision Australia. In total, World Vision  Australia will receive $2.3 million for a project in South Kalu which aims to secure water supplies and  rehabilitate the environment through afforestation activities.

 With less than half of Ethiopia's health services in operation, UNICEF Australia will receive $550,000  to purchase solar refrigeration systems from Australia as part of a program to establish effective  storage of vaccines and expand immunisation coverage of children and women of childbearing age.

 Community Aid Abroad (CAA) will receive $2.5 million for community development activities  working in conjunction with the Relief Society of Tigray. Emergency relief and rehabilitation activities  for drought affected communities will aim to restore food security and implement soil and water  conservation programs. A further $100,000 will also be provided to CAA to continue a project of  constructing sustainable rural water supply systems in the region.

 Mr Bilney said Ethiopia's Relief and Rehabilitation Commissioner, Simon Mechale, has issued a  message of appreciation to Australians for their continued generosity in helping Ethiopia's rehabilitation  after three decades of civil war.

 "I would like to extend on behalf of the millions of men, women and children who were under the threat  of famine, our hearty appreciation to all with long traditions of bringing succour, warmth and comfort  to those citizens of ours who were in desperate need this year," Mr Mechale said.

 Media contact: Allen Mawer (Minister's Office) 06 277 7660  Maree Flynn (AIDAB) 06 276 4967

