---
title: "Ad hoc response to refugees continues"
date: "1995-03-03"
creators:
  - "Spindler, Sid"
source: "Office of SPINDLER, SEN SID"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187221
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2908112%22
---

 .;c1

 41-

 95/111 3 March 1995

 Ad hoc response to refugees continues

 The Minister has now conceded that Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 3) 1994 is deeply flawed by releasing alternative amendments the Democrats said today.

 However, the new version is highly convoluted and continues to miss the objective of dealing with the status of people who are fleeing China because of its 'one child' policy", Senator Spindler said.

 The Minister should adopt the Democrat amendments which are clear and simple and which meet the Governments own policy objectives as stated by the Minister himself:

 I. "The fertility control policies of the government of a foreign country shall not in themselves be sufficient to render a non-citizen a member of a particular social group (within the meaning of the Refugees Convention as amended by the Refugees Protocol) for the purposes of considering an application for a protection visa." 2. "A particular community where fertility control policies are implemented in a way which

 amounts to persecution shall be considered a particular social group for the purpose of allowing a member of that community to adduce evidence that he or she has a well-founded fear of persecution."

 "If the Minister refuses to accept this common sense approach I trust that the Senate will, and I look forward support from the Coalition, Senator Harradine and the Greens.

 "The government has shown that it has no principles for dealing with refugees. It just introduces a knee-jerk response into parliament and hopes for the best."

 "The people in the detention centres are the real victims of this rudderless approach.

 "It is time to put an end to this adhockery and resolve the issue," Senator Spindler concluded.

 For more information call Senator Spindler In Melbourne on (03) 416 1880 or after hours on (03) 859 5607.

 Australian Democrat Spokesperson on Law and Justice, Trade end Customs. Industry and Regional DevelopMent and Ethnic Affairs COMMONWEALTH 1 of ?:j' ARLI NTA

 RY  TBRAR

