---
title: "Australia helps rebuild Eritrea"
date: "1995-02-16"
creators:
  - "Bilney, Gordon"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187053
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6G420%22
---

 Minister tor Development Cooperation · Minister tor Pacific Island Affairs  Gordon Bilney MP M DC 13 16 February AUSTRALIA HELPS REBUILD ERITREA

 Australia will provide around $4.5 million in assistance to help with Eritrea's post-war rehabilitation,  the Minister for Development Cooperation, Gordon Bilney, said today.

 "We are looking at a country which is having to start again, almost from scratch, " Mr Bilney said.

 "Three decades of devastating civil strife have left the country bereft of even the most basic of social  services and infrastructure. Much of the country's infrastructure in many parts of the country has been  damaged or totally destroyed.

 "The lack of services, combined with the impact of recurrent drought in recent years, has produced a  situation where reconstruction of Eritrea cannot be achieved without substantial assistance from the  international community."

 Although Eritrea experienced a better harvest for 1995 due to agricultural rehabilitation efforts and  good rains, this is still not enough to solve the problems created by deterioration of the agricultural  sector and the overall economy over the past 30 years. In 1995, 48 per cent of the population remain in  need of food assistance, compared with 80 per cent last year.

 Mr Bilney said that the funding announced today would go towards purchasing 8,000 tonnes o f food  for use in food-for-work projects to improve food production, and a supplementary feeding program.

 A total of $2.5 million will be provided for an agricultural rehabilitation program to the Food Security  Working Group, a consortium of three Australian non-government organisations (Australian  Catholic Relief, Community Aid Abroad and the National Council of Churches of Australia). The  Food Security Working Group will work with the Eritrean Relief and Rehabilitation Agency towards  the longer-term rehabilitation and development of the country's capacity to feed itself.

 World Vision Australia will also receive $1.3 million for another food-for-work project in the Central  Highlands focusing on dam construction, land terracing and tree planting. It will also contribute to the  long-term goal of increased food production through small-scale irrigation and agricultural training.

 It is anticipated that up to 500,000 refugees fled to neighbouring Sudan during the war. The Eritrean  Government has commenced a pilot program of voluntary repatriation and reintegration of returnees  into resettlement areas. UNICEF Australia will receive $675,000 for a supplementary feeding  program for 25,000 of the returnees in three resettlement areas, targeting children under 15 years of age  and their carers.

 Further information: Minister's Office AIDAB

 Allen Mawer Maree Flynn

 06 277 7660 06 276 4966

 Release

