---
title: "Pakistan: transcript of Senator Evan's press conference, Islamabad, Sunday, 21 May 1995"
date: "1995-05-21"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188368
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SAB20%22
---



Senator Evans: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I am  nearing the end
of a very fleeting visit to Islamabad of just 24 hours or so as part of a
round Indian Ocean trip that I'm doing, involving among other places, India
and South Africa and Sri Lanka and some of the island countries, in
particular to talk about the subject of Indian Ocean regional cooperation. I
think you've been given the text of a speech I gave in Delhi a couple of
days ago which will indicate the shape and dimensions of that initiative and
what we are trying to achieve. But more about that in a moment. During my 24
hours here, there were substantial discussions with President Leghari for
something like an hour this afternoon and with Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto
for about 45 minutes and with of course, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Sardar Asif Ali and a number of other officials. I have also taken the
opportunity to unveil a plaque to mark the commencement of construction of
the new Australian High Commission chancery on that magnificent site on
Constitution Avenue.

 The various themes that we have discussed
during this visit I

 think I can summarise as follows: first of all, it
is the bilateral Australia/Pakistan relationship which we are all agreed is
in very good shape. Certainly so far as the political dialogue is concerned,
as far as our economic relationship is concerned unquestionably, however
there is scope for adding considerably more weight and ballast to the
relationship. There is only about $400 million worth of trade between us at
the moment. Not a great deal of investment given the size of our respective
economies, we could do a lot better than that. In my discussions we've
identified, the areas of telecommunications, infrastructure development,
that is to say power plants and harbours, ports, road systems and so on,
agri-business right across the whole spectrum, mining business again right
across the whole spectrum. Financial services are another area where
Australia has particular expertise. A key thing to say about the bilateral
economic relationship is that it is now poised for take-off in a way that
simply hasn't really been in place in the past. I think we have crossed the
psychological watershed that in the past rather inhibited the Australian
business community from fully appreciating the opportunities here in
Pakistan and similarly I think inhibited Pakistani businessmen from fully
appreciating the opportunities in Australia given what we have to offer.
Also on the bilateral front, I signed a memorandum of understanding,
concerning a family planning project which we are contributing 34 million
rupees, just over a million dollars U.S. to provide training to frontline
family planning workers in rural villages and towns to improve their clients
outreach communications capability and also to sponsor family planning
orientation seminars and study tours for immediate personnel and community
leaders to update them on the latest developments in this field. That
program will be implemented in association with the United Nations
Population Fund.

 Also while here another bilateral matter to
mention quickly is that we are very close now to negotiating a concluded
extradition treaty between Australia and Pakistan, we just need one more
visit to Pakistan by an Australian delegation. I think we can bed that down
and at the same time we will be expected to commence negotiations on a
Treaty on Mutual Assistance on Criminal Matters. That's a very important new
dimension to cooperation between us.

 So far as other issues
discussed, before I come to the regional one, issues of particular concern
to Pakistan involve obviously the situation in Kashmir about which I had
quite an extended discussion, as you would expect, with all three of my
major interlocutors. Australia's position on Kashmir is essentially this: we
deplore the destruction of the Charar-i-Sharif shrine, whoever was
responsible for that. We extend our sympathy to the Kashmiri people at the
loss of one of the most revered religious shrines in the nation, or in the
region. We share the concerns of the whole of the national community about
the continuing unrest and violence in Kashmir and we are concerned about
human rights violations, wherever they occur and whoever is responsible for
them. We urge both sides to exercise restraint. We do support a properly
conducted political process, that has respect for human rights in Kashmir
and hope that something of this kind might emerge from current developments
there being discussed by the Indian Government at the moment. Essentially,
however, the whole question of Kashmir is one that we see as one for India
and Pakistan to resolve between them, peacefully and as soon as possible
within the framework of the '72 Simla Agreement.

 So far as
other issues, human rights issues, with the subject of a particular human
rights situation in Pakistan itself, the position of children, child labour
and the status of the blasphemy law exercise, questions about ratification
of the Convention of Women, are all questions that I've discussed with Prime
Minister Bhutto. I've also had a good discussion with her about the
situation of Aung San Suu Kyi presently under house arrest, of course, in
Burma in Myanmar, an issue about which Prime Minister Bhutto is particularly
concerned and which I am concerned about and have been trying to assist a
resolution of in our own part of the world.

 Just two global
related issues, a number of discussions about the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty, Australia's concern shared with the rest of the world that India and
Pakistan can still not find themselves able to sign that Treaty even though
we have now got a situation which I think is very different from that in
which the Treaty was originally born. That is to say that at the end of the
Cold War and the commitment of the major nuclear powers to move now down the
disarmament path. Also, the rather optimistic outlook on the question of the
imminent negotiation of the cut-off Convention to stop the further
production of fissile material which I am glad to see Pakistan supporting.
The question of the Comprehensive Test Ban is now reasonably imminent, I
think, and there's also a number of other developments like negative
security assurances that have been given by the nuclear powers which I
believe make it no longer really possible to argue that the NPT is
discriminatory and inappropriate so far as countries like India and Pakistan
are concerned, if indeed it was ever appropriate to try and make that case.
A particular question associated with all that is that of missile
proliferation and while in India I expressed my Government's concern about
the possible imminent deployment of Prithvi missiles which we would see
seriously destabilising and which we expressed a lot of concern about.
Equally here in Pakistan I've expressed concern about the possible
utilisation of missile technology and missiles acquired from China and the
need to ensure that neither country plunges down that path of missile
proliferation. It's a particularly acute issue at this stage.

On the question now of Indian Ocean regional cooperation. It is

 a
large and complicated question. I don't want to say too much by way of
introduction, I will respond to any questions you might have, except to say
this. I think the main need at this stage is simply to have a full
exploratory discussion of what the options for such cooperation might be
right across the whole spectrum of economic cooperation. Cooperation in the
area of transnational problems, like environmental protection issues, that
cross national borders, issues of narcotics trafficking, terrorism. Health
problems, refugees, displaced persons, questions of that kind and thirdly of
course, security questions, what might usefully be able to be done in
particular by way of creating in the Indian Ocean region a security dialogue
process of the kind that has become familiar elsewhere.

 With
all that thought in mind about the need to generate discussion about this,
Australia will be hosting in Perth next month a big forum to discuss in a
systematic way, all those issues but particularly concentrating on the
economic ones as you would expect to which have been invited participants
from 29 different countries namely all those whose borders in any way touch
upon the Indian Ocean, the Indian Ocean including the Gulf and the bottom
end of the Red Sea. Fairly arbitrary definitions are involved in these
matters but basically you try to be inclusive rather than any way selective.
And, we hope that the participation of three categories of people, that is
to say representatives of the business community, representatives of Non
Government Organisations, in particular research institutes, think tanks,
senior academics and thirdly representatives of governments but not acting
in their official capacity, essentially they're in their personal capacity,
we hope that that combination of people from that combination of countries
will generate some helpful and useful ideas that will take forward the
momentum to genuinely establish some regional dialogue.

 In a
region where South Africa is back from out of darkness to now become a
participating country, where the Cold War is over and with it a lot of the
hangups and concerns that inhibited cooperation in the past and where on the
Sub-Continent there is a new approach to economic policy which is much more
outward looking than in the past, we believe that the pre-conditions are
there for much more of a sense of cooperation and we would like to see that
happen.

 I think that just about exhausts the number of
questions in we have dealt with. The subject of cricket you might imagine is
a recurring motif in most of my talks with the thought being that we have a
little bit of unfinished business to attend to when the Pakistan team visits
Australia later this year, in particular to establish beyond any shred of
any possible remaining doubt that we are in fact world champions having now
beaten the West Indies. Pakistanis might have some slightly different views
about that but I'm sure in the finest tradition of our bilateral
relationship we can resolve them adequately.

 Question: What
will Australia do to help ensure that the UN resolutions on Kashmir are put
into effect.

 Senator Evans: Well our view along with many other
countries is that essentially those original resolutions have been rather
overtaken by the subsequent course of events and that the question of the
future of Kashmir is a question that is best resolved by appropriate
negotiations, discussions between the two countries. The fact that those
negotiations and discussions having no borne fruit so far after many long
years of trying there is no particular reason to believe that some
resolution of this is impossible. I just am not persuaded that any form of
multilateral process or other mediation would necessarily advance matters
further. I don't underestimate the complexity, the difficulty of the
situation the problem that arises because the thing is such a politically
charged issue so far as the publics of both countries are concerned and the
way it gets mixed up with party politics, all makes this very very complex.
Australia has no instant solutions I'm afraid to help advance the matter
either in terms of process or substance. Ultimately, at the end of the day
we believe that both sides have got to continue to work this one out between
themselves. I have to say just one final comment however, that having spent
a lot of time over the years and again the last couple of days of discussing
this issue with senior leaders, decision makers both in India and in
Pakistan, I am persuaded that there is a high level of potential goodwill
that can be applied to the resolution of this issue. There is a lot of
intelligence, there is a lot of moral commitment to getting a decent
solution out of all this that we work for the Kashmiri people and I honestly
think that you've just to stick at it and try to find that elusive common
ground. Yes??

 Question: India's blue water Navy is a threat to
the countries of the region. What are Australia's views on the Indian naval
build-up?

 Senator Evans: Well I think that's considerably
overstated.

 There was some concern expressed a few years ago that
India's

 acquisition of a blue water naval capability seemed to be
running

 well ahead of any discernible self defence need and was

disproportionate to any reasonable assessment of those needs. That concern
was expressed by quite a few countries in the region not just Pakistan but I
think in more recent years I've not heard that concern expressed. There's
been some considerable trimming back of expenditure as a result of budgetary
constraints and so on in the Indian system and we frankly don't see any
particular cause for concern in that respect. When you say the only naval
power, I think that underestimates Australia's naval capacity but I'm not
going to get into a discussion about that. We are a significant naval power
ourselves with both the surface and underwater capacity, as you expect given
the size of the continent we have to defend. Any country that has got a
significant coastline does just have to take the precautions in that respect
and then you have to take accounts of the possible threats. Threats are a
function of intention plus capability. Intentions are not obvious, we don't
perceive them as threats or risk to us in terms of anyone's intention at the
moment but there are certainly plenty of countries in our whole range of
geographical focus who have the capability to impact upon us so we've got a
defensive capability accordingly.

 Question: Why are you
negotiating an Extradition Treaty at this time. Is there a particular person
you wish to extradite?

 Senator Evans: Well, there is no
particular immediate need but in the context of the concerns about narcotics
trafficking which both countries share and as well in the context of a
concern generally to ensure that criminals don't escape their just desserts
wherever they might choose to run to, we are just embarking upon the kind of
treaty that both countries have with many other countries around the world.
I mean to be really successful extradition treaties have to be pretty well
universal in their scope. Every country with every other country. We're just
in the process of bedding down this to complete the range of our coverage
but obviously there's a particular context in which it has the most
immediate likely applications of narcotic trafficking because that remains a
problem as well all know in this part of the world. Yes?

Question: Follow up question on Indian Navy.

 Senator Evans:
Please don't misquote me when what I said about

 blue water navy is
just the opposite of what you attributed to me that we don't see that as in
any way a problem even though a few years ago people were a little
concerned. In so far as missile deployment is concerned, yes, there is a
potential threat to regional security, not least because any deployment of
that kind tends to trigger off a reciprocal response from other countries,
not least of course, Pakistan itself, and I think it is an utterly
unattractive prospect to go down that particular path, just as it was an
utterly unattractive prospect back in the 70s for both countries to go down
the path of developing nuclear capabilities. It's something I think that
both countries would be better off not having done and the world would
certainly be better off if that had not happened. Yes, of course we are
concerned about it, but I don't see the particular kind

 of security
dialogue that I'm talking about that we are going to be discussing in Perth
as getting down to that degree of detail about particular individual
security problems between particular countries. I think to try and debate
those sorts of issues at this early stage of the process would be
counterproductive. What we're really trying to do in the Perth forum is to
just get ideas going about what kind of dialogue processes might be able to
be established, could over the longer term help to improve trust and improve
confidence and perhaps create a more benign and more long lasting security
environment. And that's exactly what we've just done in the Asia Pacific
area, not only have we created APEC as the body with an economic brief to
develop cooperative strategies, we've also, last year, just established this
ASEAN Regional Forum which brings together the 18 major countries of the
whole Asia Pacific region to discuss security issues in the way that I've
just mentioned, trust and confidence-building strategies, preventive
diplomacy, peace building, things of that kind. It will be some considerable
time, if ever, before we get to the point of addressing in a conflict
management sense or a conflict resolution sense particular individual
problems but I believe nonetheless it can still be valuable to go down this
kind of institutional path. That's what we'll been talking about. Yes?

 Question: Given the enormous disparities between the countries of the
Indian Ocean region and the fact that they have so little in common why do
you think that an Indian Ocean regional grouping is feasible?

Senator Evans: Well, I think that's much too pessimistic a view

 of the
world with respect. Take the Asia Pacific region, for

 example, and
consider some of the disparities that are involved in the membership of that
particular body, APEC. You've got developing countries like Papua New Guinea
alongside the United States, China and Japan. Huge disparities of
population. Huge disparities of income and huge disparities along the
development continuum. But nonetheless we've found it possible to find
common ground in areas like economic cooperation, more broadly defined,
human resource developments, small and medium enterprise networking, data
compilation and exchange like the OECD does, policy dialogue on
macroeconomic issues, discussion of energy supply and demand patterns,
common projects in areas of infrastructure, telecommunications, transport
and so on. Then we have moved up from there, that's where we started, to
discuss things like, or to negotiate things like common technical standards
for certain key commodities that are widely traded in the region to reduce
the costs of them going into particular markets. Common systems of
certifications so that you certify technical standards in one place and
applies elsewhere. Common systems of customs procedures to make easier the
movement of goods and so on, and we're about to move up to a third tier
level of activity which is trade investment liberalisation - addressing
issues like tariffs and quotas and non-tariff barriers to trade. Now, all of
these things are possible and we've demonstrated that it is possible in a
very very heterogeneous region like the Asia Pacific. Now, of course in the
Asia Pacific there is already a significant measure of integration between
the various economies when APEC was started there was about 60 percent of
trade was intra regional trade. The amount of trade that was going on that
was intra-regional in character was about 60 percent now about 66 percent.
In the Indian Ocean region as we've defined it by comparison it's only about
20 percent at the moment, but consider this. It's only just very very
recently that South Africa has come back into the picture. Before that we
all had sanctions against them, and tried not to trade with them at all.
It's only just since 1991 that India, with all its huge population and the
size of its economy, has looked outward at all and has wanted to trade and
investment with anybody. Pakistan's been in the open economy business a
little bit longer, India's only just come fresh to that, so it's hardly to
be unexpected that these patterns haven't really developed. We in Australia
haven't been taking much notice, certainly not of South Africa, certainly
not of the Sub-Continent, we've tried and failed to penetrate that sort of
market in the past. But now there's a new psychology abroad and I think
efforts like this create a sense of regional identity, which are going on
all over the world: in the ECO area involving Pakistan, the Asia Pacific, in
Europe (security matters with OSCE, economic matters of course with the
European Union), in Africa not only the OAU but the SADC, Southern African
Development Commission, all of this bubble of activity is going on. If you
look back hundreds of years to the pre-colonial era, there was an enormous
amount of integration of the Indian Ocean region and trade with each other.
In the colonial period the respective countries were treated as mines or
quarries or sources of raw materials to feed directly into the European
colonial masters' markets and so on, there wasn't much cross-regional trade.
But we can recreate some of that. The relationship between the Sub-Continent
and the ASEAN countries is starting to develop very rapidly, so it may be
that this can't be created, maybe that this is artificial, maybe it's an
idea whose time has not yet come but let's at least begin the task of
exploring it because there are potential benefits for us all if this does in
fact take off. Yes?

 Question: A follow up question on
Kashmir.

 Senator Evans: I think I've answered the question on
Kashmir both in what I said originally and what I said subsequently as best
as I can. I know the extent to which this is a pre-occupation in this
country and I can assure you it is also a pre-occupation in Delhi too and I
haven't said anything more than I'm saying here and that's about it.

 Question: (Inaudible) Same reporter on Kashmir.

 Senator
Evans: Sorry you've had a go, anyone else?

 Question: What was
the Pakistan Government's reaction to your Indian Ocean proposal?

 Senator Evans: Clearly affirmative. Very affirmative, very positive
and the Government indicated that it was keen to participate in our Perth
forum and to contribute actively and positively in this exploration exercise
on which we are about. I was very pleased with the reaction from the
Government at all levels - the President, the Prime Minister, Foreign
Minister, down. There is an enthusiasm to explore this.

Question: Given that Pakistan and India are unable to cooperate on any
matters until the Kashmir issue is settled why do you think they will be
able to work together at the Indian Ocean conference?

 Senator
Evans: Well, that's not quite true it's only just less than two weeks ago at
the SAARC meeting that the countries of this region, including India and
Pakistan, were able to agree at last on the preferential tariff arrangements
of SAPTA. OK that's an issue that's been in the pipeline for a long time,
it's not going to move mountains. The reciprocal tariff concessions that
were involved here were not major, but it's a demonstration that
notwithstanding all the tension and all the drama and all the difficulty
that's going on about Kashmir at the moment, which is very heightened at the
moment, nonetheless it is possible for the two countries to agree on
something that relates to cooperative strategies and everybody's larger
interests. So I think that's just one example of what is possible. Moreover,
you can look at it the other way. Maybe if you can build up confidence by
getting more and more areas of cooperation moving in non-sensitise areas,
maybe it becomes that much easier then to address in a systematic and
hard-headed way some of the really sensitive issues rather than just
retreating to your respective trenches.

 Question: Is the
purpose of the conference to help resolve security issues in the
region?

 Senator Evans: That's a fringe benefit. It's not the
basic objective.

 Question: Did you raise the blasphemy law with
the Prime Minister?

 Senator Evans: I was just seeking an
explanation of where the

 political process had got to in terms of the
attempt to amend or revise some of the harsher application of that law. I
mean, many countries, including my own, have blasphemy laws in place and
most of them have been hardly ever utilised and certainly none of them have
been as potentially draconian in their impact as the ones that have been in
place here for the last decade or so. I don't want to tell you what the
Prime Minister said in this respect because that's a matter for her to say,
not for me to report, but she gave me an account of the efforts that have
been made over the last year or so to move that process within the
Parliament forward and explain some of the political dynamics that were at
work on the subject. Beyond that I've got no further comment.

Question: What did the Prime Minister tell you?

 Senator Evans:
It was a helpful explanation which made me understand much better what is
going on. Beyond that I think it is up to you to try and extract that
information from the Prime Minister - not to get it from me OK. There are
certain conventions about these things.

 Question: Follow up on
the blasphemy law.

 Senator Evans: I think it is reasonably self
evident isn't it, in terms of recent events. I mean I don't want to spend
any more time on that. It's a sensitive and difficult issue within this
country and opinions are very strongly held. But it is a question of
universal human rights that are involved and there ought to be a capacity to
speak reasonably freely and any laws that apply in this area, and while
they're not necessarily inappropriate to have some laws at all, nonetheless
it is very important that laws not be draconian and excessive in their
impact.

 Further question on blasphemy law.

 Senator
Evans (interrupts): I've no other comment on that.

 Question:
Diego Garcia is the last remnant of colonialism.

 Senator Evans:
The last remnants of colonialism? That's a bit

 heavy I think. I mean,
Diego Garcia is a naval base leased by the

 United States basically
from the British in the Indian Ocean. To

 some extent it's a product of
the Cold War years. But nonetheless it has assumed a continual significance
and utility as a basing station and a transit point and so on for US forces
in the Gulf and in the Pacific and elsewhere. And, we, I think take the
basic view that we've already been in support of the concept of an Indian
Ocean Zone of Peace, but the matter in issue about foreign presences in the
region has been whether those foreign presences are destabilising in
character. I mean that's been really what the argument has been about for
most of the last decade or more and Australia would take the view that the
US presence in the Indian Ocean at the Diego Garcia whatever else you might
like to say about it is not a destabilising presence and for that reason we
would not take any objection to it. We think some of the objections that
have been taken to it by some other countries in the region are perhaps a
little overdrawn and a little much of a reflection of some of the heightened
passions of the Cold War years and we ought to all be able to be a little
more relaxed about it these days. But I mean I understand it's an issue
about which strong opinions are held and the situation is not going to
change rapidly.

 Question: Will Kashmir be invited to the Indian
Ocean conference?

 Senator Evans: I think you know and I know
that Kashmir is taken

 to be a part of India at the moment and it's not
an independent

 country in its own right and as such it would be quite
inappropriate under the circumstances to be seeking representatives from
there.

 Question: So you consider Kashmir is a part of
India?

 Senator Evans: Well that is hardly news, I think for you
to appreciate that that's the way most of the international community thinks
about it.

 Journalist: Thank you very much. (Journalist rises
and begins to walk out.)

 Comment by a journalist to Senator
Evans...inaudible.


[NOT VERBATIM ONLY THE SENSE OF WHAT WAS
SAID, AS THE CONFERENCE BROKE UP]

 Senator Evans to
journalist as conference breaks up: Obviously  there's a dispute involved
over the issue of Kashmir pending resolution of the differences between
Pakistan and India.

