---
title: "Urgent explanations necessary by Bolkus on boat people"
date: "1995-03-29"
creators:
  - "Short, Jim"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187571
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2991276%22
---

  Senator Jim Short  Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Ethnic Affairs  &  Assisting the Leader on Multicultural Affairs 

  URGENT EXPLANATIONS NECESSARY BY BOLKUS  ON BOAT PEOPLE 

  The Government's decision to activate the RAAF Base Curtin as a detention centre for  boatpeople suggests strongly that the Keating Government is having difficulties in  implementing its agreement with the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) for the return to China  of the approximately 700 Sino Vietnamese boatpeople who arrived in Australia from Southern 

  China late last year and early this year. 

  The Minister, Senator Bolkus, and his Department advised me in January that it expected the  first of these boatpeople to be returned to China in March. It was for this reason that the  Government requested, and the Coalition cooperated, that Migration Amendment Bill No. 2  be passed expeditiously at the start of this Parliamentary session. 

  It seems from the Government's decision to activate the Curtin Base that something has gone  seriously wrong with the repatriation program. If the program were on schedule there would  be no need to open Curtin because there would be sufficient accommodation in the existing  detention centre at Port Hedland. 

  Senator Bolkus must come clean and tell the Australian people why there is the delay, how  long it will be, and what the Government is doing about it. Has the Government's agreement  with the Chinese Government for the return of the Sino Vietnamese come unstuck? Is this the  reason why Senator Bolkus is visiting China in the next few days?--

  These are basic questions which this arrogant, secretive and incompetent Government must  answer urgently. 

  Senator Bolkus must also tell us just how much the delay in returning the Sino Vietnamese to  China is costing the Australian taxpayer. Their continued detention at Port Hedland must be  costing the Australian taxpayer millions of dollars each month. On top of that is the cost of  opening Curt~ which the Government says will cost half a million dollars to commission and  half a million dollars a month - ie $6 million annually - in running costs. 

  I understand Senator Bolkus is leaving Australia for his latest overseas trip very shortly.  Before he goes he certainly has some explaining to do - and quickly. 

  Canberra, 29 March 1995  For further information contact Senator Short on (06) 277 3119 or (06) 295 3ffiMMo 

  ~ARLIAMBNT. NWEALm 

  J\Ry LIBRA.Ry 

  15 

