---
title: "Protection of the UN Safe Havens in Bosnia"
date: "1995-07-21"
creators:
  - "Taylor, Bill"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211190268
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2980182%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  BILL TAYLOR, MP  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  MEMBER FOR GROOM 

  PROTECTION OF THE UN SAFE HAVENS IN BOSNIA 

  The Federal Coalition deplores attacks upon the United Nations' safe havens in Bosnia. 

  The Coalition calls upon the Security Council members to immediately take strong action to  protect the remaining safe havens from attack and, in particular, to guarantee the security and  safety of those who have sought refuge within the havens. 

  The Coalition urges those members of the Security Council and NATO currently meeting in  London to take immediate and, if necessary, forceful actions to achieve the defence of the safe  havens within Bosnia. 

  The Coalition believes that by establishing the safe havens and guaranteeing the security of  those within, the United Nations accepted a responsibility to act decisively and, if necessary,  forcefully to protect those within the safe havens. 

  The Coalition accepts the broad international consensus and therefore does not believe that  any State should unilaterally lift the arms embargo upon the different parties to the conflict  within Bosnia and calls upon all parties to the conflict and all States to respect and uphold  existing United Nations resolutions with regards to the conflict in Bosnia and other States of  the former Yugoslavia. 

  If a decision is made to withdraw United Nations forces from Bosnia then the Coalition would  immediately review its position on the arms embargo. However, until that time, the Coalition  is convinced that a unilateral lifting of the arms embargo would divide the members of the  contact group for Bosnia. The withdrawal of British, French and Dutch troops would lead to a  consequent humanitarian tragedy and military conflict of even greater proportions than that  which is currently occurring within Bosnia. 

  Ultimately, the Coalition believes that having guaranteed the protection of the safe havens, the  international community has a responsibility to take such steps as are necessary in order to  defend the refugees and residents within the safe havens. 

  ENDS 

  21July1995 

  Further Information: Bill Taylor  Greg Hunt 

  COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY 

  (076) 32 4144 or (076) 35 3118 or (018) 716 965  (06) 277 4885 (w) or (06) 257 2773 

  4-4. 

