---
title: "Boat people beat nation's defences- yet again"
date: "1995-05-14"
creators:
  - "Newman, Jocelyn"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211188250
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2966846%22
---

  NEWS RELEASE FROM 

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE 

  Monday 14 May 1995.. 

  BOAT PEOPLE BEAT NATION'S DEFENCES - YET AGAIN! 

  The weekend walk-out of about 100 Chinese boat people from their temporary  detention centre at the RAAF Curtin base in the north-west of Western  Australia reveals a worrying complacency by the Federal Government for our  national defence, according to the Shadow Minister for Defence, Senator  Jocelyn Newman. 

  "When it was first announced that illegal immigrants would be housed at  RAAF Curtin, I asked the Minister for Defence whether this would compromise  the security of an important defence facility," Senator Newman said in Perth  today. 

  Senator Ray's response only last month was: 

  Should a situation arise where illegal immigrants are temporarily  accommodated at RAAF Curtin, the airfield will still be available for  essential Defence operations, and steps have been taken to ensure  that the security of the base is not compromised by the presence of  non-Defence personnel on the base. 

  "It seems that security at RAAF Curtin is a joke! Thankfully, the boat people  who left the detention centre seemed to be mostly upset at the standard of food  being served to them, and did not have any more serious intentions," Senator  Newman said. 

  "The boat people have revealed just how slack our security is in northern  Australia," Senator Newman said. 

  "Their arrival here is only noticed by people jogging on the beach or passing  motorists. Then, while being detained on an air force base, they can 

  apparently climb a fence, go for a ten kilometre walk accompanied by  Australian Protective Service officers and local police, and eventually return of  their own volition," Senator Newman said. 

  Senator Newman is visiting defence facilities in Western Australia today and  tomorrow, including the SAS Regiment at Swanbourne, RAAF Pearce, and  HMAS Stirling. 

  More information/interviews: contact Matt Francis (06) 277 3660. 

  20MMONWEALTH  ri.,J AMENTARY LIBRARY 

  16 

