---
title: "[Senator] Short signals discriminatory migration and settlement programs"
date: "1995-12-01"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211196543
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F5N20%22
---

  ,MEDIA ,RELEASE ' . . -. .' "  Senator Nick Bolkus 

  B128/95 

  Dec (qq~ 

  M IN ISTE R FOR IMM IG RATI ON M JO ETHN IC 

  AFFA IRS A ND M INIS TEfl A S SIS TIN G THE P R IM E 

  M IN IS TE R FOR MUL TI C U L TU ~lA L A FFA IRS 

  Parliam ent H ouse C an nerra A C T 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  SHORT SIGNALS DISCRIMINATORY MIGRATION AND SETTLEMENT PROGRAMS 

  The opposition has signalled its agenda for a return to White  Australia by stealth, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus,said today. 

  The Prime Minister, Mr Keating, revealed this morning that  opposition Immigration spokesman Senator Jim Short had  commissioned and distributed a report calling for open  dlscrimination against migrants without fluent English. 

  "The recommendations it contains send a strong message from John  Howard's Liberal Party to migrants of non-English speaking  background," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "You must have English to get in, you must have English to work,  and you must have English to access training, unemployment  benefits and welfare.  "It's the Newt Gingrich agenda for a divided society. It would  demolish almost all the Government's reforms to help migrants 

  learn English, secure employment and settle successfully in  Australia.  "Senator Short cannot wash his hands of this report - it is  rusted on to him and his office. 

  "It was prepared in his office, overseen by him, and disseminated  by him in the community. It reflects either total ignorance or  complete disregard for the rights of migrants from non-English  speaking backgrounds." 

  The report, prepared for Senator Short by an intern from the  University of Michegan, Zachary Wilks, calls for: 

  denial of both employment and unemployment assistance to  migrants who are not yet fluent in English - including  refugees; 

  fines for employers who give work to migrants who have not  achieved a certain level of English; 

  the abolition of the Department of Employment, Education and  Training's highly successful Working Nation initiatives for  non-English speaking background job seekers, including; 

  the abolition of Migrant Liaison Officer programs; 

  the abolition of multilingual information provision by  DEET 

  the privatisation of the Translating  Service, which provides free services  humanitarian entrants; 

  and 

  to 

  Interpreting  refugees and 

  making all migrants or their sponsors pay the full costs of  English language tuition - including humanitarian entrants  and family reunion migrants. 

  wide distribution of details of pre-migration migrants'  health details;  the introduction of pre-migration psychological tests, the  details of which could be made widely available.  the end of Commonwealth funding for cultural awareness  programs by health departments. 

  "The Government is wholeheartedly committed to migrant English  language services, because the ability to speak our common  language is central to full participation in Australian life,lI  Senator Bolkus said. 

  "But unless migrants have access to multilingual information in  all Government services, particularly Employment, Education and  Training, they won't be able to access English or any other  essential service. 

  "At the same time, we recognise that the more multilingual  Australia becomes, the greater the benefits to all of us - both  cultural and economic.1I  Senator Bolkus called on Senator Short to release details of  where he had distributed the paper. 

  "Like John Howard, he peddles his real policies to selected  audiences, while selling a different message to the public. II 

  CANBERRA DECEMBER 1 1995 

  Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860 

