---
title: "Refugee Bill to be introduced to House of Representatives"
date: "1995-03-06"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211187230
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3F520%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Nick Bolkus  B14/95 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PR IM E  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  REFUGEE BILL TO BE INTRODUCED TO HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

  The Migration Legislation Amendment Bill No. 4 will be introduced  into the House of Representatives tomorrow, the Minister for  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Senator Bolkus announced today. 

  The Bill will be introduced in substantially the same terms as  the Migration Legislation Amendment Bill No.3, which would  prevent repeat applications by people already found not to be  refugees, and provide a common sense approach to the definition  of 'particular social group' contained in the united Nations  Refugee Convention. 

  "The new Bill will incorporate amendments drafted by the  Gove-rnment to clarify the latter point," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "In the second reading speech to Bill No. 3 I said that it will  not deny refugee status to persons who seek it as a member of a  particular pre-existing social group, or on any of the other  convention grounds, who has a well founded fear of persecution  because of fertility control policies. This critical point was  also made clear in the explanatory memorandum. 

  "The amendments will incorporate this statement into the text of  Bill No 4."  opposition Immigration and Ethnic Affairs spokesperson Senator  Jim Short gave an undertaking to support measures to protect the 

  integrity of Australia's refugee determination processes in a  press release on December 30 1994. 

  "Senator Short and his Coalition colleagues have since  misinterpreted and misrepresented the Bill, saying that it  disqualifies any application for refugee status based on China's  one child policy," Senator Bolkus said. 

  "This is not nor has ever been the Government's intention. The  Bill does not have this effect.  "Statements to the contrary reflect the total disarray within the  Opposition, and its inability to grasp policy issues. 

  "The Government is committed to the protection of genuine  refugees. If we are to be able to achieve that end, we must  maintain the integrity of our refugee determination system. 

  "It is the Government's firm resolve to enact Migration  Legislation Amendment Bill No.4 this session." 

  CANBERRA MARCH 6 1995 

