---
title: "Funding to help young homeless in Darwin"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452844
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VP630%22
---

  Vanstone med ia release template http:// www .deet.gov.aulminwnlvanstone /vI581411.htrn 

  FUNDING TO HELP YOUNG HOMELESS IN DARWIN 

  V158/96 14 November 1996 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs today  announced $92,500 to the YWCA for establish a Job Placement, Employment and Training-JPET - a  programme for young people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. 

  The funding is part of $22 million to be provided nationally over the next two years. 

  "Darwin YWCA is one of eight services funded as the first step in the nation-wide re-establishment of  JPET," Senator Vanstone said. "The Federal Government has placed a high priority on youth issues,  and we are committed to providing assistance to young people who face barriers so they can realise  their full potential. 

  "In the lead up to the election the Coalition promised to re-establish the successful JPET programme  and provide $11 million a year in funding for the next two years. We are delivering on this promise  today. 

  "JPET will provide an individually targeted and flexible approach to assisting homeless young people.  Services are designed to help young people who are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless, with  priority being given to those aged 15-19. 

  "Other at risk groups, such as refugees, ex offenders, wards of the State or those exiting wardship  may also get help from JPET . They do not need to be homeless. 

  "A wide range of advice, support, and referral services is offered to jobseekers to assist with  accommodation, finances, staying at school, training and employment, self esteem, family mediation,  drug and alcohol rehabilitation . 

  YWCA Darwin JPET will provide personal one-to-one intensive support for individuals, as well as  specific training in the areas of life skills, humeracy and literacy and preparatory employment skills .  Some training will be provided by staff, some will be externally provided accredited training . 

  Participants will be expected to participate in on-the-job workplace observation . 

  Local Federal member Nick Dondas MP said that he was pleased disadvantaged young people from  the Darwin area would be provided with a flexible, individualised service to help them get back on  track. 

  Further information: Christian Kerr, Minister's Office, 08 8237 7946 

  Virginia Wallace, Minister's Office, 0419 217 918 

  11/25/96 09:32:00 

