---
title: "Human rights in Australian foreign policy: address"
date: "1996-07-30"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211451145
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2R730%22
---

  INV ENTIVE AUSTRALIA CREATIVE AD ELAIDE http://www .dfat.gov .au/pmb /speeches/fa_sp/INV ENTAU .html 

  lof3 

  The Department oj Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australia 

  INVENTIVE AUSTRALIA CREATIVE ADELAIDE 

  Address by nnde Downer, MP, Minister fo  Inventive Australia Creative Adelaide, Adelaide, 31 

  .. 

  Introduction : Australia's Strong Tradition of Inventiveness 

  It is a great pleasure to be here today to launch the Inventive Australia Creative Adelaide campaign. 

  This is a j oint initiative of the Federal and South Australian Governments. It is also a campaign that is  important for Australia's effort to update and strengthen its image internationally as a producer of  sophisticated , high technology goods and services . 

  I welcome the high level of cooperation between the Federal and State Governments that has been  evident in the development of this promotion -the objectives of which are important for all  Australians . 

  Australians have always been highly inventive . From the earliest days, Australians have been  developing innovative new products and techniques in a wide variety of fields -from agriculture and  food processing to communications and health and medicine. 

  The list of inventive Australian "firsts" is extensive . 

  In 1850, the world's first refrigeration plant was built in Australia . 

  It was in Australia in 1898 that the world's first teleprinter for recording messages onto tape was  invented, and in 1958, it was an Australian scientist who invented the "Black Box" flight recorder  which now, of course, is an essential part of all commercial aircraft . 

  Many of Australia's most important innovations were created here in South Australia . 

  Two South Australians from Mount Barker, John Ridley and John Bull, in 1843 developed the world's  first grain stripper that cut the crop and removed and placed the grain into bins, making the process of  wheat harvesting vastly more efficient. 

  In 1897, David Shearer of South Australia built a steam car with differential gears inside the left rear  wheel hub -another first. 

  Of course, the winegrowers of the Barossa Valley have spawned a range of innovations over the  decades, and the advanced viticulture methods of vintners throughout the state have been directly  responsible for Australia's recent breakthroughs in premium wine export markets. 

  The Australian tradition of innovation and inventiveness is well-established and extends across the full  range of human endeavour. 

  But this is not a fact that is well known outside Australia , and especially not amongst Australia's major  trading partners in Asia. 

  Australia is still widely perceived as an economy based on agriculture and mining, and this can 

  12/11 /96 14 :02:39 

  INV ENTIV E AUSTRALIA CREATIVE ADELAIDE http:// www .dfat.gov .au/pmb /speeches/fa _ sp/INV ENTAU .html 

  2 0f3 

  sometimes hinder our ability to gain acceptance as a world class supplier of sophisticated and high  technology goods and services . 

  For this reason, Australia needs to update its image throughout Asia, so that Australia's economic  partners have a stronger appreciation of the full extent of Australia's capabilities . 

  Inventive Australia Creative Adelaide 

  Promoting greater awareness of Australia as an innovative and creative producer of high value-added  goods and services has underpinned the work that has been completed under the auspices of the  Federal Government's Inventive Australia campaign. 

  The Inventive Australia program utilised a mix of promotional activities, including high profile print  and television-based advertising, support for media visits, business delegations and international  seminars and the production of a number of brochures, books and media articles . 

  Directed squarely at decision makers in countries such as Indonesia, Thailand, China and Korea,  Inventive Australia featured innovative Australian products and services, such as Austal Ships'  high-speed catamaran ferry, and the advanced lightning protection system produced by Global  Lightning Technologies of Hobart. The campaign also helped promote the services of some of 

  Australia's larger companies, like \Ansett and the ANZ. 

  The Inventive Australia theme has, now been joined with the South Australian Government's own  campaign to promote South Australia's investment potential and technological excellence -the  persuasive "Case for South Australia" promotion. 

  The South Australian Government is to be commended for its vision and purpose in the development  of its campaign. John Olsen and his Department have seized the initiative and taken a bold approach  to highlighting South Australia's excellence in fields as diverse as education , financial and medical  services, environmental technology and automobile production. 

  For its part, the joint Federal and State Government Inventive Australia Creative Adelaide initiative is  an advertising campaign which will draw attention to some of the special products and services that  have been developed in South Australia . 

  It will highlight the wealth of innovative talent that resides here in Adelaide and throughout South  Australia . 

  It will showcase Adelaide's highly, developed infrastructure, and it will signal the level of Government  commitment -at both Federal and State level-to international business. 

  It is this sort of Government support which has already helped attract to South Australia the likes of  Motorola, British Aerospace, A W A Defence Industries , Mitsubishi and the multinational computer  giant, Electronic Data Systems (EDS). 

  Inventive Australia Creative Adelaide brings together in a creative way initiatives at Federal and State  level that have been designed to promote similar goals. It is therefore a common sense way to advance  the interest that all Australians share in promoting trade and investment in high value-added goods  and services. 

  The promotion features a number of short television commercials advertising the innovation and  technological prowess of Adelaide-based companies and organisations . It will also feature full page  colour advertisements in newspapers and magazines such as the Far Eastern Economic Review, The 

  1211 1/96 14:02:42 

  INVENTIVE AUSTRALIA CREATIVE ADELAIDE http:// www.dfat.gov.au/pmb /speeches/fa_sp/INV ENTAU .html 

   " 

  3 0f3 

  Economist and International Business Asia. 

  Both the Federal Government and the South Australian Government want investors throughout Asia  to appreciate the potential that exists in both Australia and South Australia . 

  Both Governments also want to draw attention to the excellent goods and services being produced by  South Australians -and there are some fantastic products coming out of this great state. 

  Let me note just a few examples of South Australian quality. 

  The Adelaide Festival is now becoming internationally recognised, after years of consistent quality in  its programming, set design and construction . 

  The Australian Cranio-Facial Foundation leads the world in cranio-facial reconstruction with its  innovative 3-D imaging system and a highly skilled team of medical workers. In the words of the  advertisement prepared for the Inventive Australia Creative Adelaide promotion, the Australian  Cranio-Facial Foundation makes faces smile again. 

  Vision Systems have developed a Laser Airborne Depth Sounder which provides a dramatic new way  of charting the ocean floor, especially in areas where shallow water and reefs make traditional  methods using boats dangerous and difficult. 

  Finally , Aspect Computing develops customised corporate software programs. Its LANSA program is  a unique multilingual software system which allows developers to create custom software without  requiring programming. The software is now being used by more than 2000 companies in 50 countries  around the world. 

  These examples of inventiveness , innovation and excellence are mirrored in the work of many more  South Australian companies and organisations . 

  It is the task of this campaign to alert business people and decision makers throughout the Asia Pacific  of the innovative capacities that exist in Adelaide and South Australia . In this I'm sure the promotion  will be very successful. 

  Conclusion 

  Let me conclude by saying that, from a South Australian point of view, one of the keys to the success  of this promotion will be its recognition that identifying South Australia's advantages with Australia as  a whole can be a real asset. 

  Promoting the state as a part of the nation may seem obvious. But the best ideas are always simple.  The secret lies in having the good idea in the first place, as John Olsen and his colleagues did. 

  It was John Olsen and his team who took the baton and ran with this outstanding international  promotion and for that they deserve our congratulations . 

  1211119 6 14 :02 :42 

