---
title: "Andrew Olle lecture 1996, delivered 15 November 1996."
date: "1996-11-15"
creators:
  - "Williamson, David"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Hansonism"
  - "Xenophobia"
  - "Australian Broadcasting Corporation"
  - "Former Prime Ministers"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452849
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MSA76%22
---

 Andrew Olle Lecture 1996

 Friday, 15 November  1996

 By David Williamson

 It is a very great honour to be asked here tonight to participate. In company with Annette and his children, In the commemoration of the life and career of the late Andrew Olle. Although what I am about to say is not specifically about Andrew, I don't think It would be appropriate on such a night if I didn't devote at least part of what I am going to say to speak out on behalf of the institution in which Andrew spent the major part of his life at the ABC.

 Andrew was the quintessential representative of all that was best about the ABC, and despite the coolness of our last three Prime Ministers to it's offerings, the best about the ABC is very good indeed. My wife claims she fell in love with me at the precise instant that she phoned, early in our courtship, and found out that I was listening to the same ABC discussion that she was, but my fondness for our national broadcaster goes a little beyond that. Without an ABC the Australian airwaves would be almost devoid of intelligence, skepticism, enquiry and objectivity, and to me these qualities are as essential to the human mind as air, light and food are to our bodies.

 There's been a lot of talk about coded messages lately, so I'd like to use this opportunity to decode the standard line of our last three governments on the ABC, which was that the organisation was inefficient, bureaucratic and heavy with middle management. In the case of the Howard government that's code for, "The ABC Is full of neo Marxist, Anglo Celtic hating, radical lesbian multicultural Inner urban feminists."

 In the case of the Keating and Hawke Governments It was code for, The ABC Is full of brain dead maggots who don't realise that a modem Labour party has got to embrace the free market, suck up to capital. Increase the gap between rich and poor, and salve its conscience by providing a minimal safety net for the casualties." With the aid of new computer software which can filter out the ideology from any given

 statement, the factual residue of both the Liberal and Labour coded versions reads "The ABC is full of people who value intelligence, scepticism, enquiry and objectivity, which is the last thing politicians of any persuasion should be forced to tolerate."

 Andrew Olle was one of the key prime movers in making sure that the ABC remained on its chosen path of Intelligence, scepticism, enquiry and objectivity. Eight years ago Andrew pioneered the new format 2BL morning show, which aimed high. Its brief was to be ahead of the print media, to break news instead of tagging along behind, to set the agenda and let the others follow. It was so successful that It became the standard by which news and current affairs radio was subsequently judged. As Jenny Tabakoff noted in the Sydney Morning Herald recently, many find It odd that at the very time when the ABC is giving its blessing to this commemoration of Andrew, the show he began Is being dismantled.

 The present government tells us that there is no vindictlveness in the ABC budget cuts. It just has to suffer like every other area of Government activity. I don't know who the legendary "Blind Freddy" Is or was but I think that even he would have seen through that one. The aim of this government, like the government that went before It. is to get rid of as much intelligence, scepticism, enquiry and objectivity from our airwaves as it possibly can.

 Why is it that Andrew Olle's passing occasioned far more sincere and lasting grief than the passing of any of our recent Prime Ministers Is ever going to occasion? It's precisely because we out there knew that Andrew's life was dedicated to objectivity and truth and theirs was dedicated primarily, and often brutally, to the maintenance of power.

 The very nature of politics is to try and keep as many people as possible believing you are acting in their interests even if you're not. Lies, misrepresentations, exaggerations, hype, hyperbole, denigration and evasiveness are the staples out of which most governments build power, and the materials out of which many commercial enterprises help build profits.

 In the contemporary world we are said to be bombarded with an overload of information, but what we're also far more Insidiously bombarded with is misinformation. We appreciated and admired Andrew because we knew he was dedicated to cutting through that vast fog of misinformation which constitutes contemporary life, and allowing us access to the truth. We knew that he was on our side, and we knew that there weren't many others outside the ABC who were.

 When Justice Woods recently took the Media to task for not applying itself to the uncovering of police corruption and other forms of corruption over the years, the venerated investigative journalist Brian Toohey said that Woods seemed to be suggesting that the media was failing to perform some higher duty. He reminded Woods that in free market terms, the commercial media

 doesn’t have a higher duty. The sole goal of the commercial media is to make money, and that what many people fail to understand is that gathering information and analysing it well Is an expensive business. "This," he said, "is especially true if you are seeking to obtain information which people with power don't want you to have. You don't get it by sending them an E-mail with a "smiley" in the opening sentence."

 Toohey suggests that commercial media worldwide now does almost no penetrating investigative journalism, firstly because its findings might damage the interests of media owners themselves, and secondly because It eats up funds which could be more profitably employed speculating about whether Princess Di has become the "Queen of Australian Hearts."

 There are still, thankfully, some principled Journalists working In the privately owned print media who do regard their role as being more than maximising profits, and who do attempt to analyse In depth the important Issues of our day, but over our airwaves the ABC is now one of the few sources of information about the things that the people who hold and wield political and commercial power don’t want us to find out. Radio programs such as the one that Andrew pioneered, and television programs such as Lateline and Four Corners are some of the last avenues of genuine enquiry we have left to us in what is purportedly a free and open society.

 Despite the fact that the Howard Government, has clearly cut the ABC budget in such a way that its most important function can't help but be impaired, I don't think Andrew would have wanted me to spend this entire talk on the problems of the organisation in which he played such a crucial role. His focus was always the bigger picture and there's little doubt that the bigger picture about the effects this government is having on our national life includes far more than what is happening to the ABC.

 When Malcolm Fraser came to power In controversial circumstances in 1975, there were many of us who thought that the Black Prince himself had ascended the throne. We feared that the Ideology of Market Forces was about to change the face of Australia for ever. Government services were about to be cut to the bone, the disadvantaged were going to be begging on the streets, the arts would wither and die, and Australia would return to the arid conformity of the fifties. History has shown as that Malcolm Fraser was far more astute, moderate and principled that we had given him credit for. The one thing that he made absolutely clear both by rhetoric and action is that he had absolutely no truck with racism and discrimination of any type. It was Malcolm Eraser who insisted that Australia had a responsibility to Vietnamese refugees. It was Malcolm Eraser who was one of the Eminent

 Persons delegation who went to South Africa to try and help end Apartheid, and it was Malcolm Eraser who spoke out so strongly against Pauline Hanson recently.

 Whatever other criticisms he may be subjected to, there is also no doubt that Bob Hawke had no truck with racism of any sort either. Hawke vigorously promoted the concept of a multicultural Australia, and It was Hawke who personally guaranteed the safety of forty thousand Chinese students by allowing them to stay in Australia as permanent citizens after the horror of Tianamen Square.

 And whatever hatreds were expended on Paul Keating for his supposed "arrogance" , there was no Keating arrogance to be seen about the role of Australia In the world of the future. Keating was the first Australian politician who had the courage to tell us that we were a nation with a small population and no claim to any special status - in fact just the reverse- Paul told us to our faces that we were Insignificant Internationally - " a little country at the arse end of the Universe" was his colourful phrase, and that we had no economic future at all unless we woke up to ourselves and realised that we had to stop pretending we were part of Europe and began to learn about, and try and Integrate ourselves economically into. The many and various Asian countries and cultures in our region.

 It seems clear however that no matter how realistic Keating was being in his assessment of our future, he was to some extent sowing the seeds of the present Hanson phenomena. Tom Morton In the Australian, pinpointed the way the Keating government gave off the feel of a power elite of Anglo Celtic Australian intellectuals denigrating their own culture In favour of marginalised groups and our Asian neighbours.

 At the same time that this perception about the Keating government was taking root, Its economic rationalist policies were acting against the welfare of the majority of the Australian people. The top ten percent of income earners increased their wealth dramatically and the Keating safety net improved the lot of the bottom ten percent, but the eighty percent in the middle saw their economic fortunes declining.

 But it wasn't just an economic decline that concerned middle Australia. As Australia plugged itself into the International economy, lifetime job security became a thing of the past as "downsizing" decimated middle management. Those who belonged to the majority Anglo Celtic culture, felt rightly or wrongly, that their culture was being denigrated by its own leaders, and given also that their own security, wealth and power were on the wane, they had all the characteristics of a social group that would prove particularly vulnerable to xenophobic nationalism.

 Anthony Milner, the professor of Asian History at the ANU felt that the talk about the "Asianisation of Australia" confused people. They felt bullied reading articles headed by "Think Asia", "Can we be part of Asia?" and "Strategies for an Asian Australia." Keating's thrust was perceived by many Australians to be a policy of demeaning ingratiation to our near neighbours combined with excessive self denigration of our European roots. In order that we would be

 given access to some of the burgeoning wealth of the region. The flood of traditional Labor voters who deserted for the Coalition were undoubtedly doing so partly as a result of John Howard's coded message that he stood for an end to "political correctness", which was in effect a signal to the Anglo Celtic majority that they were allowed once again to express positive sentiments about their culture and negative sentiments about "Multiculturalism" and the â¢Asianisation" of Australia. It's been pointed out repeatedly In the press that fears of this Asianisation are highly irrational given that even if one includes the children of Asian born parents the total Asian component of the population is only seven percent, but it's a characteristic of the human psyche that its fears and anxieties often have little basis In objective reality. Because of the importance of this debate to our country's future it might be worth briefly looking at the reasons why this might be so and why John Howard would have been wise to act quickly to contain and control such irrational fears.

 When I was studying the social sciences in the late sixties and early seventies the standard social science model of the brain was that it was akin to an unprogrammed computer and that society did all the programming. In adopting this belief the social sciences were flying in the face of the intuitive easily rid the world of this scourge.

 While It Is certainly true that the human species is the most flexible and socially adaptable of all living creatures, it Is becoming increasingly apparent that that we have an evolutionary legacy that cant be just shrugged off. Our brains aren't simply blank slates waiting to be shaped to whatever our culture desires. They have inbuilt biases which predispose us towards certain types of behaviour. Evolution has left us with a distinct "human nature" and the parameters of this "human nature" are important in the present crucial debate which Australia finds itself enmeshed in.

 The dark side of our "human nature" is an inbuilt egocentricity which presses us to tilt the available evidence in our own or In our group's favour. As the neurophysiologist P.D. McLean said, the human brain has the capacity to generate strong "feelings of conviction that we attach to our beliefs regardless of whether they are true or false." Nietzsche said the same thing long ago when he posited that rational thinking was not something that the human brain found easy to do. We have a "will to power", he said, that makes us see the world the way it suits us to see it.

 The brighter side of our "human nature" is the emerging evidence that we are a social species who like each other's company and are capable of feeling sympathy for other people's misfortune. From this side of our nature comes the strong need for fairness and justice, both for ourselves and for others, that is a characteristic of all human societies.

 Unfortunately it seems that we are also left with another evolutionary legacy, the propensity for tribalism or Xenophobia. AH of us seemed pre programmed to be ready and willing to divide the world Into "them" and "us", whenever it

 suits our interests to do so. This is a predisposition which in its benign forms leads to the fanaticism of football supporters, but which in its ugly forms gives rise to the tribal hatreds and warfare that have blighted human history. All too often the positive side of our human nature, the need for fairness and justice and the capacity for empathy, is restricted to the members of our own tribe.

 The social commentator Hugh Mackay said recently that "Tribalism is virtually a universal human experience and it can easily be negative in its focus...... there is a potential for racism in all of us." I think Mackay is right In alerting us to the power of tribalism but fortunately the evidence shows that while our tribal nature does seem inherent, there is nothing inherent about racism.

 Small children of different ethnic origin play happily together without a hint of discomfort, but when they are arbitrarily assigned to groups which compete against each other, one group of mixed ethnic origin will compete ferociously with another group of mixed ethnic origin. In other words while It does seem to be part of our human nature to want to find a tribe to belong to, (and invent an ideology which assures us that our tribe is superior to all others), the members of that tribe can just as easily be of mixed racial and ethnic background as not. it is stirring if you are a Sydney Swans supporter to hear the roar "Derek" and 'Michael" when ever the talented aboriginal players Derek Kickett and Michael O'Loughlin get anywhere near the ball. There was no doubt this year that Derek and Michael were very firmly part of the Sydney Swans tribe. Tribalism itself is not the problem - it's only when race and ethnic origin are designated as the criteria for tribal membership that the classic symptoms of racial prejudice emerge.

 This of course Is exactly what Pauline Hanson did when she took it upon herself to define who belonged to the Australian tribe. The underlying implication of her statements was that Asians are not really part of our tribe and never will be. In the same way as a teacher in a schoolground can use their authority to overrule any budding racist and decree that people of different ethnicity are in the same tribe, and in so doing create a reality that didn't previously exist.

 John Howard could have gone a long way to circumvent this damaging episode in our national life by confronting Hanson early and telling her to her face, that while our ethnic minorities may legitimately regard themselves as part of their own tribes, they were also most definitely part of the Australian tribe - and a valued and appreciated part of our tribe at that. Derek Kickett and Michael O'Loughlin have no desire to deny their aboriginal heritage, but that in no way precludes them from being valued members of the Sydney Swans.

 Howard has responded angrily to accusations like this by saying that he has in fact said all of that in his recent bi partisan statement, but given the resentment that the Keating years engendered in the Anglo Celtic majority about the perceived denigration of their tribe, and given the extremely effective way Hanson has exploited this resentment and became a defacto leader and spokesperson for it, it seemed to the media here and overseas that she was far

 more potent than the eccentric Independent politician Howard depicted her as. It seemed to the media here and overseas that It was absolutely necessary that our national leader directly confront the usurper head to head and use the authority of his leadership to invalidate and repudiate her attempt to limit our tribal boundaries. It's not much use John Howard telling us that the media shouldn't have demanded this of him - they did and they did it for very good reasons and someone as politically astute as he normally is, should have been well aware of those reasons. To use race as a criteria for deciding who will be permitted to emigrate to a society or who will be permitted to be viewed as legitimate members of a society is something that inflames deep passions No one can control the ethnic group they are born into and it strikes at the very heart of our concept of fairness to be condemned for something over which we have no control We can all remember the special anger and shame most people around the world felt about South Africa which, until the ANC took power, had a political system that blatantly discriminated against people on the basis of race.

 I remember sitting next to a perfectly pleasant white South Africa" woman on a plane in the early eighties. She chatted for a long while and finally asked me what I thought the world thought of white South Africans. I asked her why she had asked the question and she replied that if she was to believe what she saw printed in South African newspapers, then she would believe that the world thought that white South Africans were a sophisticated, intelligent and industrious people bravely facing the threatening situation of being outnumbered five to one by blacks. She said however that she had some doubts over whether this was true. I told her as gently as I could that her fears were well founded, and this was not generally how white South Africa was viewed. She was quite shocked.

 While our commercial media is not as superficial and self deluding as that of South Africa at that time, commercial pressures inevitably do necessitate stroking the readership and enhancing its self image. There are many Australians who believe that we are regarded benevolently around the world as happy go lucky larrikins loved by all. How a nation could believe this about itself barely twenty years on from an Immigration policy that actively discriminated on the basis of race, is a telling example of Nietzsche's belief about humanity's huge capacity for self delusion.

 I'm not suggesting that we have, as a result of Hanson and the Prime Minister's refusal to directly confront her. become the new South Africa, but I'd be surprised if the resounding vote of no confidence we received at the hands of the UN recently didn't have something to do with a new perception of racial Intolerance that has attracted worldwide publicity to us. The Prime Minister must be aware that In recent world history it has been white skinned Europeans who have done the bulk of the world's colonising and exploiting, and that there is a special sensitivity in non European nations to any suggestion that white supremacy is again rearing Its head. He must be aware also that his record on this issue Is held to be suspect. His own use of Asian Immigration as an attempted vote winner In 1988 Is widely remembered both in

 Australia and In the region. He Is certainly aware that this country finally finished all vestiges of our white Australia policy as late as 1972 and that our near neighbours haven't forgotten that either. He may have gained short term support from the many supporters of Hanson for his inaction, but what he has done is all too easy to interpret as a grubby short term domestic gain has done incapable damage to our world and Asia in particular.

 I think Nietzsche was right and that it is hard for the human species to be rational and objective, but unlike Nietzsche and his current cynical post modern disciplines, I don't think it's impossible. Those Australians who have felt themselves denigrated for being Anglo Celtic, and who have felt threatened by their deteriorating financial and social situation, will experience the temptation to resort to the satisfactions of scapegoating, but the greatest legacy that evolution has given us, as the anthropologist Derek Freeman been telling us for a long time now, are the highly developed frontal lobes of our brain which are the seat of consciousness and, most importantly of the human capacity for making choices. We alone of the primates have the capacity to understand that our fears and anxieties and angers are often out of all proportion to the real threat, and choose not to respond to them. The human tendency to overreact might have been useful in our distant evolutionary past when we had to be ever prepared for surprise attack by the tribe over the hill, but It is a tendency that we can now recognise as totally counterproductive in most situations..

 Australia's prime minister was recently given a chance to exercise his capacity for choice and to choose to rebuke a woman whose exaggerated fears and anxieties resonated with a host of other Australian's exaggerated fears and anxieties, and by so doing help calm those anxieties and replace them with a rational and realistic vision of what Australia could and should become. It was, and hopefully still is a defining moment of our history. Let's not delude ourselves and pretend that great damage hasn’t been already been done but let's hope there Is still time for our leader to declare directly to Pauline Hanson, for without declaring it to her he will now not be declaring it to the world, that her fears are ungrounded and that her facts are wrong. Let him tell her that he believes we are capable of forging a society that will be the most inclusive and the least discriminatory In the world. Let him tell her that It Is his intention to revive the early Australian vision that we would become the social laboratory of the world. A country ruled by it's choice making frontal lobes rather than a limbic system generating emotions rooted in the past. A country that more than any other in the world is capable of conquering its primal fears and making race a total non issue.

 And we have the capacity to do it. On the other side of the world Catholics and Protestant are still blowing themselves to bits in a way that seems unthinkable here. On the other side of the world Serb and Croat tore each other to shreds in a way that seems unthinkable here. Not so far away Koreans are still discriminated against In Japan. Not so far away Tibetans are persecuted and East Timorese still die. In Africa Tutsi and Hutu are still hacking each other to

 death. All of it unthinkable here.

 I think the importance of what has Just happened to our world image should be minimised or wished away. We have just suffered a public relation disaster we can ill afford, but we can still go forwards Instead of back. Mr Prime Minister I urge you not to get defensive or angry or self righteous but to display again the admirable courage you displayed over the gun issue confront the demon of race head on. and tell Pauline Hanson and the world that race will play no part in our national life. And Mr Prime Minister, I further urge you not to penalise the ABC. as it is one of the few remaining voices that still tells us the truth about ourselves, and without someone telling us the truth about ourselves we will never attain the potential for tolerance and diversity that could make us a beacon rather than a pariah in the eyes of the rest of the world.

 Help us to finally drive a stake through the heart of the odious White Australia policy, so that that particular vampire can never come back and once again suck the tolerance and goodwill from our veins.

  

