---
title: "Labor will not stand by and allow another attack on Australian families"
date: "1996-10-29"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214176080
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011612%22
---

 <

 S h ad o w  M inister for Immigration  

 and A ssistant to the Leader of the Opposition  

 on M ulticultural Affairs

 188 Collins St, Hobart 700 0

 Ph (03) 62 3 45  2 55  Fax (03) 62 238 560

 G P O B ox32A  Hobart Tas. 7001

 Media Release 29 October 1996

 LABOR WILL NOT STAND BY AND ALLOW ANOTHER  ATTACK ON AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES

 The Opposition will today give notice of its intention to oppose in the Senate some changes  introduced by the Government to the Migration Regulations.

 The Government has made a large number of changes to the Migration Regulations that  impact significantly on many Australian residents.

 The contentious amendments that Labor will move to disallow highlight the fundamental  difference which continues to emerge between Labor and the Coalition on immigration  policy.

 Contrary to Government claims, the Opposition has gone to great lengths to NOT obstruct the  authority of the Government to manage the migration program.

 However, the areas that Labor finds unacceptable include:

 . the introduction of the requirement of citizenship for eligibility to sponsor a husband,  wife, fiance, parent or dependent child.

 This restricts the right of many permanent Australian residents (who have entitlement  to a life-time stay in this country) to choose the spouse they wish to marry, or reunite  with immediate family. Taking up Australian citizenship should be a willing choice  not attached to a motive;

 . allocating visas to the families of refugee and humanitarian entrants (who arrive later  to reunite once they are located) from the already reduced Refugee and Humanitarian  quota rather than the normal Family Reunion program. ../2

 COMMONWEALTH  PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY

 Parliam ent H ouse Canberra ACT 2600

 T elephone (06) 277 2178

 - 2 -

 This will undermine the intention of the Refugee and Humanitarian program, erode  significantly the number of visas available to genuinely needy people for asylum, and  should cause concern to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR);

 . the introduction of 20 additional points for English language skills (equivalent to a  native speaker) to the points test for the visa categories which relate to sponsoring a  sister, brother, nephew or niece.

 This visa category has a high skill requirement in the points test and a very high long  term employment outcomes. The English language points will have only one  significant effect - discriminate against the families of non English speaking  backgrounds to sponsor those members of their families; and

 . an attempt to make the effect of some of the changes retrospective. This is legally  flawed and shows contempt to the Parliament of Australia.

 These changes, if not overturned by the Senate, will represent an attack on families, a  repudiation of an election promise, and a fundamental departure from non-discriminatory  policy.

 The Prime Minister, Mr Howard, has reiterated the Coalition's commitment to a non-  discriminatory policy recently. The effect of these measures, if allowed to continue, would  stand in stark contrast with such a commitment.

 I urge the support of all Senators to remove the unfairness and unnecessary hardship  contained in the Government's amendments. They offer no benefit to Australia and long term  costs and damage to the fabric of our society.

 For further information contact: George Haddad (06) 277 2178 or 0419 009 214

