---
title: "Minister disappointed at threats by refugee service"
date: "1996-11-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452951
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8U630%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 MPS 75/96

 MINISTER DISAPPOINTED AT THREATS BY REFUGEE SERVICE

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock has expressed  disappointment at the threat by the NSW Refugee and Casework Service (RACS) to  end the application assistance it provides to asylum seekers.

 "RACS NSW has indicated it will end its application assistance to asylum seekers this  Friday after becoming the only service provider unable to reach agreement with my  Department over the short-term renewal of a previously negotiated service contract,"  Mr Ruddock said.

 "My Department has successfully reached agreement with other services to fund  continuing application assistance to asylum seekers, but RACS in New South Wales  has demanded a far larger funding increase than anyone else."

 "RACS in Victoria had sought and substantiated a request for a 3% increase in their  contract. This has been accepted as reasonable and they will continue to provide  services to asylum seekers in Victoria, along with other service providers."

 "I am disappointed that RACS in Sydney has decided it can no longer negotiate after  demanding a 10% increase, which is well above the CPI.

 "We will not negotiate above 3% and will require RACS NSW to substantiate any  increase in the value of the contract."

 "Officers of my Department remain ready to resume discussions with RACS so that  asylum seekers are not inconvenienced by the position taken by the service," Mr  Ruddock said.

 Government funded application assistance is provided to eligible asylum seekers to  help them make refugee claims, both at the primary and review stages. This assists  asylum seekers to articulate their claims and contributes towards a fair and efficient 

 processing system.

 "Should RACS carry out its threat to discontinue its assistance, asylum seekers will be  directed to other Government-funded service providers in NSW," Mr Ruddock said.

 20 November 1996

 The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Parliament House, Canberra ACT 26QfO  Telephone: (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 414*4

 MEDIA CONTACT: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715 (06) 2777 860

