---
title: "Press conference, President of the United States and Prime Minister Howard, Parliament House, Canberra, 20 November 1996"
date: "1996-11-20"
creators:
  - "Clinton, Bill"
  - "Howard, John"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452940
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NT630%22
---



PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would
like to say on behalf of my government how much I have appreciated the
opportunity of talking to President Clinton so soon after his re- election.
I would like to repeat publicly the congratulations I extended to the
President privately on his re- election.

 This is a marvellous
opportunity for both of us to reaffirm the importance of our longstanding,
deep and rich association. It's an association that goes beyond the more
formal elements of a treaty or an alliance. It's an association of
like-minded people committed to common values with many shared historical
experiences, many common cultural attitudes, and above all, a very deep
commitment to democratic institutions, values and freedoms of the
individual.

 It was also for both of us an opportunity to affirm
the importance - the contemporary relevance of our partnership in the
context of our common involvement in the Asia Pacific region, where I have
said on a number of occasions that we share a common future and a common
destiny. The President and I had the opportunity in our discussion this
morning to canvas many global issues, but ones of particular relevance to
our region, and we also touched upon a number of trade issues which are of
ongoing importance in the bilateral relationship.

 I want to say
how pleased I am personally to have the opportunity with my wife, Janette,
of welcoming the President and Mrs Clinton to our country. They are very
welcome not only for themselves and the great leadership that they're giving
to their country, but also as the President and the wife of the President of
the United States.

 The President of the United States is always
welcome in Australia. And I will take the opportunity over the next couple
of days in an informal manner to continue the discussion that both us have
had this morning.

 But to you, Mr President, against publicly,
my very warm welcome. You are here as a very welcome guest and with the
goodwill of all of the Australian people.


THE PRESIDENT:Thank you very much, Prime Minister.

 Ladies and gentlemen,
I have wanted to come to Australia for a very long time. I am glad that I
have finally come. I wish I could have come earlier, and I've had so much
fun in the last day, I'm amazed that only three American Presidents have
come here. I think it ought to be a habit because of the unique partnership
that the United States and Australia have enjoyed throughout the 20th
century and indeed going back long before that.

 The Prime
Minister and I had our first personal meeting today. It was a very good one.
We talked about a lot of the things that we share in common as nations. We
talked about our common agenda to expand global trade through the World
Trade organisation and APEC where we'll both be going in a couple of days.
We talked about the work we have done to halt the spread of weapons of mass
destruction.

 And again, I want to thank in this press
conference, Mr Prime Minister, on behalf of all the American people,
Australia for the leadership that Australia exhibited in securing the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and for your support in helping us all
defreeze the North Korean nuclear program.

 We also share a
commitment to advance democratic values. We have worked on it side by side
throughout the wars of the 20th century, throughout the Cold war and now in
this new era. We've joined together in supporting human rights in Burma,
promoting the rule of law in Cambodia, helping to keep the peace in troubled
corners of the world.

 We are working hard to build on the
partnership between the United States and Australia. We talked about our
security cooperation. We're moving forward on the Sydney statement of July
which bolstered our security ties. I made a little bit of a joke about the
U.S. Marines who will soon take part in joint training exercises in North
Australia. They are, seriously, a powerful symbol and a concrete
manifestation of our pledge to protect stability in the Pacific. But they're
also, I think, apprehensive about seeing what that vast and not very
populated area holds for them. There's a lot of talk about it, Mr Prime
Minister, already in the Defence Department, and we're certainly glad that
there was no extra spaceship up there the other day. (Laughter.)

 And let me say in the Prime Minister's defence, when we started out
yesterday morning, we thought that it might land in the United States. So no
one quite knew where it was going to come down, but we're glad it wound up
in the ocean.

 Let me also say that on a very serious note for
the future, I was deeply impressed by the comments that the Prime Minister
had about the upcoming APEC leaders meeting in Subic Bay in the Philippines.
We know we have to keep this group working together to push the barriers
that still restrain global trade and to look especially for opportunities
that will enable our people to get better jobs, to lead better lives, and in
so doing, to advance the cause of the other APEC nations as well. So I am
looking forward to the Philippines.

 Australia really started
the APEC organisation. Then I convened the world leaders of the APEC nations
in Seattle in 1993 and we've been building on it ever since. It is very,
very important, now that we have a goal of free trade in the area by 2020,
now that we have a blueprint for achieving it, it is important that we
actually take some concrete steps toward implementation of our goal, from
tariff cuts to other deregulation measures. And I will be working hard for
that.

 Let me say that the area that I would like to see the
most progress in is in information technology. Currently, trade in that area
is valued at a trillion dollars. It's projected to grow over 250 per cent in
the next 10 years. And we need to do more to open up those markets in a way
that enables more people in the world to do what I saw last night when
Hillary and I came in from the airport and all the people were waving to us.
It seemed to me about one in every third person who was waving to us also
had a cellular telephone in his or her ear, talking to someone back home and
telling them about it. As I said to the Prime Minister, half the people in
the world are still two days walk from a telephone. And we have a lot of
work to do if we're going to bring the world together to minimise
misunderstanding to minimise disruption and to maximise human
opportunity.

 Let me lastly say another word about the special
relationship between the United states and Australia. We're proud to be
Australia's largest foreign investor, its second largest trading partner.
Trade between our nations was about $16 billion last year. We're also proud
to have stood side by side with Australia in the conflicts and the struggles
for peace and freedom and prosperity in this last century. And I believe
that this remarkable and wonderfully unique relationship between our two
countries is on even more solid ground as we look to the 21st century. And I
thank the Prime Minister for the reception he has given me today.

 Thank you, sir.


PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: Thank
you.


Q: Mr Prime Minister and Mr President, you
mentioned that you talked about multilateral trade issues. Can I ask did you
specifically raise Australia's trade concerns with the United States? And,
Mr President, Australian farmers are hoping for some sort of commitments
from the U.S. that the EEP and DEEP programs won't be specifically targeted
on Australia.


PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: Could I say that I
certainly did raise with the President the ongoing concern of Australia as a
major exporter of primary produce about the practice of export support and
export subsidies in the area of agriculture. And the President responded to
that and he will do so in his own words.

 But I certainly made
it very clear that that remained one of those areas in the bilateral
relationship that needed continuous attention. And it is the fact that the
Australian government believes that the existing arrangements do work
against the interests of major primary producers such as Australia. I think
it is fair to add that the prime source of the problem is not to be found
within the United States, but rather within the European Union, and that is
a view that I have expressed before and it's not a view or a reflection on
the issue that I have invented for the purposes of today's discussions. I've
frequently expressed that view and I do see many of the United States'
actions taken in the past as being in the context of responses to the
activities of the European Union.

 But our concerns on that were
certainly raised, as they have been in the past and they will be in the
future. But I was quite reassured by the responses that were made by the
President. But he will naturally deal with that in his own words.


THE PRESIDENT: The Prime Minister actually raised two trade
issues and I'd like to tell you very briefly about both of them. The first,
with regard to the EEP and the DEEP programs in agriculture, as I'm sure you
know, the United States has just adopted a new five-year farm bill which
eliminated specific program by program or crop by crop support and reduced
overall trade subsidies. We did retain the export enhancement options
because of the problems as the Prime Minister said that we have with the
European Union.

 And I committed to the Prime Minister and I
commit to you and through you, the people of Australia, that we are going to
do everything we can to make sure that any future use of these programs is
not either directly or indirectly working to the disadvantage of a country
that is innocent of any wrongdoing - in this case, Australia. And I look
forward to the day when we will have a genuinely open market in agriculture,
which would help your agricultural interest and t:he American agricultural
interest and I believe would work to the benefit of the entire world.

 The second thing the Prime Minister mentioned was the leather dispute
and let me just re- emphasise where that is.

 Mr Fischer and
Ambassador Barshefsky have been working hard to resolve this. I very much
want it resolved. We are very close to a resolution and we're going to do
everything we can to resolve it so that when we leave Manila we'll both have
smiles on our face about that. Besides that, I don't want any more cartoons
like the one I saw in the morning paper where I hooked a golf ball way left
and broken the window of the leather goods store. You need to build up my
confidence for this golf game tomorrow, not tear it down. (Laughter.) I need
all the help I can get.


Q: Mr President, the arrest of
the CIA's former station chief in Moscow is the second major spy scandal
involving Russia in the last two years. Are you going to take - is there
going to be any retaliation for this incident, and do you think that the CIA
needs to tighten its internal watchdog system?


THE
PRESIDENT: Well, Deputy Secretary Talbott has already met with the
Russians about this, number one. Number two, this is the direct result of
the tightening of the system.- This arrest comes because of the new
cooperation that I ordered between the CIA and the FBI. And I want to
compliment Mr Deutch and Mr Freeh for the work that they did and the work
their people did and I think it's a very good thing. And I'm glad that it
happened and I think that it ought to be a signal that we're going to
continue to do this and we will do what we think we have to do in
intelligence, and we don't want any people in our intelligence agency spying
for other countries, and we're going to take appropriate action when we find
it.


Q: And in Russia, or are you -- 


THE
PRESIDENT: Well, we've already had conversations with Russia and I think
I shouldn't say any more than that at this time.


Q: Mr
President, is your foreign policy - in this region China and trying to, if
you want to, ease concerns that countries such as the U.S. and Australia are
trying to contain China? And what can Australia and the U.S. realistically
do in partnership in the region?


THE PRESIDENT: China
first. I think China has to be a big priority for all of us. If I ask
everyone in this room to go by yourselves and take out a pad and write the
five big questions down that will determine the shape of the world 50 years
from now, one of those questions would surely be, how will the Chinese
define their greatness in the 21st century? Will they define their greatness
in terms of the incredible potential of their people to learn, to produce,
to succeed economically and culturally and politically? Or will they define
their greatness in terms of their ability to dominate their neighbours and
others perhaps against their will or to take other actions which could
destabilise the march toward democracy and prosperity of other people?

 The United States has no interest in containing China. That is a
negative strategy. What the united States wants is to sustain an engagement
with China, along with our friends like the Australians, in a way that will
increase the chances that there will be more liberty and more prosperity and
more genuine cooperation in the future. So I intend to spend a lot of time,
a lot of energy, a lot of effort on that, but not with a view of containing
the Chinese, but with a view of making them a genuine partner with ourselves
and others as we move forward.

 What can we and the Australians
do? Number one, we can continue to push open trading systems that work to
the benefit of all involved. Number two, we can continue to work together as
we did with the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty to continue to reduce
the dangers of serious weapons. And number three, we can lead other
freedom-loving nations in standing up against the new threats of the 21st
century-- terrorism and the proliferation of other weapons, biological and
chemical weapons. There are a lot of things we can do together that will
make a big difference. But I see this in the context of building a
partnership with China, not isolating it.


Q: The crisis
in Zaire appears to be easing significantly. Is it still necessary to
dispatch American troops?


THE PRESIDENT: The real answer
to that question is that we have not made a final decision. Tony Lake went
to canada yesterday to confer with the Prime Minister and others. We are
very pleased, obviously, that so many of the refugees are able to move
freely back into Rwanda. He are urgently concerned about the continuing
humanitarian problems there and have allocated about $140 million in U.S.
AID funds to try to deal with those problems. And I expect to receive a
recommendation shortly. We are continuing to explore with our allies what
sort of mission needs to go there, what its composition should be, what the
remaining problems should be.

 There's no question that the
situation looks better than it did a couple of days ago. It's also no
question the that possibility of serious human loss is still there. So we're
working it hard. We'll try to resolve what we ought to do. We're working
with our allies and I will give you an answer just as quickly as I can. But
we have already allocated a significant amount of money to try to alleviate
the nutritional and other problems that we know the refugees are going to
have.


Q: Mr President, you mentioned the shared
commitment of Australia and the United States to human rights. A number of
members of your party have proposed that you raise in discussions with
President Soeharto the idea of a U.N.-sponsored act of self-determination or
referendum in East Timor. What is your view of that proposition? And I'd
like to ask Mr Howard the same question - what is your view of a
U.N.-sponsored act of self-determination in East Timor?


THE
PRESIDENT: You said people in my party have said that I should do that?
They haven't discussed that with me. (Laughter.)

 Let me say,
without answering the specific question, because I haven't made a decision
about that, let me say, I have been concerned about the whole question of
East Timor from the first time I first heard about it. The United States
has, while maintaining basically constructive and friendly relationships
with Indonesia and working with Indonesia on the whole wide array of shared
foreign policy concerns, has consistently done more in the last three years
than we have previously. We changed our arms export policy to try to not
sell those arms which could be most likely to be used to put down a civilian
rebellion or to oppress people's human rights - not in any country, but with
our sales toward Indonesia. We have co- sponsored the resolution in East
Timor in the United Nations.

 And Indonesia is a very large,
very great, very rapidly growing country with a massive amount of diversity
-- both ethnic diversity and religious diversity. This is one area where
they have not been able to manage it successfully. And we will continue to
try to work to do what we can to resolve this in a way that is consistent
with what I believe are universal values with regard to human rights and
human dignity.


PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: As far as we are
concerned, that's not an issue that I previously addressed my mind to, so,
like the President, I won't specifically try and respond to it. But let me
say that the East Timor issue is obviously a sensitive elements of the
relationship between Australia and Indonesia and,

 indeed, the
relationship between Indonesia and other countries. You will all be aware of
the great importance of the bilateral relationship between both Australia
and Indonesia. There will always be differences of view about how different
issues should be handled between our two countries. But my government and
governments before mine of both political persuasions have shown a
determination not to allow that issue to contaminate or undermine the
broader relationship.

 And the significance of the bilateral
relationship between Australia and Indonesia is only surpassed by our
bilateral relationships with one or two other countries. And it's,
therefore, important in everything that we do to try and keep a proper
balance between our desire to foster that relationship, but, by the same
token, to properly put down markers of errors and values in errors and
attitudes and also, of course, to fully respect the fact that within a
democracy such as Australia, people will openly and vigorously express their
views on this issues. And it is no part of the role of the Australian
government to prevent or discourage that. That is a point that I made in my
own personal discussions with President Soeharto when I saw him in Jakarta a
couple of months ago.

 Thank you.


Q: Thanks
very much.


Q: Mr President, if I could just follow up on
the Indonesia question with your indulgence with the Prime Minister. These
stories now coming out back home in the United States - - dribs and drabs
about John Huang's phone calls to his former business associates at the
Lippo Group when he was a Commerce Department official - 70 phone calls,
we're now told - is information that was available before the election, but
only coming out now - and other suggestions that some of your aides were
urging other aides over their objections not to release all of this
information once you had it - aren't you concerned that the impression is
going to be created that you're trying to stonewall, that you do have
something to hide? Isn't it better just to come clean and release everything
right away instead of letting it just come out piecemeal like this?


THE PRESIDENT: Well, for one thing, one of the things that we
have learned the hard way is that when you release something as soon as you
have it, then somebody is always saying, well, why didn't you release
something else. I don't personally see any problem with any of the
information that I've seen so far. I think we should answer whatever
questions are asked. I've told everybody else to do the same thing. But, you
know, I've personally, I've answered the questions that were asked of me in
a way I think are entirely appropriate, and I think that's what everybody
else should do. And I don't think there's a real issue there.

Q: - come forward and answer these questions publicly?

THE PRESIDENT: I believe that - let me just say this - I believe that
everyone will have to deal with that in his or her own way. But one of the
things I would urge you to do, remembering what happened to Mr Jewel in
Atlanta, remembering what has happened to so many of the accusations over
the last four years made against me that turned out to be totally baseless,
I just think that we ought to make sure we've got - we ought to just get the
facts out and they should be reported. That's what I've encouraged everybody
to do and that's what we'll do.

 Thank you very much.


PRIME MINISTER HOWARD: Thanks very much. 

