---
title: "Costello fails to answer the charge"
date: "1996-02-22"
creators:
  - "Baldwin, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211448656
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TKR20%22
---

   " 

  MPS 28/96 

  Minister for 

  Social Security  Peter Baldwin 

  ME D I A RELEASE 

  COSTELLO FAILS TO ANSWER THE CHARGE 

  Shadow Treasurer Peter Costello has completely failed to answer the charges  against the costings of his proposed social security savings, Social Security Minister  Peter Baldwin said today. 

  "In fact, the document released late yesterday by Mr Costello makes no serious  attempt to answer the charges," Mr Baldwin said. 

  "The Opposition thinks it can slide into Office with bluster and blarney. That is all  Mr Costello has put forward as a defence. 

  "His statement ignores the points we have made against his costings. 

  "In relation to extending the waiting period for migrants, he still thinks he can get ten  times the savings from three times the measure we introduced. He is wrong. 

  "In relation to activity test savings, he continues to pretend he can simply reduce  outlays by 3% without saying how the activity test would be tightened. 

  "And in relation to his 'pension bonus plan', he has completely ignored the costing  by the Department of Social Security I released last week . 

  "He doesn't even pretend to defend his mythical $180 million from unspecified  action on social security fraud. 

  "We claimed on Friday that he has over-estimated the savings from these four  measures alone by $1,167 million over three years. 

  "Mr Costello has said nothing to disprove that claim," Mr Baldwin said. 

  SYDNEY 22 FEBRUARY 1996 

  FURTHER INFORMATION : Lynne Adams 

  (06) 277-7560  015-488-007 

  2 

  ATTACHMENT 

  DETAILED REBUTTAL OF COALITION'S COSTINGS OF SOCIAL SECURITY  SAVINGS 

  INCREASING MIGRANT WAITING PERIOD TO TWO YEARS 

  When we introduced a six-month waiting period for migrants, we estimated that it  would save $61 .5 million over the first three years. 

  Peter Costello thinks that three times the measure will generate about ten times the  savings! 

  In fact, as the Treasurer indicated on Monday, three times the measure will generate  less than three times the saving. 

  This fact was made clear in an answer to a Question on Notice from Senator Short  (Senate Hansard, 22 November 1995, p 3821). Senator Short was told that, even  with a six-month waiting period, 37,558 people received benefits within six months  of granting of permanent residence in the two years to October 1995 . These would  have been refugees and people who received Special Benefit -people the  Opposition says that it would protect. In the same period, only 52,997 people  received benefits within two years of being granted permanent residence. 

  What this means is that the overwhelming majority of the savings to be reaped in  this area were reaped by the six-month waiting period introduced by the  Government. 

  Mr Costello would impose substantial hardship on a small number of people for very  little saving. The Coalition has ignored this information it was given -because it  was too inconvenient. 

  The Access Economics paper released by Mr Costello makes it clear that its  costings are based on analysis conducted at the time of Fightback! And even then  it concedes that the Coalition's costings are $94 million too high. But as the  Government has made clear, that costing was based on a number of assumptions  about the migrant intake and eligibility for Special Benefit which means that the  previous costing is completely useless. Either that or the Coalition is lying about its  intentions regarding migration policy. 

  CUT THREE PERCENT FROM UNEMPLOYMENT PAYMENTS 

  Mr Costello's document continues to claim that savings of 3% are to be had from  tightening the Activity Test on unemployed people without saying how the Test is to  be tightened. Apparently the public might be told in the Coalition's Social Security  policy -which has yet to be released, nine days away from the election. 

  3 

  As I made clear on Monday, breaches of the Activity Test are "punished" by  suspending people for a period of time - 2 weeks for people unemployed less than  12 months , 4 weeks for those unemployed for 12 to 18 months, 6 weeks for those  unemployed over 18 months , and with a cumulative additional 6 weeks for each  subsequent breach. 

  With an average suspension period of 6 weeks, to save 3% of outlays requires that  26% of recipients be suspended at some time (that is, 3% multiplied by 52 weeks  divided by 6 weeks) . That is equivalent to around 200,000 people. 

  To suggest that this proportion of unemployed people are not genuinely looking for  work is outrageous, and to suggest that a completely unspecified change to the  administration of the Activity Test could result in such a number being discovered is  absurd. 

  Mr Costello has now shifted ground and suggested that all he needs to do is to  move 23,000 people into employment. The problem with this argument is that -even if these people could be identified -tighter administration of the Activity Test  does not actually create any jobs. All he would achieve is to re-shuffle the  composition of the unemployment pool, with little impact on overall numbers  unemployed and hence little impact on the cost of unemployment payments . 

  And the Opposition has yet to say why its view has changed from that expressed by  Employment spokesperson David Kemp last April, when he said that 

  "We will not be making any other proposals to toughen the work test. The  toughening has already occurred." 

  PENSION BONUS PLAN 

  Mr Costello has completely ignored the Department of Social Security costing of this  proposal I released last Friday. The briefing note provided by the Department to me  last April was based on a proper assessment of a real proposal in this area - if a  benign saving of this nature was available, I would have been very keen to take it  up. 

  However, I did not take it up because that costing showed that the proposal would  build-in a substantial cost to the Budget as time went past. 

  It also showed that, depending on take-up assumption, the three-year savings from  such a "bonus" might total $25 million in the first three years -compared with Mr  Costello's estimate of $290 million. 

  Mr Costello believes there would be a take-up rate of 20% -at least double any  level the Department was prepared to find credible in the work it undertook for me . 

  4 

  Yet Mr Costello ignores the displacement effect of people postponing their  retirement. Later retirement would mean higher unemployment among younger  people -but Mr Costello makes no allowance for higher unemployment payments. 

  Mr Costello also assumes that he can completely avoid "windfall" gains to people  who postpone their retirement in any case . The fact is that there are some 60,000  people over the age of 65 in full-time work at present. A large proportion of these  would qualify for the age pension if they were to give up work, and so would have no  difficulty meeting the requirements Mr Costello says he would impose on them .  Indeed, such requirements were part of the proposal considered by my Department  last April. Even so, the Department considered that 30% of existing deferrals would  be eligible for the "bonus" and so receive the windfall gain. 

  SOCIAL SECURITY FRAUD 

  Mr Costello's latest effort makes absolutely no attempt to defend his assumption that  he can save $180 million over three years from unspecified action against social  security fraud. 

  We have said that we will save $41 .2 million from an additional 60,000 reviews of  entitlements -in addition to the 2.2 million reviews conducted annually at present. 

  Mr Costello's silence implicitly admits that his additional "saving" is bogus . I assume  that he will drop all further reference to it. 

