---
title: "Labor's Foreign Policy: address to the Rotary International World Understanding Month dinner, Noble Park, [Melbourne], 15 February 1996"
date: "1996-02-15"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Melbourne"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211448449
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/08R20%22
---

  LABOR'S FOREIGN POLICY 

  Address by the Hon Ga reth Evans OC, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to the Rotary  International World Understanding Month Dinner, Noble Park, 15 February 1996 

  This election comes at a critically important time for Australia in world and regional 

  affairs. We are, as we all know and can sense, living through one of the greatest  periods of change the world has ever kn0Wll, and it's a period in which we simply have  to constantly position ourselves to shape the world and the region in ways that protect  and advance Australia's national interests. 

  It is a period which is extraordinarily exciting, one in which it is possible to see the  previously unseeable and imagine the previously unimaginable - to grasp for  ourselves and our children what was previously out of reach. 

  We can see the Asia Pacific region, the most dynamic in the world, but until recently  the most protected, working now towards the complete elimination of trade barriers,  with all that potentially means is massive income gains for Australians. 

  We can see the countries of the Asia Pacific region, tradition ally among the world's  most mutually hostile, agreeing now to work towards achieving security with each .  other, rather than against each other. 

  We can see - if not it happening, at least.the -possibility of-a United Nations that is  reformed and re-equipped to meet the challenges of the new century. 

  We can see a world well on its way to eliminating chemical weapons, and we can now  imagine a world completely free of nuclear weapons. 

  We can see, we can imagine, all these things. But we can do more than that: we can  actually help to make them happen. The task for Australia in 1996 is really to grab  that opportunity, now and in the years ahead. 

  In foreign affairs and trade, this election as a consequence really comes down quite 

  simply to a choice between continuing to make things happen, and turning the clock 

  [V/96] 

  2 

  back. I know that, this being election time, you will be expecting me to be speaking in  pugnacious political mode rather than my more normal dulcet statesman mode. So let 

  me not disappoint you. This election comes down to a very clear choice between, on  the one hand, a team of proven leadership, vision, stamina, and professionalism - and,  on the other hand, the others! 

  I think I can fairly claim that Labor's team - the Prime Minister, Bob McMullan, and  myself - and before that Bob Hawke, Bill Hayden, and a number of others, have  brought three key attributes to our conduct of foreign policy: vision, style and results, 

  and we also have a clear ongoing agenda. So let me discuss each of those elements in  tum. 

  Vision. The first key attribute that Labor has brought to managing Australia's foreign  relations is our vision - our clearly articulated ideas about Australia's place in the  region, and the world, of the 1990s and beyond. 

  We've been in office through a period, as I began by saying, of really quite  extraordinary change - in the world, with the end of the Cold War, and in the region,  with the emergence of East Asia as the fastest growing region in the world. We've  been in office, moreover, at a time when the communications and information  technology revolutions have been fundamentally changing the way in which  businesses, governments, and peoples around the world have been relating to each  other. And throughout that period of change we've had, and have been artiCUlating,  what can fairly be described as very clear headed and realistic understanding of  Australia's national interests, and how they might best be advanced and protected .. 

  We have defined those interests first of all in very traditional ways, as geo-political  and strategic interests on the one hand, economic interests on the other. But we've  gone further than that. We've added a third dimension, to reflect the rapidly growing  sense of international interdependence which has been one of the real characteristics of  the 1980s and 1990s: that's our national interest in being, and being seen to be, a good  international citizen. This means, basically, being willing to grapple cooperatively  with other countries, and in institutions like t~ UN, with a series of problems and  issues which are inherently worth resolving, but which are for the most part beyond  the capacity of anyone country to resolve alone: problems like cross-border  environment issues, refugee problems, terrorism, drug trafficking, health pandemics  like AIDS, and a great many human rights problems. 

  3 

  Generally, we've tried to build our foreign policy in a way which recognises that while  we have a number of assets that we can deploy in the pursuit of these interests (and I'll  come to those in a moment when I talk about the style of Australian foreign policy),  we also have to recognise our limitations. As a middle power, nor a great power, not a 

  major power, we don't have the clout militarily, economically or politically, to rely on  anything other than our capacity to persuade - a capacity wh:ich is often best applied  by building coalitions of the like-minded. But even then on(~ can't do this across an  endlessly wide front: we have to be selective in the kind of issllJes that we deal with. 

  So the sustaining model which emerges, when you pull those elements together, is of  Australia as a middle power with a strong Asia Pacific orientation, pursuing  confidently, actively and (as necessary) selectively, clearly dlefined interests - geo "

  political and strategic, economic and good international citizenship in character - and  pursuing those interests at global, regional and bilateral levels as appropriate. 

  The essence of this approach is that one doesn't react to situations, or doesn't  proactively generate initiatives, on a willy-nilly, ad hoc basis. One tries rather to  develop a sense of how everything fits together: which issues are rational and  productive for Australia to pursue - and, just as importantly, which are the issues to  which it doesn't make sense for us to allocate priority effort and resources. 

  The vision that I am talking about is what I have tried very hard to articulate in a series  of published writings, including the book on Australia S Foreign Relations, now in a  second edition; the "Blue Book" so called on Cooperating for Peace which was  launched at the UN in 1993, and which has become somethiing of a reference work  internationally on the UN's peace and security role; and a number of published  articles, including in the US journal Foreign Policv last year on "Cooperative Security 

  and Intrastate Conflict" which won the Grawemeyer Prize for Ideas Improving World  Order. 

  So we do know what we want to do. We do know how we want to get there. We do  know how to prioritise our resources to maximise our influence. And we've been  spelling all that out in detail over and over again. I don't want to be too rude about  "io. 

  this, but I think if you ask Alexander Downer for his conceptual framework for  Australian foreign policy, I think he'll have to say that the dog :ate it! 

  Style. Labor has the vision. It has the conceptual framework.. But it also has what it  takes to achieve that vision, what I like to call the style of foreign policy. 

  4 

  Achievements such as APEC's regional commitment to free trade by 2020 don't just  happen. They have to be made to happen. But what arc the qualities that enable  things to happen? Two things in particular - and they are two big assets that Australia  has been conspicuously deploying. 

  The first requirement, and the first asset which we are, universally I think,  acknowledged to possess, is creativity. Some examples: 

  - the concept of APEC itself which was initiated in 1989 and the subsequent  development of APEC Leader's meetings, from which developed in tum the  2010/2020 free trade vision; 

  - the concept of an Asia Pacific regional security dialogue forum, modelled loosely 

  on the CSCE (now OSCE - Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe); 

  - the UN peace plan for Cambodia; 

  - the concept of Indian Ocean regional cooperation, to be developed initially through  so-called "second track" strategies; 

  - the endgame devised for the Chemical Weapons Convention negotiations; 

  - the concept of "cooperative security" as the sustaining theme of a post-Cold War  UN peace and security agenda; 

  - the concept of the "East Asian Hemisphere" as a way of describing the region of  which we are a part, but without going so far as to insist that we are a "part of  Asia" or a "part of East Asia", which both Asians and Australians find counter "

  intuitive; 

  - the approach to regional and bilateral security embodied in the Australia Indonesia  Mutual Security Agreement signed just before Christmas; and 

  "'" - the idea of the Canberra Commission as a means of advancing the achievement of  a nuclear weapons free world. 

  f 

  5 

  The second big requirement, apart from creativity, is energy and stamina - sheer hard  work sustained persistently over long periods of time. I think we have amply  demonstrated our capacity to do just that. 

  There are some other critical components in the style of Australian diplomacy under  Labor. We have been activist - working with like minded JX~ople around the region 

  and the world to build new institutions and to encourage the kind of international 

  behaviour that will make the world a better place obviously for Australians. We have 

  been engaged. Under no previous Government have miuisters developed such 

  extensive ties with their counterparts and relevant sectors in Asia. We took the  deliberate decision that if we wanted Australians to think differently about Asia, we 

  had to take the lead, establish the dialogue, open the doorways to practical cooperation. 

  We have been, I think I could reasonably claim, articulate. If you want to know what  this Government's vision is, it will be said you can find in the books, the speeches, the 

  articles which litter the landscape and do spell it all out. And we have been inclusive -drawing on the expertise and strength of Australian industry, unions and academics; 

  making sure our policy does pass the test of critical scrutiny from experts. With one or 

  two inevitable exceptions, I think we have passed that test. 

  Record. What about the results achieved by all this? I think we can credibly claim a  great deal in the region, bilaterally and globally. Let me take each in tum. 

  Under Labor, Australia really has become fully enmeshed as a political and economic  player in the Asia Pacific region, where the action internationally now is. First of all  with APEC: an Australian initiative in 1989f-and now firmly cemented as the key  regional body for enhancing the economic development of the Asia Pacific region. It 

  is worth remembering that when Australians last voted at a: federal election, Asia  Pacific regional leaders had never met together to discuss -common regional concerns. -But thanks to the initiat ive of Paul Keating, APEC summits have now in that short  space of time become fixed items on our regional calendar. 

  Secondly, the Asean Regional Forum (ARF): not as weIl known as APEC but already 

  becom ing the key forum for addressing and enhancing Asia Pacific security. Let's  ..... 

  again not forget that wh en Australians last voted, there had never been a meeting of 

  regional countries, all the key players, to discuss common security issues. In July 1990 

  I made the suggestion at the ASEAN Dialogue Forum, along with my Canadian  counterpart, that there should be such a dialogue - informal, confidence building, 

  cooperative in character. The Opposition, I recall, pooh-poobed the idea at the time, 

   " 

  6 

  but it was - after a cautious start -taken seriously in the region. In July 1994 the first  meeting was held, with another one last year, and a third ministerial meeting coming  up later this year. The process is evolving and advancing. 

  Of course it's the case that security relations between the major powers in our region -the US, Japan, China, Russia - will continue to define much of the region's security  environment, and old fashioned realist power balancing has by no means run its  course. But there is growing support for running, alongside that, trust and confidence  building measures, preventive diplomacy and cooperative non-proliferation strategies:  there is real potential to strengthen cooperative approaches to security in all these  respects. Last year's meeting, for example, did a great deal to defuse the tensions that  had been at that stage rapidly building up in the South China Sea issue. 

  Cambodia is another regional success story for Australia . This was not just an internal  issue, horrific as it there was, but a regional security issue because it involved all the 

  key regional players as sponsors or patrons or participants in one way in the conflict,  and of course the global superpowers as well. I am very proud to have taken up the  work that was started, admirably, by Bill Hayden, to bring about the international  solution that did eventually deliver Cambodia from those two decades of horror, giving  it the ability to elect a democratic government so that the Cambodian peoples could  determine their own fate, free of external influence, free of Khmer Rouge terror.  Whatever they're making of that freedom at the moment - there are always  disappointments along the way when countries are struggling to throw off experiences  of this kind - there is no doubt the country is now working out its own destiny free of  those other horrific constraints. 

  No one individual can take credit for all that. But Australia did undou~tedly p~y a  crucial role, in particular through producing and selling diplomatically the so-called  'Red Book' in January 1990 which broke the deadlock, shaped the final settlement, and  created conditions for peace. I can't help but recall throughout the long years we were  working on the peace process the chorus of cynics, particularly on the Opposition side,  led by Senator Hill who was then the Shadow Minister, who guffawed and carped and 

  insisted that it couldn't be done: right up until the time that we did it. ..... 

  In the South Pacific sub region within the Asia Pacific, Australia has continued to play  a leadership role, perhaps best demonstrated at the last South Pacific Forum here in  Brisbane in 1994 when Paul Keating, with major input from Gordon Bilney, really did 

  win the acceptance around the region for a new, much mare mature, approach to our 

  7 

  cooperative partnership: one which dealt far more systematically than hitherto with  the problems of managing micro-economies, of creating sustainable economic  environments, in societ ies coping at the same time with very real challenges of  international economic impact. 

  We have, moreover, in the context of France's testing in the South Pacific, been key  players in mobilising and supporting the opposition to that - as earlier we were the  architect of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone itself, now at long last about to be  signed by the US, UK and France. 

  What has the Opposition to say about all these regional issues? It is reasonable to  query the extent of the Opposition's commitment. There has been none of the hard  yards put into becoming involved with the countries, with the key players of the  region, that has been characteristic of so many individual ministers in this Labor  government. The truth of the matter is that - with the partial exception of Tim Fischer,  who has strived hard over the years to make some acquaintances and develop some  relationships in South and South East Asia - it just is the case that the Opposition  leadership team in foreign affairs doesn't know the region, and is not known by it,  certainly to the extent necessary if we are going to continue the kind of progress that  we've made. Alexander Downer made clear on television the other night how much  ground he has to make up when he couldn't name the current Prime Minister of  Thailand. 

  To make up for that very obvious deficiency, John Howard has been taking recently to  listing all the Coalition's great achievements in Asia. He has been harking back to the  Colombo Plan in 1950, the trade treaty signed with Japan by Black Jack McEwen in  1957, and Malcolm Fraser's Pacific Economic Cooperation Council in 1980. All of  them, I frankly acknowledge, were very worthy achievements for their time. But they  are hardly evidence of a contemporary feel for the reality of the region, which has  made an art form of rapid, ceaseless change. Of course, in any of these lists of  Coalition achievements in Asia, one will search in vain for any reference to the tragic  miscalculation of Vietnam. 

  ',,", 

  Alexander Downer is making the same mistake. In his Young Liberals address last  month, he had this really rather extraordinary thing to say about the Coalition's attitude  to Asia. He said this: 

  ., 

  f 

  8 

  It was through our close links with the US, UK and France that we [that is,  the conservative Australian government of the day] were able to exercise  more influence over the destiny of South East Asia between thirty and  forty years ago than we do today. Everyone has been conveniently  persuaded to forget that today. 

  But surely the whole point of the changes that have swept the region is that it is  absolutely not the role of Australia, let alone the US, UK or France, to exercise  "influence over the destiny" of South East Asia. South East Asia has chaiiged. It-_â‘  perceives itself, and others perceive it very differently from that. Only it seems the  Liberal Party hasn't changed. 

  But we've seen in all of this, and in many other statements, that there is a kind of old  thinking in the Coalition of a kind that really does worry leaders and commentators  around the Asia Pacific region. This sentiment was expressed very cogently in the  Singapore Business Times for example, on 10 October last year, two days after John  Howard made his big speech about defence in which he raised the spectre again of the  threats from the north: 

  Perhaps Mr Howard is again out to stoke up a little paranoia about Australia's  immediate northern neighbours to buttress his voter support among Australians  of European descent. He should know that strutting around like this would only  make him open to attach about his credibility if he does gain office ... How is he  going to deal with South East Asian leaders? 

  This is a question I think that has to be answered. It is the case that Asian leaders will  immediately see John Howard for what he is: a man of the past; a man who is not  comfortable with Asia; a man the likes of whom simply hasn't strutted the world stage  since - well, since the last time a Coalition governed Australia . 

  Of course Alexander Downer may not be going to have the same problem, because he  told us in an interview recently that he is not going to spend nearly as much time  overseas as I do! This is an original approach, it Q.as to be acknowledged, for a Foreign 

  Minister. 

  Our bilateral ties are something to which we give an enormous amount of weight and  attention to as part of our larger strategy of engagement in the region and indeed other 

  parts of the world as well. We've been regularly lashed for our alleged indifference, or 

   " 

  9 

  incomplete enthusiasm, for that part of the foreign policy equation: Mr Howard has  regularly promised that greatcr priority will be given to bilatcr ~11 relations, with Asia in 

  particular. 

  At the outset on this, I do want to make the fairly obvious poiint that bilateral ties are  not an end in themselves. One does not have good bilateral relations with another  country merely for the sake of Good Relations. Good relations are no more than a  means to protect or advance Australia's national interests, in the context of building  peace and prosperity with the relevant region of the globe. All that said, of course 

  bilateral relations are important, and under Labor we have bee.n assiduously nurturing  them right around the world, but particularly in the Asia Pacific: region. 

  With Indonesia our bilateral relationship has obviously never been better, the  demonstration of that being of course the mutual Security Agreement with Indonesia  signed last year. Just two days before it was signed, of course, we had Alexander  Downer saying that the AustralialIndonesia relationship was still in tatters; it hadn't 

  improved over thirteen years in government; it was still full of difficulties! On East  Timor let me just say very quickly now that the strength of our relationship with  Indonesia has not in any way inhibited our capacity or our Willingness to express our  concerns. On the contrary , to the extent that anyone is going to be helpful and 

  influential in advancing the cause of East Timorese people I think it can possibly be us. 

  As to Malaysia and Singapore. the character of our relations hip I think hardly needs  re-emphasis from me, in the aftermath of the very successful recent Prime Minister's  visit. Wi th Vietnam, we have amply'derri()nstra ted Qui undersUinding of the course of"  historical development of that country. We have not over-stated its economic  significance, but it is difficult to understate its long term signifiicance as a key player in  our region. And here again, I have to say that John Howard has blown it very badly:  in his stated unwillingness, shared by his Shadow Foreign Minister, to meet Do Muoi,  the Communist Party Leader, and absolutely key figure in Vietnam at the moment, he 

  has deeply insulted the Vietnamese government in a way that simply won't be  forgotten. And this is just a very silly set of priorities to be giving to our important  international relationships. 

  With the United States, which we are again accused of neglecting, it is the case that our  relationship is as warm and as positive and as constructive as I can ever recall it being.  Moreover, it extends to both sides of the political sense and it will be perfectly  sustainable whatever the future course US politics takes .. It is a relationship that is 

  ' j 

   " 

  10 

  strong right across, as you would expect, the political and strategic and the economic  dimensions. It's so close that it does enable us to take on the United States where we  believe this is demanded, as often, for example, in the context of the argument about  economic protection by the US towards its grain growing farmers at the expense of  ours. What we haven't done is confuse conceptually the nature of our relationship with  the United States, and indeed the nature of our global responsibilities. We haven't  confused the issues in the way, for example, that Tim Fischer has on so many  occasions dangling the prospect of the Australian support for the Joint Facilities being  used as some sort of bargaining ploy to trade off against our concerns with aspects of  US trade policy. 

  With Japan, we have an extraordinarily fully rounded relationship, no longer just one  dimensional economic, but very mature, very close, and very cooperative politically.  With China, we have also a very sound long standing relationship with a country that  is obviously already, but is going to become even more so, the giant of the region. If  US growth continues, as it is likely to in the next two or three decades, by no more  than about 2.5 per cent annually, and China continues at rather less than it is at the  moment, say 7 per cent annually, then by 2020 the Chinese economy will be bigger  than that of the United States. Now that's a huge development, and one that is making  everybody in the region think about the possible consequences accordingly. But in our  relationship with China, we haven't played the containment game : we are in the  engagement business. The Chinese know that, understand it, and appreciate it as the  only sensible business to be in. 

  With Papua New Guinea, which again we are periodically accused of neglecting, let  me say just this. We have had a somewhat bumpy, rocky road to run, particularly over  the last twelve months as Papua New Guinea has gone through a period of quite  extraordinary economic difficulty, not to mention the continuing political difficulties  involved in the BougainviIIe issue and related developments. We've got through that  period in a way that has made the relationship, I believe, stronger and more  constructive than it's ever been. That was the feeling of all the participants at the  Ministerial Forum meeting at Kavieng late last year. It was reflected in a letter which I  received just before Christmas from the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, Sir ,.,..  Julius Chan, who said that the relationship between Australia and Papua New Guinea 

  "has matured even further and risen to new levels of goodwill and mutual advantage".  So those of you who might be minded to think that something has gone wrong in that  particular relationship, please have regard for the evidence. 

  11 

  As for Europe, finally, it has been suggested that somehow we can't walk and talk and  chew gum at the same time - that it must be a zero-sum gain; that our preoccupation  with the Asia Pacific must be to the neglect of our relationship with Europe. Not true,  as demonstrated by the agreement to negotiate, as has been proceeding at the moment, 

  a major framework agreement on trade cooperation. And true, as demonstrated by a  statement from the European Union on 31 January "Australia has sought to bring the  country close to its Asian neighbours without diminishing the economic, political and  cultura l influence that is traditionally part of Europe". 

  That's all as to regional matters. As to our performance globally, I think it is again fair  to say that Australia is a respected and influential player in global affairs. We do of  course acknowledge, being the size we are and having the influence that we have, that  we can only play on a sek ctive niche basis. But we do have areas where we perceive  ourselves capable of genuinely adding value. There are a great many global 

  institutions in flux, and a great many in which a country like Australia, with our  creative and energetic diplomacy, can make a difference. 

  I think UN Reform in all its different aspects will continue to be one area in which we  will get runs on the board. The achievement so far I think has been to change a lot of  vocabulary in the way in which governments and the UN itself talks about its role, and  to get the agenda set. The real achievement of course will be down the track a little  further as we implement that, and get a more professional structure and funding, and a  Security Council better reflecting contemporary realities . I hope we will be able to  pursue all this as a member of the Security Council, after the vote later this year. 

  Again globally we've played a significant role in the GAIT, now the World Trade  Organisation, with our convening of the Cairns Group of fair trading agriculture  countries being a very crucial dimension in the successful conclusion of the Uruguay  Round: so successful, in fact, that a few wounds are still being nursed by the  Europeans about our effectiveness on that occasion. 

  With arms control and disarmament, we did play what is widely acknowledged to be a  critica l role in the endgame of the Chemical We apons Convention. And we did play,  ''Iio. 

  whatever the Opposition might like to say to the contrary, :a crucial leading role,  acknowledged by the French government, in the campaign against nuclear testing:  President Chirac is on the record acknowledging that. We were one of the countries at  the forefront of the global extension achieved in May last year on the Nuclear Non "

  Proliferation Treaty. We have long been a key sponsor of the Comprehensive Test 

  12 

  Ban Treaty and I hope to be in a position within the next month or so to announce  some further developments in that respect in the negotiations that are now proceeding  in Geneva. And we have now embarked on possibly the most exciting and far sighted  step of all: to map through the Canberra Commission the way to actual elimination of  nuclear weapons from the face of the earth. This enterprise provoked the astonishing  sight of Tim Fischer saying he would "scrap" the Canberra Commission, and  Alexander Downer saying that - notwithstanding it was a "stunt" - the Coalition  would "allow [it] to complete its report". A typical Coalition performance. 

  On environmental issues, apart from our role in negotiating conventions on  biodiversity, climate change and hazardous waste, key achievements have been the  banning of mining and oil drilling, effectively in perpetuity, in the Antarctic and the  establishment of the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. 

  On human rights we continue to make something around 500 inter-governmental 

  representations each year on behalf of individuals and groups - almost certainly more  than is done by any other country. We argue that human rights, as enshrined in the  International Declaration Covenants, are universal values and should be honoured  everywhere. I don't hesitate to raise these issues personally in meetings with foreign  ministers, presidents and prime ministers: it can be done, politely but firmly. And  when I say I raise these issues, I mean it: unlike Alexander Downer last year who  claimed that he had raised these issues with visiting Foreign Minister Cam, and was  immediately wrapped over the knuckles for his inaccuracy in a press release issued by  the Vietnamese Embassy later that day. 

  More publicly and visibly, we have been prominent voices in advancing human right  causes of great sensitivity, including the situations in East Timor, and  Burma/Myanmar. We have initiated significant human rights dialogues through visits  to China and Vietnam. We helped establish the Independent National Commission on 

  human rights in Jakarta . And against the protests, scepticism and downright cynicism  of the Opposition (Malcolm Fraser personally, honourably, excepted), we played a key  role in ending apartheid in South Africa, not least through our development and 

  advocacy of the concept of financial sanctions. ~ 

  Agenda for the Future. So much for the record to date. A good deal of the basic  design work has been done and some of the architecture is in place, but a lot of the  building remains to be done at both global and regional levels. There are nine broad  areas I would identify as being central to the future agenda of the next Labor 

  f 

  13 

  Government. The first five of them have a regional flavour, which reflects the  emphasis Prime Minster Keating gave to regional themes in his Singapore lecture in 

  January. 

  First, we will make further progress on regional trade liberalisation through APEC.  Nobody doubts that the process of reconciling national intelrests, finding domestic  consensus within eighteen separate economies and coordinating these efforts over time  so as to maintain mutual confidence will be a huge test of regional commitment. But  there is no better group to maintain the momentum than the l(~ership of.this Labor-. -Government. 

  Secondly, we will press ahead with further action on the Asia Pacific security agenda,  through strategies designed to build trust and confidence:, develop preventive  diplomacy and prevent weapons proliferation. The ARF process has got off to a good  start, but it needs constant nurturing, tending and stimulating. 

  Thirdly, we will press ahead to win greater recognition of the urgent environmental  agenda in the Asia Pacific. As Paul Keating said in his Singapore Lecture last month,  we will need to see protection of the environment in the Asia Pacific, not as an  alternative to economic growth, but as the only thing that will ensure its continuation, 

  and we will be seeking to ensure that environmental issues realily are fully integrated  into APEC's work in a way that is not the case so far. 

  Fourthly, I want to develop further acceptance of the concept of the "East Asian  Hemisphere" as a way of describing. the larger _:region,embracing . East Asia, of-which --.  we are a part - but doing so in a way which articulates our sense of belonging to it  without in any way at the same time undermining the larger significance of the Asia 

  Pacific region, or the relevance of the -regibnar entities of the South Pacific and the  Indian Ocean as part of our repertoire as well. 

  Fifthly, I want to continue to do a lot of work on Indian Ocean regional cooperation,  something that we began last year at our large inaugural Forum in Perth in conjunction  with the West Australian Government: a very C20perative meeting which set going a  whole new agenda to take advantage of new realities . These realities are that South  Africa has joined the real world; India since 1991 has joined the international  community economically by coming out of its very inward looking shell; and we have  the potential, with the triangle including Australia as a base, of really getting some 

  momentum and dynamism into that region. The main emphasis is necessarily 

  f 

  14 

  economIC, but this has potential to stretch out into all sorts of other areas of  cooperation including security cooperation as well. 

  Sixth, on the global agenda for the future will concentrate in the first instance on our 

  nuclear disarmament objectives, working obviously to try and improve negotiations on  the CfBT nuclear test ban treaty by the middle of this year, and beyond that, working  through the Canberra Commission to mark out a practical strategy for the really big  objective, and the one that's absolutely crucial if we are to win on non-proliferation,  and that's the actual elimination, the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons from the  face of the world. 

  We will be making, seventh, continuing efforts to achieve reform of the United  Nations, in particular using as the vehicle for that our hope for membership of the  Security Council from the latter part of this year. 

  Eighth, we will be seeking to build momentum towards enough progress in the trade  area to launch a new round of global multilateral trade negotiations. Bringing the  Uruguay Round itself to a successful conclusion. It is a huge task, with still some  implementation and further development of that to occur, but it's already necessary to  begin planning for the new round of negotiations . We are looking to the inaugural  Ministerial Review Conference in Singapore later this year as the vehicle for  advancing that. 

  Finally, in the agenda for the future, we will continuing to make maximum bilateral  efforts to achieve improved market access and penetration for Australian goods, not  only in the region, but around the world. Our economic focus, let me emphasise, has  never been just on the global WTO basket, or the regional APEC basket. Always  bilateral market access efforts and promotional efforts have been crucial: that job will  never cease and nor has it ever ceased. 

  Let me conclude by saying then just this. One of the bizarre elements of this campaign  in 1996 is the extraordinary way in which the current Leader of the Opposition is  trying to pass himself off as Gough Whitlam ...... He is seeking to suggest that after  thirteen years in the wilderness - and let me tell you that is a lot shorter time than  twenty-three years! - the Liberals feel that "It's Time" for a change of Government.  Well, let me tell you: I knew Gough Whitlam. I worked with Gough Whitlam. And  John Howard is not Gough Whitlam. 

   " 

  15 

  Some of you may be unkind enough to say that that's no bad thing! But for present 

  purposes, when it comes to foreign policy, I think there is real point to be made about 

  the comparison. John How ard has definitely not erected anything like the foreign 

  policy framework, a real watershed in this country's history, which was clearly  formulated, argued out, and implemented, as the most lasting political legacy of Gough  Whitlam. 

  Of course the world has changed, dramatically, since that time in the early 1970s, and  with it the need to rethink and reshape the framework of Australiian foreign policy. We  can credibly say that we have done that - repositioned Australia in the region and the 

  world in accordance with that new framework with spectacular success. 

  But the question that really has to be asked is to whether all of this will really continue  to be possible with a change of government:? It is really within the capacity of John  Howard and his fmeign policy team, Alexander Downer and Tim Fischer? Can they 

  answer with anything other than platitudes the question: 'What is Australia's place in  the region and the world?' 

  Gough Whitlam set a trend: he was a strong foreign policy Prime Minister. Those  who have followed him into the Lodge - and I include Malcolm Fraser as well as Bob  Hawke and Paul Keating - have all been strong foreign policy Prime Ministers. The  truth of the matter is that John Howard would be a weak foreign policy Prime 

  Minister. And that's not w hat's needed at this stage in our nation' s history . 

  Please stick with the strength. 

   " 

