---
title: "Gender guidelines for refugee decision makers"
date: "1996-07-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211451000
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6LZ20%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s e

 The Hon. Philip Ruddock MR Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Telephone: (06) 277 7860 Facsimile: (06) 273 4144

 MPS 34/96

 GENDER GUIDELINES FOR REFUGEE DECISION MAKERS

 Guidelines dealing with gender related claims by asylum seekers have been  finalised the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock  announced today.

 "I am very pleased to release the guidelines today, particularly as the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is visiting Australia," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The guidelines reflect the Government's commitment to work with the UNHCR to  ensure bona fide refugees are given every opportunity to present their case in a  sensitive and fair process."

 "These guidelines do not change the UN criteria that Australia uses for recognition  of a refugee. However, they will ensure that decision-makers deal with gender-  related claims in a sensitive and consistent manner."

 "My Department has consulted extensively with key agencies on the guidelines and  their views have been taken into account and modifications made."

 Mr Ruddock announced his commitment to consult on the completion of the  guidelines at the Women in Migration Conference, organised by the Bureau of  Immigration, Multicultural and Population Research on 3 June 1996.

 The Minister noted then that women refugees and asylum seekers might face  particular problems in seeking protection.

 "They might experience persecution differently to men and they do not necessarily  have the same remedies for state protection, nor the same opportunities for flight,"  Mr Ruddock said.

 "The result is that some women asylum seekers have difficulty in having decision  makers recognise the particular forms of persecution they face. They might also  experience difficulties in discussing claims related to sexual violence or cultural  difficulties."

 The guidelines will be used by all officers of the Department making decisions on  refugee cases.

 CANBERRA 15 July 1996

 MEDIA CONTACT: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715

