---
title: "Address to the Acoss Dinner Hellenic Club, Sydney 23 May 1996"
date: "1996-05-23"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
source: "Leader of the Opposition"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214170233
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011173%22
---

 3j

 m m

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

 ADDRESS TO THE ACOSS DINNER  HELLENIC CLUB. SYDNEY  23 MAY 1996

 >·

 First,  I'd like to congratulate ACOSS and the Brotherhood  of St Laurence for the unbelievably clever timing of this  National Summit on the Future of Work. The final report  of the Commission for the Future of Work has the title "A 

 Future That Works For All Of Us". It so happens that the  factors which go to establishing the workplace that the  future demands are at the very centre of current  political argument and manoeuvre.

 Labor in government had very strong and well-founded  views about the economic and social climate needed for  the education, training, labour market and all the other  elements in a rational approach to this issue.

 Central to our approach to public spending when we were  in office was the belief that a modern social democratic  approach to government required investment in human  capital. That investment was to provide opportunity and 

 protection .  It was targeted on need.

 At the same time,  it had to be within the framework of a  budget that optimised the ability of the private sector  to provide jobs and an inflation and interest rates  performance that provided stability and encouraged 

 investment.

 The result was that we produced a health system with  American-style freedom of choice combined with European-  style breadth of coverage. We produced education  policies that ensured intellectual ability would not be 

 frustrated by financial inability to get access to the  system. We produced education, employment and training  programs that optimised the creation of a high-skilled  and therefore ultimately high-wage workforce. We  produced a social safety net, highly targeted but which 

 meant that families were supported and that no-one needed  to slip into abject poverty.

 We did all this with the tightest social spending in the  Western world, bar that by one or two other economies.

 2

 Because it was fair, it was politically well supported. It was so well supported that our political opponents,   who have never had any philosophical commitment to it,  miraculously converted to it when confronted by audiences 

 such as yourselves.

 This brings me to what Mr Howard said in his speech to  ACOSS last October. You'll remember he told of his  special concerns for young people, unemployed people and  refugees.  He talked about the need for a ""strong and 

 secure" social safety net. He spoke about the ""moral  obligations of a civilised society' '  to care for its less  fortunate members.

 He gave guarantees which he said were ""iron clad'1.  Let  me remind you of a few of them:

 o ""we will not force workers off awards,'' he said;

 o ""we will not place a time limit on the receipt of  unemployment benefits'' ;

 o ""we will maintain the real value of pensions and other  social security benefits'';

 o ""there is no secret plan to slash $10 billion from  social welfare1'.

 That was then. What's happening now? It looks as though  Mr Howard's guarantees weren't worth the paper they were  printed on.

 Under the Coalition's final proposals for industrial  relations, awards are to be so rendered down as to be  meaningless. This tends to empty out what value there  ever was in Mr Howard's guarantee.

 Paper falling off the backs of trucks suggest that a  whole range of education and training, labour market and  social security measures are in the Coalition's sights:   unemployment benefit to cut out after 12 months;  cuts in  programs to help long-term unemployed; special low wages 

 for young people doing adult work;  higher HECS.

 A Cabinet document leaked in the last couple of weeks  shows not only that Mr Howard's concern for refugees is  now inoperable but also that the Government is being  misleading about it.

 Activities relevant to this Summit are really vulnerable.  Derek Volker, who had been Secretary of what was DEBT,  warned publicly in April that there was no way to achieve  the funding cuts that the Government demanded other than 

 by significant changes to programs. ""In the end,'' he

 3

 *< \

 X

 said, "the big savings have to come from cutting  programs.  ''

 Business leaders, having met Senator Vanstone just after  this,  reported that her agenda included cutting a number  of labour market programs. Since then, her department  has abolished 200 case management positions.

 Senator Vanstone shocked university and community  organisations by her flippant, trivialising comments when  the important issue of university support was raised. 

 She's reported to have told the universities that all  funding commitments given to them during the election  campaign "would not necessarily stand".  At the moment,  they're being told to consider cuts of between five and 

 12%.

 It's almost as though the Coalition has sat down to work  out what they could do either to leave the workplace of  the future for the invisible hand to mould, or to take  the workplace back to the antediluvian pre-reform days.

 We mustn't assume that all the mayhem threatened now will  actually come to pass in the Budget.  Shaking the tree is  a time-worn pre-Budget ritual. But we are entitled to  ask how and why it is targeted the way it is.

 The Coalition says that it all comes from its discovery  two days after election day that Labor had left the  economy in such poor shape as to create an $8 billion 

 black hole. Unfortunately, in politics as in war, truth  is often the first casualty.

 The fact is that no government ever has won office with  the country's fundamental forces in better condition than  those we left for the Coalition.

 We handed over the highest rate of growth of any among  the major OECD economies: four and a half years of  continuous growth, in fact. We had kept underlying  inflation down to around two and a half percent. More 

 than 700,000 jobs had been created since 1993 alone.  Unemployment remained high as more people flooded into  the workplace, but we had cut it from around 11% to 8.5%.  And we were on the way to achieving our Working Nation 

 target of 5% by the year 2000.

 The Australian Bureau of Statistics reported recently  from surveys of investment data that new capital  expenditure could rise by as much as 20% next financial  year. Access Economics' Investment Monitor reported in  April that the value of investment programs in planning 

 had doubled in the past three years.

 Even Mr Howard admitted on radio the other day that Labor  had left "some strong features of the economy'',  including low inflation and moderate wages growth.

 5

 damaging, particularly to prospects for reducing  unemployment.

 The broader social effect could be disastrous. An $8  billion cut in spending on the social wage would bring  the level down to around where it was in Menzies' time;  that is, before the community recognised the need to 

 support education, health and properly- and fairly-  targeted income support, and before the advent of  workplace change.

 The prospect is especially discouraging now as we're  discussing the important and urgent issues on the agenda  of this Summit: the number of jobs that will be created or threatened by workplace change, for instance; the  kinds of jobs that will be needed or rejected; who will  have these jobs and who won't; how people will acquire  the skills needed to do these jobs; and how (to borrow  ACOSS'  words) all this will contribute to a future that 

 works for all of us.

 A lot of work has been done on these questions: the reports being discussed at this Summit, for example;  studies by the former DEBT; the report of Barry Jones'  Parliamentary Committee for Long Term Strategies; the  Kelty and Karpin Reports; and so on.

 One important common thread throughout them all is that  the revolution in the Australian workplace comes at a  price.

 Through technological change, decline of the old  smokestack industries and recession, total employment has  just kept on marching upwards, especially over the past  10 years. Many of the new jobs have gone to the rapidly 

 growing number of women joining the labour force, and  they've been part-time rather than fulltime.

 In Australia, as elsewhere, a job for life is no longer a  right. In fact, in most areas of work, it's no longer  even the norm.

 Enterprises are increasingly being reduced to a core of  staff augmented by casuals or part-timers when the  business cycle dictates. I notice that ACOSS has picked  up the recent point made about this by reputedly the  world's biggest employment agency: that we've moved on

 from just-in-time manufacturing to just-in-time .   employment.

 The trend is for mass production to be replaced by  specialist production units and by out-sourcing services.

 My point isn't to argue against the new workplace  developments and I'm not trying to describe all their  ramifications in every last detail. (I haven't dealt 

 with the issue of unpaid work and caring, for example, or  wage-fixing or the special problems of regional

 4

 His problem is that the strategy that the Coalition  brought to the election was a total nonsense: on the one hand, a pledge of no new taxes, no cuts in benefits and a  Budget in substantial surplus and, on the other, the need 

 to find the money for a bagful of spending promises  costing $6.8 billion which on analysis turned out to be  nearly $7.5 billion.

 As for the so-called black hole, Mr Howard knows as well  as anybody in public life that forecasts about growth  adjustment are no more than educated guesses -- dipstick  readings of Budget entrails. They can vary -- and they  will -- right up to Budget day in three months' time.

 Peter Costello has got the most pessimistic estimate he  can from the Treasury to bolster his $8 billion "black  hole" myth. On the other hand, Ross Gittins, the  economics commentator, has pointed out that, even if  there's no policy change, the deficit estimate shrinks to 

 just over $3 billion the following year -- or just over  half a percentage point of GDP.

 Government officials are canvassing a Budget shortfall  because of revised estimates of growth and, presumably,  in anticipation that there'll be no policy changes  between now and then.

 What it all actually means is that, right now, we can  only guess what the actual shortfall will be come Budget  Day.

 We should keep in mind that even Mr Costello had to own  up on 12 March that the figures "should be treated with  considerable caution". And so they should. We're not  dealing with truth here. We're dealing in politics.

 There is no black hole.

 But what we could have -- if the Coalition carries on the  way it's going and a finely tuned system collapses --is  a serious social crisis.

 One of our achievements over 13 years was that we turned  the public sector into a fairer and better public sector.  The objective -- central to the Accord -- was that  workers would forego increases in the money wage so as to 

 create the capacity to set up the social wage: reforming and improving areas of social policy which had been  relatively neglected for most of the generation that had  gone before.

 As I said a moment ago, we managed to do this with just  about the lowest level of public spending in the  developed world. When we left office on 2 March, the  public sector was as lean as it could be consonant with  good government.

 An $8 billion contraction right now, therefore, when the  economy is showing signs of slowing down, could be very

 6

 development.  These are issues which deserve conferences  in their own right.)

 What I want to do is to emphasise that workplace change  raises wider questions.

 For example:  though part-time work is clearly attractive and useful for people who have family responsibilities,   it can be inadequate for others in terms of pay and  career development.  And it can add to the pressure on 

 families from life's other complications.

 Among these complications is the growth of regular,  unpaid overtime, particularly among men, which research  shows is making it difficult for the workers concerned to  combine work and family.

 Some of the issues raised by out-sourcing are being  examined at the moment by the Senate committee  investigating the system as used in the clothing  industry.

 We need to be careful about the effects of the dual  labour market:  one level with high skills, security and good conditions,  and another with low skills, insecurity  and poor conditions.

 New industries and production of new goods and services  offer greater job opportunity to more people. But they  also demand ever-higher levels of education and skills  and processes for lifelong nurturing of skills.

 Central to our initiatives has been the consistent effort  to relate education and training to future opportunities  and the real workplace. The evolution of Skillshare from  CYSS through to an exercise largely in through-life 

 support for those affected by changing economic and  social structures is a case in point.

 As it has more closely honed its programs to the local  labour market,  it has increased its capacity for  accredited training.  Future government reforms to  changes in the labour market draw heavily on the  experience.

 These concerns for relevant training opportunities and  skilling the workforce were very much reflected in our  Working Nation initiatives and the development of our  broader national training agenda.

 One of the central points of Working Nation was that our  future depended on the ideas and skills of our workforce.  It therefore concentrated on linking education and  training to the needs of the labour market and to future  employment opportunities. It offered a range of programs  to forge the link: from case management and other return-to-work activities right across to school-to-work  transition and entry-level training.

 7

 Working Nation was a huge operation.  It needed the co­ operation of State and Territory Governments, unions and  employers, bureaucracies, universities and other  education institutions. You can't turn a development as  big and as complex as this on and off like a tap. Once 

 its labour market and education and training elements are  broken up or starved to death, it will be extremely  difficult to put them together again.

 Now, we can argue about the detail. But, on the whole,  Working Nation produced some really encouraging results  by the end of the first of its four years of operation:

 o the number of long-term unemployed people had fallen by  23% in this first year -- almost twice the rate at  which unemployment in general had fallen;

 o apprenticeship and trainee commencements were back to  the record levels of the 1980s and were well above the  average for the three preceding years;

 o State Governments agreed to ensure that, by the year  2000, nearly all 19 year olds would have completed Year  12 with a post-school qualification or would be  participating towards one;

 o we'd created a system of traineeships in 21 industries.  Entry-level training had been provided in all the key  job growth industries for the first time. Record  levels of 15 to 19 year olds were taking part in entry- 

 level training.

 In addition, we made huge investments in education and  training.

 The consequence was that we had just about doubled Year  12 retention rates, for example. We had increased the  number of students in higher education by more than 70%.  Funding for ANTA (the Australian National Training  Authority) had provided an extra 35,000 students last  year alone.

 Mention of ANTA brings back the very important point I  made a moment ago about Working Nation.

 ANTA was set up in 1992 to put some kind of structure and  order into the various technical and further education  systems, some not as relevant or effective as they should  have been. Like Working Nation, it depended on getting 

 the States and Territories to co-operate and the  educational institutions geared up. .

 It also meant finding the funds in economic circumstances  that were very tight and within our very disciplined  approach to public spending.

 8

 A structure like ANTA -- an idea like ANTA -- having been  put together with all this co-operativeness and effort  and investment, won't easily be reconstructed after the  onslaught threatened for it.

 The Coalition has no mandate for this slash and burn  policy.  It did not discuss it before the election,  except to pledge that it wouldn't happen. The excuses it  has offered for it are transparently false and cynical.

 It isn't right that the social wage should be broken down  with no discussion and for no better reason than greed or  ideological experiment.  Labor does not accept it and we  will oppose it to the very limits of our capacity. I  would expect that ACOSS and the Brotherhood of St  Laurence would broadly agree.

 We're still lucky enough in our democracy that pressure  from an alert community can be effective. It can be all  the more effective when organisations such as yours use  their undoubted status and clout to send the Coalition a  strong message about the destructive nature of what it's  doing.

 The result is not only concerned with justice and  fairness:  protecting the weak, helping the stragglers --though this is essential too.  What I also mean has been  put very well in the Commission's report:

 Sustainable economic development is essential to produce  the resources and jobs necessary for social justice.  Social justice is essential to ensure the human  resources, infrastructure and community cohesion  necessary for economic development.  They must progress 

 in tandem, or both will be diminished.

 We in the Labor Party agree totally.

