---
title: "$22 million jobs programme to help young people"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452833
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HW530%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Minister for Employment, Education,  Training and Youth Affairs 

  V155 /96 

  --

  Senator the Hon. Amanda Vanstone  Senator for South Austrqlia 

  14 November 1996 

  $22 MILLION JOBS PROGRAMME TO HELP YOUNG PEOPLE 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs today  launched the re-established Job Placement, Employment and Training programme, JPET, a nation " wide scheme for young people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. 

  The programme, funded at $22 million for the next two years, will assist up to 8000 young people. 

  "The Federal Government has placed a high priority on youth issues, and we are committed to  providing assistance to young people who face barriers so they can reach their full potential, "  Senator Vanstone said. 

  "In the lead up to the election the Coalition promised to re-establish the successful JPET  programme and provide $11 million a year in funding over the next 1\vo years. We are delivering  on that promise today. 

  "JPET will provide an individually targeted and flexible approach to assisting homeless young  people. Services are designed to help any young person who is homeless or at risk of becoming  homeless, with priority being given to those aged 15-19. 

  "Other at risk groups, such as refugees, ex offenders, wards of the State or those exiting wardship  may also get help from JPET. They do not need to be homeless." 

  "A wide range of advice, support and referral services is offered to jobseekers to assist with  accommodation, finances, staying at school, training and employment, self esteem, family  mediation, drug and alcohol rehabilitation and other issues affecting young people. 

  The launch took place at the Salvation Army's Peninsula Youth and Family Services JPET on the  Mornington Peninsula today, one of the eight new JPET services. 

  At the launch Senator Vanstone praised the work of the Salvation Army, which has 0een providing  services to homeless people for more than 100 years. 

  The Salvation Army JPET project includes an outreach response and hospitality training and work  experience at The Burnt Toast Cafe in Mornington. 

  A summary of each of the JPET services announced today is attached. 

  Further information: 

  Canberra Office 

  Christian Kerr, Minister's Office, 08 8237 7946  Virginia Wallace, Minister's Office, 0419 217 918 

  Adelaide Office 

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Tel: (06) 277 7460 Fax (06) 273 2633 

  100 Pirie Street, Adelaide SA 5000  Tel: (08) 223 1757 Fax (08) 223 1750 

  INTERIM JOB PLACEMENT, EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING (JPET) SERVICES 

  Upper Mt Gravatt, Brisbane (funding of S63,836) 

  This sen' ice will tackle employment barriers faced by those wh o are at risk of long tem1  homelessness. unemployment & poverty. 

  It \-vill provide tlexible, accessible, holistic support and assistance to help clients gain  accommodation, income, counselling and life skills training, and enable disadvantaged young  people gain employment through individual case management that meets the diverse needs of  individual jobseekers. 

  y\VCA Darwin (funding of $92,500) 

  This service v"ill provide one-to-one intensive support for individuals , as well as specific training in  the areas of life skills , numeracy and literacy and preparatory employment skills. Some training  \\ill be provided by staff , some will be externally provided accredited training . 

  Participants \\111 be expected to participate in on-the-job workplace observation. Approximately  50% of the young people assisted are expected to be indigenous. 

  Mission SA, Adelaide (funding of 571,500) 

  JPET sen'ices \vi11 be run from three locations in metropolitan Adelaide; five days per week in all  employment training centre in Smithfield, three days per week at a youth sobering unit in  Hindmarsh and five days per "'.leek from a youth and community centre in Noarlunga. 

  Each centre 'will aim to provide meaningful intervention for clients and give access to opportunitie s  currently out of reach. 

  JPET staff will provide mentoring to clients to help them find stable accommodation, improve  living skills, remove employment, education and training barriers and increase their quality of life. 

  Sydney City Mission, Campbelltown (funding of $72,500) 

  This sen'ice will aim to achieve full open market employment for young homeless people through  the provision work placement and training programs which ar(; linked to and enhanced by  appropriate accommodation, support and related services, using an individual case\'iork approach. 

  Com petency based training , vocational education and access to formal accreditation will also be  provided. 

  The centre will offer appropriate support for participants , employers and trainers and provide post  program support as appropriate for young people ~ they look for employment. 

   " Wanneroo, Perth (funding of S7~,755) 

  Wanneroo JPET will pro\-ide professional assessment, development of individual progr~ plans  and ongoing client support to assist clients into job readiness_ 

  Two specialist staff will develop employment projects and placements through marketing  programs/services and clients to local employers by maintainin g links \\ith employers, service  organisations and regional economic bodies, and providing support to employment and trainin g  providers . 

  Staff will match clients to suitable employment placements or training and develop needs based  training. 

  Centacare Newcastle (funding of $72,275) 

  This service will deliver a holistic service to assist young people who are homeless or at risk of  homelessness, using a client-focused approach. 

  The program will consist of individual needs assessment. orient ation \\-orkshops and developme nt  of an individual programme plan focussing on psycho-social support, job skills trainin g, job  brokerage and post placement support. 

  Burnie City Council JPET (funding of $70,320) 

  The centre will assistjobseekers develop life skills and attitudes that \\ill enable them to undertake  training in their chosen fields so as to develop their abilities and thereby proceed into a meaningful  lifestyle and employment. 

  This will be achieved by the development of individual program plans, employment related training  using TAPE , SkillShare , mentors and employment placement, skills analysis, data collection on  clients on a regional basis and data collection on the needs of employers in the region to enable  training to be directed to these needs. 

  Salvation Army Peninsula Youth and Family Services JPET, Mornington (funding of  $91,915) 

  The Salvation Ann y JPET service will provide an outreach response as well as a facility based  service and will offer pre-employment training where necessary. 

  Competency based individually negotiated employment and training experience in hospitality will  be provided at the Burnt Toast Cafe. 

  The Burnt Toast Cafe is a part of the Salvation Ann y's ongoing programmes to assist disadvantaged  young people and provides training and work experience for JPET clients. 

  The Salvation Anny expects to assist about 50 homeless young people during the six-month period of  this current JPET project contract. 

