---
title: "Strengthening Australia's human rights credentials"
date: "1996-12-10"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211453326
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OI730%22
---

  STIZENG THENfNG AUSTRALIA'S HUMAN RIGHTS CREDENTIALS http://www .dfat.gov .au/pllIb/spceches/fa_sp/AMNESTY_ .hlml 

  of8 

  The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australia 

  STRENGTHENING AUSTRALIA'S HUMAN RIGHTS CREDENTIALS 

  Address by The Hon Alexand wner, M.P, Minister for Foreign Affairs to a Forum on  Australia's Human Rights Obligations for Human Rights Day, National Press Club, Tuesday  10 December 1996 

  CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY UNDER EMBARGO UNTIL 1 PM 

  Introduction 

  It is indeed a pleasure to have this opportunity to speak about the Australian Government's approach  to human rights issues on Human Rights day. 

  I want to thank Amnesty International, Defence for Children International, and the United Nations  Association of Australia for their invitation and for the indispensable work you do in promoting  human rights . 

  The co-hosts of this Forum are all important organisations, so I appreciate having been invited to  speak here today. 

  Human rights are an integral element in Australia's foreign policy because they express values which  are central to Australian society . 

  This Government believes in the universality and indivisibility of fundamental human rights. It also  believes that Australia can take effective steps to ensure the promotion of human rights, including  through representations to promote those rights in its dealings with other countries . 

  Today I would like to outline the Government's broad approach to human rights issues. I will do this  first by explaining the intellectual foundations of the Government's approach to human rights .  Secondly, I want to outline how these foundations translate into concrete and practical human rights  initiatives . Thirdly, I will outline initiatives for the future. 

  Part One: The Foundations of the Government's Approach to Human Rights 

  This Government views human rights as an inseparable part of Australia's overall foreign policy  approach. 

  The importance of human rights within Australian foreign policy is explained by four key principles  from which the Coalition draws. 

  First , human rights are important in the conduct of Australian foreign policy because the treatment of  individuals is of itself a matter of concern to Australia. 

  Secondly, the promotion and protection of human rights is important to Australia's national interest  because it underpins the country's broader security and economic interests . It is clear that serious  human rights abuse can upset regional security as was sadly evident both during and following the  period of Khmer Rouge control in Cambodia which ultimately led to refugee flows and the need for  major international involvement. 

  " 

  12 /11196 13 :57 :02 

  STR ENGT HENING AUSTRALIA 'S HUMAN RIGHTS CR ED ENTIALS hnp://www .dfut.g ov.uu/pmb /spccchcs/fu_sp/AMN ES TY _.hlm l 

  20f8 

  Thirdly, the Australian Government's policies on human rights are based on the Universal Declaration  of Human Rights and subsequent international human rights instruments which enshrine the principles  of universality and indivisibility of human rights . 

  Australian policy, therefore, does not presume to hold other nations to standards that we do not apply  to ourselves . 

  The Australian Government has been prepared to open itself to international consideration of our  human rights record. A delegation from Amnesty International visited Australia earlier this year and  the UN Special Rapporteur for Religious Intolerance will visit in 1997. 

  Australia also accepts its reporting obligations under international human rights treaties . The  comments of UN Committees on Australia 's reports, and on complaints brought by individuals help to  ensure that we meet our international commitments under these treaties . 

  I welcome the initiative of my colleague, the Attorney-General, in convening recently the first session  of a regular forum for NGOs to exchange information and discuss domestic human rights issues. This  meeting complements the successful NGO human rights consultations organised by my Department  for a number of years now . 

  Fourthly, the Government believes that attention and consideration should be given to the promotion,  protection and implementation of all human rights, whether they be civil and political, or economic,  social and cultural. 

  This proposition lies at the heart of the right to development which links the two categories of rights  in a way that is particularly relevant to our region. 

  Economic development is critical for improving the quality of life for people in developing countries,  which is the ultimate aim of all human rights endeavours. At the same time, the stability of free and  democratic societies can enrich and accelerate human development by providing standards and  direction for social and economic growth. 

  With these points in mind, the transition of ethical approaches into practice is guided by two  considerations. 

  First , Australia must be realistic in its assessment of what can and cannot be done on particular human  rights issues, and practical about the best means of seeking to realise its human rights goals. 

  Achievable objectives are vital for effective foreign policy of any sort. 

  Secondly, Australia's policies must be based on a clear analysis of the way in which human rights  concerns fit with Australia's interest in maintaining security and enhancing prosperity . 

  This means that the Government's policy approaches will necessarily be developed as part of a  comprehensive treatment offoreign policy and implemented in the conte xt of the overall relationships  that Australia has with other countries . 

  The specific goals which flow from these considerations include a commitment to promoting basic  economic and social rights such as maternal health care and primary education. 

  Similarly, there are key civil and polit ical rights , such as adherence to the rule oflaw and freedom of  speech and assembly which this Government will seek to foster and which are critical to both  individual freedom and long term social stability . 

  '. 

  12/11196 13 :57 :07 

  STR ENG THENING AUSTRALIA'S IIUMAN RIGHTS CRED ENTIALS http:// www .dfal.gov.au/pmb /spccchcs/fa_sp/AMN ESTY _.hlml 

  3 0f8 

  Part Two: Practical Human Rights Policies 

  Having outlined the basic principles which underpin Australia's approach to human rights I want to  explain how Australia translates these principles into practice . 

  This Government's approach to human rights has one hallmark, and that is a commitment to achieving  practical outcomes which actually improve the lives of individuals abroad. 

  We aim to make a difference on human rights, rather than merely to posture. 

  The Government is employing a variety of approaches to human rights issues to achieve the best  possible results . They encompass development co-operation, public diplomacy and private diplomacy. 

  Development Cooperation 

  The first of the ways Australia promotes human rights is through its development cooperation  program. Australia's aid program not only promotes economic, social and cultural rights but also civil  and political rights . . 

  The Australian Government recognises that the development of these rights must be safeguarded and  nurtured by appropriate institutions and structures . 

  Australia's development cooperation program, through AusAID, will continue to support democratic  development and human rights institution building in developing countries. 

  The Government is particularly supportive of helping countries in the Asia Pacific region to develop  strong, independent national human rights institutions. These are an important means of promoting  adherence to international human rights standards. 

  In Papua New Guinea, for example, we are broadening our assistance in the law and justice sector.  Current and planned assistance in this area comes to about $120 million, and is focussed on  strengthening PNG's legal institutions such as the PNG Attorney-General's Department, the  Ombudsman Commission, corrective services and support for community-based responses to the  over arching problem of law and order in Papua New Guinea. 

  Another important new initiative is the provision of a program of assistance to the Research Centre  for Human Rights at the Ho Chi Minh Academy of Political Sciences in Vietnam. This addresses  international law and human rights instruments and seeks to improve the capacity of the Academy and  the Centre to conduct research and training in these areas. 

  Despite the tough budgetary environment, I have also secured the continuation of a human rights fund  which supports priority human rights activities identified by Australian missions overseas. 

  At the World Congress Against the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in Stockholm in  August, Australia re-affirmed its commitment to eliminating child prostitution . To that end, AusAID is  providing significant funding in support ofECPAT -the Australian NGO concerned with ending child  prostitution, pornography and trafficking in Asian tourism. 

  Peace and human rights are also inextricably linked. Nowhere has this been more graphically  illustrated than in Mrica where, in recent years, some of the world's worst human rights atrocities  have been carried out in the context of civil war. In recognition of this, the Australian Government  recently made 'contributions both to the initiative of former Tanzanian President Nyrere to prevent war 

  12/1119 6 13:57:07 

  STRE NGTHENING AUSTRALIA'S HUMAN RIGHTS CR ED ENTIALS http:// www .dfut.gov.au/pmb /speechcslfa_sp/AMN ESTY _.hlml 

  40f8 

  in Burundi, to the OAU Peace Fund and granted $2.6 million to Australian NGOs to carry out relief  work during the current crisis in the Great Lakes region. 

  In the area of economic, social and cultural rights , the Government is making additional efforts to  ensure that development assistance promotes an environment conducive to equitable growth, as well  as effectively targeting basic needs and poverty alleviation . 

  In this endeavour, the role ofNGOs is obviously very important and the Government wishes to see  NGOs continue to make their valuable contribution in the aid program. 

  Landmines 

  A second policy area where the Australian Government has promoted human rights is the issue of  anti-personnellandmines. The impact of these weapons involves not only the immediate human  tragedy; it also undercuts the overall development of those areas affected, by diverting both financial  and human resources which could otherwise be employed in providing basic health and education. 

  In April of this year, along with my colleague the Minister for Defence, Mr McLachlan, I was  delighted to announce that Australia supported a global ban on the production, stockpiling, use and  transfer of anti-personnellandrnines and implemented a unilateral suspension on their use by the  Australian Defence Force. 

  The Australian Government has increased its efforts to do something practical to tackle the  humanitarian disaster posed by these weapons. 

  In May, I announced a de-mining program for Cambodia and Laos worth $12 million over three years. 

  I am pleased to note that, since the announcement of our new policy, the international momentum in  favour of a global ban on anti-personnellandmines has grown considerably. 

  Fifty countries, including Australia, attended the Ottawa strategy conference of pro-ban states in  October. One hundred and forty-one countries voted in favour of a resolution, co-sponsored by  Australia, at this year's UN General Assembly which called for the vigorous pursuit of an effective,  legally-binding international ban agreement. 

  We are also looking at ways in which improved de-mining technology can speed up the rate and scale  of the de-mining process, and to that end I registered at the UN General Assembly in September,  Australia's interest in working with other countries to improve de-mining technology, with a view to  increasing the rate and scale of the de-mining process. I am proud of the work we have done on this  Issue. 

  Human Rights Representations 

  A third way the Australian Government will work to promote human rights is the important area of  human rights representations . 

  The Australian Government remains committed to continuing bilateral representations on both  individual cases and general situations as an important means of improving human rights observance  overseas and to give appropriate expression to concerns that are felt in Australia . 

  Most of the cases raised are based on Amnesty International "Urgent Action" cases which the  Government pursues on behalf of the Amnesty International Parliamentary Group. 

  1211 1/96 13 :57:07 

  STRENG TH ENING AUSTRALIA'S HUMAN RIGHTS CR ED ENTIA LS http://w ww .dfut.gov.nu/pmb /spcecheslfn _ spl AMN EST Y _ .hlml 

  50f8 

  Australia will thus maintain a vigorous human rights diplomacy, both multilaterally and bilaterally .  Australia will continue to make representations through our network of Embassies and High  Commissions overseas on cases of human rights' concern brought to our attention by Amnesty  International. 

  These representations strengthen Australia's profile as a concerned and active country in the human  rights field. 

  Diplomatic Approaches 

  Beyond development assistance and representations on individual cases, the Government has available  to it the various tools of diplomacy. 

  The Australian Government is committed to an active diplomacy aimed at improving the observance  of international human rights standards . 

  The Australian Government is using both public and private diplomacy to express Australia's concerns  and urge action to resolve problems, and I and senior officials in my Department have spoken out  consistently on a range of human rights concerns. 

  Most fundamentally, the Australian Government seeks to be effective in its human rights work. In  practice that means that we have to choose what will be the most effective method of improving  human rights conditions in any particular case. 

  In some cases that will mean strong public statements and in others that will mean that the bulk of the  work must be done in private. What I will not do though is engage in sloganeering just for the sake of  winning a few pats on the back, because the result will often be to limit Australia's influence . 

  The nature of international politics is such that at the Government to Government level a demand will  often produce a reaction which is counter-productive . This is not always the case but it is a fact of the  landscape and one which must be taken into account in deciding upon the most effective approach in  anyone case. 

  Nevertheless there are cases where a mix of strong public diplomacy and private diplomacy is the  optimal approach. 

  As an example of this approach, with regard to conditions in Burma I have spoken out consistently  and strongly called for greater dialogue between the SLORC and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. 

  Australia will continue to make strong representations to the Government of Burma on specific  human rights cases of concern and will maintain regular contact with opposition spokespeople,  including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. 

  We will also maintain pressure on the SLORC. At my instruction Australian officials boycotted the  "Visit Myanmar Year" opening day launch in Rangoon. Last week, again on my instructions , our  Embassy in Rangoon made representations on the detention of National League for Democracy Youth  members . 

  Australia has also just co-sponsored a human rights resolution on Burma in the United Nations  General Assembly in New York, which sent a clear message to the Burmese Government about the  urgent need for improvements in the human rights and political situation there. 

  The leaders of the Burmese opposition in exile, Dr Sin Wein , specifically singled out Australia and a 

  '. 

  12/11 /96 13 :57 :08 

  STRENG TH ENING AUSTRALIA'S IIUMAN RIGHTS CR ED ENTIALS http:// www .dfat.gov.au/pmb /spcc(;hcs /fa_sp/AMN EST Y _.hlnd 

  6 0[8 

  small number of other countries for our "special efforts" in ensuring that the resolution was  representative of the current crisis in Burma . 

  The Australian Government is also engaged in intensive regional diplomacy with our Asian  neighbours. During the ASEAN Regional Forum in July I had the opportunity to meet with my  Burmese counterpart and put forward Australia's concerns about human rights, democracy and  political detainees in what can only be described as direct and unqualified terms. 

  I am pleased that it was with the encouragement of an Australian proposal, that, for the first time,  there was discussion of Burma's human rights' record during the formal session of the ARF . 

  I believe that ASEAN is the key to human rights progress in Burma. The single most important thing  Burma is seeking from the international community is membership of ASEAN . 

  As such I am convinced that Aus!ralia must work for change in Burma by working closely with  ASEAN neighbours to influence Burma . Ifwe set ourselves at odds with ASEAN over this issue I am  convinced that we will lose the best chance we have to influence developments in Burma . 

  That is why the Government has maintained the "benchmarks approach" in relation to Burma which  links greater bilateral contact with moves toward greater regard for human rights. 

  Significantly, the Australian Government will continue the ban on exports of defence and defence  related goods to Burma and our bilateral development assistance program will remain suspended. 

  I will not underestimate the challenge in seeking to bring about reform in Burma. But I do say that the  touchstone of our action has been to take those steps which we believe will genuinely encourage  practical change in Burma . 

  In dealing with particular issues I have previously said that I believe it is generally best not to lecture  but to seek results in human rights diplomacy. I believe a good example of this has been the  Government's approach to East Timor which aims to help bring about improvements there. 

  By way of practical initiatives, while I was in Jakarta last April I announced a contribution of  $300,000 for the International Committee of the Red Cross (lCRC) to continue its human rights  monitoring work in East Timor. This is in addition to Australia's continuing development assistance  program to East Timor. 

  I also made it clear in Jakarta in April, July and October, and in my two other meetings with Ali  Alatas that Australia will continue to lend whatever support it can to the two streams of dialogue on  East Timor held under the auspices of the United Nations and to help in reducing the dramatic  unemployment problem in East Timor which undoubtedly compounds the problem there. The  Government also provided approximately $25,000 to meet costs associated with the All-Inclusive  Intra-East Timorese talks in Austria in March. 

  It was against this background of practical assistance that I have been able to raise Australia's  concerns about conditions in East Timor with both Foreign Minister Ali Alatas and President  Soeharto -amongst others. Whilst making Australia's concerns clear, I deliberately chose not to  lecture or hector, but to offer Australia's assistance in seeking a constructive and peaceful resolution . 

  Whilst recognising that there is much work still to be done in East Timor, I note the recent comments  of the former Human Rights Commissioner and now Special Adviser to the UN High Commissioner  for Human Rights, Brian Burdekin, who only last week said of Indonesian progress on human rights : 

  '. 

  12/11 /96 13 :57 :08 

  STR EN G THENING AUSTRALIA'S IIUMAN RIGHTS CR ED ENTIALS http:// w ww .dfut.gov.uu/pmb /spccchcs/fn_sp/AMN ESTY _.hlml 

  7 0f8 

  "I don't have any doubt that what's happening in this country is moving in what I see in the overall as  a positive direction" . 

  In that respect, the Australian Government will continue to look for opportunities to make a concrete  contribution to the resolution of the East Timor issue. 

  Part Three: Looking to the Future: Initiatives 

  In looking to the future the Australian Government is involved in three initiatives which will make  practical, long term contributions to human rights and democracy at a structural level. 

  The first of these is the support we are providing for the development of Asia-Pacific human rights  arrangements. This is important because the establishment of a human rights framework and  institutional infrastructure in the Asia Pacific will bring our region in line with Africa, the Americas  and Europe. 

  Our support is being developed through the informal Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights  Institutions which was established in June this year. The Australian Government is providing  $225,000 over three years to enable Australia's Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission to  provide a secretariat for the Forum . 

  The second Government initiative I would point to is the proposal to establish a new Centre for  Democratic Institutions which would focus on the promotion of democracy and democratic change,  especially in the Asia Pacific region. My Department is currently developing detailed proposals for the  Centre in conjunction with NGOs. 

  A third initiative to which I want to lend my strong personal backing is the establishment of an  International Criminal Court. 

  I believe an International Criminal Court would be an important step forward for the international  community in dealing with the most serious crimes of international concern such as genocide, war  crimes and crimes against humanity. 

  That is why I want to make this one of the Government's prime multilateral and human rights  objectives in the next two years. The world needs an International Criminal Court and Australia is  uniquely placed to help deliver it. 

  Conclusion 

  In concluding, I want to commend the role of human rights monitors in the ongoing world-wide  campaign to promote and protect human rights . In that context I believe there are two important  things to note. 

  First, to recognise that governments and NGOs have different but complementary roles. The special  capacity for witnessing and advocacy which rests with NGOs cannot easily be replicated by  government. However, government has a capacity for representation and direct diplomacy, which  although often less public, is usually not within the power ofNGOs . 

  Secondly, there will at times be disagreements over both approaches and objectives, as there are  within the non-government community itself. That is simply a feature of healthy democracy. 

  Let me reiterate that I both invite contact and want to work closely with the NGO community on the  topic of how we can make a genuine contribution to the promotion and protection of human rights . 

  12/11/96 13:57:08 

  STRENGT H ENING AUSTRALIA'S HUMAN RIGHTS CREDENTIALS http://www .dfal.gov.au/pmb /speecheslfa_splAMNESTY_.hlml 

  80f8 

  This Government is focused on practical and effective approaches to the promotion of human rights . 

  Ultimately, all of these approaches flow from a coherent philosophy which recognises that human  rights are an integral part of Australia's interests and that Australia has a responsibility in its foreign  policy to promote the dignity of the individual. 

  [Return to DF AT Home Page] 

  -. 

  12/11196 13 :57 :08 

