---
title: "Australia: much more than a middle power: speech to the Young Liberals National Convention."
date: "1996-01-08"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Foreign policy"
  - "Liberal Party policy"
  - "Middle powers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211447870
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UT4Q6%22
---

  EMBARGOED UNTIL 2 P.M 8 JANUARY 19% 

  SPEECH TO THE YOUNG UBERALS 

  NATIONAL cawEmicm 

  JANUARY 8 11996 

  BY 

  ALEXANDER DOWNER MP 

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

  MONDAY 8 JANUARY 2996 

  " A U S W A :  MUCH MORE THAN A M I D D E  POWER" 

  it is a great pleasure yet again to begin MY poiitimt year by addressing t h e  

  Young Liberal Movement. I do so feeling a good deal more positive than I fett 

  in Adelaide one year ago, although as all of you know, experience is character 

  building!. 

  t a m  s u r e  this is going to be a truefy great year for t h e  Libera1 Party; a year in 

  which we will at last win the e/edion and form a new Government for Australia. 

  When polling day arrives, foreign affairs may not be at the front of voters 

  minds. Instead, they will be gravely c o n e r n e d  about Australia‘s unacceptable 

  rate of unemployment, an aiiing health system, threats to t h e  environment and 

  the burdensome tax regime. 

  . 

  Yet a successfu1 foreign polic;y is vital to enhance Australia’s economy a n d  

  SecUfity. 

  Success only comes about w h e n  foreign policy is formulated in a conceptual 

  strategic framework, not just dreamed up in a n  ad h o c  way in response to 

  e v e n t s  or crises. 

  It IS one thing to talk glibly as does Mr Keating about t h e  importance of Asia or 

  to dredge up a potiticaliy mnvenient stunt such as the so-called Canberra 

  Commission to abolish n u d e a r  weapons - it is quite another to know what 

  strategy suits Australia the best. 

  Clearty it is not in Australia’s best interests to have a foreign policy maned by 

  grandstanding and inconsistency as happened when Senator Evans argued 

  before the International Cowt of Justice that nuclear weapons w r e  illegal, 

  disregarding the consequences for the ANZUS alliance. 

  Nor have our best interests been served by Mr Keating calling the head of 

  government of one of Austratia's most important neighbours "recalcitrant" or 

  denigtating our histonc ties with countries such as the United States and 

  Britain. 

  The Labor Party speaks of itself as being driven by Wlsunian idealism: its 

  deeds are littered with inconsistencies which damage Australia' standing in the 

  world. 

  By contrast, the Liberal Party has been and will continue to be the Party of 

  enlightened realism. We are enfightened by our unswewing mmrnitrnent to 

  democracy, economic liberaiisrn and human decency and rights; we are 

  reahtic about hciw our national interest can be advanced within t h e  framework 

  of t h e s e  Liberal values. 

  Politicians and journalists speak of Australia as a middle power and suggest 

  this status should partly define our foreign policy strategy. 1 do not believe the 

  term middle power does justice to Australia's standing in the world. 

  TO say Australia is a middle power implies we are merely similar to a multitude 

  of other auntnes, a mediocre power defined only by the size of our 

  popu;Lation. Worse, it suggests we are helplessly wedged between big and 

  small powers wth very littte role to play. This seils us short and overlooks the 

  rich potential Australia has to play a vital role in the worid. 

  To say Australia is a middie power ignores our uniqueness. We are a western 

  nation on the edge of Asia; a thriving democracy at a time when many 

  countries are making t h e  transition from authoritarianism to freedom. f n  an 

  age when the cry for Civil liberties cannot be ignored. Australia c3n boast a 

  proud record of respect for fiberty and the dignrty of the individual. 

  We have d i b i l i t y  with the devefoping warid. Yet, despite Mr Keating, w e  still 

  have an excellent reputation as a loyal afly and true fn'end of the United States 

  and even the UK. 

  AI! these qualities give Auskalia a unique and indispensable role in the world. 

  1 do not accept Australia as merely a middle power. Rather, I believe Australia  -7 u ...- 

  is a "pivotal" p e r  a n d  while there are many facets to Australia's foreign 

  policy, Australia's role as a crucial link with other countries is one we should 

  actively promote. 

  There is a basic dictum in life: know yourself. Knowledge brings 

  understanding; understanding brings wisdom. Let us look closely at 

  OUfSeiVeS. 

  Let me explain what I m e a n .  

  Australia shares many important charactenstics with the western wortd. We 

  have a relatrvely prosperous ecnnomy, we value democracy and its 

  concomitant institutions. we believe in the rule of law and an independent 

  judiciary. So do the countnes of North Amenca and the European Union We 

  also have dose cultural ties with many of t h o s e  countnes and these cannot 

  and should not be disregarded. They explain why we frequently draw simifar 

  mnctusions about intematio,naf events, as we did when Iraq invaded Kuwait. 

  What att this means is that we would be b I i s h  to disregard the importan- of 

  North America, and the United States in partiarlar, or for that matter the 

  countries of fie EutUpean Union, as significant factm in uuf thinking. In 

  international forums s u d  as the United Nations, countries with common 

  values and perspectives frequently work together very s u o ~ % ~ f u f t y .  fn our 

  case, one of t h e  more successful smafl UN groups we participate in is the 

  CAN2 (Canada, Australia and New Zealand) group. 

  Gone are the days, though, when our national interest is best served by simply 

  following the lead of the UK or the US. 

  Australia has distinct interests which distinguish us from those countries. 

  By virtue of our geography, Australia self-evidently needs to pursue a secunty 

  strategy which draws u s  in cfosely Mth t h e  countries of South East Asia. Ever 

  since the Second World War, it has been in Australia's interests to develop a 

  web of bilateral and multilateral security ties with countries which are 

  predominantly members of the non-aligned movement. While some of these 

  countnes believe their security interests are best served by deliberately 

  distancing themselves from the Unrtsd States, Australia sees 

  ANZUS IS a central feature of our security policy. We have however to t a k e  

  into aaxunt the different perspectrves of other m u n t n e s  in our region when 

  dealing w t h  them. 

  Our geography also links us econornidly much closer to the countries of Asia 

  than other western countnes. Japan IS our most mpmtmt tradrng partner and 

  most of our top ten trading partners are in East Asia. In that respect we are 

  very unlike other western cquntries and again, that obvious fact will inevitably 

  help to dictate our foreign policy priorities. In trade disputes between the US 

  and Japan, for example, it is not always in our interests to support 

  automatically the US position. 

  Finally, white Australia is indisputabty a developed economy, our economy 

  d o e s  share some characteristics with developing countries - not least a 

  dependence on cornrndities and on the savings of foreigners to finance 

  economic growth. 

  Now my ananlysis of Australia's unique place in the world does not mean our 

  national interest is best served by deliberately mating strains With western 

  nations - 8 strategy which was disasternusly pursued by t h e  Whitlam 

  Government and finds favour still amongst some in the Labor Party who 

  believe the way to win a badge of honour is by cheap criticism and even verbal 

  attacks on the US. 

  What all this tells us about Australian foreign poky is that we have the vital 

  capacity to act as a crucial link between the developed western world and the 

  developing and non-aligned world. If we handle this pivotal role propedy, we 

  should be able to command the respect of western a n d  non-a,igned countries 

  alike and help link diverse views and perspectives to achieve practical 

  outcomes 

  In East Asia, Australia can play a cruual linking role in formulating a 

  constructive regional security policy by encouraging t h e  US to remain actively 

  involved in East Asia and faulttating that involvement while at the s a m e  time 

  encouraging the evolution of regional bilateral and rnultilaterat securty ties. 

  We can play a significant rcie In the vital area of disarmament. 

  Australia, as an ally of the US, wh,& also has a r e a f  interest in keeping 

  weapons of mass destruction out of t h e  East Asian hemisphere and fighting 

  vigorously against nuclear proliferation and the emergence of a regional ams 

  race. 

  Australia a n  continue to promote trade liberalisation through bodies such as 

  t h e  Cairns Group which include developed and developing countries. 

  Ausbaiia can also play a major role in achieving reform of t h e  United Nations 

  and other international institutions because Australia is as trusted by the 

  western powers as it is by the non-aligned movement. 

  Having said all this, Australia's unique position does not guarantee we can 

  play a pivotal role. Australia has to work hard at it. First. we must know 

  ourselves, understand our role, and finally act clearly and consistently by it 

  thought out reckoning of Australia's interests. 

  Australia must understand itself and have a mature and confident Sense of its 

  place in t h e  world Over two centuries ago, explorers searched for t h e  great 

  southern land. Today when the world looks south it sees a people richly 

  committed to the pnnuples of freedom, a fair go a n d  t o  a communrty where the 

  individual IS a b h  to express an opinion, increase prospenty and live in peace. 

  This m n e p t  of a mature and confident Australia wth a unique a n d  

  indispensible place in the wortd is way beyond the n a r w  thinking of Mr 

  Keating He preaches only that Asia is important to Australia. It is a sermon 

  preac!!ed with alt the zeal of a recent convert who himself Only recently 

  disawered the importance of .Asia. As Treasurer, he almost never visited Asia 

  and in his twenty two years as an MP before he b e c a m e  Prime Minister, 

  Keating showed no interest in Asian matters. 

  Keating, like all zealous converts. is dangerous because he lacks perspe-dve. 

  It is insuffiaent for a country like Australia to say its fweign policy is claset ties 

  with East Asia. Austrafia must have a more sophisticated vision of its tole in 

  the world than the simple truism that a country to the immediate south of 

  South East Asia needs to build tinks with South East as well as North East 

  Asia. 

  Obviously Australia needs to build ties with its own immediate region and with 

  the East Asian hemisphere more generally. Only the Labor Party could have 

  doubted that for over half a century. As the refease of classified rnatenal from 

  1965 in recent days has proven, the Liberal Party since its foundation has 

  been pre-occupied wth Asia. 

  Indeed, I never heard of a country uninterested in its region. 

  We Libera!s should never forget it w-as the Menzies Government which 

  established the Colombo Plan and negotiated the Japan-Australia trade 

  agreement in1 957 (in the face of Labor opwsition). 

  Liberal governments were main players in the process of de-alonisation in 

  Asia being intimately involved in discussions about independence for Malaysia 

  and Singapore and, importantly, in tndo-China. 

  It was through our dose ties wrth the US, t h e  U K  and France that we were 

  able to exercise more influence over t h e  destiny of South E a s t  Asia between 

  thirty and foorty years ago than we do today. 

  Everyone has been conveniently persuaded to forget that today. 

  But we Liberals do not fixget. It was in 1977, while Labor derided Indo- 

  Chinese refugees as "Asia's Baits", that the Fraser Government offered those 

  persecuted and homeless people a home in Australia. 

  Above all, let u s  remember t h d  it was t h e  greatness of Liberat Party foreign 

  policy - a policy of entightened realism - which achieved so MU& in Asia 

  without forgoing our traditional ties and long-standing alliances. 

  Mr Keating cannot boast mrnparable achievements. 

  If Australia is s e e n  to be developing ties with Asia at t h e  expense of our ties 

  with the United States and the European Union, among others, then we wll 

  quickly lose our capacrty to act as a crucial fink in world affairs. 

  Consequently, our global influence wil inevitably diminish a n d  Australia will 

  become little more than a small player at t h e  bottom of South East Asia. 

  W h e n  we come to power this year, I c a n  a s s u r e  you this will not happen. 

  Instead I promise you the Coalition Government wll have a foreign policy 

  based on a sound knowledge of ourselves a n d  our role in t h e  worid We 

  understand our unique place in intematlonal affiirs and we will develop that 

  position wrth wisdom. 

  And I promise you a Coalition Government will be applauded for recognisirig 

  and developing Australia's role in the world as a crucial link and for protecting 

  and advancing our national interest in this way. 

