---
title: "Regional and domestic security: the Middle East and the Asia Pacific: address to the 37th Biennial Conference of the Zionist Federation of Australia, Melbourne, 2 June 1996"
date: "1996-06-02"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211450352
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S5X20%22
---

  I LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY CHECK AGA~AELIVERY  ADDRESS TO THE 37TH BIENNIAL CONFER ~' 

  ZIONIST FEDERATION OF AUSTRALIA  REGIONAL AND DOMESTIC SECURITY -

  THE MIDDLE EAST AND THE ASIA PACIFIC 

  MELBOURNE, 2 JUNE 1996 

  Mr Leibler, Mr Shalit, Mrs Zablud, Members of the Executives,  Honoured Guests and delegates. 

  I am delighted to be here today, amidst so many familiar faces  and friends of long standing and after a week that has meant  so much to the people of Israel and the Middle East, also, of  course, to everyone in this room and to all those around the  world who hold hopes for lasting peace in the Middle East. 

  As it now appears, Benjamin Netanyahu has achieved a majority  in the Prime Ministerial poll and will assemble the support of  smaller parties in the Knesset to form a Government for the  next four years. 

  I am deeply saddened ~ that our fraternal party in Israel  appears to have lost office, particularly as the party  carrying the legacy of a man who was one of the few statesmen  in the international political landscape of the late twentieth  century, Yitzhak Rabin. 

  Whilst a Likud victory certainly casts a different complexion  on the future, I would not be too hasty in calling the peace  process into question. There are a number of reasons for this: 

  Firstly, the election has been very tight indeed. There were  not more than 50,000 votes separating the two candidates, of a  total of nearly 4 million voters. I am something of an expert  on tight electoral margins, and they do not give you a lot of  room to manoeuvre. 

  Secondly, the Knesset is delicately balanced, with the focus  now on the smaller parties of the centre as Labour and Likud  lost 18 seats between them.  Thirdly, we must consider the relative roles of individuals  and structures within any study of politics. In many ways, the  crucial election was the last one. In 1992, the Israeli people 

  took the chance for peace and much of what has happened since 

  I 

  then cannot be undone . It will be, more than anything a matter  of tempo and detail as the process goes forward. 

  In the spirit of reflecting upon what has already been  achieved, I would like to take a few moments to speak of the  contribution of Yitzhak Rabin, and in this I echo the Prime  Minister's comments yesterday.  All of us shared the distress of the Israeli people at the  death of Yitzhak Rabin last year. 

  Every event which has marked the history of Israel had Yitzhak  Rabin at its core. Even as a young man after the war of 1948  he was involved in negotiations separating the forces as well  as having been involved in the fighting . He was a hero in  every major event in Israel's survival thereafter. 

  His life as a warrior, diplomat, politician and statesman was  of a piece. Every step, every direction, he held before him a  devotion to his nation - its survival, its health; the right  of its citizens to live in peace. 

  Yitzhak Rabin's lifetime goals were largely advanced but were  not complete. His country, his people, his region and all of  us need their completion. He deserved to see that end. It is a  tragedy for us that he did not, but let us hope that these  goals will eventually be achieved. 

  My theme today is security ---for individuals, for  communities and for entire nations. The Jewish community, of  course, here in Australia, in Israel and around the world has  perhaps the most highly developed appreciation of the  significance of this term and its many dimensions. 

  Often when we talk about the peace process in the Middle East  we view it very much through one-dimensional blinkers. Media  coverage and political discussion require a shorthand that  often covers a receding in memory of the strategic reality and  psychological underpinnings. 

  We should never forget how hard it is for a people  geographically situated on a territorial sliver with a  background of war and the Holocaust to treat peace simply as a 

  matter of give and take in land ownership. 

  I well remember standing upon the Golan Heights, looking down  into Israel just a short drive down the road. Indeed, when you  register that the drive from the Golan Heights all the way  across Israel to the coast equates to a country drive from  Northam into Perth, you very quickly learn to appreciate the  difficulties as we urge Israel to settlement.  Australians stand in awe of the Government and people of 

  Israel for their fortitude in pushing forward the peace  process thus far, despite the devastating impact of acts of  terror ism from extremist quarters. 

  It is the hope of all of us in this room, I am sure, and in  the community generally, that following the next few weeks of  constitutional uncertainty , peace will continue to advance,  and will provide the guarantee of security for Israel which it  has always sought. Australia, of course, is a very committed, 

  if relatively modest, contributor to the peace process in the  Middle East. 

  We were an early participant in the comprehensive  international response to Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait.  That response took out of the equation for the timebeing a  major threat to the state of Israel, particularly in the area  of weapons of mass destruction . 

  As Gareth Evans and Robert Ray made clear at the time,  Australia made a significant contribution both in terms of our  naval support in the Gulf as well as the vital role played by  the joint defence facilities particularly their early warning 

  capabilities - in protecting Israel and Saudi Arabia from  Iraqi rockets.  Australia is participating in two of the five working groups,  on Arms Control and Regional Security and Water Resources,  which form multilateral tracks of the peace process, work  which is acknowledged as a substantial contribution and which 

  all of us hope will continue  We have provided $15 million in assistance to the Palestinian  Authority to help provide the social and economic development  which will reinforce support for the peace process. 

  There will always be a special bond between Australia and  Israel. In 1949 Labor's Foreign Minister Doc Evatt strongly  supported the creation of the state of Israel. Today Australia  continues to offer its heartfelt support for Israel as it  works with, and in, its neighbourhood to build a sustained  security environment.  Australia's external situation cannot by any measure be 

  compared to Israel's, of course, but it is not without its own  complexity. Australia is now deeply economically engaged with  the East Asian region which, though currently one of the most  peaceful regions on the globe, is nevertheless historically  volatile, with numerous remaining points of tension. 

  Under Labor, Australia evolved into a real player in the East  Asian region, instrumental in such major initiatives as the  establishment of APEC and the peace process in Cambodia. 

  Our Government had credibility in the region: Gareth Evans'  press conferences were events of regional importance. Asian  leaders were accepting and welcoming of a greater role for  Australia than we have traditionally played. That comfort and  understanding enabled the historic treaty agreement with 

  Indonesia last year - an event all the more remarkable for the  well known caution of Indonesia in the past. 

  When former Prime Minister Paul Keating doubted the capacity  of our opponents to deal with Asian leaders during the  election campaign, he was not doubting the politeness of the  reception they would enjoy from countries in the region. 

  What he was questioning was the ability of the Coalition  leadership to establish a paradigm in our relati ons with our  region which could build on our successes to date, not to let  them lie fallow. Their challenge is to maintain the greater  role Australia enjoyed under Labor, not to let us slip back  into relative obscurity. There is no room for complacency here 

  - we left a formidable record of achievement. 

  The jury is still out on this question. Tim Fischer, Alexander  Downer and John Howard are yet to be tested on this, they have  not shown us anything yet. 

  This process of engagement with our region has involved, and  will continue to rely upon, drawing on the enormous resources  of our cohesive, diverse, innovative Australian community.  Which brings me to the internal aspects of security. 

  Our capacity as a nation to engage credibly in, and with, our  region vitally depends on the cohesion of our community, our  common purpose and our shared sense of national direction. 

  The more secure we are at home, the more we can achieve in the  world. 

  Australia commands considerable respect, authority and  influence in the international arena because we have  manifestly succeeded where others have struggled -- in  building a diverse, yet harmonious, society at a time when  most conflicts are between different communities within  national borders. 

  And that is the theme I want to address with you today - " preserving and advancing the spirit of Australian unity into  the 21st Century. 

  For some years now, Australia has been undergoing a  transition. We have been moving from a closed, inward-looking  place to a more confident, competitive and  internationally-focused economy.  This is a process that reflects Australia's external and 

  internal circumstances and the reform program we pursued when  in office. It has both economic and social dimensions. 

  As a nation we are making great strides to harness the  economic opportunities presented to us by this era of change. 

  But thankfully we are not a society which defines success only  as a good set of numbers. 

  We stand or fall by the degree to which our society remains  open, inclusive and tolerant; and by the sense of common 

  identity which binds us together and carries us forward, no  matter how diverse we may be. 

  Australia today is a very different place to the homogenous  population of 50 years ago. Then, we were 7.5 million people  of mainly Anglo-Celtic stock. The rights of indigenous 

  Australians were abused, and those of others outside the  mainstream were neglected. 

  Today we are nearly 18 million people, one in four of us is of  non English speaking background and four in 10 of us either  migrants or the children of migrants. 

  Australians from something like 240 different cultural and  ethnic backgrounds are living together. 

  And the diversity doesn't end there. Our community is  increasingly varied in terms of the values, attitudes and  lifestyles of its members. Families have changed in structure  and in lifestyle. 

  Many more women are ln the workplace, and returning to it  while the children are young. Many more Australian households  have only one adult member. 

  The workplace is changing too, with job growth primarily  occurring in the service and knowledge industries; with  growing numbers of small, special-purpose companies and an  increasing focus on international trade. 

  Our diverse, yet harmonious, community is not only a great  national triumph itself, today it is the very basis of all  that we achieve asa nation.  It gives us strength. It is the source of our energy and  creativity. It is the basis of a productive workforce and a  harmonious, competitive economy. 

  It is a major advantage as we continue to internationalise our  economy and develop our trade and investment linkages with the  world. Indeed, a common reason cited by international  companies like Unilever and Novell when they choose to locate  their regional headquarters in Australia is that our skilled,  mUlti-lingual and productive workforce is of tremendous value 

  to their international customers.  Australian society is still evolving. As we move to the  threshold of the 21st century we have both the opportunity,  and a responsibility, to determine the kind of place we want 

  to be.  We in the Labor party recognise that this era of transition  presents special opportunities and challenges for our  community. 

  We can not afford to be complacent or to stand still. We must  be vigilant against threats to our social cohesion. And we 

  must find positive ways to reinforce our sense of common  identity and purpose. 

  The task of nation-building is always before us. 

  Both the Zionist Federation and the United Israel Appeal of  Australia, as well as the community organisations they  represent, are tre men dously important in this process. 

  You will continue to playa vital role, both in looking after  the interests of individuals within our multicultural  Australia and in strengthening our local and national  communities. 

  The key to the success of our common efforts resides in  working from sound guiding principles and in making those  principles live through effective action.  Some very simple principles underpin Labor's approach to  building a united, diverse Australian community. 

  They can be expressed this way: 

  Australia expects all members of the community, regardless of  their background, to share a loyalty to Australia and its  future; to accept the basic structures and principles of 

  Australian society, including a commitment to democracy,  equality of opportunity and tolerance; and to accept the  rights of others to express their views and values.  In return, Australia commits itself to equality of access for  all Australians to all aspects of national life; to ensure the  potential contribution of all Australians is recognised and 

  respected; and to ensure that Australia's institutions reflect  Australia's cultural ,diversity.  These principles provide an important conceptual framework for  the kind of Australia that we are, and want to be. They make 

  it clear that all members of the community must sign on to our  core Australian values. And they spell out the commitment to  social justice for all.  They may be elaborated further --but that is their essence. 

  It is obviously not enough, however, simply to articulate  principles, important though they are. They are meaningless  unless they are translated into action. 

  My Government was active in finding practical ways to give  life to the principles which guide us.  You will all be familiar with the milestones of  multiculturalism -and in particular with the ground-breaking  work of the past thirteen years --everything from the 

  introduction of the first Access and Equity programs in 1985;  the establishment of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity  Commission in 1986 and the Office of Multicultural Affairs in  the Prime Minister's Department in 1987; and the National 

  Agenda for a Mu ltic ult ural Au str ali a wh ich was launched in  1 989 . 

  Each of these milestones heralded fundamental changes to the  way we think and act as a society . We are more fair, just and  open as a result. 

  But I would li ke to concentrate on a few more recent measures  nation-building measures -- which I believe will be  tremendously important to preser ving and advancing our  national unity as we approach the next century.  We share this country with the first Australians who hold a  unique place in our society. 

  A key long-term goal for us is to achieve reconciliation  between indigenous and other Australians. Much work still  needs to be done before that goal will be achieved. 

  Obviously the High Court1s Mabo decision and the Labor  Government's Native Title legislation to follow-up that  decision were very important parts of this process. 

  Other positive developments are occurring too. A new style of  leadership has emerged from within Australia's indigenous  communities -- one which is more focused and more effective in  advocacy than ever before. The focus of the debate is shifting  away from the problems and towards the solutions. 

  We canlt underestimate the obstacles that remain. But I am  hopeful that the dialogue is becoming more responsive and  robust on all sides. 

  Whilst in Government, we proposed legislation which would  protect people from acts of racist intimidation or harassment  based on a person's race, colour, or national or ethnic  origin. The proposed legislation had both civil and criminal 

  sanctions, and was based on extensive community consultation. 

  We regarded this legislation as tremendously important. In our  view it is meaningless to talk about our cohesive national  community if we are not prepared to protect the rights of  individuals within that community. 

  When we are confronted with racial hatred we have a  straightforward choice -- we can passively accept it, or we  can move to stamp it out. 

  So we proposed criminal sanctions for serious cases of racial  hatred, including threats of physical harm to people or  property or the incitement of racial hatred. It was proposed  that crimes of this nature would attract a maximum penalty of 

  two years in prison. 

  As you know, Parliament enacted an am ended version of the Bill  excluding the criminal sanctions . The then Opposition, now the  Government, unwillingly conceded the civil measures, but it 

  does not accept that extreme racist activity should be a  crime. 

  In our view the exclusion of criminal sanctions provisions  weakens the legislation. We believe that there are grounds for  criminal sanctions against actions which clearly undermine  Australian society and Australian standards. 

  We reluctantly accepted the Bill in its amended form, but we  preferred the old Bill. The Government ought to be pressured  to strengthen legislation against racial hatred in this  country. 

  I would also like to address some of the excellent work being  undertaken by the co-hosting body for this conference, the  United Israel Appeal Refugee Relief Fund. 

  The Refugee Relief Fund has been providing support to young  refugees from Ethiopia, former Yugoslavia and the former  Soviet Union for several years now, including transport to  Israel and tuition there, to help rebuild lives damaged by  anti-Semitism and civil unrest. 

  The work of the Fund, particularly in the war zones of Bosnia  Herzegovina, has often been nothing short of miraculous. 

  This work shows us, more than anything, the deep appreciation  that members of the Jewish community have for individual  security and the passion with which they defend and uphold it.  It is in the context of the Refugee Relief Fund that I would  like to outline some of our new concerns.  By now, you would all be aware of the Governmentls plan to cut  the number of immigrants to Australia arriving in the refugee  and other humanitarian categories. This sends a bad signal for  a few reasons: 

  o Firstly, it administers a blow to people who should be able  to, and historically have been able to, expect assistance from  a prosperous country such as Australia; 

  o Secondly, it represents a clear breach of the Coalitionls  (repeated) promise throughout the election campaign "not to  reduce the refugee component and to emphasise the role of  assisting genuine refugees II.  o Thirdly, it should not be forgotten that the orderly  absorption of refugees has been important in ensuring that we  are able to enforce vigorously the laws on illegal access to  our borders. 

  In addition, the Coalition is introducing legislation to  extend the waiting period applying to a serie~ of welfare  benefits for migrants to two years. Some of those were  benefits for which we extended the waiting period to six  months. That they took to the electorate. They have since 

  added a range of famil y benefit s that those in employment  recei ve as well as those wh o are unemployed. 

  Taxpayers contributi ng to our defence , pensions, education,  health, etc. are being denied benefits available to all other  Australians. Abo ve all, they go to children and they support  family life. 

  The Department of Social Security has made it clear to the  Minister, Mr Ruddock, that the savings will be less than half  the $600 million the Government is budgeting to save from  these measures. 

  Of course, it makes no sense whatever to talk about building  our sense of common identity and future without mentioning  Australia's constitutional arrangements.  It is time for us as a nation to move forward and embrace our 

  full nationhood. It is time for our Head of State to be one of  uS .. That would be a most powerful gesture of national unity to  take into the next century. 

  Undoubtedly the gesture will be largely symbolic. But that  makes it only the more worthwhile. Nations speak about  themselves, and their sense of self, through symbols. 

  We in the Labor Party committed ourselves when in office to an  Australian Head of State. One of us should hold that symbolic  position. This is of course now in the hands of the  Government. 

  We will cooperate with a properly formed constitutional  inquiry but we believe the debate has moved past the point  where politicians should be occupying its centre stage. The  Australian people now want to express their opinion, and we  want to see the issue put to them this term. 

  Many thousands of people came to Australia with nothing more  than a few belongings and a small black and white photo of a  loved one. 

  They made their home here, they gave this country their  loyalty and their hard work. They raised a new generation of  young Australians. 

  The tolerant, cosmopolitan and open Australia we have today  rides substantially on the wave of post-war immigration.  As we look back to those days, we remember that it was the  search for democracy , freedom and opportunity which drew so  many to Australia; we acknowledge the cultural riches brought 

  to this country by waves of courageous individuals; and we  recognise the generosity of those who welcomed so many  settlers to our nation. Most of all, we celebrate the great  tolerant, modern and diverse society we have achieved together  over a remarkably short period of time. 

  As we look to the year 2000, that most resonant of years in  modern times, there is no doubt in my mind that Australia can,  and should, be the nation that most closely captures the  spirit of the age. 

  In a divided world we aim to be united as a community behind  our common ideals and our highest aspirations. We aim to be a  just society, which values each and every individual, and  which offers opportunities for all. 

  But there remains much to do. 

  That is why reconciliation between indigenous and other  Australians is so fundamental to everything we hope to achieve  as a nation. 

  It is why striving for an Australian Head of State is not a  diversion from our national goals but central to them. 

  It is why the racial hatred legislation remains important for  us. 

  And it is why we remain committed to a vital and vigorous  multicultural Australia and thankful for the contribution of  organisations such as those represented here today. 

