---
title: "Press conference, Adelaide, 14 November 1996"
date: "1996-11-14"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211452832
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GW530%22
---

  f Department of the Parliamentary Library 

  Information Storage and Retrieval System Page 1 

  Press conference, Adelaide, 14 November 1996. Alexander DOWNER, MP.  Press release 

  The text of this press release has been scanned electronically from the original. Freedom from  errors or omissions cannot be guaranteed. 

  E&OE .... 

  The Federal Government is deeply concerned about the situation in Zaire and we have  been giving consideration to what action we as a Government can take on behalf of  Australia to alleviate the plight of those people that are suffering so grievously. I  recently sent the Director-General of Au sAID , the national aid agency, to Nairobi for  him to assess the situation in Zaire and Rwanda -Nairobi being an appropriate base  from which he can do that - and he has reported back to me, making various  recommendations. On the basis of the advice I've had from the Director-General of  AusAID, I have decided that the Australian Government will give $2.6 million  immediately, in order to provide assistance to Non Government Organisations. Those  Australian NGOs will be able to use the money to help with the distribution of the food 

  and materials to refugees and also to provide logistical support to the distribution of  food and materials. At the moment the assessment of the Director-General of Au sAID  and of international agencies is that there is a substantial amount offood and there are  other materials available. The problem is the distribution of those materials. 

  Consequently we believe the best and most practical way Australia can assist  immediately is to provide $2.6 million to a range of Australian NGOs to help with the  distribution of food and other materials. Those organisations include bodies such as  Community Aid Abroad (Oxfam), Care Australia, World Vision, the Australian Red  Cross, Medicine Sans Frontiers, as well as the Australian Catholic Relief, Austcare,  UNICEF Australia and the Adventist Development Relief Agency. Those  organisations will get between $200,000 and $300,000 each. This is an immediate  response by the Australian Government, it's something we can quickly and effectively.  We are harnessing the expertise of the Non Government Organisations. We believe  that in providing some assistance in this way, we are fulfilling our responsibilities as a  Government which represents a humane community which I'm sure would want to feel  that Australians were helping the plight of those suffering in Zaire and Rwanda. 

  Journalist: My apologies Minister, but could you repeat the total outlay the Australian  Government is prepared to put forward. 

  Minister: At this stage -I emphasise, we may be able to do more later -but at this stage  we are going to spend $2.6 million. That money is to go a range of Australian Non  Government Organisations. 

  Journalist: Will you consider sending troops to join the Canadian forces opening up  those access routes for the refugees. 

  Minister: We have not received any request for troops at this stage. If we were to  receive a request, then that's something the Government would have to consider. You  have to understand that at this stage the United Nations Security Council is  considering this proposal for the deployment of neutral intervention force, but they 

  , 95-3689 Page 2 

  haven't as yet put together details such as the precise objectives, the rules of  engagement, composition of the force, and so on, and as I've said at this stage we've  received no request from the United Nations Secretary General or from any particular  nation. If we were to receive a request we would give consideration to it. 

  Journalist: So you certainly haven't ruled out sending troops in. 

  Minister: Well I can only repeat what I've said, we have not received a request yet. If  we were to receive a request then the Government would obviously give that  consideration. 

  Journalist: There is some criticism that Governments, not just the Australian  Government, around the world have not acted quickly enough. Do you (inaudible) 

  Minister: It's easy to criticise, but this is an enormous logistic problem, that I have to  say. I've noticed though that the European Commission has been very critical of the  failure of the United Nations to act as decisively as maybe the European Commission  would have liked. By the time you work out what type of force you're going to send,  what its composition should be, what the right balance of nationalities is, it is 

  obviously quite an important political decision, and what the rules of engagement are  going to be, that takes a bit of time. It would be nice to feel that this problem could be  solved with the waving of a wand, but it can't be. 

  Journalist: The situation with the distribution, it's one thing to be given $2.3 million,  (Minister interjects: 2.6 million) sorry, 2.6 million, but if there aren't any (inaudible)  groups it's impossible for these agencies to do the job anyway, isn't it? 

  Minister: Well there are a combination of things here. First let me repeat the point I  made earlier -the food and materials are available, so there are no shortages, at least  in the immediate future of food and materials. Secondly, there isn't any capacity to,  distribute that food and materials. Thirdly, there is a question of security on the 

  ground, and whether even if you had the capacity to distribute the foods and materials  you would be allowed to do so. There are some indications coming out of the region that  you would be allowed to do so. I'm not saying that the success of our assistance is going  to be dependant on a military force. The fact is, if a military force goes in, the object of  that would be to facilitate the distribution of food and materials, by opening up safe  passages. 

  Journalist: So, it really is a bit of a precursor, we really do need to see some degree of  safety down at the (inaudible). 

  Minister: There is some consideration that a certain amount of food and other  materials could get though to certain camps at this stage. But we are not at the point  where we can say the food and materials could get thought of everywhere that we  would like it go, clearly that is not the case. We couldn't get it through there because of  the security situation. 

  Journalist: Is that a factor to consider -whether or not we send troops eventually. 

  Minister: As I said, what will influence our thinking is if there is a request for any  support from the Australian Defence Force, and if that request comes we will obviously 

  95-3689 Page 3 

  have to consider it. 

  Journalist: The troops we sent to Somalia, (inaudible) 

  Minister: It's a different sort of situation. Of course it's appallingly serious. You've got  at least a million refugees on the move in Zaire, Rwanda. It's not a question of getting  into a game of measuring whether that's more serious or less serious than Somalia.  The Somalia exercise though in a sense was not very successful because once the troops  withdrew, the situation in Somalia returned to one of disarray. This is a different  circumstance. It's caused by different factors. Part of the solution must come from the  local people, fairly obviously, part of the solution may come from political leadership,  part of the solution lies in the humanitarian distribution offood and materials. Maybe  part of the solution is the assistance of some type of military force. We will have to wait 

  and see. 

  Journalist: Mr Downer, on another issue, are you happy to let John Holloway back  into the diplomatic service? 

  Minister: It's a matter for the department. 

  Journalist: But you (inaudible) of the department. 

  Minister: I don't run the administration of the Department, I'm the Minister. Those  sorts of personnel matters are matters that are handled by the department. Can I  make one other point to you, it's not what I'm getting into today. 

  Journalist: There has been some question about the way the organisations handle the  funds that are given, over the recent weeks. How is this $2.6 million going to be  accoun ted for? 

  Minister: We've made a careful study through the Director-General of Au sAID of what  we could most effectively do as a Government to assist the humanitarian situation in  Zaire. We have made the judgement based on the experience of the relevant aid  organisations that we have chosen in this case, and I mean by experience, their  experience in Zaire and Rwanda, and given their experience with logistic issues that  those Australian Non Government Aid organisations which are best placed to ensure  that the $2.6 million is efficiently and effectively spent. But, we have been very  cautious in how we have made an assessment of how we will fund the money to Zaire. 

  Journalist: Do you think this a quick fix? 

  Minister: I would like to feel that it would be a quick fix -I'm afraid it won't be a quick  fix. All we can do is show that we, as a Government show the humanity that the  Australian people feel towards this crisis and do the best we can in the circumstances.  We have some money that we set aside every year for humanitarian crises of this kind, 

  and this is one way that we are able to deploy those resources. 

  Journalist: Mr Downer, do you have any concern or make in statement in relation to  the US pressure on Australia over tariffs, by any chance? 

  Minister: Have I ever ... 

  95-3689 Page 4 

  Journalist: Have you given any recent (inaudible) 

  Minister: Are you talking about the Howe leather situation? 

  Journo: Yes, that's right. 

  Minister: Well, I've personally had discussions with the United States administration  about it. However in the last couple of weeks we've had at the officials level, extensive  discussions with the Americans, I hope that we will be able to find some way through  that problem, but at this stage it is not resolved. 

  Journo: (inaudible) ... affect Australia US trade relations. 

  Minister: It's obviously a problem in the trade relationship. 

  Journo: What's does the John Holloway case say about the Child Sex tourism act? 

  Minister: I've got nothing to say about the John Holloway case. 

  Journo: That it's not working? 

  Minister: Same answer, nothing to say about it. If you want to do a story on the John  Holloway case look elsewhere. 

