---
title: "Kerr counsels caution on tribunals"
date: "1996-04-19"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
source: "Shadow Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214170156
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HPR02011632%22
---

 18/04 96 THU 17:03 FAl 002 23 8560 BEAZLEY 0 0 0 2 ^

 19 April 1996

 Media Release

 Duncan Kerr, Shadow Minister for Immigration

 Kerr Counsels Caution on Tribunals Shadow Immigration Minister Duncan Kerr today warned the Federal Government  against any moves to erode the rights o f individuals in refugee and immigration  applications.

 Mr Kerr welcomed the fresh attention Mr Ruddock was giving to this issue, saying  there was no argument the whole merit review system had had some problems.

 “The Minister already has a major report which the Government has not responded to,  in front of him.

 “There is absolutely no need to waste any public money on yet another report,  especially at a time of sackings and spending cuts across the board. It would be  completely irresponsible.”

 As Justice Minister in the previous Government, responsible for Administrative Law  Mr Kerr commissioned a review of the Commonwealth merit review system to be  conducted by the Administrative Review Council.

 “The independent and comprehensive report, Better Decisions, was tabled in the  Parliament late last year. While some of its simple recommendations have been  implemented in relation to a number of tribunals including the Refugee Review  Tribunal and the Immigration Review Tribunal, there has not been an official 

 Government response.

 “The Report makes a broader recommendation to unify and streamline tire whole  tribunals system. This addresses the points Mr Ruddock rightly makes in respect of  time and cost efficiency. The Attorney-General and Mr Ruddock should look to this  Report, which was prepared at considerable cost to the public, before committing  more money to what could only be a PR stunt and a simple duplication.

 ,../2

 '«uambtoS m S u»

 18/04 96 THU 17:04 FAX 002 23 8560 BEAZLEY @003

  “People are entitled to impartial and fair review within policy framework by  government and Parliament, otherwise governments can ride roughshod over people’s  rights. “Merit review is very different from judicial review, it enables simple scrutiny o f  bureaucratic decisions. It aims for fair and preferable decisions. “Judicial review is limited to deeming a decision being so unreasonable that no  decision maker would arrive at, or otherwise flawed by misunderstanding of the law. “Constitutionally it is impossible to eliminate the right o f people to judicial review.  The wholesale transfer o f review to the courts system is counter-productive. “If the tribunal option were abolished and decisions o f Departmental officers appealed  in the courts as a matter of routine, the cost and delays would be far greater. “More importantly it would be a step backwards in access to justice. Despite the  recent increase in appeals of decisions of the RRT and IRT to the Federal Court and  the High Coun, the fact i$ only about 6% o f total decisions end up in these Courts. “The merit review system, as well as being quick, cheap and accessible also acts as a  filter so that only the tough cases make it as far as the courts.” Duncan Kerr is available for further comment on 0418 125161; (002) 345 255, ,  -2-

 “People are entitled to impartial and fair review within policy framework by  government and Parliament, otherwise governments can ride roughshod over people’s  rights.

 “Merit review is very different from judicial review, it enables simple scrutiny o f  bureaucratic decisions. It aims for fair and preferable decisions.

 “Judicial review is limited to deeming a decision being so unreasonable that no  decision maker would arrive at, or otherwise flawed by misunderstanding of the law.

 “Constitutionally it is impossible to eliminate the right o f people to judicial review.  The wholesale transfer o f review to the courts system is counter-productive.

 “If the tribunal option were abolished and decisions o f Departmental officers appealed  in the courts as a matter of routine, the cost and delays would be far greater.

 “More importantly it would be a step backwards in access to justice. Despite the  recent increase in appeals of decisions of the RRT and IRT to the Federal Court and  the High Coun, the fact i$ only about 6% o f total decisions end up in these Courts.

 “The merit review system, as well as being quick, cheap and accessible also acts as a  filter so that only the tough cases make it as far as the courts.”

 Duncan Kerr is available for further comment on 0418 125161; (002) 345 255,

 ,  -2-

