---
title: "Howard confirms a swing to Labor among migrant Australians"
date: "1996-02-09"
creators:
  - "Bolkus, Nick"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211448374
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SHQ20%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Nick Bolkus  B23/96 

  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC 

  AFFAIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME 

  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

  Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600  (06) 277 7860 

  HOW ARD CONFIRMS A SWING TO LABOR AMONG MIGRANT AUSTRALIANS 

  John Howard's belated immigration and multicultural policies confirm a swing to Labor  among non-English speaking migrant communities, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic  Affairs, Senator Nick Bolkus, said today. 

  "I have been expecting a swing of between 5 and 7 per cent to Labor among non-English  speaking background Australians," Senator Bolkus said. "I believe this policy will confirm  that swing and maybe even increase it." 

  "This policy is nothing more than a last minute attempt by the Opposition to bribe  communities with conscience money and distract people from past mistakes. But no matter  how hard he tries, John Howard cannot crawl away from the prejudice of the past and his  appalling track record. 

  "He was on the record as opposing Asian immigration for some six and a half years before  backtracking on the eve of becoming Opposition leader. 

  "He lies about the White Australia Policy and who dismantled it. The reality is that in 1971,  five years after the Holt Government's minor adjustments in 1966, only 1 % of a program  of 155,000 places were for non-Europeans. They were denied assisted passages and had to  wait years to become citizens, while British migrants could register as citizens without a  ceremony after 12 months!" 

  "The Liberals then were saying that if Labor got in, there would be an invasion from Asia. 

  "John Howard forgets this as he rewrites history, just as he rewrites history about his 1988  comments on Asian immigration. He claimed six years later that those comments were  unfortunate and clumsy -but they were in fact deliberate and made consistently over a long  and protracted campaign. 

  "This prejudice has carried into the present, with his failure to act over the 'dewogging'  statements of the National Party candidate for Leichhardt, and the support of senior Liberals  for the racist US Lyndon LaRouche group." 

  Senator Bolkus said John Howard was way behind on both multicultural and settlement  policy, and immigration policy. 

  "Almost alLhis suggestions are at least 12 months out of date - the Government is already  doing everything he suggests and more. 

  "For example, we have increased funding for Adult English Migrant language services by  at least $20 million in the last three years, and are making them I!lore accessible, flexible and  better targeted . 

   "  " 

  "", .  . 

  "In the area of racism, he attempts to salve his conscience by spending money on education,  when he knows the Government is already doing this. More importantly, he knows that for  it to be effective, we need racial hatred legislation with criminal sanctions -the stick arul the  carrot. It's a telling area of difference. 

  "The Government already has comprehensive strategies for ethnic aged, youth of NESB (not  mentioned in this statement) and productive diversity in the workplace (hardly mentioned). 

  "The Government is reforming overseas skills recognition, has a NESB women's health  strategy and a program for women migrant outworkers . 

  . "We have already reviewed and strengthened our systems for keeping gang members and war  criminals out of the .country, and are spending another $1 million this year improving our  " migrant alert lists. " 

  " "As well, the Government has thoroughly overhauled our visa processing systems with state  of the art technology - making Australia the world leader in this area." 

  Senator Bolkus said that while John Howard was playing catch-up, there were some clear and  telling differences between Liberal and Labor policy. 

  "Their policy on Citizenship, for example, points to a far more restrictive approach, and the  possible reintroduction of the Oath of allegiance to Queen Elizabeth 11. 

  "The Liberals do not seem to understand the breadth of the Humanitarian Program, in  particular the role of the Special Assistance Categories (SACs) in responding to areas of  particular need. They say they'll review the SACs, and only make a commitment to  ~

  "They want to tighten up spouse migration, keeping partners apart for a minimum of two  years. They also want to impose English language requirements across the board for the  Concessional family component, making it much tougher for families to reunite. 

  "Finally, they are going to put the prices up for applications." 

  "John Howard is offering nothing to reassure migrants whose real concerns are industrial  relations and the protection of wages, Medicare, social justice and meaningful legislation  against acts of racial hatred. 

  "He tells people for example that if they want to lift their wages they'll have to take their  lawyer with them to sign contracts . NESB job seekers will have least protection when  they need it most. 

  "In Short, Howard still shows no real interest in or understanding of immigration or what  makes cultural diversity work for all of us. " 

  BRISBANE FEBRUARY 9 1996 Contact: Ruth Dewsbury (06) 277 7860, (0418) 624847 

   " 

