---
title: "Australia's role in promoting international development and human rights: address ... to the ACFOA Pre-Election Forum, 29 February 1996"
date: "1996-02-29"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211448862
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FYR20%22
---

  Attached is a speech delivered today by Foreign Minister Gareth Evans, "Australia's role in  promoting international development and human rights". 

  The speech contains the announcement of a major new Australian peace and disarmament  initiative; the tabling today in Geneva of a hundred page model text for the proposed  COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR TEST BAN TREATY (pp 6-7). 

  For further information; Robert Newton 06 277-7500 

  Australia's Role in Promoting; International Development and Human Rights 

  AJJrcss by Han Gareth Evans QC, Minister for Foreign Affairs to the ACFOA Prc " Election Forum, Sydney, 29 February 1996. 

  Just two days out from voting day, it is crunch time - time to weigh it all up, to m easure  promise against performance, to test ambitions against practical achievability, to locate  common ground and to expose differences in the competing views on offer. Can I suggest  two tests by which you should judge the policies of the four speakers before you today: are 

  they any good, and can they be implemented? 

  B y this test, two of the speakers - representing the Democrats and Greens - can articulat e  fine goals, make adventurous promises, conjure up elaborate ambitions, and dish out strong 

  criticism. They can do this regardless of the practical constraint s of the possible , because  after March 2, they will not be able to deliver: they will not be in Government. Like  minority parties anywhere, they have the misfortune to have to speak loudly, but carry a  very small stick. 

  The third speaker in this debate represents the Coalition - certainly with the potential to  form a Government and implement policy, but whose policies and attitudes have the  potential to tum the clock back in Australia's foreign relations . 

  The backdrop now is not the more or less steady-state environment that prevailed through  the Cold War years, but one of dramatic change - the end of the C:old War; the emergence  of the Asia Pacific region as the most economically dynamic in the world; the revolution in  communications and information technology; the globalisation of markets; the emergence  of urgent new transnational problems including threats to the environment, the plight of 

  refugees; and the continuing international reality of multiple tmeats to universal human  rights. 

  Against this backdrop, this is surely not the time to be "relaxed and comfortable" about  Australia's future. It is surely not the time to cut the aid budget - or to slash the operations  of the foreign affairs department. It is surely not the time to allow the outdated and  mi sconceived precepts of Coalition old-think to tarnish Australia 's international reputation 

  and set back our efforts to build a strong and prosperous and independent future for  Australia. 

  [1X/96 J 

  \Vc have to go out there and win that future, in the region and in the world. We have to 

  recognise that the change going on around us offers Australians a rare and priceless  opportunity: to help build, actively and creatively, new economic and security structures  and to find new ways to protect and advance our basic national interests . We can't just wait 

  for the future to fall into our lap; we can't afford to be timorous and nervous about asserting  and advancing our interests; we have to reach out and grab our opportunity with both 

  hands. 

  So the choice really is very clear. Only one of the political parties represented in this  election forum is capable of conceiving and delivering an effective, positive and forward " looking foreign policy, including on the issues closest to ACFOA"s heart: the Labor Party. 

  In all that we have done in government, Labor has pursued what can be defined as any  country's basic national interest responsibilities: security and strategic interests on the one  hand, and economic interests on the other. But we have added a very important third  dimension: we've also defined, as a clear national interest, our interest in being and in being 

  seen to be a good international citizen. This means being actively and creatively engaged,  with other countries and in institutions like the United Nations, in advancing the emerging  new transnational agenda I referred to before. 

  The central point is that Labor does not see good international citizenship as subordinate  to, or in conflict with, our more traditional national interests . We see them all as integrally  related and mutually reinforcing. The coalition clearly does not. We see good citizenship 

  activities - our human rights dialogue, our humanitarian relief, our development assistance,  our commitment to international action on the environment - as an integral, vital part of  our overall engagement with Asia and the rest of the world. The coalition clearly does not.  Mr Downer does not say much in this election campaign about such matters. His silence 

  points to a deep gap between the two major parties on the kind of policies that we bring to  the argument. Let me go first to the sharp end of the debate: the aiid budget. 

  Development Assistance 

  Labor has increased aid spending in real terms in each of the last six budgets. This year we  are providing just over $1.5 billion, which represents 0.33 per cent of GNP - a  proportionate decline because of the rapid growth of the Australian economy, but still a 

  real increase in dollar terms and a substantial improvement on the OECD average of 0.30 

  per cent. Australia is one of only four OEeD donor countries which has increased its aid 

  3 

  hudgct in real terms. So against the key m easure used to judge Australia and other dUJ10r  countries, we are perfonning well. Moreover, the Labor Party Platform expresses our "best 

  endeavours" commitment to increase that level of spending to 0.4 per cent of GNP hy 

  2000 . As the NGOs have repeatedly pointed out to us, howeveJr, and as has exhaustively 

  been discussed in recent days, we have not been in a position at this stage to make an  explicit budgetary commitment to achieving this target: it's a matter each year of seeing  just how far we can go, and I can assure you that budgetary battles are very hard fought by 

  my portfolio. 

  By contrast, the Coalition parties enter this campaign with a promise to simply cut the aid  budget - not to reallocate it away from infrastructure sp

  this can only be achieved at the expense of $282 million worth of broken promises to other 

  governments (and $27 m illi on of broken contracts with Australia n contractors). 

  This cut will push Australia's official development assistance to less than 0.30 per cent of  GNP - below the OEeD average for the first time. In dollar terms, this cut is larger than  that proposed in the last campaign by John Hewson, who wanted to cut the aid budget by  15 percent, or $209 million . In this campaign, Mr Downer is out-Fightbacking Fightback!  Mr Downer's defence is to say that at least he is being honest. John Hewson was being  honest too. With consistent honesty like this, the Coalition win be able to do without an  aid budget entirely before too long! 

  So let's get this point very clear. In this campaign, Labor has increased real aid spending  and will seek to do so in the future. The Liberals' starting point is a deep cut in aid  spending. 

  According to Mr Downer, the program targeted for elimination --the Development Import  Finance Facility (DIFF), is a business subsidy. This ignores the fact that DIFF projects are  nominated by recipient countries as high priority aid projects and that they do deliver real  and positive assistance to poor people in many countries . This is the whole point of the  criticism directed at the coalition by business groups since their spending policy was  announced. Abolition of DIFF will strike out more than fifty projects, many of them 

  involving water, sanitation and related engineering, education institutions and the like  already agreed with governments in the region. 

  One point that has been insufficiently recognised In the debate about DIFF is its 

  increasingly striking "green" credentials. As their Telstra-environment trade-off 

  4 

  highlights, the Coalition's green credentials are already thin as tissue, and abolishing DlFF  fits in nicely. I say that because DIFF these days is playing an immensely important role ill 

  Australia's efforts to develop air and water pollution controls, clean and efficient energy 

  and improved waste management in developing countries . A couple of examples. In the  Philippine city of Saguio, 25 per cent of the residents have no piped water supply and 

  water rationing is necessary in summer. Partly through DIFF, we arc supplying pump s,  booster stations, chlorination facilities and technical assistance to improve the existing  water supply system and expand it into new areas. In Jinan City, the capital of China's  Shandong Province, the residents are dependent on rapidly depleting ground water  reserves. Our water supply projects - in willch DIFF provides more than $6 million of the 

  $17 million commitment - will draw water from new sources and treat it to internationally  potable standards. 

  Human Rights 

  On human rights issues more generally, Labor is also happy to be compared with our  opponents. I don't believe there is any country more active than we are in making  representations to governments around the world about particular human rights issues  involving individuals or groups: we make at ministerial and official level some 500 each 

  year, on behalf of political prisoners, trade unionists, ethnic minorities, religious activists  and other dissidents 

  We were one of the key international players in the campaign against apartheid - at a time  when John Howard was doggedly defending not Nelson Mandela but the regime that put  him in jail. We have tried very hard to advance the cause of democracy and human rights  in Burma . We repeatedly take up with Indonesia conditions in East Timor: even Jose 

  Ramos Horta nowadays accepts that. And while I am consistently being urged to be more  confrontational with Indonesia on tills issue, I am rarely given any advice as to actions  likely to be more productive in achieving positive outcomes. 

  Mr Howard and Mr Downer profess concern about human rights conditions within  Vietnam. But they administered a calculated snub last year to Communist Party leader Do  Muoi, dramatically diminishing their capacity to be influential on anything should they 

  come into government. And when it came to meeting with Vietnamese Foreign Minister  Cam early last year, Mr Downer insisted he had "raised" human rights only to have the  Vietnamese Embassy retort in a formal press release that human rights had not been 

  "discussed" at all. This is not a human rights dialogue, it is a human rights charade. 

  We have been prominent in moves to reform and reinvigorate the United Nations, so that it  can advance in a more effective and integrated way its founders' treble objectiv es of peace,  development and human rights. There is growing support for the argument that I and  others have been putting that we must reengineer the UN so that all these objectives can be  achieved in a more coordinated and prioritised way. One of the means towards that goal is 

  to secure the UN's funding base, and we have urged examination of imaginative and 

  innovative ways to do this, including, as we make clear in your questionnaire, 

  consideration of a Tobin tax. We have also been leaders at the global UN conferences, for  instance in winning acceptance for the "conference of commitments" principle at the recent  Beijing Women's Conference. 

  Peace Building 

  But achieving a truly peaceful world, in which human rights are protected and upheld in  both their political and economic dimensions, will require much more. The international  community is just now learning the ways of addressing the underlying causes of conflict,  both to entrench peace in countries trying to recover after being tom by conflict, and also to  stop conflict erupting in the first place. 

  Societies lacking peace are frequently societies that lack distributive justice and political  representativeness . In tum, these are absent because there is no civil infrastructure capable  of delivering or sustaining them. One of the particular peace-building contributions that  developed economies like Australia can make is to help provide what could be called the 

  appropriate technology of governance. In Cambodia, for example, the conduct under UN  supervision of the elections in May 1993 entailed the creation oj[ an electoral process that  did not previously exist. But a lot more was necessary to rebuild the country's 

  administrative infrastructure, and this is very much a theme of Australia's development  assistance policies not only in Cambodia but elsewhere. In Cambodia itself we are  providing senior policy advice in education, health, foreign affairs and agriculture; we are  supporting NOOs and the UN Centre in Phnom Penh, to help widen the acceptance of  human rights and to strengthen the legal institutions; we are looking at a project which  would allow Cambodia to draw on Australia's legal and organisational precedents to  strengthen local police, judicial and custodial systems; and with the World Bank we are  preparing a project to de mobilise and reintegrate excess soldiers from the Royal  Cambodian Armed Forces. All this as well as helping a number IOf NOOs rebuild the lives  of urban and rural poor, and providing support and training for clearing the scourge of  landmines. 

  6 

  These activiti es all come under the heading of in-country peace building. \Ve are \\'orkin g  at peace building at the regional and global level, too, with active support for the grl)wing 

  w eb of international legal regimes and dialogue arrangements designed to reduce bl)th the  likelihood of war and its awful human costs if it does occur. 

  You will be aware of our commitment, restated recently by me in unequivocal term s, to  support a total ban on the manufacture, stockpile, use and transfer of anti-personnel  landmines - their total elimination. 

  We have also been active in developing, as a major new theme of Australian foreign  policy, international efforts to control weapons of mass destruction . We helped form the  South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone; John Howard said it was "absurd" - so absurd that the  US, UK and France have now agreed fmally to ratify the Treaty. We led the way in  achieving the successful conclusion of the Chemical Weapons Convention negotiations, in  particular by drafting a model treaty text at a crucial stage to accelerate the end game; we 

  were a key player in winning the indefinite extension of the NPT; we led the protests 

  against French nuclear testing, as even President Chirac has conceded. And now we have  judged that the time is right to seize the opportunity to push, with the formation of the  Canberra Commission, not just for an end to nuclear testing and other half-way house  objectives, but to seek the total elimination of nuclear weapons. I was delighted to see the 

  commendation in yesterday'S press of the Canberra Commiss ion by Australian peace  groups - and their rejection of the Coalition's knee-jerk dismissiveness of the worth of this  enterprise. 

  Let me finally take this opportunity to tell you of a new effort Australia has under way in  this field - in relation to th e Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty negotiations . Later  today, in Geneva, the Australian delegation to the Conference on Disarmament will present 

  delegates with a new hundred page model treaty text for the proposed Treaty. As you  know, the CTBT is intended to ban all testing of all nuclear weapons for all time, which is  of course a very key step towards the elimination of nuclear weapons. The UN General  Assembly has called for the Treaty to be concluded "as soon as possible in 1996". But 

  since negotiations resumed in January, there has been a disappointing lack of urgency  about the process. There is a maze of proposals on the table. 'iVhat we have done is to  identify, in a model text, potential solutions to the many outstanding negotiating issues. 

  We are not seeking to set up some alternative negotiating process or to replace the existing  rolling text. We just want to offer solutions to outstanding problems - and we are  investing considerable effort in the task. The Secretary of the Department, Michael 

  Costello, will himself table the model text at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva -I would have been tabling it my self, as I did previously with our exercise on the Chemical 

  7 

  Weapons Convention, but I've had some domestic preoccupations this week! At the sam e 

  time senior officials have this week been writing to key capitals around the world to 

  explain the text and to seek support. We want to show all delegations that the CTI3T is  within reach, this year. With this model text we hope - as we were able to do with the 

  Chemical Weapons Convention - to reinvigorate the negotiations as they move to the end "

  game phase and to provide a catalyst for consensus. 

  * * * 

  I know that NGOs like ACFOA have not seen eye to eye with the Government on every 

  issue. You sometime criticise us for not going far enough, not doing enough, not tackling  all the problems that jostle for our attention . I make no apology for recognising, in 

  Government, the differences between what can be done, what can't be done and what can't 

  be done now. But I do not think we have ever lost sight of what should be done, or that we 

  have ever failed to do what must be done - and that will remain our practice in 

  Government after 2 March. 

