---
title: "Health care in a multicultural society: address to the Seminar 'Health Care in a Multicultural Society', University of Melbourne, 25 July 1997"
date: "1997-07-25"
creators:
  - "Wooldridge, Michael"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND FAMILY SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211455400
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XCH30%22
---



In 1990, the poet, Vaclav Havel, made his inaugural speech as the newly
elected President of Czechoslovakia. To a people who had triumphed over
communist oppression, Havel spoke with moral vision and moral courage.

 Communism may have gone, swept aside by an irresistible and peaceful
revolution. But Havel saw that communism had bequeathed a legacy as potent
and dangerous to Czech society as its now rejected Marxist ideology.

 The worst thing about the end of communism said Havel is that 'we
live in a contaminated moral environment. We learned to ignore each other,
to care only about ourselves. Concepts such as love, friendship,
compassion... lost their depth and dimensions and for many of us they
...resembled gone astray greetings from ancient times, a little ridiculous
in the age of computers and spaceships."

 Within two years,
Havel's beloved Czechoslovakia was split in two. His people held a
referendum and voted to divide the nation into its ethnic parts: the Czechs
and the Slovaks were to be separate countries and separate people.

 It was too much for Havel. He resigned as President. He could not in
conscience preside over a country governed by a mindset which encouraged
people to care only about 'ourselves'. He could not stomach the thought that
compassion was restricted to an 'us' and a 'them'.

 Today
Australia is facing a similar challenge. The voices of a strident few have
come into prominence, most notably those of a noisy and resentful minority
represented by Pauline Hanson and the One Nation Party, who are now trying
to split this country into an 'us' and a 'them'.

 Just as Havel
rejected this mindset in his own Czechoslovakia, I -along with the vast
majority of Australians -similarly reject it in Australia.

 It
is painfully wrong and misleading to describe the most disadvantaged of all
Australians, our indigenous people, as the beneficiaries of reverse
racism.

 It is wrong to reject as "them" those people who have
come to our shores to make a home here. Wrong, too, to single out people
from our neighbourhood of Asia for hatred.

 Wrong to describe
migrants as taking our jobs. Wrong to say we have reached "compassion
fatigue", as though compassion has defined limits.

 It is not
'One Nation', Australia, which that misnamed party stands for. Rather it is
two nations. Like Czechoslovakia, there are to be two Australia's divided
between the so called mainstream, the 'us', and another for 'the
them'.

 I find these views morally repugnant. Like Vaclav Havel,
I cannot and will not be part of a nation which discriminates on the basis
of race. Nor will I let it happen.

 As Minister for Health, I
reject the view expressed in Pauline Hanson's now infamous maiden speech
which parodied aboriginal people as beneficiaries of reverse racism
especially while the opposite is tragically true.

 According to
the most recent figures, for every government dollar spent on health for
non- - indigenous Australians, indigenous Australians receive just 80
cents.

 Yet their health needs are enormous. Indigenous
Australians live an average of 15-20 years less than their fellow
Australians and it is unconscionable that the original Australians
experience third-world rates of disease in the so called 'lucky
country'.

 These Australians rightly deserve the attention this
Government is giving to improving their lives and their health.

As a Member of Parliament for a constituency not 20 minutes away from here,
which comprises 22 per cent of people from non-English speaking backgrounds
and 30 per cent of people who are first-generation migrants, I reject the
view that Australia should turn its back on its commitment to a
non-discriminatory immigration policy.

 And on its proud record
of welcoming people from other countries and of building a society where
racial harmony and a celebration of diversity does work.

 To
subscribe to these narrow minded and racially discriminatory views would not
only be wrong in principle. It would overlook the distinguished contribution
which recently arrived migrants have made to this country.

 Take
my own area of responsibility, health, where Australia owes a great debt to
those migrants who have come to Australia:

 The 1996 Australian
of the Year John Yu from the Children's Hospital in Sydney whose work in
paediatrics made Australia world-renowned in this field;

 Victor
Chang, whose pioneering work in heart surgery has contributed to Australia's
proud reputation for excellence in this field;

 Where would the
Australian medicine have been without Gus Nossal, who fled his native
Austria and the oppression of Nazi Germany to come here as a seven year old
refugee in 1939?

 Think of the contribution of South African
born Priscilla Kincaid Smith, one of the world's leading figures in kidney
disease?

 It is unthinkable to imagine even today's meeting
without acknowledging the contribution of Malaysian born Dick Smallwood,
head of Australia's National Health and Medical Research Centre from 1994 to
March this year.

 Just as it is unthinkable to imagine
Australia's medical and scientific community without acknowledging the
contribution of these immigrants, I challenge those who argue Australia
should withdraw into itself, "look after our own", and turn our back on our
own region and the wider world.

 Australia cannot afford to
lapse into a mindset that our backyard is the only place which matters. We
cannot afford to think that we have to withdraw from the United Nations and
other international organisations, end overseas aid and re-erect tariff
walls to keep them -in particular our Asian "competitors"- out.

If only it were that simple. If only it was possible to turn the clock back
and fix Australia's jobs problem by such measures. But it is not the answer.
Raising new trade barriers would only inevitably invite others to re-erect
their own and deprive us of vital markets we need to create the new jobs we
so desperately need.

 By one estimate, 20 per cent of
Australians jobs are already dependent on exports, a figure which has
doubled in the last 12 years.

 In short, Australia cannot afford
policies which would make us isolated, insular and backward- -
looking.

 And make us a stranger in our own region.

Soon I will be heading off to Asia for two weeks, visiting countries as
vital to Australia as Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand to name a few. Above
all else, I will take to those countries simple message that Australia is
fully committed and more than willing to play its active part in addressing
the health issues which the people of our region face.

Australia has an historic opportunity to work closely with other countries
to offer its expertise to address region-wide health issues such as the
common threat we face from the pandemic HIV/AIDS.

 And to
provide services and know how to assist those countries as they seek to
develop further their own health and medical systems.

 In fact,
it would be hard to imagine a more important contribution we could make to
our region than to assist other countries in these ways.

 Health
has the potential to be one of our most invaluable links to the region. It
has the potential to be more than simply an export market, more than simply
a way Australian can provide much needed jobs.

 Ultimately, our
endeavours in health could directly improve the lives of people in other
countries and could be one of the most profound links we could ever
establish with our regional partners.

 Yet all this undoubted
potential is threatened by the very mindset and views espoused by the One
Nation Party which would have Australia cut itself off from the world and
care only for ourselves.

 But perhaps the greatest threat this
mindset poses is to the most precious feature of Australia's health system,
namely our commitment to certain basic moral values: humane principles such
as human dignity, compassion, a 'fair go',

 This mindset
of"looking after our own" threatens our commitment to providing a health
system which is based on respect for human rights of 
all people,
whatever their racial and cultural background.

 And of that
basic principle that health care in a multicultural society is founded on
the principle that our society provides care to people on the basis of
need.

 And that means not only seek to protect those who are
vulnerable, those with a mental illness or a disability, and strive to
provide them with decent care.

 But, in a particular way, to
seek actively to uphold the right of those of differing cultures to be
treated with full regard to their cultural backgrounds, with sensitivity to
their history and identity.

 It is these principles which form
the bedrock of our health system and of our society.

 It is
these principles we need to keep firmly in mind when any discussion of
health care in a multicultural society takes place.

 And work
hard to preserve and protect.

 That is why I welcome your
discussions this afternoon: discussions about 'to whom does my body
belong?', 'the impact of family culture on treatment approaches in
medicine', and 'the right to health an aboriginal perspective', to name a
few of the topics.

 There can hardly be a more important time to
discuss these vital issues and to reflect on the core principles of respect
for all people and their cultural backgrounds which underpin our health
system and indeed our country.

 Just this week I visited St
Vincent's Hospital nearby in Fitzroy. In the new sandstone courtyard, just
outside the entrance to the casualty, there are four words inscribed in
large letters on the ground.

 Compassion, human dignity, justice
and excellence.

 These are not words which "resemble gone astray
greetings from ancient times, a little ridiculous in the age of computers
and spaceships."

 They are words that I, Vaclav Havel and the
vast majority of Australians would regard as the basis of both of a fair
health system and a just society. We must work hard to make sure that they
are the values of the only Australia worth living in.

 I look
forward to hearing more about your discussions and wish you well for this
conference.

 Media Contact: 

 Bill Royce, Dr Wooldridge's
office, 0412 137 699

