---
title: "Ministerial visit to the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, United Kingdom and Italy"
date: "1997-01-22"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211550727
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A1930%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  ALEXANDER DOWNER 

  FAS 22 JANUARY 1997 

  MINISTERIAL VISIT TO THE NETHERLANDS, BELGIUM, SWITZERLAND,  UNITED KINGDOM AND ITALY 

  I will visit the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Italy from 25  January to 9 February 1996. The key objective of my visits is to give practical effect to the  Government's commitment to give increased standing to its relations with Europe and to  strengthen bilateral relations with each of the countries to be visited. 

  In the Netherlands, my meetings with the Dutch Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and  Foreign Trade Minister will focus on the further development of Australia's commercial and  political relationship with the European Union (the Dutch currently hold the EU Presidency)  as well as our bilateral relationship with the Netherlands. My visit to The Hague will also  enable me to discuss a range of important international issues with the President and  Prosecutor for the International Criminal Court for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of  the International Court of Justice and the Executive Secretary of the Organisation for  Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. 

  My meetings in Brussels, including with the Vice President of the European Commission, Sir  Leon Brittan, and the Commissioner in charge of Agriculture, Franz Fischler, will enable me  to address a number of political and commercial issues with the European Commission,  including negotiations on the EU-Australia Framework agreement and a bilateral Veterinary  Agreement. 

  I will also be meeting with the Belgian Foreign Minister, Erik Derycke, to discuss our  relations with Belgium. 

  In Geneva, I will be addressing the opening session of this year's UN Conference on  Disarmament where I will be tabling the report of the Canberra Commission and pursuing  Australia's commitment to rid the world of landmines. I will also be meeting the new  Secretary General of the UN, Mr Annan, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs  Ogata and the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights, Mr Lasso. 

  I will be attending the Annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos where I have  been invited to address seminars on Security in Asia and International Trade. I will also be  holding private meetings with a range of political and business leaders attending the  conference. 

  The focus of my visit to London is to highlight the modern and dynamic nature of the  UK-Australia commercial and political relationship . I will jointly launch with my UK  counterpart the "new IMAGES" promotion, address the Britain-Australia Society on the 

  Medio releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet . http:/ /www .dfat.qov.au/ 

  ..... 

  . ~ ... 

  importance and relevance of the bilateral relationship and meet Prime Minister Major and  Foreign Secretary Rifkind. The London visit also provides an opportunity for official  discussions on the Northern Ireland situation and to meet key opposition figures, including  Opposition Leader Tony Blair. 

  I will also visit Italy as a guest of the Italian government. This visit, the first by an Australian  Foreign Minister in almost a decade, has been planned as the focal point in the process of  revitalising the bilateral political and commercial relationship between Italy and Australia. In  Rome I will hold discussions with Foreign Minister Dini on our bilateral political and  commercial relationship . My meetings with the Italian Prime Minister, Defence Minister and  senior political leaders will also serve to reinforce the Government's renewed focus on its  relationship with an important partner in Europe in line with our election commitment. 

  During my visit to Rome I will also have a private audience with His Holiness Pope John Paul  II and have discussions with the Vatican's Secretary of State, Cardinal Sadono 

  My visit to Europe presents an opportunity to promote Australia's trade and investment  interests with the Netherlands, the EU, the UK and Italy. This will be achieved through a  series of addresses and meetings with key business leaders in Amsterdam, Brussels, Rome  and Milan as well as through meetings with Trade Ministers in The Hague and in Rome. I  also intend to promote Australia's interest and involvement in Asian regional economic and  security issues through keynote addresses to foreign policy institutes in London and in The  Hague. 

  For further information, please contact Peter Collins on 06 277 7500 and 0411 414 695 or  Ross Burns, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, on 06. 261.3412. 

