---
title: "Candle Day in the Australian Capital Territory, Canberra, 18 October 1997: address at the launch."
date: "1997-10-18"
creators:
  - "Deane, William"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456827
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NOL30%22
---



Four years ago the first candle-floating ceremony to launch Candle Day for
Amnesty International in Canberra and the Southern region, was held here at
the Mirror Pool at Commonwealth Park.

 It was a simple gesture
performed by about 100 people ... floating the small, shining Amnesty
candles into the darkness across the water, so that those present might
reflect on human rights and the ray of hope that Amnesty brings to those
whose rights have been violated in so many parts of the world.

As I say, it was a simple idea, yet the symbolism of the action caught the
public imagination - so much so that last year some 2000 candles were
launched during the ceremony, and this year it is hoped that there will be
even more. Certainly it is becoming very much part of the annual cycle of
life in this City. And that can only be a good thing.

 For each
candle not only represents an individual conscience whose liberty -
somewhere - is at risk. Quite as importantly each candle burns with the
determination of individual men and women everywhere to do something about
it through the work of Amnesty. Singly our lights may flicker and gutter in
the wind on the water, together they glow and illuminate the night.

 The work and membership of Amnesty International has grown vastly
over the 35 years since its foundation. But, sadly, the reasons for its
existence remain as compelling as they ever were. Human rights abuses and
suffering continue. And wherever and by and against whomever they occur,
they diminish all mankind.

 This year, Amnesty has an
international campaign focussed on the needs of refugees - a campaign under
the broad theme "human rights have no borders". It is tragic to reflect
that, as Amnesty points out, over the past decade the number of refugees has
almost doubled. More than 15 million people world-wide have been forced to
escape from violence or persecution in their own countries and to seek
asylum abroad. Another estimated 25 to 30 million people are internally
displaced - that is, they have been forced to abandon their own homes
although they are still living within the borders of their own countries.

 We are all aware of how, in so many cases, the basic human
rights of refugees are ignored in those very places where they have sought
asylum. Suffering, continued violence, incarceration, forcible repatriation
where safety is still at risk, lack of legal protection or procedures ..
these things still happen day after day to refugees throughout the world.
And it is to the lasting credit of Amnesty International that members
everywhere are working to raise public awareness and public opinion to
ensure that refugees are not only made safe from further harm, but that they
are treated with the human dignity that their tragic circumstances
demand.

 Ladies and gentlemen, Candle Day is Amnesty's major
promotional and fund- raising event in Australia. In a very real way it
reflects the whole basis of the movement, which is to mobilise individual
men and women throughout their communities to speak together, to work
together and thus make a tangible difference in the global struggle for
human rights. One small candle is soon snuffed out. Many candles burning
together can prevail against the darkness.

 And now, with a
lighted candle on this Mirror Pool, I officially launch Candle Day in the
Australian Capital Territory. 

