---
title: "Minister launches report on migrant experiences"
date: "1997-10-10"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456723
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HJL30%22
---

  M e d I a R e I e a s e 

   " 

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 

  Telephone: (02) 6277 7860 Facsimile: (02) 62734144 

  MPS 102/97 

  Minister launches report on migrant experiences 

  A new report has identified the friendliness of Australian people as one of the major reasons  migrants like our country, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock  said today. 

  The report found that around a third of migrants listed the friendliness of Australians and our  climate as the reason for liking Australia. 

  Mr Ruddock launched the report, "The Migrant Experience", while opening new premises for  the Migrant Resource Centre at Blacktown, NSW . The Blacktown MRC is one of 32 locations  around Australia which provide a community focus and shopfront services for migrants. 

  The Minister said the report is a summary of the main findings of the Longitudinal Survey of  Immigrants to Australia (LSIA) which provides Commonwealth and other government agencies  with reliable information to improve immigration and settlement policies, programs and  services. 

  "The LSIA is the most comprehensive survey of immigrants ever undertaken in Australia. It  collects a wide range of data not previously available on how well immigrants settle into their  newly adopted country." 

  Other findings include confirmation that migrants entering under the skilled streams have a  lower level of unemployment and a higher level of home ownership. It also found that people  entering under the Refugee and Humanitarian Program were the most likely to apply for  Australian citizenship . 

  "Governments and other organisations need accurate and objective information about the  migrant experience to help ensure the assistance provided is appropriate and relevant and  makes the best use of available resources," Mr Ruddock said. 

  The initial findings on unemployment was one of the reasons the Government moved to a  better balanced immigration program, w ith greater emphasis on skilled migration while  maintaining a commitment to bona fide immediate family migrants. 

  "I believe it is important that the Australian public retains confidence in the migration program  and understands the positive effects that immigration has on Australia's economy and society,"  he said. 

  "The LSIA data on the migrant experience will assist in this, by ensuring not only better  informed policy decisions, but also a better quality of debate based on solid evidence of the  migrant experience." 

  10 October 1997 

  Editor's Note: More information on the LSIA is at Attachment "A". 

  INFORMATION ON AUSTRALIAN IMMIGRATI ON MATTERS IS AVAILABLE THROUGH THE INTERNET ON : http://WWW .immi.gov.au. 

  -2-

  Attachment A 

  BACKGROUND 

  The LSIA project dimensions are: 

  Survey population -visaed immigrants arriving between September 1993 and  August 1995 ;  Sample size -over 5,000 households;  Sample distribution -all major metropolitan centres, plus Cairns;  Sample designed to be representative of the recent immigrant population, with  specific attention given to obtaining adequate numbers in each State and  Territory , migrant eligibility category, country of birth and level of English  proficiency ;  Interview frequency -first interview between 3 and 6 months after arrival, the  second interview one year later and the third interview a further two years after  the second ;  Questionnaire - personal interview of the Principal Applicant (PA) and any  accompanying spouse, with questionnaires containing over 300 questions,  covering a wide range of personal and household topics (the average length of  interview in wave 1 was 90 minutes, decreasing to slightly over 70 minutes for  later waves) . 

  Five other reports using LSIA first wave data are also available: 

  Assessment of Overseas Qualifications ;  Usage and Accessibility of Interpreters and Translators;  Immigrant Health and the Use of Medical Services;  Initial Location Decisions of Immigrants to Australia; and  Initial Labour Market Experience of Immigrants. 

  Reports on the following topics, comparing results from the first and second waves of  the LSIA, will also be produced : 

  Analysis of the changing pattern of immigrants' labour force experiences;  Assessment of clients ' needs for ESL services and their perspectives of ESL  servIces;  Analysis of the changing pattern of immigrants' health and use of medical  services;  Housing needs and preferences of immigrants;  Level of satisfaction reported by recent immigrants; and  Immigrants' demand for, utilisation of, and level of satisfaction with, support  servIces. 

  Further information on Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  research: http://www .immi.gov.au/research1/sumindex.html 

