---
title: "Australia's societal engagement with Asia: address to the Foreign Correspondents' Association, Singapore, 29 July 1997"
date: "1997-07-29"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211455430
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BJH30%22
---



It is the job of a correspondent to make different societies comprehensible
to each other. As a politician, I know your job is to make what might appear
separate societies inseparable.

 And you succeed. Australians
are increasingly aware that no story in Australian newspapers or on
Australian airwaves of interest to the region fails to be picked up by
regional media instantaneously, or at most 6 to 12 hours later.

This certainly has profound implications for regional politics, but equally
profound implications for domestic politics. They now blur into one another.
The domestic political decision which reverberates offshore is no longer the
exclusive province of the great power. We are now so tightly interlinked -
our economies, our media and our people, that we move each other.

 I want to talk to you today about Australia's engagement with Asia,
but in doing so, I want to talk about how we have engaged and some of the
elements of Australian society which have, almost imperceptibly, become
critical underpinnings of that engagement. 

 Let me begin by
saying that whatever the political flak and however thick it might fly from
time to time, the underlying reality is that there has been in the last few
decades a sea change in Australian social and political attitudes to the
region around us.

 Australia is no longer isolated from Asia. Of
course, geography dictates that we never have been, but proximity often
created its own problems.

 But today's Australia is no longer
preoccupied with defending ourselves 
from the region. Today's
Australia no longer sees a region to be traded with almost grudgingly and at
best at arm's length. And today's Australia does not choose its new
Australians - its future citizens - on the basis of their country of origin,
their colour or their race.

 A realisation has stretched across
politics, business and academia now that obtaining economic and physical
security for Australia requires an interrelationship with Asian countries
which draws in and responds not just to a commercial and political outlook,
but to a social and cultural one as well.

 That does not mean
that we will always see eye to eye with our regional neighbours, but it does
mean that we see common interests and points where we can make a
contribution .

 But the way in which we arrived at this point is
a story in itself.

 Australians draw the point of reference for
their nationhood back to the bloody battlefields of Gallipoli and the First
World War, but it was in the Pacific theatre of World War Two that
Australia's Asian destiny was forged.

 Britain was heavily
engaged in Burma, and America in the Pacific, but the Pacific theatre was a
different matter for Australian society - the security of our very heartland
was engaged.

 I don't think that the ramifications of this fact
for Australian attitudes to the region are fully understood. Britain's
struggle for survival was in Europe. Though a determined opponent, Japan was
never a serious threat to the continental United States. Australia's very
survival was perceived to be at stake. Our leaders, and to some extent our
people, became sophisticated quickly.

 Our contribution was
greater than many recognise. This was dictated to some extent by Douglas
MacArthur's public relations exigencies. But it is a fact that there were
more Australian troops under MacArthur's command than Americans until the
latter part of 1943. The victories he won in New Guinea, and which
substantially established his reputation, were fought with Australian
troops. Indeed, they inflicted Japan's first defeats on land.

Australia was rapidly coming to the realisation that it had to make its own
luck in the region. We jettisoned old alignments to save ourselves. We also
gained a more sophisticated understanding of regional aspirations. In the
latter part of the war, our controversial role in what was then the
Netherlands East Indies was at least partly motivated by a desire to play a
role in the postwar settlement which reflected our distinctive
attitude.

 In the postwar settlement, our focus was security but
our analysis recognised powerful nationalist sentiment that had to be
accommodated. The urgency of this was emphasised by Foreign Minister Evatt
in 1947 thus:

 
Australia's position in South-East Asia and
the Pacific is geographically very different from that of Britain. It is in
this part of the world that our immediate destiny must be determined.

 Our support for Indonesian independence was a clear reflection of our
changed views. T.K. Critchley, our representative on the UN Good Offices
Committee on Indonesia said of Chifley that he accepted "that the
Indonesians had a right to run their own country". He had an understanding
of the changes that were taking place in Asia and the importance of
Australia coming to terms with them.

 Nor did this go unnoticed
in the region: Meg Gurry of LaTrobe University points out that Indian Prime
Minister Nehru welcomed this attitude of Australia's and incorporated
Australia in the region when he hosted a major regional conference in
Indonesia, welcoming attending states, which as he said:

 
...
represent from Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines on one side to
Egypt and Ethiopia on the other ... half of the circumference of the globe
and by far the greater part of its population. We represent the ancient
civilisations of the East as well as the dynamic civilisation of the
West.

 The robust support for rolling back the European Empires
was not a bipartisan position. Then Opposition Leader Robert Menzies said it
was foolish to "take sides against European nations as though they were ...
interlopers in countries where they have long been colonists, administrators
and educators." Nevertheless, in the fits and starts of Australia's gradual
efforts at enmeshment with the region this period represented a new
benchmark.

 Australia's approach in the 1950s and 1960s saw less
a withdrawal of commitment to the region than a retreat to viewing it
largely through the prism of Cold War strategy. A plethora of regional
organisations sprung up to which we assigned support - including military
forces - which saw us involved in a number of imbroglios from the Malayan
emergency to the final phases of the war in Vietnam. Here the region was
perceived as the object of policy - one theatre in a global superpower
confrontation. Subtlety was not at a premium. 

 Mercifully, lack
of subtlety was not an entirely bipartisan approach either. The Australian
Labor Party can claim substantial credit in engagement with China.
Recognition of China was an obsession of Gough Whitlam's, although one which
pre-dates him within sections of the Parliamentary Labor Party. Whitlam
nurtured this ambition through the long years in Opposition and finally saw
it realised as Prime Minister in 1972.

 Nevertheless, for all
their importance, these were all more or less traditional foreign policy
exercises in that they were externally-focused. They were not an attempt to
engage Australian society with Asian societies, and certainly not in a way
which would improve our understanding of each other.

 At the
same time, however, Australia was seeing the beginnings of the first large
scale Government-sponsored exercise in cultural convergence. The Colombo
plan showed the dawning of Australia's real understanding of the region's
importance. It for the first time recognised the need for Australia to open
its society as well as its foreign policy to the region. The students who
came to Australia were the first ambassadors from Asia - upon their return,
they were in a very real sense Australia's first ambassadors to their home
countries. These students met in Australia with an increasing awareness of
the region in academia and the increasing attentiveness of a new generation
of students to the region's affairs.

 Professor and former
Australian ambassador to China Stephen FitzGerald uses this background to
ask for patience from our interlocutors in Asia with the vicissitudes in
Australian public policy and opinion. He says in his recent book "Is
Australia an Asian Country?":

 
Australia perhaps has some
right to ask for that understanding and patience. The tradition of the quiet
Australian goes back a long way. They were understanding and patient when
Asian countries were wrestling with the problem of development before they
became economies of dynamic growth. Quiet Australians developed the Colombo
Plan. Australia has been quietly helpful in many spheres, from defence to
the development of schools and universities, and in the training of vast
numbers of Asian people in commerce and economics and business and marketing
... who have gone back to their countries and become agents of the dynamism
which is making Asian economies the focus of the global economy.

 But clearly, initiatives like the Colombo plan represented only half
the story. We were allowing Asia to come to us, but we were not making much
large-scale effort to go out into the region ourselves.

 It was
not until the late 1960s that we finally knocked over some of the last
remaining barriers within our own society which enabled us to see the path
ahead into the region.

 The most fundamental shift came with the
overturning of the two most egregious examples of racial discrimination
remaining in Australian society.

 The first of these was the
abolition of the White Australia Policy, technically dismantled from 1966
onwards, but rhetorically put to the sword by Gough Whitlam in 1972. Here
was Australia sending the most important message it had ever sent to the
region it was to make its home. Australia was offering the peoples of Asia a
part of the nation's future - as immigrants, as new Australians.

 The other task which remained was the 1967 referendum to extend
voting rights to Australia's indigenous peoples and to establish the power
of the Commonwealth Government to make laws for their benefit. This was an
important first step in what has become a long road to reconciliation
between indigenous and non-indigenous

 Australians, and we
celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of this event this year still with the
painful recognition that there remains much to do.

 Many will no
doubt ask why these essentially domestic decisions had such profound meaning
for Australian foreign policy and for Australia's future engagement with
Asia. 

 They were the foundation stones for our engagement with
the region for one simple reason: They meant that Australian nationality was
no longer defined by racial exclusion. Here was Australian Government policy
making it clear that Australian identity was to stand on its own two feet,
without any official succour for beliefs of superiority. From now on,
Australian culture and identity, too, had to make their own way in
Asia.

 Subsequent changes in Government policy advanced these
basic positions. Asian immigration increased greatly in the 1970s and 1980s
and Australia showed itself willing to offer support to the region in
different ways with its acceptance of Indochinese refugees in the late
1970s. The Aboriginal land rights agenda gathered pace in the 1970s and
1980s, culminating in the Mabo decision in our High Court and subsequent
legislation in 1993. In itself this was a struggle to incorporate into our
land tenure system the righting of an historical wrong and a legal fiction -
the doctrine of terra nullius - the doctrine that Australia was an
uninhabited land at the time of European settlement.

 Most
recently, there have been further advances in the reconciliation process.
The Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission has released a
report which documents systematic injustice against the Aboriginal people in
the form of the removal of Aboriginal children from their parents right up
until the 1970s.

 This is an important report in that it was not

international condemnation of Australia. It represents the discovery
by Australia of an ability to reflect upon itself and the injustices for
which it is responsible. In doing so, it reflects a new and growing national
maturity.

 I cannot emphasise this point too much. Our most
difficult criticism to handle has been self-criticism. Our institutions have
pointed to our own faults. Others have not had to do it for us. That is a
strength in that it represents our capacity to change as a result of our own
moral impulses, not a response to others showing us the way.

 Of
course, not everyone in Australia agrees with all elements of these social
changes. It is no news to anyone in this room that, in the presentational
aspects at least, this pattern of deepening involvement has appeared to
experience a hiatus of late.

 One Member of Parliament, Pauline
Hanson, has now probably sold as many newspapers in the rest of Asia as she
has in Australia and this is a very bad outcome for Australia.

It is a very bad outcome for two reasons:

 Firstly, we all
recognise stereotyping as a time-honoured means of psychological
incorporation of complexity. We in Australia also recognise there is a
stereotypical Australian. In the last few decades, he has started to lose
some of his uglier features - they have been overwritten by a general
appreciation of a slightly knockabout, but basically good nature which
Australians are not uncomfortable with, and this for the reason that it is
not entirely inaccurate.

 If those ugly features return however
- and particularly the White Australia overtones of them - it will not only
be damaging to Australia, it will also be unfair to the social sea change we
have won through decades of often commendably unflinching self -
analysis.

 Secondly, and more disturbingly, Pauline Hanson is
now giving some sheen of "respectability" to a gaggle of long-standing and
hitherto effectively marginalised right-wing extremists. People with links
to the League of Rights, the Ku Klux Klan and the Confederate Action Party
are now popping up in organisational positions in Pauline Hanson's
newly-formed One Nation Party. It should be noted that this information has
been made public in a courageous speech by the Leader of the National Party
in the Australian Senate, Senator Ron Boswell.

 There is now
delight in some quarters in the region at being able to portray an Australia
which has not changed.

 In and of itself, this is a turn for the
worse in terms of Australia's regional reputation.

 But a real
problem arises should a perception emerge that on immigration or indigenous
issues there is a flirtation in leading circles in the direction of
extremist opinion. There is enough evidence in Australia's history and
elements of Australian society for such flirtation to be a temptation, but
we turned our back on those elements, beginning in the 1960s as I have
pointed out. Any return must be resisted.

 What is required of
Australian leadership is clear-cut, unequivocal repudiation of extreme
positions.

 Even where some of our citizens are uncomfortable
with change and - in seeking some of the perceived certainties of the past -
reach for some of the unfortunate baggage of that past, there is
nevertheless a basic appreciation that reversion is impossible, and
ultimately, undesirable. In our hearts we all know this is not good for the
country.

 The choices facing Australia are too stark for
ambivalence. Over 60% of our exports go to East Asia and their annual growth
rates eclipse those of the remainder, so we can only expect that share to
rise. These kinds of numbers get through to people.

 No matter
how timid Australian leaders might be, they can, if they wish, draw comfort
from that basic realisation to meet what is now a major challenge:

 .
Australia is now unremittingly in the spotlight on these
issues;

 .
There is an increasingly sophisticated media, dutifully
beaming every development into the region, and

 .
As countries in the
region grow in their understanding of political systems, they understand our
preferential voting system far better. They will understand how vulnerable
minority parties or independents are, and, most importantly, they will
understand the role the major parties have in their marginalisation or
otherwise.

 It is up to others to speak for themselves, but let
me tell you what the Australian Labor Party has been doing on these
issues:

 .
In October last year, we initiated a bipartisan
motion against racism in the Federal Parliament to address the attitudes
expressed by Ms Hanson. 

 .
We recently agreed to place the Liberal
and National parties - our traditional political enemies - ahead of Ms
Hanson's candidates on our preference list at the next election. We have
made it clear we will do no political business with Hanson and her ilk

 .
And we have resolved to take up the debates about Australian
history in ways which enhance, not diminish the unity of the Australian
community. In particular, we have sought an apology from the Australian
Parliament for the policies which saw thousands of Aboriginal children
removed from their families.

 I have already offered an apology
on behalf of the Australian Labor Party for those practices which took place
under past Labor administrations. Remarkably, even State Parliaments, led by
conservative governments and often with far more at stake legally and
financially than the Commonwealth Government have offered apologies.

 I am convinced that a united effort of the major parties and
Australia's political leadership can mount and win the argument against
extremism. More importantly, we can send the message out into the region
that extreme views enjoy no support, tacit or otherwise, within Australia's
political mainstream.

 As I said earlier, whatever the
occasional political flak might be, Australia has much to offer our region,
and I would like to use the remainder of my time here today to document
this.

 We are a forthright and courageous interlocutor on
security matters. Australia has demonstrated independent credentials in both
bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, and we have been an important dialogue
partner in the past for regional countries wishing to use us as an
interlocutor with our historical allies, the United States and the United
Kingdom.

 We are also excited by the opportunities presented by
multilateral institutions such as the ASEAN Regional Forum.

 The
recent crisis in Cambodia has brought all regional security arrangements
into sharp focus, but it has been most instructive as a snapshot of ASEAN's
evolving diplomatic activism. ASEAN played a leading role - along with
Australia - in the Cambodian peace process culminating in the 1993 elections
which have been the best guarantee of peace this troubled nation has known.
In the process, ASEAN showed then that active diplomacy by other countries
in the region does have a role in advancing stability within the countries
of the region.

 Importantly, it also showed that solutions can
be advanced when the situation is serious enough despite the long-standing
non-interference ethos of Asian international relations.

 As the
international community once again faces the need for some renewed
diplomatic activism to deal with the situation developing in Cambodia, it
looks first to ASEAN. US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's assertion
at the weekend ARF meeting that ASEAN should "take the lead role" in
resolving the Cambodian crisis is a strong indicator of this trend. The
newspaper columnists are already speaking of an historic shift in the
diplomatic centre of gravity. And while we must not underestimate the
organisational culture adjustments required of ASEAN to fulfil this new
role, we must also recognise that increased diplomatic activism is a
concrete and necessary expression of all the promise shown by regional
security dialogue to date.

 As in the period 1991 to 1993,
Australia must stand ready to play its part. We must not be left flat-footed
as the regional security agenda gathers pace.

 This is just as
important when it comes to the ARF's role in establishing dialogue and
confidence-building measures with the emerging regional giant, China. As we
are all aware, there are any number of potential points of dispute between
China and members of the ARF. While exploration of this issue remains
tentative for the moment, the Chinese have shown themselves receptive to
dialogue on these issues. In terms of these future directions, I note with
interest the recent agreement between China and Russia aimed at settling
their differences along a massive and highly conflict-prone land
border.

 I pause at this point. There is some suggestion that
confidence-building measures in this region needs to be limited to the
informal. These agreements along the borders of the old Soviet Union are
much more hard-edged than that. There are real prospects for sophisticated
diplomacy in the region where all potential players both within and without
the region can be brought into the process. The nations of South, South-East
and East Asia are becoming adept at this diplomacy on both a bilateral and
multilateral basis.

 Australian government needs to preserve its
options to contribute to these processes. We need not shrink from bringing
to the table our own perspectives and explaining them. We have for example a
long-standing relationship with the United States. When we were in office we
had many disagreements, both direct and nuanced, with US Administrations.
Nevertheless, we did not operate on the basis that the United States did not
have a major role to play in the region's security and stability. Part of
the sophistication required of Australian policymakers is to be able to
sustain that perspective in conversation with all players in the region and
sustain the argument that it threatens no one's legitimate interests.

 This is not easy with another player in China highly and reasonably
sensitive to the possibility that a containment strategy might be pursued
against her. Nor is it easy when suspicions are entertained American
attitudes are being driven by imperatives in US domestic politics. Having
decided that the United States has a significant role to play however, we
cannot shirk the task.

 In addition to, indeed underlying much
of our strategic interests in the region is our economic contribution. Our
exports of minerals have supported much of Asia's economic development, but
Australia also stands ready to support future decades of Asian growth with
its increasingly sophisticated manufacturing and services industries.

 Australian education is a case in point. There are at any one time
approximately 80,000 overseas students studying in Australia, accounting for
export revenue of $2 billion per annum. This makes education one of the
largest export industries in the country. Policymakers view this with a
quiet delight. Australia is building bridges with tomorrow's regional elite
on a scale undreamt of by the Colombo plan.

 Where Australian
exports in the past assisted to build the physical infrastructure of Asia,
tomorrow's exports do the same for the human infrastructure.

Australia is also reaping the benefits of an increasingly technologically
sophisticated society. We now have more personal computers per head of
population than any country in the world and our internet usage ranks second
only to the United States. Despite our small population, the Australian
information technology industry is the second largest in Asia -and eighth
largest in the world- employing 82 000 people with a turnover of around $A1
8b. Australia's export performance has grown off the back of this. Our
information technology and telecommunications export revenue went from $2.6b
in 1994/95 to $3.6b in 1995/96. These exports have grown at a 28% compound
annual growth rate since 1990. Australia is fast becoming an information
technology and telecommunications centre for the Asia-Pacific region.

 But importantly, there is also societal ballast in Australia's
regional engagement. From clearing away obstacles in our past, we are also
building resources for the future of regional engagement.

 For
example, we now have more students of Japanese than any other country in the
world outside Japan. By the year 2000, my home State of Western Australia
intends that 60% of its school children in years 3 to 10 will be learning at
least one Asian language, and the remainder a European language.

 As I mentioned before, there are over 80,000 foreign students
currently studying in Australia, most of them in universities, most of them
from Asia, among them more than 6,000 from Singapore. Australia is about to
pass the United States as the preferred destination for students from Hong
Kong.

 The boom in Asian tourism to Australia has also succeeded
in establishing people- - to-people links and cultural familiarity which can
only assist in deepening Australia's engagement with the region.

 In summary, the view I have been trying to put across here today is
that Australia's engagement with Asia is not a recent event - it has been
building since the Second World War and before.

 Our engagement
is not lip service - Australia has transformed its society and its culture
to open them to the outside world and the opportunities it offers.

 Our engagement is not shallow - it is deepening as we come to
understand Asian societies and they come to understand us and the
people-to-people links expand and mature. 

 And finally, and
most importantly, our engagement is not retreating. Political fortunes are
transitory. Political debates and political polls are mere static in the
broader currents driving our engagement with the region. We have some
hard-won social ballast in our engagement strategy now and I am convinced
that we will push on and our societies continue to converge for the good of
themselves and the ultimate good of all the people in this region.

 Thank you. 

