---
title: "Queensland migrant settlement plan benefits community"
date: "1997-10-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456762
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JAR30%22
---

  r97106 Page 1 of 1 

  MEDIA  RELEASE 

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  The Hon Philip Ruddock MP 

  MPS 106/97 

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Telephone (02) 6277 7860 Facsimile (02) 62734144 

  Queensland migrant settlement plan benefits community  A five year plan to help migrants in Queensland quickly become contributing members of our  community has been launched by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs , Philip  Ruddock. 

  "The 1996-2001 Queensland Migrant Settlement Plan will provide a basis for helping migrants to  settle successfully in Queensland and add to the state's economic, cultural and social  development," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "Effective settlement programs provide services which help reduce dependency on Government  resources such as social security and give migrants the basis for developing their independence  while building a new life as part of the community in Australia." 

  The Queensland Migrant Settlement Plan will identify gaps in services , eliminate duplication and  generally provide a more co-ordinated approach to the provision of settlement services in  Queensland. 

  An important initiative is the early identification of migrants and refugees who need additional  assistance in order to successfully settle in to their new community. 

  "The plan has been developed by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs in  conjunction with government agencies and community groups, through the Queensland Migrant  Settlement Planning Committee," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "It demonstrates the co-operation between the three levels of Government and community groups  and organisations and the commitment of the people working on this plan to ensure better and  more effective settlement for migrants and refugees." 

  "Migrants and refugees need to be able to settle quickly and effectively into their new  community. The quality and range of settlement services provided by both government and  non-government organisations plays an important part in ensuring this outcome." 

  The Queensland plan is part of the National Integrated Settlement Strategy (NISS), which aims to  link and improve the services available to migrants and refugees in Australia at local, regional ,  State and national levels. 

  "Migrants and refugees have made a great contribution to the development of this state and this  nation," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "The Government supports effective settlement programs that ensure the whole community gains  from the wider benefits that flow from immigration." 

  15 October 1997  Media contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860 

  [Media Release index] [Home Page] 

  http://www.immi .gov.aulminrellr97106.htm 12/0211998 

