---
title: "Legal aid changes achieve balance and equity"
date: "1997-11-12"
creators:
  - "Williams, Daryl"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211457228
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XZM30%22
---

  NEWS  RELEASE 

  -ATTORNEY-GENERAL --------------

  ---THE HON. DARYL WILLIAMS AM QC MP -------------------

  12 November 1997  361 

  LEGAL AID CHANGES ACHIEVE BALANCE AND EQUITY 

  The Federal Government has ensured that legal assistance is better directed to the  people who need it and has substantially achieved its savings target on legal aid  funding. 

  The commitment to more effective, equitable and balanced legal assistance has been  achieved with the finalisation of all legal aid agreements and the provision of  supplementary funds to the States in light of better information on legal aid service  levels. 

  Transitional arrangements will ensure a smooth adoption of the new agreements and  will result in annual savings of $32.5 million a year from 1999-00. 

  The 1996 budget target of a $100 million saving over three years was based on the  breakdown of State and Federal legal aid on 1994-95 service figures. Service figures  for 1995-96 became available during discussions and allowed for some renegotiation.  Accordingly, savings will now total $91.6 million over the next three years. 

  Savings in 1997-98 will total $28.6m and the savings will increase to $30.8m in 1998-99 and $32.5m annually from 1999-00. 

  In line with the changes announced in 1996, the Government has been flexible in  finalising agreements and allowed further allocations in accordance with information  provided on legal aid service levels. 

  The new agreements with the States and Territories mean that Commonwealth funding  will be directed to assisting people in Commonwealth issues with a priority on family  law matters. 

  Each legal aid agreement specifically sets out areas of priority and each states that  " ... protecting the safety of a child or spouse who is at risk is to be accorded the highest  priority in making grants of aid in family law". 

  Other areas where people will be assisted through Commonwealth funds include  refugee matters, veterans affairs and other matters arising under Commonwealth laws. 

  I am grateful to my State and Territory colleagues for their commitment to continued  joint legal aid arrangements during what has been a long and difficult process. 

  2 

  I am very pleased that we have agreed on the basis for a continued partnership in the  future for the provision of legal aid to the Australian community. Together we have  ensured that the "one-stop-shop" for legal aid services continues. 

  From now on, Commonwealth funds will be used by legal aid commissions to provide  legal assistance for matters arising under Commonwealth law, and the State and  Territory governments will be responsible for funding commissions to provide  assistance for matters under State and Territory law. 

  This will lead to a more effective and efficient use of scarce legal aid resources, while  ensuring that appropriate services are available to those in need of legal assistance  who cannot afford to pay for it themselves. 

  When I announced the Government's intention to introduce new legal aid  arrangements, I indicated that there would be a reduction in the Commonwealth's  legal aid budget of $33m annually. 

  Despite the difficult and protracted nature of negotiations with the States and  Territories, this budget will largely be met. The time frame to meet this has been  extended to ensure a smoother transition to the new arrangements. 

  The Commonwealth now has much greater control over the priorities on which its  funds are spent. 

  We will continue to work with the States and Territories to seek productivity and  efficiency improvements in the delivery of services by legal aid commissions to reflect  better what an ordinary prudent self funding litigant would spend on legal services to  resolve a legal dispute. 

  This will result in better control over the cost of individual legal aid cases and a more  equitable distribution of the legal aid dollar . 

  As we move towards the new millennium, the new agreements will underpin a process  of reform in legal aid which is integral to reform of the legal system as a whole.  Reforms are needed to attain our objectives of greater efficiencies and access to  justice. 

  The finalisation of the agreements and budgetary allocations will now allow for work  to proceed on a legal aid needs analysis across Australia. 

  Further work will be aimed at ensuring that the distribution of funding in the future is  according to actual needs for legal assistance. 

  Media contact: Nicholas Harford (02) 6277 7300 

