---
title: "Survival: Australia in the 21st century: address to the Sydney Institute, State Parliament House, Sydney, 16 September 1997"
date: "1997-09-16"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211456278
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UWK30%22
---



Politicians have a complex relationship with history. It is rarely
respectful and often extremely unjust. I should add that I am speaking here
of what politicians do to history, not what history does to
politicians.

 The reason for this is straightforward -
simplification is the politician's stock in trade, but it is the mortal
enemy of history.

 There is little more frightening than a
politician with an interest in history. 

 Nevertheless, tonight
I want to take issue with a slogan that has all too rapidly become part of
the Australian foreign policy landscape under this government.

It is the Prime Minister's pet phrase that Australia does not have to choose
between its history and its geography.

 This beguilingly simple
statement demands much closer analysis than it has received to date.

 Greg Sheridan has called it a 'classic Howardism' because it
expresses what should be a positive as a negative. But the negative
formulation hides an obvious question:

 Precisely how would you
go about choosing between your history and your geography anyway?

 What we have here, in fact, is a deliberately false dichotomy between
a supposedly European history and an Asian-Pacific geography.

It is false, because the clear trend in the history of Australian foreign
policy since World War Two, but in reality since well before then, has not
been a lack of engagement with our own region, but a search for focus in
what has been a steadily increasing engagement.

 And it is
deliberate because in fact the Prime Minister is not talking about history
at all. History is a coded reference to identity. And it is questions of
identity that this government has steadily moved to centre stage in the
foreign policy debate as a means of playing foreign policy for domestic
political advantage.

 My argument tonight is that this
represents a decisive break in the trend of Australia's deepening engagement
with its region.

 The best illustration of this I can think of
is the metaphor Gareth Evans used to use to speak about our engagement with
the region. He referred to it as a journey 'beyond the looking glass' - a
way of describing our mounting ability as a nation to look at our region in
ways which did not obsessively return to our own image - as different,
threatened, isolated.

 We were realising that a confident
Australian nation with a robust, cosmopolitan identity had much to offer its
neighbours - and a role in the region's future they would accept.

 The last 18 months have been an effort to haul us back to the near
wide of the mirror, an effort which became obvious during the Prime
Ministers first trip to Indonesia last year.

 What we clearly
heard was the repeated assertion that Australia is not Asian. To be precise,
it was repeated 16 times in various forms in just 3 speaking engagements,
rapidly becoming less a matter of curiosity or discord and more a matter of
simple offence.

 Once again, the negative formulation avoids an
obvious question: who ever said that Australia 
was part of
Asia?

 In 
The
Australian on Saturday, Meg Gurry of
LaTrobe University took issue with Geoffrey Blainey's claim that the former
Labor government proclaimed Australia part of Asia. As she says:

 "In most foreign policy speeches after 1993, both Prime Minister
Keating and Foreign Minister Evans emphatically claimed that Australia was

not part of Asia."

 As she points out, we instead claimed
membership of the Asia-Pacific region - a vitally important distinction for
all that it expresses about promotion of open regionalism and a Pacific
community of nations, including the United States and Canada. The broader
and more sophisticated foreign policy logic has been ignored in favour of a
simplistic and misleading debate about identity, which speaks volumes about
the governments priorities.

 The Prime Minister's subsequent
trips have compounded the impression of retreat. 

 The visit to
China was entirely driven by the need to 'back and fill' to repair damage
wrought on that relationship by a series of miscalculations. The most
egregious of these was last year's push to portray the annual AUSMIN talks
as a 're-invigoration' of the US alliance. This was a simple case of
overclaiming and hubris on the part of the Coalition Government, but
suddenly became a major issue both for us and for our ally as China re-
interpreted the alliance as one directed against it.

 The Prime
Minister arrived in China a supplicant, already humiliated. Human rights
discussions had to be hived off for separate talks between officials and the
way had to be smoothed by a decision to go back on previous practice and not
support a resolution condemning China's human rights abuses at the United
Nations Human Rights Convention.

 As for the Prime Minister's
trip to the United Kingdom and the United States, I think the

Republican's headline "Travelling PM on last train to Klutzville"
probably encompasses all that need be said of that particular effort.

 What we are left with, deliberately or otherwise, is the agenda of a
well- - focused State Premier when the Prime Minister travels overseas. He
visits Asia to discuss trade - there is little or no attempt to put a clear
Australian view on issues of any strategic importance to the region.

 What this amounts to is the collapse of ambition in Australian
foreign policy - a collapse the recent White Paper on Foreign and Trade
policy has confirmed.

 This paper is a security blanket for a
government without any foreign policy ideas beyond what Australia is

not and what our foreign policy will 
not do.

 It
is a C-grade Foreign Minister's recipe for diplomatic recidivism. The only
passion evident is the bureaucratic one for ticking boxes and it fails all
the substantive tests:

 .
It represents the withering of an
agenda for societal change in terms of education, immigration and
multiculturalism to a narrow mantra on trading opportunities, divorced from
their political and social underpinnings.

 .
It collapses a
proactive regional and multilateral agenda to the raw mechanics of bilateral
negotiations, divorced from any concept of a community of states in the
Asia-Pacific among which Australia might find a future.

 .
It
replaces an unambiguous assertion of Australia's destiny in the Asia- -
Pacific with the timid and narrow complaint that Australia's 'core values'
need not be surrendered in the process.

 In fact, the very title
of the paper, and the liberal references throughout to the 'national
interest' and imprecations to 'realism', represent a harking back to a 1950s
doctrine of international relations and a definitive shutting of the door
against any foreign policy which alms at a societal dimension to engagement
with the region.

 The White Paper's complete disappearance below
the waterline of informed debate so soon after its launch is a clear
assessment of its value as a document, and a measure of its ignorance of the
way international relations have changed over the last few decades.

 One of the lesser-noted features of Samuel Huntington's 
The Clash
of Civilisations provides a sketch of the evolution of international
relations. Huntington argues that in the 18th Century, individuals owed
their allegiance to princes, whose squabbles with each other shaped global
politics. In the 19th Century, in the wake of the French Revolution,
allegiance was to states, whose relations with each other similarly shaped
global politics.

 The 20th Century for Huntington has seen the
devotion of individuals to ideologies (fascism, communism, capitalism) and
the conflict between these overarching ideologies has determined
international politics. He concludes that the next century will be shaped by
conflict between civilisations.

 This is not the place for an
enumeration of the problems with Huntington's arguments, besides, my host
for the evening, Gerard Henderson, has already ably done so elsewhere. But
it does raise the interesting question of precisely what has shaped
international relations in the past, and how they are likely to be different
in the future.

 In my view we are not seeing so much the rise of
civilisations as the collapse of what might be called the 'emissary culture'
of international relations.

 Princes and states have always had
their emissaries to mediate relations between them. The diplomatic tradition
extends beyond its most recent golden age in 19th Century Europe back to the
Holy Roman Empire and beyond, but it has always relied upon the fact that
the societies concerned were more or less hermetically sealed off from one
another. The art of international relations was all in the manner of
mediation between closed societies

 This is what is meant by the
'realist' tradition in international relations. Realism - a tradition our
current Foreign Minister professes himself a great fan of.

 But
the end of the Cold War was, at least in part, about the 
failure to
close off one society from another. It is argued that the ability of the
Soviet Union to isolate its people from the corrosive 'demonstration effect'
of capitalist prosperity in the free world was badly eroded by the spread of
fax machines, satellite television and international telephone lines.

 As Fred Halliday of the London School of Economics has argued, the
Cold War was a battle between two competing economic and political systems -
'the Great Contest', as he calls it. Once it was clear that the Soviet Union
was demonstrably unable to provide for its citizens as well as the United
States and its allies could, its fate was sealed.

 As with so
much else, globalisation is to blame. The rapidly increasing intensity of
communications between citizens of different nations means that societies
can no longer be isolated from each other. The various roles of mediating
institutions such as diplomatic missions, Foreign Affairs Departments, even
national governments themselves are being transformed in the process.

 Incidentally, we can see a similar process already underway in
business. As trading over the internet enables customers to place orders
directly with producers without cumbersome ordering and invoicing processes,
intermediaries such as wholesalers find themselves an increasingly
irrelevant part of the value chain.

 To date, improved
communications have driven an evolution rather than a revolution in
international affairs. Hence we see the rise of second - and third- - track
diplomacy as non-government organisations, interest groups and populaces in
different countries become increasingly accessible to each other.

 The state remains important. But the salience of the state will
increasingly depend on its ability to influence the new channels of
communication between 
societies.

 What this amounts to is
a requirement for governments to look within the societies they represent
for the strategies to engage with the countries around them, where in the
past this was a more or less traditional foreign policy exercise, conducted
through official channels. 

 Of the many ways we can chart the
progress of Australia's relations with our region, one is in terms of this
gradual evolution in foreign policy practice.

 I said earlier
that Australia's history is not one apart from Asia - indeed, our history
has often been one of uncomfortable proximity.

 Arguably one of
the reasons behind Australia's emergence as a nation at the turn of the
century was the search among our colonists for a way of articulating a
policy of regional engagement either separate from the imperatives of
Empire, or at least sufficiently salient for our perspective to dominate in
the South Pacific, if not further afield. The first 40 years of our national
history is replete with interesting perspective on Australian engagement
with the region.

 The period 1905-1914 saw a flowering of
official attitudes sceptical of Imperial defence and Imperial federationist
argument. Deakin and Fisher struggled against Admiralty prejudice to
establish the RAN. Neville Meaney's monograph on our founding intelligence
officer E.L Piesse shows Piesse's scepticism at the outbreak of World War I
as to whether or not a whole- hearted contribution should be made at the
Empire's heartland in Europe - it was seen as the wrong war, the wrong
place, and debilitating of Australian manpower.

 Ironically,
Australia's first significant contribution to world politics was to be about
the only allied force capable of mounting offensives on the Western Front in
1918. The German offensive came to ruin on Australian resistance while
divisions around them wilted. Remarkably, the Germans stopped, the
Australians moved to the offensive. They pursued the broken Germans and
re-engaged them. In some of the little fighting which took place in open
fields, one of the few times the Western Front saw a battle with movement,
the Australians held their lines where required and regained villages and
towns forfeited by others.

 The recapture of Villers-Bretonneux
on Anzac Day 1918 signalled the end of the German offensive on the Somme. A
hardened, professional Australian army, a very different army to that which
had landed at Gallipoli, fulfilled all that the High Command had asked of
them.

 So successful had our war been, that our pre- war
scepticism all but disappeared. Imperial defence would work, we thought,
after we had contributed so heavily to it.

 This policy was
repeatedly challenged as a rising Japan begged refocussing, but only in the
late 1930s did official policy start to shift.

 I would argue
that insufficient attention is paid by historians to Australia's wartime
experiences from 1941- 45 and our diplomatic activity after it. I say this
particularly from the point of view of the maturing and deepening of
Australia's understanding of the region in which we live, our capacity to
handle ourselves in a new regional order and a willingness to set an agenda
at various levels of engagement.

 Some useful history is
beginning to emerge in the United States which is beginning finally to
recognise Australia's major contribution to Japan's defeat. Some of this can
be seen in the writing of the maritime historian Dan Yan der Vat, a recent
Macarthur biography by Geoffrey Perret and more recently in a book by
military historian Eric Bergerud, 
Touched with Fire. Bergerud argues
that the Japanese were only fought on equal terms in the South Pacific in
1942 and 1943. It was largely the Australians and, to a lesser extent, the
Americana in New Guinea and the Solomons who blunted the machine:

 "In July 1942 the Japanese army was invincible In the fall of 1943
both Australians and Americans ripped it to shreds in every encounter ...
The stage is large enough and the time frame long enough to illustrate and
analyse the 'turning of the tide' in the Pacific war."

 The
victory of Australians (including conscripts) at Milne Bay was the first
defeat on land in the history of the Japanese Empire. Our campaign
throughout Papua New Guinea after Milne Bay was a sustained rout of a
determined enemy which had swept all before it until that time.

The Australian political leadership sensed the dimension of their nation's
contribution but puzzled how to render the achievement effective. They
believed that it entitled them to a major say in the post-War settlement,
but struggled to give it meaning. Having watched the Japanese effort to
appeal to nationalist sentiment in the region, they understood the hourglass
had been set for European empires, and believed that Australia's security
and economic interests depended upon demonstrated sympathy for new national
aspirations. TK Critchley, our representative on the UN Good Offices
Committee said of Chifley that he accepted "That the Indonesians had a right
to run their own country".

 This was not a bipartisan
position.

 Then Opposition Leader Robert Menzies said it was
foolish to "take sides against European nations as though they were ...
interlopers in countries where they have long been colonists, administrators
and educators."

 Despite this, Australia was feeling its way to
a focus that now engaged us distinctively with the region, albeit one which
still saw the region in largely utilitarian terms. 

 As Meg
Gurry shows in her article "Identifying Australia's 'Region': From Evatt to
Evans", the utilitarian approach proved hard to shake: On the face of it,
the 1950s saw more institutional links created with the region than any
other decade: the Colombo Plan, ANZUS and SEATO to name just a few.

 But as she shows, these links had a clear strategic purpose - they
were all viewed through a Cold War prism as supports for a strategy of
forward defence. Even the Colombo Plan, hailed by External Affairs Minister
Percy Spender as "the commencement of the special relationship between
Australia and Asia" was also described by that same Minister elsewhere as
providing a "defence against the effective penetration of Communist
imperialism."

 It must be said that these were not entirely
inappropriate strategies for their times, and many of them laid the
foundations for the accelerating engagement of the 1980s and 1990s, but they
often did so unwittingly.

 There was, however, an increasing
realisation. that the greatest obstacles in the way of proper engagement
with the region lay in Australia's society, not in its foreign policy. As
early as 1954, Australia's High Commissioner to India, Walter Crocker, noted
that

 "... nothing costs us so much goodwill as our immigration
policy ... The extent and depth of the resentment can hardly be
exaggerated."

 A series of later steps removed these
impediments. The White Australia Policy was technically dismantled from 1966
onwards, and received full- - throated rhetorical disavowal by Gough Whitlam
in 1972.

 The 1967 referendum extended voting rights to
Australia's indigenous peoples and established the power of the Commonwealth
Government to make laws for their benefit.

 Together, these
decisions were vital in that they showed Australians and their regional
neighbours that Australian nationality was no longer gained by race
exclusion. Australian Government policy was making it clear that our
identity was to stand on its own two feet, without any official succour for
beliefs of superiority.

 This marked the start of a sustained
upswing in societal adjustment to international engagement. Asian
immigration increased greatly in the 1970s and 80s and Australia showed
itself willing to offer support to the region in different ways with its
acceptance of Indochinese refugees in the late 1970s. At the same time,
multiculturalism gave those immigrants a stake in Australian society.

 Federal Labor's agenda (during the 1980s and 1990s intensified
societal engagement across several fronts at once:

 .
The
Hawke Government produced the National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia
in 1989, making a substantial policy effort to re-define the cultural
underpinnings of Australian society.

 .
In 1984, COAG endorsed
the report "Asian Languages and Australia's Economic Future" which
recommended joint action by Commonwealth, State and Territory governments to
expand the teaching of Indonesian, Japanese, Korean and Mandarin in
Australian schools. The targets were that by 2006, 60% of students in years
3 to 10 and 15% of year 12 students would study one of these languages. The
1995 Budget committed $68 million as the Commonwealth's contribution, with
another $4 million devoted to expanding university-based teacher preparation
courses in these languages.

 .
Australia opened its doors in
an unprecedented way to students from Asia. Over 143,000 overseas students
were studying in Australian universities, schools and private colleges last
year, nearly 85% of them from Asia.

 .
The boom in Asian
tourism to Australia also succeeded in establishing people-to-people links
and cultural familiarity.

 .
Reconciliation between indigenous
and non-indigenous Australia advanced during the 1980s and 90s, culminating
in the High Court's Mabo decision and subsequent legislation in 1993. In
itself this was a struggle to incorporate into our land tenure system the
righting of an historical wrong and a legal fiction - the doctrine of

terra nullius. 

 All of these advances were important
contributions to a more sophisticated policy of engagement for Australia in
a more sophisticated age. In the context of the effects I described earlier
of communications technologies on international politics, these were
essential adaptations.

 But they must not stop there, and this
is my concern with the current government's agenda. It represents a refusal
to allow Australian identity to grow with the region we know is our home and
our future.

 It is certainly true that some cultural insecurity
within Australian society attaches to engagement with Asia. But the solution
is not for Australia to give up the goal and retreat to a shrivelled,
depressive, neo-colonial image of our place in the region. It is for
Australians to be more confident about their culture and their history, and
to be more comfortable with the societies they observe in Asia.

There is much potential to build on here.

 For example,
Australia can be justly proud of the fact that it has shown as a nation an
ability to reflect upon itself and the injustices for which it is
responsible. Our most difficult criticism has been self-criticism. An
Australian court overturned 
terra nullius, an Australian Commission
wrote the Stolen Children report. Our institutions have pointed to our own
faults. Others have not had to do it for us. That is a strength in that it
represents our capacity to change as a result of our own moral impulses, not
a response to others showing us the way.

 Australians also have
a magnificent reputation for accepting new cultures and races without social
disruption. Hence there is little in Asian societies with which we as a
nation are genuinely unfamiliar, and we are rapidly amassing the language
skills to enable us to deal ever more confidently with our region.

 These societal resources are great foreign policy resources, but they
require a foreign policy, and a prosecution of it, which understands
contemporary realities, is ambitious about Australia's capacities and does
not see all foreign policy as an arena in which to score domestic political
advantage.

 The fact is that Australia is again, as we were at
the close of World War Two, at the centre of an unfolding regional order. We
have the capacity to influence this order, or we can stand back and allow it
to be shaped around us.

 The government has signalled its
intention, and backed it up in the White Paper, to re-emphasise bilateral
diplomacy as the primary vehicle for advancing Australia's regional
interests.

 I believe that last year's controversy over China's
interpretation of the US alliance was a foretaste of the problems this
strategy has prepared for us. The Chinese could not conceive of anything
other than a regional rationale for this so-called 're-invigoration' of the
Australia-United States alliance. Our government did not see that it was
sending such a message. It failed to understand that increasingly in the
post-Cold War world bilateral initiatives are viewed through regional
prisms.

 This is not to say that the US alliance is not central
to our regional strategy. Indeed, its centrality is precisely what makes it
imperative that it is not misunderstood or its role in the region undermined
by empty posturing.

 In my view, much of the heavy strategic
workload in our region in coming years will be carried by multilateral
institutions - to wit, the ASEAN Regional Forum on the security front and
APEC on the economic front

 APEC was an Australian
initiative.

 Nothing illustrates more clearly our potential
influence over regional affairs than the APEC's success to date, in
particular the historic Bogor declaration.

 Nothing illustrates
the potential advantage of multilateral diplomacy to Australia's national
interests: what would Australia's chances have been of negotiating free
trade by 2020 bilaterally with China?

 Nothing illustrates
better the importance of seizing a diplomatic window of opportunity when It
opens up: what would be the chances of establishing an economic grouping
comprising both Taiwan and China today?

 APEC needs ongoing
leadership and energy from Australia to maintain its momentum and the
interest of major players.

 The ASEAN Regional Forum shows at
least as much potential in security affairs. It is an excellent example of
the growing self-confidence of our regional neighbours in managing the
security order around them.

 In particular it can play a role in
engaging the emerging regional giant in China. For example, properly
understood, the recent agreements between China and Russia foreshadow real
opportunities for ARF confidence-building measures. They show that the
current ASEAN preference for the informal will be able to take more
substantial form when the players are ready. The disengagement of forces
along the massive Russian/Chinese border, and between China and Soviet
successor states has levels of detail that those familiar with old arms
control arrangements in Europe and between the Soviet Union and the US will
easily recognise.

 Our approach to ARF should also figure in one
neglected but very important Australian bilateral relationship - that with
India. ASEAN is quietly drawing all players in in order to balance them. We
have a real opportunity here, with the enormous understanding we have built
of South-East Asian affairs, to offer valuable advice for a power whose
attention has hitherto firmly been drawn to its borders, its north and
central Asia.

 Australia's involvement with the ARF promises
much for our future regional diplomacy. As multilateral diplomacy plays a
larger and larger role in regional affairs, we must exploit our relationship
with the ARF for the voice it gives us in an established, respected and
successful forum, both in terms of a seat at the table for multilateral
discussions, but also a chance to advance bilateral agenda items with fellow
members.

 But we also have much to offer the ARF. Here is the
opportunity for a payoff for years of solid commitment through five- power
and bilateral defence relationships to the region's security. We have
managed through the 1980s and 90s to update these arrangements to keep their
relevance fresh Contrast that with the fate of SEATO. Even in periods of
testiness, our neighbours have been cautious not to jettison ASEAN's
benefits. One of the payoffs of our small involvement in the Gulf War was
that it was a timely demonstration of resolution at a time when some had 8
few question marks over our reliability.

 There is no substitute
for the diplomatic activism of Australia's recent past if we are to
capitalise on the opportunities we face in our region.

 It was a
Labor Prime Minister, John Curtin, who in the period of greatest threat to
this nation's survival appreciated the necessity for Australia to shape its
own destiny in its own region. He made the decision to give Australia the
resources it needed to do so.

 The Labor government aspire to
leave will be a fitting heir to that tradition. The threats to Australia
today are of a different nature, but nothing less than our survival is at
stake in managing our response to them.

 Like John Curtin, we
will look without sentimentality or distortion to the region we inhabit and
find a place for a confident, forward- looking nation within it.

 Thank you. 

