---
title: "New look National Multicultural Advisory Council"
date: "1997-06-30"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211454999
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OQH30%22
---

   " r97066 

  lof5 

  http:/ /www.immi .gov.au/minre\/r97066.htm 

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  MEDIA  RELEASE 

  The Hon. RuildockMP ----. ........ =  Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600 -Phone (06) 277 7860;  Facs (06) 273 4144 

  MPS 66/97 

  New look National Multicultural Advisory Council  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, has reconstituted the  Government's council on multicultural affairs. 

  "The first task for the new look National Multicultural Advisory Council will be to advise on a policy  and implementation framework for the next decade, to ensure that cultural diversity is a unifying  force for Australia," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "Cultural diversity is a fact of life in Australia. The Government is committed to managing this  diversity to ensure that all Australians capitalise on its benefits, and to ensure an inclusive and  tolerant society is maintained." 

  "I am pleased that Mr Neville Roach, Managing Director of Fujitsu Australia, has agreed to chair the  Council. He has a deep interest in, and commitment to, progressing cultural diversity issues and  brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to this important task." 

  In addition, the Council will provide advice to the Government on the cultural diversity dimension of  significant forthcoming events, including the Centenary of Federation and the Sydney 2000  Olympics. 

  The Minister acknowledged the contributions of the former National Multicultural Advisory Council. 

  "I look forward to working with the new Council in developing strategies to enhance Australia's  unique culturally diverse society ," Mr Ruddock said. 

  The Council will comprise 15 members:  Mr Neville Roach (Chairman)  Mr Randolph Alwis  Mr Iftikhar Aziz Chaudhry  Bishop David Cremin  Ms Ann Duffield  Mr Angelo Hatsatouris OAM  Emeritus Prof Laksiri Jayasuriya AM  Dr Chandran Kukathas  Ms Peggy Lau-Flux  Dr Colin Rubenstein  Ms Evelyn Scott  Dr My-Van Tran OAM  Ms Agnes Whiten  Dr Peter Wong AM 

  Emeritus Prof Jerzy Zubrzycki AO CBE 

  30 June 1997  Media inquiries (06) 277 7860  c=: __ 

  Members of the National Multicultural Advisory Council (NMAC) -biographical  data 

  07/18/97 12:33: 13 

  ∑ rJ7066 

  2of5 

  http:// www.immi .gov.au/minrel /rJ7066.htm 

  Mr Neville Roach  Mr Roach, Managing Director of Fujitsu Australia, has been appointed as Chairman of the National  Multicultural Advisory Council. He chaired the previous National Multicultural Advisory Council in  January 1996 following the resignation of the Hon Mick Young, AO. He is the Chairman of the  recently established Business Advisory Panel. Mr Roach has significant experience with advisory  bodies, holding the positions of Director with the Australian Information Industry Association and the  Committee for Economic Development of Australia and member of the Australian Graduate School  of Management Advisory Council. He has also been Chairman of the Asia-in-Australia Council and  the Committee ofInquiry into the Temporary Entry of Business People and Highly Skilled  Specialists. 

  Mr Randolph Alwis  Mr Alwis is Chairperson of the Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia. He has  served on various national committees including the Telstra Consumer Council, Austel Consumer  Forum and the Taxation Commissioner's Advisory Panel of the Child Support Agency. He has been  President of the Multicultural Communities' Council of South Australia, Ethnic Communities'  Council of South Australia, and is acting Chairperson of the Overseas Qualifications Board of South  Australia. Mr Alwis is a practising accountant and business consultant. 

  Mr Iftikhar Aziz Chaudhry  Mr Chaudhry has extensive experience with state and national voluntary organisations. He is a former  Chairman of the Migrant Resource Centre in Southern Tasmania and former President of the  Australian Federation ofIslamic Councils. He has also served as a member of the Tasmanian  Advisory Council for Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs. Mr Chaudhry is a Chartered Accountant and  has been Vice-President of the Institute of Internal Auditors-Australia. 

  Bishop David Cremin  Bishop Cremin had been appointed Vicar for Immigration in 1989 and is Chairman of the Catholic  Immigration Committee which oversees the work of the Catholic Immigration Office of the  Archdiocese of Sydney. As Vicar for Immigration he deals with a large number of migrant  communities and organisations including the Australian Catholic Migrant and Refugee Office, the  Jesuit Refugee Service and the St. Vincent de Paul Society Migrant & Refugee Service. 

  Ms Ann Duffield  Ms Duffield is the Assistant Secretary of the Multicultural Affairs Unit in the Department ofthe  Premier and Cabinet in Victoria. She is Chair of the Inter-departmental Multicultural Services  Advisory Committee (IMSAC), established by the Premier to monitor and evaluate service delivery  issues relevant to Victoria's diverse communities. Ms Duffield is a member of the State  Inter-Governmental Settlement Committee and of the Commonwealth Access and Equity Working  Group. 

  Mr Angelo Hatsatouris, OAM  Mr Hatsatouris chairs the Greek Welfare Centre in Sydney which operates under the auspices of the  Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia. He is President of the Castellorizian Club in Kingsford and  Chairman of the Castellorizian Nursing Home Administration Committee. He is a solicitor in private  practice. 

  Emeritus Professor Laksiri Jayasuriya, AM  Professor Jayasuriya has been involved in a range of community activities in the field of social policy,  welfare and ethnic affairs. In addition to research and writing extensively in this area, he has also  served on numerous government bodies, including the Committee of Review of the Australian  Institute of Multicultural Affairs, and as head of the National Advisory and Coordinating Committee  on Multicultural Education. Professor Jayasuriya recently retired from the University of Western  Australia and is currently Honorary Senior Research Fellow in the University's Department of Social  Work and Social Administration. 

  Dr Chandran Kukathas  Dr Kukathas is Senior Lecturer in Politics at University College, the Australian Defence Force  Academy, and Research Committee Member of the Institute of Public Affairs. He is the founding  editor of the Political Theory Newsletter and co-editor of the Journal of Political Philosophy. He has 

  07/18/97 12:33: 14 

  1'97066 

  :1 of 5 

  http:/ /www.immi.gov.au/minrellr97066.htm 

  previously been Director of the Centre for Independent Studies' Multiculturalism Research Program. 

  Ms Peggy Lau-Flux  Ms Lau-Flux, a corporate banker by profession with a MBA degree, is the fonner Deputy Chainnan  of the South Australian Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs Commission. She is a Board Director of the  Royal Adelaide Hospital and is a fonner President of the Financial Women's Association. Her 

  interests lie in the areas of commerce and trade, communications and media and international  relations. 

  Dr Colin Rubenstein  Dr Rubenstein is a Senior Lecturer in Politics at Monash University. He has held a number of  positions on the then Victorian Ethnic Affairs Commission including the position of Acting  Chairperson. Dr Rubenstein is the National Policy Chairman of the Australia Israel and Jewish  Affairs Council. He has been a member of the Australian National Commission for UNESCO, Social 

  Science Network. He is a fonner consultant to the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs. 

  Ms Evelyn Scott  Ms Scott has been involved in Aboriginal Affairs over the past thirty years and has played a major  role in the establishment of Aboriginal Legal Services, Housing Societies and Medical Services  within Queensland. Ms Scott has been a community consultant to the Aboriginal Employment  Development Task Force and a member of the Commonwealth Women's Advisory Council. 

  Dr My-Van Tran, OAM  Dr Tran is an Associate Professor in Asian Studies at the University of South Australia. Dr Tran was  appointed as Director to the Board of Directors ofthe Special Broadcasting Service, she is an  Associate Director and Executive Member of the Centre for International and Cross-Cultural Studies,  a Counsellor for the Federation of the Vietnamese Communities in Australia and a member of the  South-Australia-Asean Research Group. Dr Tran was a member of the previous National  Multicultural Advisory Council. 

  Ms Agnes M. Whiten  Ms Whiten finished her tenn as Women's Adviser to the Catholic Archbishop of Brisbane in 1996.  This position was the first and only one in Australia. She is currently serving her second tenn as a  member of the University of Queensland Senate. She is also a member of the Ministerial Advisory  Committee for Queensland Women, Convenor of the Women's Issues Network of the Ethnic  Communities' Council of Queensland, member of the Board of the National Foundation for  Australian Women, member of the Australian Federation of University Women (Qld) and the  Executive Committee ofthe National Council of Women (Qld). Ms Whiten was a member of the  previous National Multicultural Advisory Council. 

  Dr Peter Wong, AM  Dr Wong is the Chainnan of the Australian Chinese Charity Foundation and Chinese Migrant  Welfare Association. He was a member of the NSW Ethnic Affairs Commission, Founding Chair of  the Ethnic Schools Board and Chinese Language Education Council ofNSW and Senior  Vice-President ofNSW Federation of Ethnic Schools. He was also a member of the Medical Board of  NSW. He initiated the 'Festival of Nations' and 'Minister's Award for Ethnic Schools Children', both  of which are annual multicultural events in Sydney. Dr Wong is practising as a family physician. 

  Professor Jerzy Zubrzycki, AO, CBE  Professor Zubrzycki has been the Foundation Professor of Sociology at the Australian National  University. Professor Zubrzycki has published widely in the area of ethnic relations and served as an  adviser on ethnic affairs to Australian Governments (1968-1986). He has been Chainnan of the  Australian Ethnic Affairs Council, Chainnan of the Ethnic Affairs Task Force of the Australian  Council on Population and Ethnic Affairs and member of the Australian Institute of Multicultural  Affairs. He is a member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences, Vatican City, and a Fellow of  the Academy of Social Sciences on Australia. 

  National Multicultural Advisory Council-Terms of Reference 

  The Council will advise the Minister on policies for further enhancing Australia's unique culturally 

  07/18/9712 :33:14 

  ∑ ~7066 

  4 of5 

  http : // www.immi.gov . au / minre1 / ~7066.htm 

  and linguistically diverse society. The Council will: 

  1. Develop a report to the Minister which recommends on a policy and implementation framework for  the next decade, that is aimed at ensuring that cultural diversity is a unifying force for Australia. 

  The report should: 

  -articulate the guiding principles and unifying values that underpin the policy; and  -identify elements of a policy framework and implementation strategy (including any impediments in  the current policy framework and nomenclature) which will contribute to: 

  : broad community support for, and understanding of, these principles and values; and : enhancing  national unity through acceptance by Australians of both the diversity and the common structures of  Australia. 

  2. Consider and provide advice to the Minister on the policy implications of Australia's linguistic and  cultural diversity in significant forthcoming events including the Centenary of Federation and the  Sydney 2000 Olympic Games. 

  3. Provide advice and report on other specific matters referred to it by the Minister. 

  In carrying out its work the Council will: 

  ∑ take account of the Joint Parliamentary Statement of 30 October 1996 that: 

  "this House: 

  -reaffirms its commitment to the right of all Australians to enjoy equal rights and be treated with  equal respect regardless of race, colour, creed or origin.  -reaffirms its commitment to maintaining an immigration policy wholly non-discriminatory on  grounds of race, colour creed or origin.  -reaffirms its commitment to the process of reconciliation with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  people, in the context of redressing their profound social and economic disadvantage.  -reaffirms its commitment to maintain Australia as a culturally diverse, tolerant and open society,  united by an overriding commitment to our nation, and its democratic institutions and values.  -denounces racial intolerance in any form as incompatible with the kind of society we are and want to  be." 

  ∑ take account of the context emerging from wider Government directions, priorities and policies ,  including commitments to: 

  -seek a socially cohesive, tolerant and harmonious nation united by common values, goals and  aspirations; 

  -advance the interests of the wider community, and hence the national interest, as distinct from the  special interests of sectional groups; 

  -individual choice and responsibility as integral to public policy-making in Australia; -fair, open and  competitive markets that support both economic and social needs; and -work with community groups  to develop the great strengths which derive from the diversity of languages and cultures in Australian  society, and to reaffirm the strength of the unifying values that Australians share. 

  ∑ note that the values/principles underpinning current multicultural policy as articulated in the 1989  National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia retain their importance; 

  The Council may wish to consider the application of those values/principles in the context of  changing circumstances. It is noted that a great deal has been achieved under policies and programs  that have been built on those values/principles. These policies and programs include access and  equity, anti-racism education, English language services, settlement services and those relating to the  benefits of cultural and linguistic diversity. The challenge is to ensure that policies adapt to meet new  or changing priorities, without jeopardising existing achievements. The application of those 

  07118/9712:33:14 

  r97066 http://www.immi .gov.au/minrel/r97066.htm 

  values/principles should aim to consolidate these achievements, but should not be constrained by the  perspectives of previous policy. 

  ∑ take account of recent reports that deal with cultural diversity issues, including the 1995 National  Multicultural Advisory Council report Multicultural Australia: the Next Steps, Towards and Beyond  2000; 

  ∑ engage the community in discussion, particularly at the local community level, to ensure effective  input to policy development and a better understanding by Australians of how diversity within a  common structure can enhance national unity; and 

  ∑ keep the Minister informed of progress, particularly in relation to any major developments. 

  June 1997 

  0711R /97 12:33:14 

