---
title: "Ethnic communities breakfast, Friday 24 July 1998, Melbourne: address."
date: "1998-07-24"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211461454
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LE705%22
---

   

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY     EMBARGOED 
UNT1L DELIVERY

  

  ADDRESS TO ETHNIC COMMUNITIES BREAKFAST

  FRIDAY 24 JULY 1998

  MELBOURNE

  

  

  The last 2 ½ years of the Howard Government have been a time of great 
difficulty for Australia’s ethnic com munities. In this time, 
we have all come to learn what it means when a Party’s election commitments 
are there to neutralise a political issue for them, not as a genuine 
commitment to govern, as they themselves put it, 'for all of us’.

  

 The words may have changed from day to day, but the 
music has remained remarkably consistent throughout. It has been a constant 
refrain of ambiguity, equivocation, half-commitments and obvious silences, 
and all too frequently, this Government’s words and its actions operate 
at cross-purposes.

  

 What else are we to make of a Party that promises 
an Australian Council on Citizenship, but which 2 ½ years later has 
not appointed one single member to such a Council?

  

 What else are we to make of a Prime Minister who professes 
his admiration for the contribution of Australians of ethnic background, 
but is not prepared to do the simple, decent, self-evident thing, and 
keep his election promise to hold an anti-racism campaign?

  

 But more than anything else, these last 2 ½ years 
have shown the kind of commitment you can expect from this Government, 
and this Prime Minister, when it really counts. I am speaking, of course, 
of his response to Pauline Hanson and her One Nation Party.

  

 This has been a pretty spectacular week in Federal 
politics, with Peter Costello as good as declaring his designs on John 
Howard’s job, and a terribly bruising Claytons’ backdown on Telstra, 
but I think something has got lost in the fog, and I want to put the 
spotlight back on it this morning.

  

 On Tuesday, Liberal Senator Ross Lightfoot went on 
morning radio to call on his Party to form a Coalition with One Nation 
for the next Federal election. It is true that in response, John Howard 
ruled out a Coalition with One Nation before the election. But it is 
what he didn’t rule out, has never ruled out, and persistently refuses, 
to rule out, that is the real issue here.

  

 We all know what a coalition arrangement between One 
Nation and the Liberals means. It is what I call getting One Nation 
into Government by the front door. This would be roughly the same arrangement 
as they currently have with the Nationals, which involves dividing up 
Ministries between the two parties, and operating as one for the purposes 
of Government.

  

 But that has never really been the issue. The real 
issue is John Howard doing what Rob Borbidge was falling over himself 
in his rush to try and do after the Queensland election - and that is 
to come to an arrangement whereby One Nation offers support for Budget 
Bills and in votes of no-confidence, enabling the Liberals to form Government, 
relying on One Nation’s numbers in the House.

  

 That is what I call getting One Nation into Government 
by the back door. That is also what John Howard has been asked about 
repeatedly — including by me in the Parliament — and what he avoids 
answering every time.

  

 But we are not talking about an inexperienced politician 
here. John Howard knows the difference, and his refusal to rule out 
both the front- and backdoor options means he is quite deliberately 
leaving the second one open. The question must be what he would offer 
One Nation to make it worth their while helping him to govern.

  

 I have also been asked directly whether Labor would 
govern in coalition with One Nation, or govern with One Nation support, 
and my answer is the only word that will suffice: never.

  

 It is time John Howard gave the same undertaking.

  

 In part, I have come here today to launch a booklet 
which catalogues this Government’s failings on the issues of citizenship, 
immigration, multiculturalism and ethnic affairs. But I also believe 
that you have a right to expect more from the alternative Government 
of this country than just a denunciation of its opponent’s policies.

  

 And today I am here to announce some of the things 
we will do.

  

 Ever since we lost office, the Australian Labor Party 
has been working hard to reconnect with the people who did not vote 
for us at the last election.

  

  We see our challenge as that of remaining true to the proud record 
of Labor Governments past, and also understanding how we can advance 
Australian society, safeguard its tolerance, celebrate its diversity, 
and make ours a society which is valued and respe cted all around 
the world.

  

  The policies I announce today, and those that will come closer to 
the election, are Labor’s commitment to building this Australia. They 
represent our determination to stake out some principles on these key 
issues of immigration,  multiculturalism and citizenship, and 
declare our determination to defend those principles.

  

 Because this is what Australia needs right now. If 
political leaders are silent when central values of Australian society 
come under threat, then that silence will be filled by other voices, 
and not voices we can be proud of.

  

 Let there be no mistake. The outburst of intolerance 
this nation has suffered over the last 2 ½ years is a direct result 
of this Government’s failure to stake out its principles and defend 
them.

  

 In contrast, Labor’s principles were out there for 
all to see, and out there early. We made our decision over a year ago, 
before the Queensland election, before One Nation really even figured 
in the opinion polls, that Labor would put them last in all elections, 
in every State, and in every House.

  

 So, in outlining Labor’s policy positions to you 
today, I want to lay out four key principles of how Labor regards policy 
in this area. Those principles are a belief in the role of citizenship, 
a commitment to opposing racism, our belief in supporting ethnic communities, 
and an emphasis on employment. Let me now talk about each of these in 
turn.

  

 I have stated before today my firm belief that at 
the core of our idea of multiculturalism must be a firm commitment to 
energising the role of Australian citizenship.

  

 This is the reason behind our two-fold commitment 
I announced back in March:  first to rename the Office of Multicultural 
Affairs, the Office of Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs and second, 
to put it back in the Prime Minister’s Department with a Minister 
directly responsible to the Prime Minister to give it the stature it 
deserves.

  

 So not only will this important office be back in 
the Prime Minister’s Department, where it was until John Howard took 
it out, but it will also have the explicit brief of encouraging more 
migrants to become Australian citizens. It will also be an expression 
of my dedication as Prime Minister to the important role of migrant 
communities within Australian society.

  

 Labor believes that encouraging citizenship ensures 
that immigration helps to build a cohesive Australian society — one 
that recognises people’s rights, respects their background, gives 
them a sense of belonging to a proud and supportive community, and shows 
them what the traditional Australian sense of ‘a fair go’ really 
means.

  

 Labor recognises that becoming an Australian citizen 
means explicitly recognising the exchange of rights and responsibilities 
between a migrant to our shores, and the society into which he or she 
comes.

  

 The responsibilities are nothing more and nothing 
less than the kind of commitment a person needs to make to feel at home 
in a new country: a need to learn the language, a need to find work 
or find educational opportunities, a need to get involved in the local 
community, and the standing requirement Australia has of all new migrants 
— that they leave old enmities behind when they enter Australia.

  

 At the same time, Australia must extend a welcoming 
hand to newly arrived members of its society. And this is where Labor 
places an emphasis on rights.

  

 The Office of Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 
will coordinate a Labor Government’s support for all migrant communities, 
across all Government portfolios. In particular, it will recognise the 
different needs of different migrant communities: the specific needs 
of newly-arrived migrants to find accommodation and employment, to build 
their English language skills, and to get access to counselling services 
if and when they need them.

  

 But it will also focus on the needs of more established 
migrant communities. Few have recognised just how damaging the Howard 
Government’s nursing homes policy has been to ethnic communities. 
So many of the migrants who came to Australia immediately after the 
Second World War took the great Australian dream of home ownership enthusiastically 
to heart. They worked all their lives to own their own homes — a dream 
that would have been impossible in the countries of their birth.

  

  Now, at a time of failing health, they find themselves forced to sell 
what for many of them is their only asset to meet the Government’s 
up-front entry fees for nursing homes — the fees which remain, after 
all the backflips, as a standing rebuke to decent  public policy 
in Australia. Labor is, as you know, absolutely committed to abolishing 
these fees when we get into office. We see it as the least we can do 
for the generation that built this country, so many of whom came from 
overseas to make their homes here. We say they should be allowed to 
keep them.

  

 The Office of Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 
will also be responsible for setting up the Australian Council on Citizenship. 
Labor will not just promise a Council, we will actually establish one.

  

 We think it embarrassing that this Government has 
not appointed even one member to this Council after 2 ½ years, despite 
their election promise to do so. We think it embarrassing that the numbers 
of people taking out Australian citizenship have fallen steadily from 
112,000 in Labor’s last year in power, to what looks like being only 
87,000 for 1997/98. And we think it embarrassing that with less than 
6 months to go until the 50th Anniversary of the Citizenship Act, the 
best this Government can do is start talking to Australia Post about 
perhaps producing some commemorative stamps.

  

 I want to spend the rest of my time with you here 
today talking about the commitments a Labor Government will make to 
guaranteeing the rights of those we hope will become our newest Australian 
citizens.

  

 Let me start with the most basic right, and that is 
the right to freedom from racism. No person coming into Australia, be 
they a tourist, a short term visitor, or a newly-arrived migrant, should 
ever suffer ill treatment, or abuse in the street.

  

 I hate the idea that Australians of an ethnic background 
have to watch their contribution to Australian society degraded every 
night on their TV screens in their living rooms.

  

 Let me just take issue here with something the Prime 
Minister said recently in answering the question of why he would put 
One Nation last in his seat of Bennelong. He said then, and I quote:

  

 “Oh, I think, generally speaking, there is a perception 
that some of the policies of One Nation make people who form some minorities 
in our community just feel a bit uneasy and a bit unwelcome, and for 
the first time I’ve actually heard over the last couple of weeks people 
who’ve lived in this country for a very long time of Asian descent 
say: ‘Gee, for the first time I just feel a little bit unwelcome.”’

  

 Prime Minister, it is not some policies, or some people, 
feeling just a little bit unwelcome, it is lots of people, the length 
and breadth of this country, feeling a lot more than a little bit unwelcome.

  

  It is Australians who have  framed their citizenship certificates 
on the lounge room wall — the ones who tuck their kids into bed at 
night in boxing kangaroo pyjamas, the ones who barrack as loud and as 
long as anyone else at the footy, the ones who love their families and 
their adopted country. It is the Australians who represent our country 
at the Olympics, and in international sport, the Dean Lukins, the Mark 
Bosnichs, the Christian Vieris — even the Michael Kasprowiczs who 
excels in that most Anglo of Australian sports —cricket.

  

 We are talking about people who never once would question 
their allegiance to Australia, and now they have to listen to someone 
else do so.

  

 I want to take the opportunity to read to you from 
a letter written recently to the Age. It says, and I quote:

  

 “I feel disgusted to learn that Pauline Hanson wants 
to introduce a policy that all future migrants to Australia must pass 
an English-language test. As I am 15 years old and my future lies in 
Australia, this hurts me a lot ... All four of my grandparents came 
to Australia as immigrants. They worked hard, established businesses, 
brought up families and contributed much to our community. I love my 
grandparents deeply and I am proud of the values they have passed on 
to me. If Pauline Hanson’s policy had been a reality then, I wouldn’t 
be here today. How can we as a community live with such a discriminatory 
policy?”

  

  The young man who wrote that letter is here today. His name is Dan 
Same, and he is the grandson of my friend Saul Same. Dan is here today, 
so is his father David, and so is his grandfather, Saul. I couldn’t 
agree with your letter more, Dan. I think it goe s to the core 
— the simple human core — of why the struggle against One Nation 
is worth joining.

  

 And to Saul’s name, we can add so many others — 
names of people who came to this country without much English, and have 
made a fantastic contribution across many different fields — Sir Arvi 
Parbo, the late Victor Chang, and even (and non-Carlton fans will have 
to excuse me here) Alex Jesaulenko.

  

 We need to convey to the wider community that simple 
human core of what is wrong with racism, and we all know that education 
and leading by example are the only ways.

  

 This is why I call on the Prime Minister again today 
to implement his promised anti-racism campaign without delay.

  

 After all, when in the last 30 years of this country’s 
history has an anti-racism campaign been more important than now? It 
is not as if we are asking for it to come out of thin air, we are just 
asking for an election promise to be kept.

  

 I have said before today, and I say it again, Labor 
will implement an anti-racism campaign when we get into office. That 
campaign will take the form of grass-roots, community-based activities 
across the entire country, not just glitzy advertising and policy launches.

  

 Our model is the very successful ‘Australia Remembers’ 
campaign, which Labor implemented in 1995 to celebrate the 50  th  
anniversary of the end of the Second World War. That campaign gave communities 
all around Australia an opportunity to celebrate in the way they chose, 
and in the way that was most meaningful to their local community. We 
look forward immensely to seeing an anti-racism campaign along the same 
lines. We will be proud to see communities all around Australia taking 
concrete, meaningful action, shaped and implemented at the local level, 
to celebrate Australia’s diversity and combat racism and intolerance.

  

 This leads me to the next vital component of the rights 
of immigrants to Australia. I am speaking here of the right to some 
assistance to settle into their new country.

  

 Migrants arriving in Australia, particularly those 
arriving as refugees, need the security that a supportive community 
can give them. I place on record today Labor’s enormous admiration 
for the Migrant Resource Centres, the ethno-specific organisations, 
and other community organisations that are so important to making immigrants 
feel at home when they first arrive in Australia.

  

 That welcome is crucially important to how immigrants 
perceive their new home, and the organisations that provide that welcome 
deserve security.

  

 This is why I announce today that a Labor Government 
will guarantee funding on a three-yearly basis to the Community Grants 
Programme to assist humanitarian entrants and migrants to settle in 
Australia.

  

 We believe in strengthening the role of these organisations 
as the best way of ensuring that different migrants get the particular 
support that they need. For some, torture and trauma counselling is 
vital. For others there is a stronger need to organise transitory accommodation, 
or language classes, and any number of other services.

  

 Labor will provide this funding guarantee in return 
for these organisations agreeing to quality assurance and performance 
measures in the delivery of services to the people they serve.

  

 Before I move on, let me say there is a disturbing 
trend in the immigration debate today — perpetuated by many people 
who know better — to regard assistance to migrants as somehow electorally 
-motivated pandering to minorities, and therefore as something to be 
criticised and cut back.

  

 I want to give those people just one example today. 
Because it is very easy to talk in generalities, and use them to dehumanise 
instances of real and desperate need.

  

 It is the story of a family that arrived in Australia 
from Bosnia during the war in the former Yugoslavia. The husband and 
wife were both qualified engineers. They arrived in Australia with their 
2 children after having endured the trauma of war for months, and losing 
loved ones in the fighting. Australia gave them sanctuary from the war, 
but some of the war came with each of them.

  

  The husband was particularly badly affected. He couldn’t cope with 
the slightest noise, because he kept imagining in it the terrible vibrations 
of bombs and shells going off around him. A Migrant Resource Centre 
worker referred him to the Foundation for S urvivors of Torture 
and Trauma for counselling for him and his family, and also helped them 
find a house in a quiet area to help his recovery.

  

 In the meantime, the children started at school, and 
the wife attended English classes which helped her to find work as an 
Engineer. In time, the husband’s condition responded to treatment 
and stabilised. He was linked by the Migrant Resource Centre worker 
to the local TAFE College and other organisations that were prepared 
to assist him. He eventually found work as a Mechanical Engineer.

  

  That family has made a new life in this country. They have overcome 
terrible trauma and difficult obstacles, to become successful members 
of the Australian community. Australia is the stronger for them being 
here. Our society is th e better for being able to help them.

  

 But this story is not just a story of human courage, 
will and strength of character. It is also a story of a welcoming, supportive 
community — the story of a nation we can be proud to call our own.

  

 It is the story which explains why Labor supports 
the organisations that do this vital work.

  

 Finally, Labor recognises that one of the most important 
determinants of how welcome a migrant feels in his or her new home, 
is the ability to find employment.

  

 Having a job helps to establish migrants in society, 
gives them networks of friends, acquaintances and contacts, and gives 
them and their families important financial security.

  

 We also know that we prosper as a country when migrants 
find jobs. Far from taking a job from other Australians, a migrant finding 
a job in Australia, as we all know, creates jobs elsewhere in the economy 
— jobs building houses, jobs building cars, jobs teaching children, 
and much more.

  

 The language skills of migrants to our shores are 
invaluable in helping Australia open up trading opportunities all around 
the world. It is time all these benefits were more clearly articulated 
and argued in our political debate. But we know this Government is not 
the one to carry the agenda forward.

  

 There are more people unemployed today than there 
were when John Howard assumed office 2½ years ago, and that includes 
migrants. Yet this Government has denied unemployment benefits and with 
them even assistance in finding a job to newly arrived migrants. Migrants 
have suffered along with all other Australians this Government’s comprehensively 
botched reforms to the employment services market.

  

 The document we circulate to you today mentions the 
case of the New Enterprise Incentive Scheme, or NEIS, introduced by 
Labor in 1995. This scheme was established to help job-seekers from 
non-English speaking backgrounds set up small businesses. It was a great 
success. The case study in this booklet shows that 150 people set up 
businesses under this scheme in the Southern Melbourne Metropolitan 
Region alone. This is the same scheme John Howard cut $23 million out 
of.

  

 Labor, on the other hand, is committed to helping 
migrants find jobs once they arrive in Australia. And we understand 
that for many migrants, English language skills are the key to secure 
employment.

  

 This is why I announce today that Labor will expand 
English language assistance for unemployed migrants. We know that service 
industries are increasingly Australia’s greatest job-generators. They 
are also where English language skills are so important — in hospitality, 
tourism and other services. Good English language skills will open a 
world of opportunity for migrants and the chance of better jobs in the 
future.

  

 English language assistance is also vital in helping 
many older migrants who have suffered the economic restructuring of 
traditional industries, particularly in manufacturing. Those who have 
lost jobs in these industries know they face an uncertain future where 
their best prospects of finding another job are in industries which 
require strong English language skills. Labor will be there to help 
them.

  

  The policies I have announced to you today are about recognising and 
enhancing the contribution of immigrants to Australian society.

  

  We absolutely repudiate the idea, no matter how sneakily it is expressed, 
that immigration is a burden on Australia. On t he contrary, we 
believe that immigration will be a central part of Australia’s achievements 
in the 21  st  Century.

  

 The policies I have announced today are there to put 
the Howard Government on notice.

  

 They show that Labor is here to take up the fight 
for ethnic communities. Over these last 2 ½ years, our position in 
the Senate means we have not been able to prevent all the damage this 
Government was intent on causing. They have got through some measures 
through which have caused great damage.

  

 We know that we cannot rebuild Rome in a day, although 
this Government has managed to burn it in one. But we also know we can 
take some first steps. We can make a strong start on repairing the damage, 
and we have outlined to you the direction we will take and some of the 
measures we will implement to do so.

  

 Above all, we know that a Labor Government can truly 
govern for all Australians — that we understand the reality of Australian 
multiculturalism and its enormous contribution to our society, and we 
believe in the great opportunities immigration provides for Australia’s 
future.

  

 Thank you.

  

  

  

 gb

