---
title: "Patients forced to catch a bus or train home."
date: "1998-09-24"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211463363
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DUY16%22
---

  dfkh! Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare 

  -L!J ,ftu,s~~,~~,~& -‘H/,2 * \... .-- 

  M 

  e 

  cl   0 -1 1   a 

  R   a ..L   1 

  e 

  a 

  S   e 

  24 September 1998 

  Patients forced to catch a bus or train home 

  Member for Calare Peter Andren says the crisis in local hospitals looks set to   continue, with neither Labor nor the Coalition promising sufficient funding to top up   the ailing health system. 

  “Sick country patients are being treated like third world refugees due to chronic   overcrowding and a lack of funds in both Sydney and regional hospitals,” Mr Andren   said. 

  “A patient transported by air ambulance from Orange to Sydney with a serious heart   complaint, has been asked to make a 6% hour bus trip back home a week later, after   two operations. 

  “Another man from Orange was sent to Sydney for heart transplant, and when the   operation didn’t eventuate he had to find his way to Central to catch a train back to   Orange, whereupon he was admitted to Orange Hospital with a severe angina attack. 

  “Instead of trying to encourage people to take out private cover, the Prime Minister   should first ensure the States receive the extra half billion dollars a year they each   require for health care,” he said. 

  “Emergency accident or heart patients turn up first at the Public Hospital, whether   they’re privately insured or not, and hospitals like Orange can no longer cope. 

  “The Air Ambulance is only available for hospital to hospital transfers, but surely a   car service at least should be provided to get these sick and anxious people back from   Sydney. . 

  “Apart from this appalling treatment of country patients in Sydney, Orange Base   Hospital is chronically understaffed and there’s little chance of a bed for these sick   people even when they return by public transport from Sydney,” Mr Andren said. 

  “I am told by contacts within Orange Base Hospital the Mid West Health system is in   disarray, with an excess of bureaucrats and a drastic shortage of doctors and nursing   staff. It is disgraceful to lose a specialist of Dr Tony Burrell’s standing because of the”   bloody-minded bottom line mentality where cost-cutting means more than patients. 

  “The public is sick and tired of the states blaming Canberra and the Federal   Government blaming the States. There is just not enough money coming from   Canberra. 

  “And don’t let us hear the GST ins the answer, because under the Coalition plan it’s   obvious the Federal Government simply wants to transfer hospital funding to the   States when health care funding should exclusively be a Federal responsibility” Mr   Andren said. 

  For further information contact (02) 6332 6229 or Mobile 041961 2891 

