---
title: "Government committed to Australia's cultural diversity."
date: "1998-09-01"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211462536
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8L905%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 MPS 122/98

  

  GOVERNMENT COMMITTED TO AUSTRALIA’S CULTURAL 
DIVERSITY

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today said the Coal ition’s commitment to building tolerance 
and understanding in the Australian community is reflected by the range 
of measures implemented by the Government since attaining office.

  

 Mr Ruddock said the depth and breadth of these measures 
debunk any suggestion the Government has shown little commitment to 
Australia’s cultural diversity.

  

 “Australia is a country uniquely defined by its 
people, its land and its indigenous inheritance. There can be no question 
that immigration and cultural diversity has built upon this foundation 
and created a country all Australian’s can be justifiably proud of.

  

 “The Government has at all times sought to build 
upon this legacy by ensuring that those people that have sacrificed 
so much to make Australia their home have access to the same services 
and opportunities as other Australians”.

  

  Measures implemented by the Government include:

  

  * Increased funding 
for the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) by over $17 million over 
four years to enable migrants to gain or enhance the skil l that 
is most crucial to their successful settlement — English language 
ability.

  

  * Directed $20.8 
million over four years to the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy 
(IHSS) for improved planning, coordination and delivery of services 
to refugee an d humanitarian entrants.

  

  * Extended $19.3 
million in funds to assist migrants and refugees settle quickly and 
effectively into the Australian community.

  

  * Continued funding 
fundamental migrant services through the nationwide 30 member Migrant 
Resource Ce ntre (MRC) network.

  

  * Established the 
National Multicultural Advisory Council (NMAC) to advise on multicultural 
policy and establish a framework cor cultural diversity for the next 
decade.

  

  * Appointed the 
Australian Citizenship Council under the chair of  the eminent 
Sir Ninian Stephen to undertake a comprehensive review of citizenship 
and recommend the best ways to celebrate the 50  th  anniversary 
of Australian citizenship

  

  * Unveiled an anti-racism 
campaign - Living in Harmony - to promote tolerance and un derstanding 
and make it clear there is no place for racism in the Australian community.

  

  * Conducted a nationwide 
campaign launching   Australian Immigration: The Facts  to dispel myth and misinformation 
and put some truth back into the immigration debate.

  

  *  Retained 
a safety net for migrants subject to the two year waiting period for 
benefits such that any individual who suffers changed circumstances 
after arrival can access Government assistance.

  

  “This Government is proud to administer a completely non-dis criminatory 
Immigration program which is, per capita, one of the most generous resettlers 
of refugees in the world,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “When the totality of these measures are considered 
it is clear that the Coalition has supported Australia’s cultural 
diversity and strived to ensure that migrants have the assistance necessary 
to help them settle effectively into the Australian community”.

  

 ENDS

  Tuesday, 1 September, 1998

  

  Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715.

  

  

  

  dd

