---
title: "Two more contracts signed for English language tuition in NSW."
date: "1998-04-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211552671
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/32305%22
---

   

  

  Immigration, Multicultural Affairs

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock 
MP

  

  Two more contracts signed for English language tuition in NSW

  

  MPS 42/98 

  

  Migrants will have access to more flexible and effective English languag e 
tuition in New South Wales following the awarding of two further contracts 
for the delivery of the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP), the Minister 
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, announced 
today. 

  

 The two contracts, between 
the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and a consortium 
led by the Australian Centre for Languages (ACL), were signed today 
for the Western and South Western Sydney regions under the open tender 
process. 

  

 Mr Ruddock said English 
language ability is one of the key factors in the successful settlement 
of migrants into the Australian community. 

  

 "Studies have shown 
that migrants with a low level of English language skill tend to have 
a poor employment experience and can face social isolation. 

  

 "The new AMEP service 
delivery arrangements will provide better services for clients including 
a wider choice of provider, more flexibility in service delivery options 
and better pathways to further study or employment." 

  

 The consortium, including 
Mission Australia, Macquarie Community College, University of Western 
Sydney (Macarthur) and the Kindergarten Union Children's Services will 
begin delivering language services in July 1998. 

  

 The Minister said the 
new tendering process has already proved successful in Victoria and 
Western Australia where innovative approaches by the winning tenderers, 
from a range of organisations in both the public and private sectors, 
are now delivering the benefits to students. 

  

 "The Government's 
aim in moving to open tendering was to improve the flexibility and effectiveness 
of English language tuition, while ensuring best value for money," 
Mr Ruddock said. 

  

 "Advances in technology 
will also help providers deliver English language services that are 
responsive to the changing needs of clients. 

  

 "The measures this 
Government have introduced will significantly improve the quality and 
sustainability of the Adult Migrant English Program and will also encourage 
ongoing improvements to how English can and should be taught." 

  

 Individuals entering 
Australia under the Refugee and Humanitarian stream will also have access 
to additional preparatory tuition to prepare them for the course. 

  

  15 April 1998

  Media inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715

