---
title: "East Timorese should be granted special visa: military repression continues as Portugal denies Australian Government claims that East Timorese are Portuguese."
date: "1998-06-03"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211459941
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0F405%22
---

   

  Media Release

  

  Bob Brown

  Australian Greens Senator for Tasmania

  Australian Senate

  

  Wednesday, 03 June, 1998

  

  East Timorese Should be 
Granted Special Visa

  

  Military Repression Continues 
as Portugal denies Australian Government claims that East Timorese ar  e 
Portuguese

  

  Greens Senator Bob Brown says that The Portuguese 
Government has now made it abundantly clear to the Australian Government 
the 1650 East Timorese asylum seekers in Australia are not Portuguese 
citizens.

  

  “The Federal Government should immedia  tely grant the 1650 
East Timorese asylum seekers in Australia a special visa category,” 
said Senator Brown.

  

  “The new Habibie regime in Indonesia has made no concrete steps 
towards self- determination for East Timor. In fact recent reports suggest 
a new crackdown by the military in East Timor

  

  “The legal fig leaf behind which successive Australian Governments 
have tried to hide behind has now been stripped away. The East Timorese 
asylum seeker are what they have always been, a people who have suffered 
much at the hands of the Indonesian military and who have fled to Australia 
seeking respite from the persecution they have endured.

  

  “That the Government has sought the removal of the East Timorese 
on the grounds that they enjoy Portuguese nationality has struck many 
Australians as repugnant.

  

  “The Prime Minister recently described the Indonesian presence in 
East Timor as a major irritant in international relations and that he 
would welcome moves by the Indonesians to ensure autonomy for the East 
Timorese. Mr Howard’s cabinet could aid this outcome by immediately 
extending to the 1650 asylum seekers a special visa category enabling 
them to stay in Australia.

  

  “This would demonstrate to the Indonesians that its close neighbour, 
military ally and the only country in the world to have extended legal 
recognition to the Indonesian occupation of East Timor has limits to 
what it is prepared to accept in the name of friendship,” said Senator 
Brown

  

  More Information: Ben Oquist 02 6277 3170 or 0419 704 095

  

  Attached:   Press Communique issued today from the Portuguese Government

  

  EMBASSY OF PORTUGAL

  CANBERRA

  

  PRESS COMMUNIQUE

  

  The Portuguese Government has been following 
closely the developments regarding Australian Tribunal and Court findings 
on the nationality of East Timor  ese asylum seekers. Portugal regrets the Tribunal’s decision on 
the case Jong Kim Koe considering that Australia, despite being a party 
to the Refugees Convention and Refugees Protocol, is under no obligation 
of granting protection to the Applicant on grounds that he can avail 
himself of the protection of Portugal.

  

  As other East Timorese asylum seekers in Australia, Mr Koe has never 
applied for Portuguese citizenship, therefore there is no basis for 
him to enjoy protection from the Portuguese authorities. Portugal has 
consistently stated that the attribution of Portuguese citizenship to 
East Timorese born persons presupposes an individual and voluntary application 
that reveals the wish to become a Portuguese national. It means that 
East Timorese are not automatically Portuguese nationals.

  

  Portuguese nationality laws were not designed to force the assimilation 
of East timorese people into the Portuguese State, but to positively 
provide them with the right of exercising a free choice on what concerns 
their nationality until self determination is settled in the Territory. 
The application of Portuguese nationality laws must be done in accordance 
with the right to self-determination of the people of East Timor, as 
required by Article 293 of the Portuguese Constitution and international 
law.

  

  It is ironical that Australia, the single member State of the international 
community that has recognised “de jure” the integration of East 
Timor in Indonesia, for the sake of granting protection to East Timorese 
now considers them to be Portuguese. In fact   “Australia has never considered the people of 
East Timor as anything but Indonesian since 1979",  as Foreign 
Minister Downer said, so the finding on Mr Koe case can only be interpreted 
as a denial of responsibilities towards East Timorese persons from Australian 
authorities.

  

  Portugal will continue to consider, on a case 
by case basis, all applications for Portuguese nationality by persons 
born in East Timor who voluntarily seek to obtain it.

  

  

  rd

