---
title: "Contract signed for English language tuition in Tasmania."
date: "1998-06-09"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211460041
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DK505%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP 

  

  Contract signed for English language

  tuition in Tasmania

  MPS 63/98 

  

 Migrants will have access 
to more flexible and effective English language tuition in Tasmania 
following the signing of a new contract for the delivery of the Adult 
Migrant English Program (AMEP), the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs, Philip Ruddock, announced today. 

  

 The five year $2.5 million 
contract, between the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 
and the successful tenderer, the Adult Migrant English Service, was 
signed today at a special ceremony in Hobart. 

  

 Mr Ruddock said English 
language ability is one of the key factors in the successful settlement 
of migrants into the Australian community. 

  

 "Studies have shown 
that migrants with a low level of English language skill tend to have 
a poor employment experience and can face social isolation. 

  

 "The new AMEP service 
delivery arrangements will provide better services for Tasmanian clients 
including more flexibility in service delivery options and better pathways 
to further study or employment". 

  

 The ceremony also marked 
the achievement of an important milestone in the history of the AMEP 
program in Tasmania - the program's Fiftieth Anniversary. 

  

 "The AMEP's 50 
years have been distinguished by many impressive achievements," 
Mr Ruddock said. 

  

 "Since it began 
in 1948, the program has helped over 15,000 of Australia's new arrivals 
to learn English and settle in Tasmania. 

  

 "The AMEP in Tasmania 
provides over 38,000 hours of English language tuition to around 200 
clients from over 40 language backgrounds each year. 

  

 "It is acknowledged 
as a world-leading language program and is one of Australia's key migrant 
settlement services. 

  

 "The AMEP has made 
a major contribution to the successful settlement of non-English speaking 
migrants and refugees and the maximisation of Australia's cultural diversity". 

  

 The ceremony marking 
these achievements will be held on the MV Cartela ferry, at the Brooke 
St Pier, Franklin Wharf, Hobart. 

  

  Tuesday, 9 June 1998

  Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715 

  

  For more information, 
visit the AMEP 50th Anniversary Website:

   http://www.immi.gov.au/amep/amep.html

  

  

  rw

