---
title: "Federation of Ethnic Communities' Council of Australia Conference, Parramatta, N.S.W., 28 March 1998: speech."
date: "1998-03-28"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211552346
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y0505%22
---

   

  

  Speech to the Federation 
of Ethnic Communities' Council of Australia Conference

  

  by

  Hon Kim C Beazley MP

  Leader of the Opposition

  

  PARRAMATTA NSW

  28 March 1998

  

  Labor's task since entering Opposition two 
years ago has been to be the only Party in the Au  stralian Parliament capable of presenting a view of a truly cohesive 
society.

  

  We have had the task of presenting that view, and defending it repeatedly, 
in the face of a government which does not understand it, and whose 
every action seems calculated to undermine it.

  

  I have before me today an audience that understands these facts probably 
better than any other in this country.

  

  And what I want to talk to you about is where this Coalition government 
has managed to create a 'collapse of consensus' in areas of policy where 
many of us believed that consensus to be beyond challenge.

  

  In talking about that collapse of consensus, I want to talk about 
immigration and multiculturalism, but in doing so, I don't intend to 
fall into the trap set by the opponents of multiculturalism and immigration. 
I don't want to allow the discussion to be one concerned with the margins 
of Australian life. I refuse to accept the distinctions the Prime Minister's 
favourite term 'mainstream Australia' is designed to throw up.

  

  Because the point of introducing a term such as 'mainstream Australia' 
into any debate is automatically to suggest parts of Australian society 
that are not 'mainstream', and we must then ask ourselves whose interests 
it serves to divide Australian society in this way. 

  

  We must understand the term for what it is meant to achieve politically. 
It is meant to achieve many things without saying any of them. 'Mainstream 
Australians' are a self-selected group. All of us (now, there's another 
slogan) can think of ourselves as 'mainstream' Australia if we want 
to. But what is involved in doing so is the exclusion of others. What 
is involved is the act of defining yourself against someone else whose 
values, appearance, language, religion or political opinions you do 
not share.

  

  Well, I don't want to talk about 'mainstream Australia' or any other 
part of Australia for that matter. I want to talk about Australian society.

  

  Immigration and multiculturalism have been integral parts in building 
the Australian society we have today. 

  

  When Australia's immigration policies were changed after World War 
Two, it was done at least to some extent to address the exhaustion of 
the Australian population from depression and war, which had substantially 
slowed the nation's population growth. Australia was faced at the time 
with a population which could not develop the opportunities the country 
presented.

  

  To some extent, the alarmist and now much-mocked slogan at the time, 
'populate or perish', was a product of that realisation. It was, of 
course, also the product of some insecurity regarding the region around 
us. But the overriding point about the population debate we had in the 
years following the Second World War was a strong focus on national 
strategy and a clear view of the character of Australian society.

  

  The view of the character of Australian society at the time was basically 
right. That view assumed that Australians were intelligent enough, egalitarian 
enough, and open enough to new experiences and influences to accept 
people from different backgrounds and cultures and make them welcome 
in their new country. That is the belief that now underpins the idea 
of multiculturalism. Multiculturalism at its simplest is an expression 
of the fundamental decency of the Australian people - a down-to-earth 
decency that does not stand on ceremony or look down on others, an uncomplicated 
decency that built a tolerant, multicultural society. The success of 
multiculturalism is testament to its foundations in the Australian national 
character, and belies all the dark mutterings about social engineering 
of its political opponents. Australia today is a multicultural nation, 
and we should celebrate that fact. In particular, politicians should 
cherish both the word and the reality of multiculturalism. 

  

  Our current government may not agree that words are important in this 
debate, but let me use just one example to show why I believe they are.

  

  Probably most of the people here today know, 
but many others do not, that the official dismantling of the White Australia 
policy began under Harold Holt's government in 1966. I hazard a guess 
that most Australians think it happened under the Whitlam gover  nment from 1972 onwards. 

  

  This misapprehension is itself instructive. It tells us something 
very important about White Australia, and about Australian identity. 
White Australia was not merely a series of technical arrangements, its 
effect easily reversed by dismantling the arrangements which sustained 
it. White Australia was, of course, a state of mind. That state of mind, 
that belief about the essence of being Australian, could only be changed 
by countering those ideas where it really mattered - in public, and 
in full cry.

  

  So, in a very real sense, the misapprehension is more accurate than 
the reality. It was Gough Whitlam who counted out the White Australia 
policy, because he was the Prime Minister who was prepared to stand 
up and proclaim it ended. This is why words are important - it is why 
they were important then, and why they remain important today.

  

  And it is why this government's farcical reluctance even to utter 
the word 'multiculturalism' is so damaging. 

  

  Well, we in the Opposition will not play   that game.

  

  We believe in optimising and enhancing Australia's multicultural identity 
at every opportunity for what it contributes to our society, but also 
for what it contributes to our national interest.

  

  We have, through our multicultural society, an enormous capacity to 
understand and address societies in the region around us, and further 
afield, and we should never underestimate the other contributions to 
national character made by successive generations of immigrants.

  

  As a result of our embrace of other people, we have been able to make 
part of the Australian psyche the maturing influences of an enormous 
range of human experience. We have been able to absorb as a people the 
experiences of immigrants without Australia having had to confront on 
our national soil the horrors that produced some of those memories.

  

  Our refugee intake has deeply reinforced and nurtured Australians' 
natural commitment to freedom, and has taught us some valuable lessons 
about the need for social coherence in diversity.

  

  But that social coherence has more elements to it than policies on 
immigration and multiculturalism.

  

  Labor's concern when we were in government was not to graft specifically 
multicultural or immigration-related policies onto the existing body 
politic, but to have before us a vision of Australian society and resource 
it accordingly.

  

  This was only logical. No-one was being conscripted to come to Australia. 
People chose Australia as a place to live because of our unique gifts 
as a nation and as a society. In a sense, we would only distract ourselves 
from the task at hand if we believed that policy for immigrants started 
and finished with immigration policy.

  

  Labor took a view of an evolving Australian society - one committed 
to ideals which valued and developed individuals, which energised the 
concept of citizenship, and which strove for real equality. These things 
made Australia a more attractive place, they made us a better society, 
and they gave us all a more robust sense of identity and national pride.

  

  We also believed that to get the maximum benefit from the diversity 
of the Australian community, we need to remember that society is most 
enhanced when the political leadership encourages a sense of reciprocal 
obligation between government and the governed.

  

  On this, let me say that there are tendencies emerging in this government's 
approach to policy which increase the stress on the community. The newest 
members of our community suffer those stresses with all other Australians, 
but we all know that as the tide goes out on decent policy, on decent 
social programmes, on job creation, on health care, education and all 
the other things that good governments do, the most recent arrivals 
to our shores are those most likely to suffer.

  

  One such example is the government's position on industrial relations. 
This government's policies are deliberately calibrated to produce insecurity 
in the workforce - to tip the balance between employees and employers 
massively in favour of the latter. Working Australians have been wrong-footed 
and pressured, their confidence that they may enjoy a reasonable family 
life and fairness in their workplaces has been dented.

  

  In particular, these strains are felt by sections 
of the workforce most affected by the consequences of globalisation. 
Some of that strain is the product of developments in the new international 
division of labour. But some of it has been directly produce  d by government fiat. 

  

  These are issues which hit particularly heavily in communities of 
a non-English speaking background. Many past and current immigrants 
to Australia were drawn into those industries where now the impact is 
being most keenly felt. 

  

  A recent study showed that of all unemployed people from an English-speaking 
background, 29% were previously employed as labourers or plant and machine 
operators. For people from a non-English speaking background, the comparable 
figure is 38%. 

  

  This tells us what we all know intuitively - that many first and second 
generation migrants, now in middle age, find their jobs of twenty-years' 
standing under threat as redundancies in older industries mount. They 
now face a situation where their English language skills, perfectly 
adequate for their current job, will not serve them as well if cast 
out into the employment market.

  

  Labor is concerned to ensure that people in these circumstances have 
worthwhile opportunities for further remuneration or other contribution 
to their communities. 

  

  Our primary focus in government will be on jobs and job security. 
Labor will not stand idly by and watch older industries collapse as 
if by some act of nature. We will be in there fighting for workers and 
their job security. We will also be out there working at greater job 
creation - providing good economic management for higher economic growth, 
proper education and skills training, and industry and regional development 
policies to create new jobs for the unemployed. 

  

  We will also think of other ways to re-connect people with their communities. 
Cheryl Kernot is researching for Labor what role volunteering can play 
in this process. Part of the value of different cultures within a multicultural 
society is the sense of community they bring to the individuals who 
identify with them. The impetus to volunteering is strongly rooted in 
these sections of the Australian community and I urge you to make what 
contribution you can to Cheryl's work in this area.

  

  I could discuss a range of other areas in which this government has 
undermined security and increased stress in the community, but I want 
to cover just one more, and that is health.

  

  It is increasingly obvious that this government has no real commitment 
to our universal health care system. This is nothing more and nothing 
less than a refusal to commit to equal access to health care for all 
Australians. We must understand this about the health care system in 
Australia: so finely balanced is that system that a government unprepared 
to fine tune it regularly finds itself overrun by reality.

  

  The levels of choice and service Australians enjoy and expect from 
their health system are every bit as broad as those available to Americans, 
and broader than those in most societies with National Health Services. 
Yet the genius of our system has been to produce a national cost of 
health care closer to that of National Health Service countries than 
to the US. We spend 8% of our GDP on health care - in the United States, 
they spend 14%. An Australian government which takes its hand off the 
system will very rapidly produce US conditions, but in a society which 
in no way for individuals - or for society as a whole - enjoys US levels 
of wealth.

  

  This is a particular issue for people of a non English-speaking background, 
and it has shown up most clearly in the area of nursing homes. The Prime 
Minister sets great store by the legacy of Sir Robert Menzies in making 
Australia a great home-owning democracy, and declares his personal ambition 
to make us a great share-owning democracy, always presuming one has 
the money to buy shares in the first place. 

  

  What he overlooks is this - a great many immigrants 
to this country during the Menzies period truly took on board the great 
Australian dream of home ownership. It was f  or them one of the attractive features of Australian life, and many 
of them worked tirelessly to buy their own homes. I can think of no 
more poignant symbol of commitment to the Australian way of life, and 
belief in Australian values and ideals. 

  

  That ambition, nurtured by Robert Menzies, 
is being torn asunder by John Howard. For thousands of Australians of 
migrant background, John Howard's nursing homes policy means relinquishing 
the one asset they have fought all their lives to build up, and it   means relinquishing 
it at the most vulnerable time in their lives - when they are required 
by medical necessity to enter a nursing home.

  

  No amount of backflipping and political spin can conceal the fact 
that, for the first time ever, the government is circling the family 
home. It is a disgrace, we oppose it, and we will put a stop to it when 
we get into office.

  

  This government knows in health care and nursing homes, as in so many 
areas, that we are approaching a crisis point in public services. It 
is now intent on buying tax changes with the money made from dismantling 
a series of public services which will be exceptionally expensive for 
individual Australians if they are forced to pick them up individually 
on the open market.

  

  All these developments strain stability and coherence in our society.

  

  That stability and coherence must be restored. But if we are to benefit 
from a multicultural society such as the one we have, we must always 
be determined to protect and nurture the economic and social underpinnings 
of tolerance.

  

  And on this matter, I must say that I find it impossible to pass up 
a comment made by the Immigration Minister, Philip Ruddock, just over 
a week ago.

  

  The Minister's claim was, and I quote:

  

  "In essence, the former government was almost single-handedly 
responsible for destroying the Australian community's confidence in 
immigration policies and programs."

  

  This comment happily ignores a full two years of policy-making by 
this Coalition government which has had far-reaching effects on confidence 
in the immigration programme in this country.

  

  I think the Coalition's agenda has never been more comprehensively 
put than by John Howard in one of the first Question Times of his government, 
when he said of his policy on the two year waiting period for various 
social security benefits, and I quote:

  

  "The Australian people are perfectly happy to support a measure 
which very clearly and very simply stops people coming to this country 
as immigrants on the basis of sponsorship and, after having that sponsorship 
undertaking immediately going on the unemployment list. That situation 
is happening. As those opposite will know, many of the immigrant communities 
have unemployment levels of 50 to 60 percent. We do not regard it as 
acceptable that people can have a sponsorship arrangement but, when 
they come to this country, that sponsorship arrangement is immediately 
broken, and people can go on the unemployment list. Labor members might 
think that is satisfactory, but I can tell you that the Australian community 
does not ... I will say to the Leader of the Opposition that what we 
have committed ourselves to in the legislation is utterly consonant 
with what was in the policy document."

  

  That occasion was a moment for all of us to draw breath. It signalled 
a sea-change in immigration policy in this country.

  

  We had all grown used to Prime Ministers who understood that their 
job was always to unite the Australian community. There is nothing in 
this Prime Minister's record, or his government's record over the last 
two years, which suggests anything other than the intention always to 
play divisive political games with immigration policy, multicultural 
policy and foreign policy for short term gain. 

  

  But I want to talk to you about the specific policy the Prime Minister 
was talking about in the excerpt above, because I know it is one which 
concerns you.

  

  It is an unavoidable fact that when an election changes the government, 
it also changes society. It changes many things materially, and for 
long periods of time. When Labor next gains office at the Federal level, 
we will face, as I intimated earlier, a substantially different Budgetary 
situation from when we left office. We will face a situation where, 
because of the pressures created by the Coalition's more than $3 billion 
of unfunded policy reversals last year, a Budget cut of nearly $400 
million like this one will be largely irretrievable for us.

  

  In circumstances of tight fiscal restraint, 
we will need to re-think our priorities to get the greatest possible 
benefit per Budgetary dollar laid out. In that context, for example, 
we need to address current government policies which have denied recently   arrived migrants any 
access to employment services to help them find work. Many migrants 
face a critical period just after they arrive in Australia, where if 
they are not assisted to find work quickly, they and their families 
run the risk of becoming alienated and impoverished in their new home. 
It will be an absolute priority of the next Labor government to prevent 
this type of thing from happening.

  

  Having said that, I also want to set down some markers for you today 
on Labor's approach to policy on immigration and multiculturalism specifically.

  

  Australians today know, better than we did just after World War Two, 
what immigration can achieve for this country. What we really need today 
is the kind of immigration debate we had in this country after World 
War Two, which I spoke about earlier. However, one thing is clear, we 
will not get that debate in the current climate.

  

  To get it, in my view, we need to recognise the limitations of our 
current immigration debate, and then do two things. 

  

  To begin with, we must recognise that the Australian immigration debate 
today is now almost entirely dominated by an annual argument over the 
numerical intake of immigrants. It is certainly true that the annual 
intake must depend on the prevailing economic climate in Australia. 
It must reflect the concern of all Australians to provide opportunities 
for work for our people. We also, however, need to assess the programme 
against a broader view of our national interest.

  

  What we need to do about this is, firstly, to make the idea of multiculturalism 
absolutely separate from, and absolutely unassailable by, that annual 
debate surrounding the numerical immigration intake.

  

  As I have said, multiculturalism is a reality 
of Australian identity today. It properly belongs in a debate   about what it means 
to be a citizen of modern Australia, about how we see ourselves as Australians, 
not about how many people from any particular background will be let 
into the country in any one year. Accordingly, I announce today that 
as Prime Minister, I will be renaming the Office of Multicultural Affairs 
- calling it the Office of Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship, and 
putting it back into the Prime Minister's Department, with a Minister 
directly responsible to me, to give it the stature and the scope it 
deserves.

  

  We have never accepted the view that our traditional national traits 
of democracy, equality, resilience and generosity were contradicted 
by the pursuit of multiculturalism. We proudly recognise this in our 
new citizenship oath which commits our new citizens to those values. 
Part of our republicanism, our stress on community, our view of reciprocal 
obligation is our understanding of the need for a notion of active citizenship. 
It is clearly appropriate that the two functions be pursued in the same 
office.

  

  The second thing we need to do is change what has been an immigration 
debate, and a narrowly focused one at that, into a broad debate about 
strategies for Australia's future.

  

  We believe Australia needs a broader vision of a comprehensive population 
policy for this country, encompassing not only immigration policy, but 
also considering desirable rates of economic growth, the skill base 
of our population, environmental sustainability, settlement patterns 
and pressure on public infrastructure. We must also consider in this 
our goals in industry and regional development, the fertility and mortality 
of the Australian population and the management of our natural resources.

  

  As it stands, the best we can do is consider these issues as ad hoc 
inputs into an annual discussion about numbers of people entering the 
country. That discussion always ends up hostage to the political winds 
prevailing at the time. It is no way to prepare for our future as a 
nation.

  

  As you know, I changed the name of the immigration portfolio after 
the election to reflect Labor's belief in a population policy, and we 
will want to hear more from you and you will see more from us in due 
course on the idea of a population policy for Australia.

  

  Finally, let me make one further specific undertaking 
to you today, and that is Labor's commitment to an anti-racism campaign. 
I know you have a promise outstanding from John Howard on this issue, 
but let me offer you a novel slant on that promise. Labor   will resource an anti-racism 
campaign, and we will also actually implement one!

  

  This government has had its anti-racism campaign sitting in abeyance 
for over two years now, as Pauline Hanson has criss-crossed this country, 
peddling her rubbish. It is blindingly obvious to anyone but the genuinely 
malignant that if there was any time to hold an anti-racism campaign 
it is now, or to be precise about 18 months ago.

  

  We will do it, and while we are about it, we will think of a better 
way of doing it than the government seems to be planning. Everyone here 
today knows that combating racism in this country cannot just be about 
writing out a cheque to an advertising company. Racism is not countered 
by gala launches and glitzy campaigns. What we need is a genuine grass-roots 
campaign. 

  

  The level of community involvement I have in mind is the level we 
achieved with the 'Australia Remembers' campaign. That campaign was 
about developing activities in close consultation with local communities, 
harnessing their best ideas and making sure that an issue of critical 
importance to the entire Australian nation gains proper appreciation 
throughout the Australian community. We believe that is the kind of 
activity we should resource as a proper anti-racism campaign, and it 
is what we intend to do upon our election.

  

  In conclusion, let me say that the first thing those Australians who 
are concerned about the current state of affairs in immigration and 
multicultural policy can do is to remove this government.

  

  I have said before today that Labor is not in a position where we 
can civilise our opponents' agenda from Opposition. If there was any 
doubt about it before, there can be none now. The conservatives' belief 
in individual empowerment via radical isolation has ugly cousins when 
it comes to its attitude to cultural diversity. 

  

  In the same way as conservatives only see opportunities for individuals 
in isolation from their communities, they can only see a future for 
Australian identity in isolation from other cultural influences. Their 
inability to understand how individuals can grow and prosper within 
a supportive community leads to an ignorance of how the Australian nation 
can benefit from being part of a community of nations externally, and 
how Australian culture can benefit from being part of a community of 
cultures - a 'multi-culture' - internally. 

  

  This government's refusal even to utter the word 'multiculturalism' 
is not just a weak, cynical and poll-driven exercise in political calculation, 
it is also endemic to its political philosophy. Well, Australians have 
a right to expect better than that from their government. We have a 
right to expect a government that is not running away from the realities 
of modern Australian identity. 

  

  The policy directions I have outlined to you today are my downpayments 
not to ethnic communities, but to all Australians. They are downpayments 
on the policies we will take to the next election. We want your help 
with these policies, but above all, the Australian Labor Party gives 
you these assurances:

  

  We believe in a multicultural Australia and we believe intensely in 
the contribution that successive generations of immigrants have made 
to this country. 

  

  In the Labor Party, we defend the things we believe in. 

  

  In particular, we believe in multiculturalism not just as a word, 
not just as a policy, but as a national reality and a vital part of 
our national identity.

  

  That is the belief we will carry through to the next Federal election 
- whenever it is - and it is the belief we will act on when we are returned 
to government.

  

  Thank you.

