---
title: "Landmines: Australia's policies and programs."
date: "1998-10-30"
creators:
  - "Sullivan, Kathryn"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211463903
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MSD05%22
---

   

  

  LANDMINES: AUSTRALIA’S POLICIES AND PROGRAMS

  The Hon Kathy Sullivan MP, Parliamentary Secretary 
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Speech delivered in Melbourne, 
30 October 1998.

  

  Contents

   Introduction   
  Australian Su  pport 
for Demini  ng and Related Pro  grams   
  Sustain  ability 
of Programs    
 Coordination   
  Victim Assistance   
  Public-Private Partnerships 
- "Destroy a Minefield"   
  International Conventions

  

  Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to you tonight. As 
Australia’s Special Representative on Demining I am particularly pleased 
to have the opportunity to talk to you about the issue of landmines, 
and Australia’s involvement in both demining activities and the banning 
of landmines.

  Introduction - Impact of Landmines

  A landmine is an abhorrent weapon. 

  Manufacturing a   landmine is cheap. Removing it is a tedious, dangerous, lengthy and 
expensive process. It can cost as little as $3 to produce but as much 
as $1000 to neutralise. 

  They can be spread at rates of more than 1,000 per minute - like 
the butterfly and dragontooth mines dropped from helicopters - but 
it may take an entire day to clear a mere 20 square metres of mine-contaminated 
land.

  You may be as aware as I am of the statistics: 

  These figures do not include those - mostly 
children - who are killed outright, or blinded or who suffer serious 
internal injuries from shrapnel.

  According to the medical database of the International Committee for 
the Red Cross, only 25% of mine-injured patients receive medial attention 
within six hours of being injured - 16% travel for more than 3 days 
to reach help.

  Landmine victims need blood transfusions twice as often as people 
injured by bullets or other weapon fragments. The number of units of 
blood required to operate on patients with landmine injuries is between 
2 and 6 times greater than that needed by other war casualties. 

  Landmines make large areas of otherwise productive land unusable, 
hamper post-war food production and prevent the return of refugees. 

  The mining of agricultural land can lead to malnutrition and even 
starvation. Demining agricultural land gives people the chance to grow 
their own crops rather than rely on international aid. (As a vivid example 
of people’s anxiety to reclaim their land, at one stage Australian 
deminers in Mozambique were clearing narrow strips of land only about 
a metre wide each day. Each time they came back to start work the next 
morning, they found the previous day’s cleared strip was already planted 
with crops.)

  Landmines’ impact on children is particularly tragic. The recent 
United Nations report on the   Impact of Armed Conflict on Children  states 
that children are particularly vulnerable to landmines: 

  If they are too young to read (or are illiterate for other reasons) 
signs posted to warn of the presence of mines are useless. 

  Protecting children from land mines calls for 
a major international commitment to large-scale mine clearance, as well 
as the development of child-oriented programs for mine awareness and 
physical rehabilitation.

  Australian Support for Demining 
and Related   Programs

  Tonight I want to firstly give you some idea of the demining and related 
activities that Australia has been and is presently involved in, and 
then an outline of the international scene - both regarding demining 
programs and efforts to ban landmines altogether.

  Australia responded early to calls for assistance and has been a substantial 
contributor to demining programs in the most heavily mined countries 
in the world.

  In December last year our Minister for Foreign Affairs (Alexander 
Downer) announced that Australia would provide a total of more than 
$100 million for demining and related activities for the ten years from 
1995 to 2005. Already $35 million has been committed to specific programs. 
This makes Australia a major donor in assisting with demining, mine 
awareness and victim assistance.

  Australian support is provided through a range of channels, including 
the United Nations, non-government organisations and Australian Defence 
Force personnel. (The $35 million I have mentioned comes from our overseas 
aid budget and does not include any expenditure by our Department of 
Defence on humanitarian demining.) 

  Our funding has focussed on four internationally accepted components:

  In line with the overall priorities of Australia’s 
aid program, the majority of this assistance has been directed to countries 
in Australia’s immediate region - particularly Cambodia and Laos. 
However, sig  nificant support has also been provided to Angola, Mozambique and 
Afghanistan.

  Australia has pledged more than $20 million for demining related programs 
in   Cambodia . Over half of this has been channelled through the 
Cambodian Mine Action Centre with the remainder going to Australian 
NGO projects, the Australian Red Cross and World Vision, for demining 
and victim rehabilitation activities.

  Just on $4 million has been provided to   Laos . Our funds support the funding 
of the Lao Unexploded Ordnance program, World Vision Australia for an 
integrated unexploded ordnance clearance program involving both UXO 
clearance and awareness programs, and UNICEF Australia for a nationwide 
UXO awareness safety program.

  Afghanistan   is one of the most heavily mined countries in the world and was one 
of the first recipients of Australian demining assistance. This has 
included financial support since 1991/92 for both landmine awareness 
and demining projects. Deminers from the Australian Defence Force were 
instrumental in establishing the Afghan demining program.

  Landmines were used extensively in the   Mozambique  civil war that ended 
in 1992. Most were laid in rural areas, thereby locking up productive 
land and posing a serious physical threat to farmers. Australia has 
maintained an active role in mine clearance and related activities in 
Mozambique since 1994.

  In   Angola , we have been involved in mine awareness programs and 
mine clearance programs as well as the production of prosthetics. 

  In   Sri Lanka  we have recently provided funding for mine surveys 
and a mine awareness project for children.

  And in 1997/98 Australia contributed $2 million to the International 
Red Cross global appeal for assistance to landmine victims.

  As you can see, Australian efforts over a number of years have included 
diverse and innovative projects through NGOs and international humanitarian 
agencies, as well as directly by Australian military personnel.

  Sustainability of Programs

  An important element of Australia’s programs is the focus on sustainability. 

  In the keenness to clear land, there is a danger of overriding the 
basic premise of good development assistance, namely, building sustainable 
local capacity to implement indigenous demining programs. Even if the 
international community were to make an all-out effort to clear the 
world’s existing mines, in some countries - given the presence of 
guerrilla and other groups outside the state structures - it is likely 
landmines will continue to be laid. Hence the need for local capacity 
to implement ongoing programs.

  Coordination

  As well as our efforts, a number of other countries are contributing 
a variety of assistance (this is by no means an exhaustive list of international 
initiatives) and it is clear that the international coordination of 
initiatives is itself very important. 

  Coordination was a central theme of a Conference on Global Humanitarian 
Demining in Washington earlier this year, which I attended on behalf 
of Australia. The United Nations Mine Action Service is the focal point 
within the UN system for all mine-related activities and, following 
the Washington Conference, the principal international coordinator of 
demining.

  There are many advantages in the UN taking an overall coordination 
role, particularly in mine-affected countries where counterpart structures 
are weak or politicised. The UN is also seen to be impartial, when individual 
donors - for example, former colonial powers - may not be accepted 
as such. 

  Communications among donors will also be facilitated through UNMAS, 
and donor coordination will be through the Mine Action Support Group, 
a New York based donor group initiated by Norway.

  Victim Assistance

  Very importantly, Australia is a firm believer that mine action is 
not just about mine clearance - it is also about reducing the social, 
economic and environmental impact of landmines. Although mine clearance 
operations will gradually reduce the accident rate, the accumulated 
number of mine victims will continue to rise for many years to come. 

  The vast number of landmine victims come from rural communities, often 
women and children from poor families who lack access to the required 
medical and rehabilitation resources. 

  Even if medical care and physical rehabilitation are provided, little 
is currently done to assist the victims’ further reintegration into 
society. Local Ministries with responsibility for this task are often 
under-resourced and lack internal structures to cope with such a demanding 
task. 

  There is a need to consider allocating resources to programs that 
go further than providing prosthetics - vocational training and income 
generating activities, for example. Australia will be increasingly seeking 
opportunities to support such activities.

  The Washington Conference also made comprehensive recommendations 
in this important area of victim assistance. 

  Public-Private Partnerships - "Destroy a 
Minefield"

  The Washington Conference also looked at encouraging public-private 
partnerships and the potential of the private sector to provide expertise 
and financial resources. 

  In this regard, the Australian Government has recently announced an 
innovative initiative on mine clearance and mine awareness called "Destroy 
a Minefield". The initiative will enable individuals, schools, 
community groups, business and associations to participate directly 
in solving the landmines problem by "adopting" active minefields 
which have been selected by the United Nations as having a high priority 
for clearance.

  The "Destroy a Minefield" program will use funds from the 
Princess Diana Trust Fund set up to collect the sales tax revenue raised 
from the Elton John "Candle in the Wind" tribute CD in memory 
of the Princess of Wales. The Government will allocate $200,000 from 
the Trust Fund plus an additional $200,000 to the program from our overseas 
aid budget. From within its own community a sponsor will raise the necessary 
funds to clear the adopted minefield so as to return the land to productive 
use by the local population. 

  Every $2 raised by sponsors will be matched 
by $1 from the Princess Diana Trust Fund CD sales. This   will create a potential $1.2 million contribution to clearance of 
high priority minefields. The "Destroy a Minefield" program 
will educate and involve Australians in the landmines issue in a compassionate 
and productive way.

  International Conventions

  I would like now to turn to the international political arena and 
recent efforts at achieving a total ban on landmines. 

  Australia remains determined to achieve a comprehensive and lasting 
solution to the global landmines crisis. An important step forward was 
made in December 1997 when the Ottawa Landmines Ban Convention was opened 
for signature. The Minister for Foreign Affairs (the Hon Alexander Downer 
MP) accompanied by Sister Patricia Pak Poy (the Australian Coordinator 
of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines) signed the Convention 
on behalf of Australia. By signing the Ottawa Treaty, Australia - along 
with the 120 other countries which signed - entered into a legally binding 
commitment forswearing the use, stockpiling, production and transfer 
of anti-personnel landmines. This is an achievement of major international 
significance.

  I am pleased to be able to inform you that 
the process of ratifying the Convention - including the passage of legislation 
(interrupted by the Federal Election) - is well advanced, and our aim 
remains for Australia to be an original state party to the Conve  ntion by the time it 
enters into force on 1 March 1999.

  However, I would note that we must also be realistic about the current 
coverage of the Ottawa Convention. The long list of countries which 
have signed the Convention does not include key countries in the global 
landmines equation - that is, some of the major producers and users 
of landmines. 

  It is for this reason that Australia has continued to play a leading 
role in pushing for complementary negotiations in the United Nations-affiliated 
Conference on Disarmament to achieve a ban on transfers, namely, all 
forms of trading and transportation of anti-personnel mines not only 
across but also within national borders. Such a ban, if adopted by those 
major traditional producers and traders in landmines who have not signed 
the Ottawa Convention, would represent a very important step forward 
in the global battle against landmines. 

  Australia has ratified the Revised Landmines Protocol (Protocol II) 
to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. We continue to encourage 
all states which have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention 
and the Revised Protocol, and we are active in promoting adherence to 
the Revised Protocol in our region.

  I conclude with an excerpt from a book by Rae McGrath, a recipient 
of the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on the banning of landmines and 
who recently visited Australia during Refugee Week. He says:

  "There is a frightening and illogical tendency among expatriate 
aid representatives working with communities in a mined e  nvironment 
to assume their own indestructibility, often, at the same time, voicing 
concern for the threat to the indigenous population. It should be superfluous 
to point out that no-one is immune from the sudden and shocking horror 
of a mine explosion: the only protection lies in understanding the threat 
and adjusting your life accordingly. But there are no guarantees of 
safety, except, of course, that the foreign worker may select the final 
option and leave the country. For the indigenous community the choice 
is starker: live with the mines or abandon your land: and often not 
even that level of choice exists."

  

  

  

  jy

