---
title: "Ruddock "over the top""
date: "1998-12-07"
creators:
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211467567
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NN006%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Hon. CON SCIACCA MP 

 FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BOWMAN 

 Shadow Minster for Immigration 

 7 December 1998 

 Ruddock “over the top” 

 Immigration Minister, Philip Ruddock, had gone “over the top” in his  extraordinary recent attacks on the Judiciary, acc ording to Shadow Minister for  Immigration, Con Sciacca. 

 “The Minister is coming dangerously close to offending the doctrine of the  separation of powers,” Mr Sciacca said. 

 “It is unacceptable to have a Minister of the Crown launching such a concerted  and deliberate attack on members of the Judiciary simply because he doesn’t  like some of their decisions. 

 “I have no doubt that Mr Ruddock is making these comments in an attempt to  publicly sell the Government’s decision to limit Judicial review from decisions of  Immigration Tribunals to the Federal Court and the High Court.” 

 Mr Sciacca said that both the Prime Minister and the Immigration Minister are  hell bent on denying people the basic human right of having their day in Court. 

 Mr Sciacca said that the Government this week intended to debate in the  Parliament the Migration Legislation Amendment Bill (No 5) 1997, which would  contain a Privative clause restricting Judicial review, except in exceptional  circumstances, from the decisions of Immigration Review Tribunals. 

 “However the Opposition is in agreement with the Government that something  has to be done to stop the rorting of the system by unscrupulous lawyers and  Migration Agents. 

 “It is unacceptable to the Opposition that some lawyers, for example, are  publicly advertising for asylum seekers to join class actions for a specified fee in  an attempt to cause delays and buy time for some questionable applicants. 

 The Government does not have a mortgage on trying to preserve the integrity of  Australia’s Migration program the Opposition is of the same view.” 

 Mr Sciacca said that taking away people’s right to Judicial review and attacking  the Judiciary was not the sensible and correct course of action in trying to  address obvious inadequacies in the present system. 

 “The Opposition is more than happy to consider alternative procedures that  would end rorting of the system, including the possible imposition of substantial  monetary penalties for frivolous appeals or the introduction of special leave  provisions so that the merits of a particular case could be considered by a single  Federal Court Judge on an expeditious basis, thus saving time and resources. 

 “Simply abolishing Judicial review is akin to throwing out the baby with the bath  water.” 

 Mr Sciacca said that the Opposition will strongly resist the proposed Government  legislation and would vote against it in both the House of Representatives and  the Senate. 

 Ends. 

 For further information please contact Con Sciacca on (02) 6277 4548 

 rd 

 

