---
title: "Liberal National Coalition Government immigration and multicultural affairs policies: launch."
date: "1998-09-18"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211463158
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IPA05%22
---

   

  (Embargoed: 1.30pm 18 September. Check against delivery)

  

  

  LIBERAL NATIONAL COALITION GOVERNMENT

  IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS POLICIES

  

  LAUNCH BY

  

  THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND

  

  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

  

  THE HON PHILIP RUDDOCK MP

  

  18 SEPTEMBER 1  998

  

  

  Welcome by Mr Muzzafer Serin, President of the Turkish Islamic Association 
(Canning).

  

  Thank you for those kind words Muzzafer, it gives me great pleasure 
to be here with you today to share your hospitality and time and I hope 
that I will be able to  answer any questions you or your members 
have at the end of my short address.

  

 In two weeks, all Australians will have a clear choice 
to make about their future and the future of the nation. The Coalition 
is offering a plan for a stronger Australia. By contrast, Labor offers 
no real answers for Australia’s future.

  

 The Coalition’s plan is good for jobs, families, 
senior citizens as well as rural and regional Australia.

  

 It lowers Australia’s stifling income taxes and 
increases people’s incentive to work and save by lowering tax rates, 
so that over 80 per cent of working families will be on a top marginal 
tax rate of 30 per cent. It removes distorted and complex taxes on business 
and individuals. It abolishes Labor’s ten growth-stunting taxes and 
reduces red tape. It secures revenue for services to those best able 
to deliver them - the States.

  

 The Coalition’s plan is driven by fundamental values, 
which are also strongly held within our ethnic communities.

  

 At the centre of Coalition thinking is concern for 
our families and the future of our children. Families are the very heart 
of Australian life. They give us support and carry us through our difficult 
times. They are the best social welfare system ever devised. Stronger 
families and strong family life means a stronger and better Australia.

  

 It is in recognition of the cost of raising a family 
that the Coalition is significantly increasing and simplifying Family 
Benefits, introducing a new simpler Child Care Benefit and doubling 
the tax-free thresholds, under the Family Tax Initiative. Through various 
measures, the Coalition is boosting family security and support by more 
than $2 billion each and every year. As income earners, families will 
also directly benefit from dramatic reductions in personal income tax 
of over $13 billion a year.

  

 Labor’s plan instead, is for a weaker Australia 
and its tax cut promises are unfair and discriminatory. They discriminate 
against working mothers, self funded retirees, people who rely on savings 
and middle income earners wishing to earn more income. Australian families 
deserve a stronger future in which to raise their children. They also 
deserve a strong and stable economy in which small business can flourish.

  

 Small business plays a major role in generating and 
maintaining employment, growth and prosperity in this country.

  

 To help small business take care of business, the 
Coalition will simplify current unfair, costly and complex reporting 
requirements. The Coalition’s new tax system will ensure that profits 
are not eaten up by unfair bidden taxes. It will reduce the tax burden 
on businesses by over $10 billion per year and put more money in the 
pockets of consumers.

  

 To support small business is to support Australia, 
particularly as so many migrants are involved in this area. Our plan 
for a fairer tax system guarantees that Australia’s small businesses 
will continue to grow and prosper into the 21st century.

  

 Labor’s tax policy would be a disaster for small 
business. Its tax policy will take a huge chunk out of the money small 
business operators planned to retire on as it will apply the Capital 
Gains Tax (CGT) to assets acquired before 1985. The business is part 
of many small business operators’ retirement package. It will now 
be subject to CGT. Furthermore, Labor has no plan to remove 10 burdensome 
taxes and provide a fairer, better, more modern tax system, which gives 
small business a real incentive to work, save, invest and employ.

  

 The small business sector accounts for nearly half 
of all jobs in Australia.

  

  Don’t go back to La bor. Australia’s small businesses can’t 
afford it.

  

  The Coalition also understands that Australia’s future is not just 
about economics - its about people. In order to face the future and 
win, Australians must be confident about who they are and where they 
are going. This involves a constant dialogue betwee n governments 
and communities about the nature of our social capital.

  

 It means that investment in education, health and 
welfare must be properly targeted to meet the needs of an uncertain 
future. It means that we refocus the nature of the relationship between 
governments and individuals to emphasise mutual commitment, where rights 
and responsibilities again form the core of the social compact.

  

 It is this Coalition Government which has provided 
the tough leadership required to re-focus Australia and Australians 
on the necessities of the future — not in a way which diminishes our 
past achievements or demeans our national pride - but in a way which 
is positively Australian.

  

 Unlike the ALP, the Coalition has actively sought 
to focus Australia’s attention on the things that unite us as a people. 
We have sought to ensure that all Australians, no matter what their 
origin, are united on common ground.

  

 The ALP actively sought to divide Australians, to 
focus upon differences as a way of shoring up marginal support. Such 
an approach led to the creation of a coalition of interest groups tearing 
our nation apart.

  

 There are few societies in the world which are not 
challenged by the diversity of their peoples - and not just in language, 
culture or religion. Our diversity extends to differences between the 
bush and the city; between younger and older generations; between and 
amongst youth cultures; between men and women; between the employed 
and the unemployed.

  

 These differences should not be a source of anxiety 
nor generate fear and intolerance. They should not be used to divide 
us.

  

 Instead, political parties must focus on ways of building 
bridges of understanding, of implementing inclusive policies that ensure 
that all Australians believe they are part of something greater than 
themselves - where all Australians believe that their own individual 
contribution, their individual differences, are an essential heartbeat 
of the nation.

  

 Australia has successfully absorbed people from all 
over the world, who through their dedication and commitment contributed 
to building this nation and making Australia a modern, dynamic, competitive 
and attractive country.

  

 The Coalition is committed to building on its inclusive 
approach to fostering social harmony as a means of consolidating Australia’s 
position as a strong and united country.

  

 All the Coalition’s Policies reflect that spirit, 
and I am very proud to be able to launch here today, the Liberal National 
Party Coalition party’s Immigration and Multicultural Affairs policies.

  

  INTRODUCTION

  

 In every respect, Australia’s immigration history 
has been a history of nation building. As we approach a new century, 
our immigration and multicultural affairs policies and programs must 
complement Australia’s aspirations as an independent and strong economy 
in a complex and challenging global environment.

  

  BUILDING ON OUR STRENGTHS

  

 Australia is one of the great immigrant nations in 
modern history. As a result we have a rich heritage of development as 
a multicultural society. Successive waves of migrants from some 200 
countries have helped Australia forge a peaceful and stable liberal 
democratic society, that is tolerant, harmonious, freedom loving, culturally 
rich and diverse, which has provided migrants with the opportunity of 
making a new life for themselves and their families.

  

 Today, almost one quarter of all Australians were 
born overseas. Over 2 million came originally from non-English speaking 
regions.

  

 It is the enduring strength and credibility of our 
national institutions and character which has attracted so many people 
seeking to establish a new life in Australia

  

 Australia has benefited from the energy, skills, enthusiasm, 
commitment and diversity which new settlers have brought to their new 
home. We will continue to benefit from these attributes of immigration 
by ensuring that we continue to provide innovative and properly targeted 
settlement and multicultural policies.

  

  The Coalition takes great pride in its role in this achievement.

  

  It was a Coalition Government that presided over the arrival in Australia 
of millions of migrants in the 1950s, l960s, late 1970s, and early 1980’s. 
These periods spanned the greatest diver sity ever experienced 
in our official immigration intake.

  

 It was a Coalition Government that began dismantling 
the White Australia Policy and opened up large-scale immigration from 
continental Europe, the Mediterranean, Eastern Europe, the Middle East, 
and more recently Asia and the Pacific. We have played an important 
humanitarian role in the international community in resettling millions 
of people from war ravaged regions around the world.

  

  The Coalition strongly believes that the current level and compo sition 
of our migration program does not adversely impact upon our social, 
physical and ecological environment. At the current rate of population 
growth, the Coalition shares the view that our population will stabilise 
at around 23 million by 2031 before it begins to decline

  

 We do not believe that a net zero immigration policy 
would achieve population stability or result in a better economic, social 
or ecological outcome for Australia.. Our below replacement and falling 
birth rate would mean that our population would go into perpetual decline 
within 20 to 30 years. In about 200 years, Australia would have a significantly 
aged population of around 5 million and be in rapid decline. Our society 
would be unrecognisable.

  

 However, the Coalition does not believe that a significant 
increase in the migration program is necessary at this time. Nor do 
we believe that a larger immigration program would reduce the impact 
of Australia’s ageing population. Extensive research on the issue 
supports this view. For example, if net overseas migration were doubled 
to 120,000 per year for the next 50 years, we would only reduce the 
proportion of aged people in the population by 2.4%. Furthermore, for 
this reduction to be maintained, we would have to continually increase 
the annual intake and continually reduce the average age of immigrants 
— neither option is sustainable.

  

  MANAGING FOR INTEGRITY

  

 The Coalition recognises that in an increasingly mobile 
world, the pressures on Australia’s migration program will become 
greater. However, we also recognise that closing the program will only 
force people to come here and remain illegally.

  

 Australians are travelling more and more overseas 
and wanting to return with partners, spouses and children. Investment 
and labour are increasingly on the move and Australia needs to be best 
placed to take maximum advantage of the opportunities these movements 
present. Furthermore, information technology, television, music, the 
internet, and intermarriage link us directly to the rest of the world 
and Australia must be open to the challenges these pressures represent.

  

 The Coalition is committed to ensure that these challenges 
to our migration program are managed in such a way to produce outcomes 
that are in the best interests of Australia and all Australians.

  

 However, these benefits can only be realised with 
the support of the Australian people.

  

  KEY PRINCIPLES

  

 The Coalition will administer an immigration program 
that:

  

  * is free from 
discrimination based on race, religion, gender, nationality or count ry 
of origin.

  

  * has integrity and compassion as its defining ethos;

  

  * has the confidence 
of the Australian community in its administration and rationale;

  

  * is suited to Australia’s national interests and international responsibilities;

  

  * balances econo mic, social, environmental and international 
considerations.

  

  MULTICULTURAL, SETTLEMENT AND CITIZENSHIP POLICY

  

 A Coalition Government will continue to place great 
emphasis on consultations with stakeholders on settlement policy and 
programs and develop settlement programs that are:

 * service and outcome focused;

 * run by competent and accountable managers and operators;

 * designed to respond to objectively assessable needs; 
and

 * inclusive insofar as they engage the local community.

  

 A Coalition Government will continue to give priority 
to refugees and entrants under the Special Humanitarian program in its 
settlement programs. We will continue to maintain this focus and have 
allocated an additional $4.4 million a year for the next 2 years to 
the AMEP to ensure that humanitarian entrants are able to benefit from 
additional and more flexible English language training.

  

  In recognition of the essential role that community organisations 
play in the provision of settlement services, the Coalition will provide 
an additional $5.2 million a year for the next two years to community 
organisations through the Community Settlement  Services Scheme.

  

 I have always believed that the capacity to speak 
English is one of the most important skills that new migrants can acquire. 
The Coalition will maintain its commitment to a flexible, efficient 
and efficacious Adult Migrant English Program while at the same time 
continue to reform and improve the Translating and Interpreting Service.

  

  MULTICULTURAL POLICY

  

 The Coalition Government acknowledges and celebrates 
Australia’s multicultural heritage, which goes back to the first fleet.

  

 We are committed to ensuring that Australia’s cultural 
diversity is a unifying force in the interest of both the individual 
and society as a whole.

  

 The Coalition Government is committed to the right 
of all Australians to enjoy equal rights and to be treated with equal 
respect, regardless of race, colour, gender, creed or origin.

  

 We have demonstrated our strong support for the building 
of Australia as a culturally diverse, accepting and open society, united 
by an over-riding commitment to our nation and its democratic institutions 
and values

  

 Prime Minister John Howard moved in the House of Representatives 
a motion that denounced racial intolerance in any form as incompatible 
with the kind of society we are and want to be.

  

 This principle is demonstrated in our commitment to 
proceed with the extensive multi-pronged education campaign Living in 
Harmony’, through the allocation of an additional $5 million, taking 
the total sum for the campaign to $10 million, to help eradicate racism 
and consolidate social harmony and cohesion

  

 We will also continue to foster and develop Australia’s 
rich cultural and linguistic diversity to stimulate economic growth 
through the development of our Productive Diversity initiatives.

  

  CITIZENSHIP POLICY

  

 The Coalition believes that Australian citizenship 
reflects our democratic traditions and diversity while emphasising our 
shared values, our common purpose and vision. The acquisition of Australian 
citizenship is also symbolic of the inclusive nature of our society 
and our unity as a nation

  

 Citizenship is about loyalty to Australia and its 
people, a shared belief in the democratic process, respect for the rights 
and liberties of other Australians, and a commitment to uphold and obey 
Australia’s laws.

  

 A Coalition Government will report to Parliament on 
the findings and recommendations of the Australian Citizenship Council 
and utilise the valuable input from the Council to celebrate the 50th 
anniversary of Australian Citizenship on 26 January 1999. Finally and 
most importantly, we will encourage the enhancement of Australian citizenship 
as not only the unifying force but also the symbol at the very heart 
of what being Australian is all about.

  

 Ladies and Gentlemen, we are at an important point 
in the history of our nation.

  

 It will be up to all of you to decide the direction 
in which this country will head at the turn of the century.

  

 Will you decide to return to the divisive policies 
of the Labor party policies that have fractured Australian society and 
left us with a legacy of debt and uncompetitiveness that we are only 
now beginning to overcome.

  

 Or will you decide to follow the path that the Coalition 
parties have begun to take us down; a path that will lead to a stronger 
and more prosperous Australia an Australia proud of its achievements; 
tolerant of its differences and celebrating its diversity.

  

  

  rw

