---
title: "Federation of Ethnic Communities Council National Conference, Brisbane: address."
date: "1998-11-20"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211465284
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MMUQ3%22
---

  PRIME MINISTER 

  20 November 1998 

  TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  THE RON . .fOHN HOW ARD MP  ADDRESS TO THE FEDERATION OF ETHNIC COMMUNITIES COUNCIL  NATIONAL CONFERENCE, BRISBA1'"'l: 

  E&OE ................................................................................................... . 

  Thank you very much; Randolph, can 1 commence my address by congratulating you  for your re-election as chainnan of this organisation, and I would like to acknowledge  the presence this morning ofrepresentatives of many organisations, most particularly  Gatjil Djekurra and Evelyn Scott as leaders of A TSIC and the Council for Aboriginal  Reconciliation. 

  I am particularly pleased to be here this morning and have the opportunity so soon  after the Government's re-election to discuss our approach to immigration and other  policies which are very important to the members and supporters of the various  organisations that are represented this morning. 

  The next three years does provide all of us with tremendous opportunities to celebrate  and showcase the Australian achievement. Our achievement as a nation of  immigrants will be central to our national celebrations during that time. 1999 will  mark the 501h anniversary of Australian citizenship, and the year will provide the 

  chance to reaffirm the value of Australian citizenship and its role as a unifying force  in our culturally diverse Australian community. The Olympic Games in the year 2000  will be an opportunity to showcase our success as a harmonious and united nation  with a commitment to shared values, excellence and respect for ea.ch individual. And 

  of course most importantly, the centenary of federation in 2001 will allow us to  reflect on the Australian achievement and how far we have come as a nation and what  our aspirations are for the new century. 

  Above all, in observing these things and celebrating these events, we must celebrate  the values and principles that have made us such a cohesive nation. We are a society  united in the belief that each ofus should have the same opportuni1y to reach our full  potential and share in what this great country has to offer. Our society is underpinned  by those uniquely Australian concepts of a fair go and practical mateship - integral  features of our community and national identity. 

  Ours is a resilient and optimistic community that has extended the gift of welcome to  people from every comer of the world. Whether Australian by birth or by choice we  join as one people strengthened by a diversity of experience and cultural background. 

  But above all of this we share a strong set of values: 

  We honour the importance of family life where the hopes of our children can be  realised and where our elderly can be given the respect that they have earned and  deserved. 

  We dedicate ourselves to the principles of fi-ee enterprise, to the fruits of working ~  hard and taking risks. We revere our democratic national institutions and respond to  calls for personal responsibility and the provision of practical help for the less  fortunate. And we are ambitious for Australia to succeed into the next century and for  all of us to share in that prosperity. 

  These enduring values hold important messages for all of us. 

  First anQ foremost, we are all Australians, and no Australian need feel foreign in their  own land. No-one is better or worse than any other. There exists no qualificarion by  birth or race, wealth or heritage, which limits a person's pride in this nation or the  stake they hold within it. 

  We all belong to Australia and we all have an equal right to regard it as our home,  '"'1th all the sanctuary that a home provides. There is no place within our community  for those who would traFfic, for whatever purpose, in division based on a person's  religion, ~eir plac~ of birth, the colour of thei: skin or rl:ei: ethnic makeup. There is 

  1 

  no place in Australia for any semblance of racial or ethntc mtolerance. 

  In October 1996 the Commonwealth Parliament passed a resolution that contained a  simple, direct and unambiguous statement of certain values and principles including  the commitment to maintaining a non discriminatory immigration policy and the  denunciation of racial intolerance. 

  What I never want to see, and I know no person in this audience wants to see, is an  Australia where people of a particular racial background feel unwelcome. That  would be a denial of everything that our country stands for. We have welcomed  people from all around the world and all deserve to be treated equally and with an 

  equal share of decency and civility. That is one of our common bonds as Australians. 

  My answer to all of those who feel threatened by our immigration programme is that  they need not feel that way. I don't call them racist. I genuinely believe, however,  that there are some who seek to prey upon community fears to encourage a sense of  hostility towards people of panioular racial backgrounds. 

  This is something that we should all oppose very strongly and I believe we should be  reassured by the message sent by tbe Australian mainstream at the election that we are  in essence a !,'Teat hearted people and small minded policies will never hold sway over  US. 

  2 

  One of the great virtues of being Australian as we come to the close of the century is  that we occupy a unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic  circumstance. 

  Australia is a projection of western civilisation in this part of the world. We have  deep and enduring links with Britain and the other nations of Europe and we share  much of their great legal, cultural and democratic political inheritance. 

  We have profound Jin.ks with North America and we have shared many experiences  with the United Stares in both war and peace. 

  We are geographically located in the Asian-Pacific region, and we have within the  Australian community a vibrant community of people of Asian descent who add to  the strength and the vitality and the tolerance and the great cross section of modern  Australia. This unique intersection means that we can draw strength from our 

  diversity and our understanding of the region. We have an opportunity to use these  unique characteristics in an effective way to achieve what no other country can. 

  And having just come from a meeting of APEC in Kuala Lumpur, and that is an  organisation that brings together leaders of all of the pacific nations, and therefore a  great cross-section of that enormous community, it was a reminder to me of just what  a special intersection of those circumstances of history, geography and culture and 

  other things that Australia really occupies. And we do have insights and  understandings because of that particular background and the diversity of that  background that gives us an opportunity to project a view which is superior and more  enlightened and more comprehending of what is needed in that part of the world than  that possessed by any other country. 

  And it is because of that combined backgrot.md, our European associations, our long  association with the nations of North America, our location in the Asian-Pacific  region and our understanding of the people to people contact that that location gives  us all of those things combined in a very special way to give Australia a capacity to  influence events that no other country can possibly possess. 

  Our diversity is a source of great national strength. Particularly since World War TI,  migration has made an enonnous contribution to Australia's economy, Australia's  society and Australia's culture. 

  There is not an example anywhere else in the world of the successful absorption of  such a diverse group of new citizens. 

  Multiculturaljsm involves the principle of mutual obligation. Within the framework  of an overriding commitment to Australia, it respects the right of each individual to  celebrate his or her particular cultural identity in an atmosphere of tolerance,  understanciing and mutual self respect 

  As a Liberal Party Prime Minister I am proud to be the recipient of the Liberal Party  heritage of compassion and commonsense in relation to our immigration programme.  In the post World War II years, both sides of politics pursued policies which brought  millions of migrants to Australia and greatly strengthened Australia. Liberals, in 

  3 

  particular, are grateful that it was the Liberal Party of Australia that did away with the  White Australian Policy. 

  It was under the Fraser Government that Australia realised its full humanitarian  obligation by talcing on a per capita basis, a larger number ofrefugees from war tom  lndo-China than any other country in the world. 

  This tradition, which has given Australia a level of tolerance and harmony \vithout  parallel, lives on today in our own immigration programme which seeks to strike a  proper balance between compassion and the national interest. When the Coalition  came to power in 1996, we set about making changes to the programme to restore  confidence in it. 

  Any sovereign country has the right to determine how it will dispense its compassion  and determine the level, from time to time, of its migration programme. In our view,  our predecessors failed to assert contra] over the programme in the national interest  and overtly politicised aspects of immigration and multicultural policies. 

  - That is why we have now fine tuned programme levels in accordance with Australia's economic situation,, It is why we altered the skill composition and selection criteria to better reflect future development requirements. That is why we have not exempted this area from fiscal consolidation and why we have cracked down on iJJegal immigrants and overstayers. During our second term we aim to build on our achievements to ensure that the immigration programme continues robe managed with integrity and compassion so that it enjoys the confidence of the entire Australian community. We will continue to run the programme in the national interest. This means balancing economic and non-economic components of the programme and ensuring an appropriate dispersal of our migrant intake. We will examine the recommendations of a Commonwealth/State working party which is due to report next year on options to increase the number of skilled migrants in regional areas. It is important that the immigration programme be managed in an open and publicly accountable manner and that migrants are selected on an objective case by case assessment of applications against clear legal criteria. To maintain community confidence in our programme we wi]l curb the number of applicants who seek to abuse the review process by reintroducing legislation in the Senate to restrict access to judicial review in all but exceptional circumstances. - We will also reintroduce JegisJation, which was delayed in the Senate, to streamline the two-tier review process of non-refugee visa decisions to a single review by the Migration Review Tribunal. We v.111 also continue to balance Ihe humanitarian, family and economic components of our immigration programme. The skilled proportion of the migration programme 4 

  increased from 32 per cent to 52 per cent in the last financial year. Skills in short  supply in A11Stralia will continue be the principal detenninant of skilled migrant entry. 

  Employer nomination, where migrants are guaranteed employment, will be accorded  a higher priority for skilled entry. Minimum thresholds will be established to remove  anomalies in the current points test and we wil I introduce factors more relevant to  gruning employment in Australia. 

  During the election campaign, I committed the Coalition, ifre-elected, to consult  community groups, academics and others on settlement and multicultural policies and  to engage all sections of the community in the settlement process. 

  The goal of our settlement programme is to allow our newest arrivals to fuliy  participate in our community. 

  Over the next term of office we will maintain the role of community organisations in  providing settlement services, support for migrant resource centres, the community  settlement services scheme and funding for the AduJt Migrant English Programme.  ~ 

  We will tender out the AMEP Research Centre and ensure that the eligibility criteria  for programmes are ·sufficiently liberal and flexible to achieve more lasting benefits  for non English speaking migrants. 

  We will maintain funding to English language and literacy training and education. 

  We will also provide better access to the translating and interpreting service as well as  put the operation of the service on a commercial basis. 

  Australia is one of the oldest democracies in the world and democratic principles are  deeply etched in our national character. It is that very democratic tradition, so much  part of the Australian way, which has allowed the cultural diversity produced by our  immigration probrramme to flourish so successfully. 

  Last year the government established a new National Multicultural Advisory Council,  chaired by Mr Neville Roach, to recommend policies and an implementation  framework to ensure that cultural diversity remains a unifying influence. The  Council's report is expected shortly. 

  As you are aware, after appropriate consultation and research we launched the first  stage of the 'Living in Harmony' campaign to promote community hannony and the  enonnous benefits of cultural diversity wjthin Australian society. 

  The first stage included a $2.5 million programme of grants and partnership projects  with the A_usrralian Cricket Board, the New South Wales Rural Fire Service and  Woolworths. We are committed to maintaining this campaign through the allocation  of an extra $5 million which will take the overall campaign to $10 million. 

  We are also planning for the celebration of 50 years of Australian citizenship in l 999.  For this reason we established the Council for Australian Citizensrup to promote  debare on citizenship issues. 

  5 

  We will report to the Parliament on the findings and recommendations of the  Citizenship Council and T look forward to nexi year's celebrations. 

  Let me at this opportunity, Mr Chairman, pay particular tribute to Philip Ruddock  who has been the Minister for lmmigrarion and Multicultural Affairs since the  Coalition Government took office in March of 1996. I believe that Mr Ruddock has  handled the portfolio with great skill and compassion. He has been very professional  and evenhanded. Philip's qualities both as a Minister and as person who has unique  insights and understandings of the area for which he has responsibility have been  recognised in his promotion to Cabinet and his new role in assisting me in relation t-0  reconciliation issues. I record with great thanks and admiration Philip Ruddock's  contribution in these areas. 

  Mr Chairman, let me conclude by saying a couple of general things. 1 have every  confidence as we head towards a new Australian century that we can become even  stronger and more united. I take a profoundly optimistic and positive view about the  character of Australian society. I believe that the things that unite us as Australians  will alwa.ys be more powerful and more enduring than those things that divide. Our  nation has been immensely enriched through the successive waves of immigration  over the years that have brought new people from every corner of the world. We have  succeeded better 1han any other nation on eanh in recognising that we are a 

  community of many parts and many origins. We do have a level of tolerance and  understanrung that is the envy of most nations. We are essentially a united people,  but we respect the different cultural heritage of those within our community and we  recognise and support their right to celebrate their own particular culture and their  own heritage in a completely tolerant and open fashion. 

  We are a nation like any, not without our blemishes. We have within our ranks those  who are intolerant, and those who would seek to exploit differences based on race for  their own particular purposes. As a community we face the challenge of achieving an  effective and widely accepted reconciliation between the indigenous people of this 

  country and the rest of the Australian community. And T particularly welcome the  presence here today of Gatjil and Evelyn in that context. 

  But it is important that we approach these issues in a spirit of both optimism and  hope. The Australian achievement, and I believe it is a glorious one, is quite special,  it is unique. There is an Australian way, there is an Australian character and all have  made a contribution to it And whether you were born in this country or your parents  and grandparents were born in this counny or whether this is your cotmtry of choice, 

  it is equally our own and we ali have a right to share in its benefits and we all have a  right to enjoy both its tolerance, its respect and its protection. 

  I have great confidence that the next century hold enormous prospects for Australia. T  have a great belief that the unique intersection of which I spoke gives a capacity to  leave a mark, not only on this part of the world, but on the world generally which  would be denied to any other community. 

  I thank the Federation for inviting me here today. We will continue to have as a  government and at a political level as two coalition parties we'll continue to have a 

  6 

  7 

  constructive ongoing dialogue with your organisation. We will agree on some things,  we will disagree on others. You will like some of the things we do, you will dislike  some of the other things we'll do. That is in the nature of public office and public  life. But I come on behalf of the Government in goodwill, with a positive attitude to  all of the organisations and <1Jl of the different groups that are represented here today. 

  I thank you for inviting me, I wish you and your deliberations well and I look forward  to three years of constructive co-operation. 

  Thank you. 

