---
title: "Enjoyment of human rights not yet universal: statement on 50th anniversary of UN Declaration on Human Rights."
date: "1998-12-10"
creators:
  - "ATSIC"
source: "ATSIC"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211467686
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6Z006%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC) 

  

  

  10 December 1998 

  Statement on 50th Anniversary of UN Declaration on Human Rights

  Enjoyment of human 
rights not yet universal

  On th e 50  th  anniversary of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights, it is right to celebrate progress towards ensuring 
that all peoples enjoy the protection of their fundamental rights, ATSIC 
Chairman, Gatjil Djerrkura, said today.

 However, it is also 
important to realise how far we have yet to go.

 "Any boasts about 
Australia’s achievements will look foolish without equal recognition 
of the amount of work still needed to get our own house in order," 
Mr Djerrkura said.

 "The Universal 
Declaration has been the basis for human rights struggles all over the 
world. It stresses the commonality of all humankind and that there are 
certain minimum rights that apply to all peoples.

 "But we need to 
keep working towards the international recognition of the rights of 
indigenous peoples. In Australia, the evidence of this struggle is obvious.

 "We are currently 
seeing the property and cultural rights of indigenous Australians being 
removed, piece by piece. 

 "The dismantling 
of our property rights under changes to the Native Title Act has moved 
away from national attention, but we are now fighting to retain our 
rights at the level of state and territory governments.

 "At the same time, 
the federal parliament is currently considering amendments to the Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act. These further reduce 
our hopes of guarding what’s left of our cultures. 

 "Australia prides 
itself on its human rights record, yet we now hold the honour of being 
the first western country to fall under UN investigation for the direction 
of its human rights policy." 

 In August this year, 
the UN’s High Commissioner on Human Rights issued a press release 
naming Australia, Yugoslavia and the Czech Republic as countries causing 
concern about their handling of human rights. The UN’s Committee on 
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination has asked Australia to provide 
information on changes to native title, Aboriginal affairs policy and 
the role of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice 
Commissioner. 

 Mr Djerrkura also expressed 
concern about the government’s recent signals that it is seeking to 
have the term "self-determination" removed from the UN’s   Draft Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples . 

 "There is no right 
more fundamental for indigenous people than self-determination," 
he said. "It is an inherent right of all peoples. 

 "Self-determination 
is recognised in International Law in the   International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  and the   International Covenant on Economic, Social  and   Cultural Rights . Australia is a signatory to both. 

 "But the government 
prefers terms such as ‘self-empowerment’ and ‘self-management’. 

 "It is blatantly 
discriminatory to proclaim self-determination as a right of all peoples 
while denying or limiting its application to indigenous peoples.

 "ATSIC will use 
whatever processes are available to us to protect indigenous rights 
at both the national and international level." 

 Mr Djerrkura said he 
was impressed with such initiatives as the Universal Rights Network 
— a new interactive multi-media site launched today in Melbourne to 
coincide with the anniversary of the Universal Declaration.

 "This gives us 
all equal access to information about and the words of human rights 
heroes — people like Pat Dodson, Mahatma Gandhi, Rigberto Menchu, 
Aung Sun Suu Kyi and many others," he said. 

 "It profiles the 
work of human rights agencies such as UNICEF, the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees, Amnesty International, Greenpeace, Care Australia, 
the Fred Hollows Foundation and others — including ATSIC.

 "I’m proud to 
be associated with this initiative."

 The Universal Human 
Rights Network is at: www.universalrights.net

  Media contacts  :

 Brian Johnstone 02 6289 
3307 / 0419 010 687

 Martin Freckmann 02 
6289 3399 / 018 631 045

  

  

  

  jy

