---
title: "Princess Diana trust funds for "Destroy a minefield" initiative."
date: "1998-10-12"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211463657
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D0D05%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

  ALEXANDER DOWNER

  

 FA129

  12 October 1998

  Princess Diana Trust Funds For "Destroy A Minefield'' Initiative

  As part of the Government's ongoing commitment to addressing the appalling 
humanitarian disaster caused by  landmines, I am pleased to today 
announce an innovative initiative on mine clearance and mine awareness.

 The Government's "Destroy 
a minefield'' initiative will enable individuals, schools, community 
groups, businesses and associations to participate directly in solving 
the landmines problem by "adopting" active minefields selected 
by the United Nations as having a high priority for clearance.

 The "Destroy a 
minefield'' program will use funds from the Princess Diana Trust Fund 
set up to collect the sales tax revenue raised from the Elton John "Candle 
in the Wind tribute CD in memory of the Princess of Wales.

 The tragic effects of 
landmines were of particular interest to Princess Diana who worked hard 
to raise awareness of the plight of landmine victims and the magnitude 
of the problem prior to her death last year.

 An Australian non-government 
organisation (NGO) will be selected to implement and administer the 
program. The NGO will seek sponsors in the Australian community to raise 
the necessary funds to clear adopted minefields.

 The $200,000 allocated 
from the Princess Diana Trust Fund will be the final allocation of the 
$793,000 of sales tax revenue raised from the tribute CD. The Government 
will also contribute an additional $200,000 to the program on top of 
the Trust Fund allocation.

 Sponsors will raise 
funds in their respective communities to clear the adopted minefield 
and return the land to local populations for productive use. Every two 
dollars raised by sponsors will be matched by one dollar from the Princess 
Diana Trust Fund. This will create a potential contribution of $1.2 
million.

  As part of the Government's commitment to eradicate landmines, I was 
today also pleased to open a photographic exhibition on landmines in 
the Atrium of the Department of F oreign Affairs and Trade. The 
exhibition is a powerful and timely reminder that, despite considerable 
progress made recently in addressing the landmines problem, there is 
no room for complacency. Encouraging as it is that an international 
treaty banning landmines has been agreed, and that over 120 countries, 
including Australia, have signed on to it, the sad reality is that millions 
of landmines remain in the ground, killing and maiming innocent civilians 
on a daily basis.

  

 The exhibition is a stark portrayal of the devastating 
impact of landmines on the lives of ordinary people and their communities. 
The "Destroy a Minefield" program is about enabling Australians 
to make a direct contribution to solving this humanitarian crisis.

  

 Australia is one of the leading international contributors 
to landmine clearance programs, and our demining skills, experience 
and technology are in demand. Australian soldiers and civilians have 
been involved in demining programs in Cambodia, Angola, Mozambique and 
Afghanistan, and Australia is now the largest donor to the Cambodia 
Mine Action Centre. Based on the Government's record to date and our 
ongoing commitment to demining, we anticipate allocating in excess of 
$100 million for demining, victim assistance and related activities 
by the year 2005.

  

 The Ottawa Convention, which Australia has signed 
and is in the process of ratifying, will enter into force on 1 March 
1999. Australia's aim is to be an original state party.

  

 The photographic exhibition coincides with National 
Refugee Week, the theme of which is demining -"Clearing a Path 
to Safety". It is sponsored by the International Committee of the 
Red Cross and Austcare, and will run from 12 to 16 October.

  

  For further information: 

  Departmental - Kirk Coningharn (02) 6261 1555

  

  

  

  jy

