---
title: "Tomorrow is United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture."
date: "1998-06-25"
creators:
  - "Margetts, Dee"
  - "The Greens, Western Australia"
source: "Office of MARGETTS, SEN DEE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211460559
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YN505%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Dee Margetts

  Senator for Western Australia, The Greens (WA)

  Perth: Tel. 08 9470 2688’ Fax. 08 9470 4098

  Parliament House: Tel. 02 6277 3599 Fax. 02 6277 3588

  

  TOMORROW IS UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL

  DAY IN SUPPORT OF VICTIMS OF TORTURE

  

 25th   
June 1998

  

 Greens (WA) Senator Dee 
Margetts today gave notice of a motion to acknowledge that tomorrow 
is the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture.

  

 The motions reads:

  

 “That the Senate:

  

  1. Notes:

  a) That 
Friday 26th June  1998 is the United Nations International Day 
in Support of Victims of Torture;

 b) That torture is a global problem inflicted by some police and security 
forces as a repressive tool and perpetuated by the global trade in weapons 
of torture;

 c) That Amnesty International has documented cases since 1990 showing 
electric shack torture and ill treatment have been carried out in prisons, 
detention centres and police stations in at least 50 countries including 
Algeria, Austria, Bulgaria, China, Cyprus, Egypt, Greece, Lebanon, the 
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, USA Yugoslavia 
Vietnam and Zaire

 d) The increasing trade in weapons of torture and the growth in over 
100 companies that trade in modern stun technology and electro-shock 
weapons since 1990;

 e) That many refugee applicants in Australia have suffered from the 
trauma of torture but are still  subjected to the Government’s 
policy of mandatory, non-reviewable detention;

  

  2. Calls 
on the Government to:

  a) Work 
internationally and bila terally to end torture through gaining 
state accession and implementation to the Convention against Torture;

 b) Actively pursue a strong Optional Protocol to the Convention against 
Torture with a strong investigative mechanism;

 c) Support measures to end the trade in weapons of torture, particularly 
ensuring that Australian companies have no role in the production, transfer 
or sale of weapons of torture; and

 d) Ensure that policies in relation to refugee applicants are reviewed 
to show proper concern for the physical, psychological and social difficulties 
faced by these survivors of torture.”

  

  “We should never forget that torture is a daily nightmare for many 
people around the world and it is our responsibility to do everything 
in our power to eliminate t hese outrageous crimes against humanity”, 
Senator Margetts concluded.

  

 The government position 
with company employment is unchanged. The industry must embrace it and 
other reforms in order to become cost competitive and survive. The government 
will not even consider the “reform linked equity measures” proposed 
by the SRG until the industry has demonstrated its determination to 
help itself.

  

 Adopting company employment 
on July 1st will be an important first step in that process.

  

  For more information on the   Government’s maritime industry reforms, see http://www.dwrsb.gov.au

  

 For further information 
contact:  Ian Hanke (0419) 484095

  

  

  

  LK

