---
title: "Asylum-seekers right to judicial review must be safeguarded."
date: "1998-12-07"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211467561
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5P006%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

  

 7 DECEMBER 1998

 98/907

  

  Asylum-seekers right to judicial review must 
be safeguarded

  

  The government risks having the blood of asylum seekers on its hands 
by pursuing i ts proposal to limit judicial review of immigration 
rulings even further, according to Senator Andrew Bartlett, Australian 
Democrats’ spokesperson on Immigration.

  

 Immigration Minister Phillip Ruddock has accused Federal 
Court judges of undermining the Government’s strict refugee policy.

  

 In the Senate today, Senator Bartlett asked the Government 
to justify how the Minister’s comments were anything other than “cheap 
populism”.

  

 “This is another case of cheap populism by the Government 
in trying to look tough on migrants and bash some judges,” said Senator 
Bartlett.

  

 “Of the 979 decisions of the Refugee Review Tribunal 
which were appealed to the Federal Court over the last four years only 
21 - or 2 per cent - have been successfully overturned. How then can 
the Minister accuses judges of a ‘legal frolic’ on refugee cases?” 
asked Senator Bartlett.

  

 “Asylum-seekers’ right to judicial review must 
be safeguarded.

  

 “An error in judgement by the Refugee Review Tribunal 
may result in the torture or death of an asylum seeker. By pursuing 
its current proposal to limit judicial review of immigration rulings 
even further, the Government risks having the blood of asylum seekers 
on their hands.

  

 “If it is true that judges are undermining the government’s 
strict policy on refugees, they are not alone. Agencies that work with 
asylum seekers, peak community organisations, the Australian Democrats 
and numerous others oppose the curtailing of the legal rights of would-be 
refugees,” concluded Senator Bartlett.

  

 For further information contact:

 Senator Andrew Bartlett on 02 6277 3406 or 0418 743 
789

  

  

  rw

