---
title: "Ministerial Council Communique: Meeting of the Ministerial Council of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Melbourne, 27 March 1998"
date: "1998-03-27"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211552309
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/72305%22
---

   

  Immigration, Multicultural Affairs

  

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock 
MP

  

  Ministerial Council Communique

  Meeting of the Ministerial Council

  of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  Melbourne, 27 March 1998

  

  Key issues on  immigration, settlement and multicultural affairs 
were discussed at the annual Meeting of the Ministerial Council of Commonwealth, 
State and Territory Ministers responsible for immigration, multicultural 
and ethnic affairs and representatives of the Australian Local Government 
Association, held in Melbourne today. 

  

 The topics discussed included the size and composition 
of the 1998-99 Migration and Humanitarian Programs, the National Integrated 
Settlement Strategy, Translating and Interpreting services and harmonious 
community relations. 

  

 The Council noted the challenge for the Government 
in formulating programs which are appropriate to prevailing economic 
conditions and which balance and reflect Australia's economic, social, 
environmental, humanitarian and international interests. 

  

  Migration

  

 In the Family Stream, the Council noted that measures 
had been taken to lower the numbers in the 1997-98 program. This included 
capping (or limiting) the number of visas which may be granted in certain 
categories of the Family Stream, and enhanced bona fides testing strategy 
for spouse visa applicants to protect the integrity of the category. 
The enhanced testing had resulted in a decrease in application rates 
and an increase in refusal rates for applicants. 

  

 The Council noted, therefore, that measures taken 
by the Commonwealth Government to shift the emphasis of the Migration 
Program to skilled migration were showing results, with over 50 per 
cent of migrants entering under the Skilled stream in the first quarter 
of 1997-98, compared to 22 per cent in the first quarter of 1996-97. 

  

 The measures were aimed at ensuring that skilled migrants 
came to Australia with high levels of skill and were able to join the 
work force quickly. They included an increased emphasis on English language 
ability and raising the points test pass mark for Skilled-Australia 
linked migrants. 

  

 The Council noted that the Review of the Points Test, 
announced in May 1997, is approaching completion. The focus of the Review 
is to evaluate and report on the effectiveness of the points test in 
selecting skilled migrants who could quickly make a positive contribution 
to the Australian economy, labour market and budget. 

  

 In relation to regional migration, the Commonwealth 
Government had put in place most of the measures endorsed by the Ministerial 
Council in Darwin in 1997. These included the introduction of a Regional-linked 
category, the Regional Established Business in Australia category, Skill 
Matching, the State/Territory Nominated Independent category and the 
expansion of the Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme. 

  

 The Council also noted the review of entry options 
for Parents. A number of directions would be considered, including the 
possibility of longer term temporary entry which might better balance 
the social dimensions of parent entry against the high costs to the 
community. 

  

 The Council noted the progress of the community consultation 
process in formulating the size and composition of the Migration and 
Humanitarian Programs. 

  

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 
advertised widely for written submissions, and conducted a series of 
community and public consultations for 1998-99. For the first time he 
held public meetings in Perth and Melbourne which were attended by members 
of the public as well as community organisations and individuals. In 
addition he invited community and business leaders to consultations 
in all other capital cities and in Bendigo and Ballarat (VIC), Berri 
(SA), Port Hedland (WA) and Townsville, Gladstone and Mount Isa (QLD). 

  

 A diverse range of views were expressed at the consultations, 
ranging from those who advocated higher immigration levels to those 
who sought reductions in the program. Strong support had been expressed 
for the Commonwealth Government's current emphasis on skilled migration 
and for regional migration initiatives. 

  

  All States and Territories were keen for higher levels of business 
migration to their own jurisdiction. 

  

  The Council noted the major factors to influence and shape the 1998-99 
Migration Program will be ongoing management of demand in the Family 
stream, a nd delivering a Skills stream that ensures the continued 
entry of skilled migrants with high level of employability. 

  

 The Council agreed to establish a working party to 
investigate the development of long-term skilled migration options which 
look at increasing the number of skilled migrants to States/Territories 
and regional areas, with particular reference to the impact of growth 
rates generated by such migration on infrastructure, employment and 
sustainable economic development. The working party will present its 
report to the next Ministerial Council Meeting in 1999. 

  

 The Council also noted that the Commonwealth Government 
remained firmly committed to maintaining the primary focus of the Humanitarian 
Program on those who had the greatest need. In the 1998-99 Program this 
was likely to be people from the countries of the former Yugoslavia 
and the Middle East. The views of the United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees would be taken into consideration. 

  

  Settlement and multicultural issues

  

  The Council  endorsed the paper "Towards National Settlement 
Priorities", outlining the priorities for the National Integrated 
Settlement Strategy (NISS) over the next few years. The paper identified 
the need for more consistent and effective data collection and analysis 
to substantiate the level of settlement need. 

  

 The Council noted that much progress towards meeting 
those priorities had been made since last year's meeting. 

  

 The Council also noted the relevance of the Settlement 
Indicators project the Commonwealth Department of Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs (DIMA) is currently undertaking. The project will provide a 
better database for identifying crucial settlement needs. A survey of 
sponsors and proposers of prospective migrants also assisted in identifying 
strategies for further development. 

  

 The Council noted that changes to the administration 
of the Translating and Interpreting Service from 1 July 1998 would continue 
to draw from State-based contractors throughout Australia. The Council 
also noted the Commonwealth undertaking to ensure that TIS customers 
in all States will continue to receive high quality service. 

  

 The consolidation would bring TIS into line with the 
best practices of other telephone call centre operations and enhance 
the national dimension of the service. 

  

 Ministers noted the need for continuing monitoring 
of the implementation of the arrangements to ensure they were working 
effectively. 

  

 The Council agreed that Ministers take up with relevant 
Ministerial colleagues (including, where appropriate, through Ministerial 
Councils) the need to make due provision as part of the core-funding 
of all government-funded community-based organisations for those organisations' 
payment of user-charges for interpreting and translating services in 
accord with Access and Equity principles. 

  

 The Council also agreed that the issue of the provision 
of funds for interpreting services be referred to the Standing Committee 
of Attorneys-General seeking a specific allocation of funding for interpreting 
services to CLCs. 

  

 Ministers discussed the impact of the criteria for 
access by newly-arrived migrants to DSS Special Benefits. The Council 
noted initiatives by the Commonwealth, States and Territories to promote 
harmonious community relations. The Commonwealth reported on the continuing 
development of its Anti-Racism campaign. 

  

  Melbourne, 27 March 1998

