---
title: "Adelaide, 15 May 1998: transcript of doorstop interview [Indonesian crisis; India]"
date: "1998-05-15"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Indonesian crisis; India"
  - "Indonesian crisis"
  - "India"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211459409
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E4305%22
---

   

  TRANSCRIPT of

  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER MP

  Minister for Foreign Affairs

  

  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - ADELAIDE

  FRIDAY, 15 MAY, 1998

  

  SUBJECT: Indonesian crisis and India

  

  DOWNER:

  

 The Government is renewing its consular advice for 
Australians who are either considering going to Indonesia or who are 
in Indonesia. First of all, we   would advise Australians who are considering going to Indonesia 
to defer all travel to Indonesia with the exception of Bali where the 
situation is fairly calm. Secondly, we’d recommend that all those 
Australians who are currently resident in Indonesia or are visiting 
Indonesia, with the exception of those in Bali, should consider leaving 
the country. Thirdly, we’ve decided that in view of the current situation, 
non essential Australian Embassy staff and dependents in Indonesia are 
authorised to depart the country for the time being should they wish 
to do so. I just want finally to emphasis in relation to Bali, our view 
that the situation here’s quiet in Bali. There have been some demonstrations 
there, but for those people who do wish to go to Bali for their holidays, 
we’re not suggesting you don’t go, but, we’re just saying that 
if you do go, make sure that you leave you name and details with the 
Australian Consulate or with the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade before you go.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Minister, if the situation gets worse what contingencies 
in place to get Australians out quickly?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, I don’t want to go into the contingency planning 
publicly, but we do have a very developed contingency plan. We have 
around 20,000 Australians in Indonesia, we have a system of wardens 
around Indonesia who our Ambassador has spoken to during the course 
of the last week. They are providing at the moment constant reports 
on the security environment where they’re based and they have, as 
wardens, methods of communicating with the Australians for whom they’re 
responsible. Then we do have transport arrangements that can be put 
in place should it be necessary. But, let me say we obviously very much 
hope that it doesn’t come to that but, in the meantime it is important 
people understand that we are advising them that they would be best 
off out of Indonesia not in Indonesia.

  

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 You’re talking about shipping out non-essential 
staff, embassy staff, how many people is that?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 If they wish to leave we will allow them to leave. 
That is of course the important point. We’re not instructing them 
that they have to leave, only if they wish to leave. Well, therefore 
of course, by definition, we don’t know how many will want to take 
up that option.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 20,000 Australians all up in Indonesia, how many do 
you expect then to leave after this latest statement?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 I can’t judge that, they obviously have to make 
their own call. By definition they’re there, and so they know what 
the environment is around where they live and work and they’ll make 
their own judgments about that. Some will leave and as I say, we would 
recommend that they do. We think that, let me make just one other point, 
we see at the moment as of half past twelve today, the environment on 
the ground in Jakarta as being much calmer. But, that’s not to say 
that the calm after yesterday’s storm is a calm that will last indefinitely. 
It may last for a very long time and we hope it does, but we don’t 
want to give people, we don’t want people to draw any false conclusions 
from the calm that there is now. We have a primary responsibility to 
Australians and Australian citizens and the best we can do is to warn 
them that there are risks and dangers.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 When you are talking about other contingencies like 
evacuating all Australians though, obviously you would be very keen 
for most of those 20,000 to get out now?

  

  DOWNER:

  

  Well, I wouldn’t put it as strongly as that,  I would, it 
would be an overstatement. As I said, you’d have to mark my words 
very carefully, they should consider leaving the country. Not that we 
would say you must leave the country but they should consider leaving 
the country. They have in the end though to make their own judgments 
about whether they want to but the commercial air services are still 
working in the normal way and there are seats available on aircraft 
and they should take the opportunity if they wish to leave the country 
for the time being. We say consider leaving the country, we are not 
saying they have to leave it.

  

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do we know of any Australians who’ve been involved 
in the rioting or have been hurt in any way?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 No, I don’t know of any. I have to say I’ve not 
been given any advice that any have been involved or hurt. I mean, of 
course we have a number of eyewitness accounts of the rioting but we 
certainly have no information on anyone being hurt.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 ...about this handling of the situation  

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, I’m not getting into criticising foreign governments 
in this type of environment. I mean that, the cause of what has happened 
takes you back quite a long time, it’s not something that’s just 
erupted in the last few days. The cause goes back to the economic crisis, 
the catastrophic plunge in the value of the rupea, the consequent, very 
rapid increase in prices, the very rapid increase in unemployment, the 
fact that now you’ve got in Indonesia something like 40 million people 
who are simply economically marginalised, it’s an extraordinarily 
volatile mix and there you are what we thought was likely to happen 
did indeed happen and we hope that the situation from now on stabilises, 
but it does very much remain to be seen.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 ..step down, is it time for change?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, as far as the government of Indonesia is concerned, 
as I’ve said, ever since I became the Foreign Minister, look, it’s 
not our job to tear down governments or to prop up governments in other 
countries. It isn’t our job and no Australian Government is ever going 
to get into that sort of game. We work with whatever government the 
Indonesians provide and I’ve always said that. This isn’t by the 
way some new line that the Australian Government’s developed in recent 
days. We’ve always said that, we work with whatever government they 
have, we have to, we’re next-door neighbours, we are friends of the 
people of Indonesia and Australian Government’s successively for over 
thirty years have worked well with the Suharto Government. If the government 
changes, I’m sure we’ll work well with the successor government, 
we have an enormous range of contacts around military, political, academic, 
circles in Indonesia and sure, if the administration were to change, 
we would still be well regarded by any successor administration. If 
it doesn’t, we continue to work with what is in place. We, I mean 
for all that you know the gratuitous advice you read from the odd columnist 
or whatever it may be, we obviously as a foreign country can’t determine 
who is going to rule a country of 200 million people, which is a fiercely 
independent and proudly nationalistic nation. If course we can’t, 
and it’s just, it’s rather childish to think that Australia could 
chose the Heads of State and Heads of Government of countries in our 
own region or beyond.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you have any information though that President 
Suharto might stand down?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 No, I don’t have any information that President 
Suharto might stand down. On the contrary, the best advice that I have 
from our Ambassador in Jakarta, and I’ve spoken to him this morning, 
is there are no signs that he will step down. A lot was made by, I suppose 
understandably, I’m not saying this critically, but a lot was made 
by the media of the comments that President Suharto made when he was 
in Cairo. But, on the other hand, I’d draw the media’s attention 
to the fact that he’s made similar remarks in the past, often, believe 
that that type of language is the language which traditionally was used 
by Javanese leaders in generations gone by. So, I don’t think too 
much should be interpreted into his words in Cairo.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 You’ve been very critical of India this week, why 
have you been so generous with Indonesia? Very little criticism of how 
the Indonesian Government has handled this crisis.

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, I think, you know, with the greatest of respect, 
and I’ll say this as kindly as I can. There is a world of difference 
between a country which is facing civil disorder born out of very rapid 
increases in both crisis and unemployment of the like we’ve never 
seen in this country and a country, on the other hand, which has decided 
to undermine regional and global security by detonating five nuclear 
devices. We have a very strong argument with India for, as a deliberate 
act of Government policy, as a deliberate act of Government policy, 
threatening the security environment of South Asia and the Indian Ocean 
and threatening what has been a very successful non-proliferation, nuclear 
non-proliferation regime, very successful for decades. In the case of 
Indonesia, the Indonesian Government, I say this politely, has not been 
out there trying to encourage violence. It is not Government policy 
to encourage violence. It is not Government policy to bring people out 
onto the streets and get them to demonstrate, or get people to riot, 
to burn shops and to throw stones and so on. And it is not Indonesian 
Government policy, so it’s a world of difference. I’ve explained 
our assessment of the cause of the crisis in Indonesia and that has 
come out of the economic crisis that has hit that country. Now, never 
forget this point, that even in this country, if unemployment increases 
rapidly as it’s been increasing in Indonesia, and if the prices of 
essential food stuffs and other material increased as fast as they have 
been increasing in Indonesia in recent months, there would be substantial 
civil disorder, it would happen anywhere. But, it is also important, 
I make this point as I’ve done on several other occasions, that the 
Indonesian authorities, the Indonesian Government, the army, the police 
force as well as students and other demonstrators act with a maximum 
of restraint because if people don’t act with restraint, the situation 
will simply be exacerbated.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Is Australia reconsidering its assistance to Indonesia up or down 
in light of what’s happened in the past week?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, in, just over a week ago, nearly a fortnight 
ago, I announced that we provided an additional $30 million worth of 
aid and a lot of that is food aid to help the poor in Indonesia and 
we’re doing that because, you know, within the limits of our means, 
we must do all we possibly can to try to alleviate the humanitarian 
crisis that there is in Indonesia borne about by its economical problems 
but also by the very severe drought that Indonesia has suffered as well.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Does that include being a place of asylum for those 
people particularly ethnic Chinese who’ve been displaced in the current 
unrest?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, there hasn’t been to the best of my knowledge, 
unless something’s happened this morning, but to the best of my knowledge 
there hasn’t been any apparent increase in demand for visas from people 
in Indonesia to come to Australia, or for that matter, there hasn’t 
been an indication of boat people heading to Australia, that’s to 
the best of my knowledge.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 upon that...

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, we hope that realistically the situation in 
Indonesia can calm down. We obviously think it’s important that the 
security forces in Indonesia do what they can to stop gratuitous assault 
on ethnic Chinese people and particularly you know singling out ethnic 
Chinese people, destroying their businesses, setting fire to their houses 
and, generally speaking, discriminating against them in a way that we 
would regard as unacceptable. ‘Course this isn’t being done by the 
security forces, it’s being done by the rioters and it’s important 
that the security forces provide appropriate protection for those people 
and they are trying to do that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Given what you’ve said, those people would be able 
to ....for being refugees.. treat them like that?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 When people seek political asylum they do so under 
the terms of the United Nations and also our domestic law so we have 
not changed our domestic law in recent years when people seek political 
asylum they apply and their application is considered by a tribunal.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Has the Australian Government opened up any new talks 
with Opposition leaders in Indonesia?

  

  DOWNER:

  

 Well, not new talks but there’s, again one of the 
sort of urban myths of some sections of Australia is that we don’t 
have communication with the Opposition. I mean, I as the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs had the leader of the, one of the main Muslim leaders 
and Opposition leaders Amiean Rais visit Australia last year under a 
Government program called ‘The Special Visits Program’. When I was 
in Jakarta in January of this year I met with Megawatti. There have 
never been, well not never, but there are no restrictions on us talking 
with so called Opposition figures or different power centres in Indonesia. 
Our embassy in particular has always done that. I think because I’m 
a generous man, I think it’s fair to say that even the previous Australian 
Government, for all its faults and they were manifold, used to maintain 
some contact with Opposition figures in Indonesia, the present Government 
absolutely does. The Indonesian authorities know that, they have no 
objection to that. We have a very broad relationship with Indonesia, 
that just doesn’t mean with the Indonesian Government, it does mean 
with the Indonesian Government, but it doesn’t just mean with the 
Indonesian Government. We have a very extensive relationship, with all 
the sorts of people around Indonesia and that’s as it should be.

  

 ends

