---
title: "Presentation of the 1998 Human Rights Medal, Sydney, Thursday 10 December 1998: address."
date: "1998-12-10"
creators:
  - "Deane, William"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211467695
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D5106%22
---

 1

 ADDRESS BY SIR WILLIAM DEANE 

 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 

 ON THE OCCASION OF THE PRESENTATION OF THE 

 1998 HUMAN RIGHTS MEDAL 

 SYDNEY

 THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 1998

 It is a privilege for me to be here with you today, on this 50th Anniversary of the  adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights, to present the 1998 Human Rights Medal on behalf of the Human Rights and Equal  Opportunity Commission. I would, at the outset, wish to make clear my own unqualified  support for the Commission, its President, its Commissioners, its staff and their work.

 We Australians are fortunate and privileged in that our very system of government  embodies basic notions of equality, freedoms and rights under the law. But no one could  seriously maintain that the fundamental rights enunciated in the Universal Declaration are  yet fully enjoyed by all Australians. That point is adequately made simply by referring, in  the context of the unemployment and poverty which exists in our affluent Australia, to the  declarations, in the first sentences of Articles 23 and 25, of the right of everyone to  protection against unemployment and of the right of everyone to a standard of living  adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family. This 50th Anniversary  is an occasion when we should realistically assess and acknowledge how much more needs  to be done. And it is also an occasion when we should renew our commitment, as  individuals and as a society, to the quest for the practical enjoyment of full human rights  by all Australians.

 But golden anniversaries should be a time for celebration. And celebration surely  is the theme of this anniversary luncheon. I understand that, at each of the tables, there is  a copy of this document listing the names and achievements of 50 great Australian men  and women -  one for each golden year. Each in his or her own way has made a  significant contribution to the human rights movement in this country. Some of those  names are well known ... my friend and former chair of the Human Rights Commission,  Dame Roma Mitchell; surgeon, humanitarian and internationalist, “Weary” Dunlop;’  Faith Bandler, to whom it was my privilege to present the Australian Human Rights Medal  last year. Some of the names are not so well known, at least not to the general public.  They are, however, shining examples to all who know of their work and their achievements  in the cause of human rights.

 There are 50 names here. But, of course, we could collectively add another 50  times 50 names, and we would still be merely describing the tip of the iceberg in each of a

 2

 variety of fields of endeavour: in the women’s movement, in the promotion of multicultural Australia, in reconciliation between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal  Australians, in overseas aid, refugee assistance and international peace; in religious  ecumenism; in health and education; in the fight against poverty here in affluent  Australia; and in promoting the well-being of Australians and non-Australians  everywhere. There are names of people who are still with us, and some of whom are  sharing this occasion. Others have died: Jessie Street, who accompanied Doctor Evatt to  the United Nations founding conference in 1945; Bishop Burgmann, who dreamed of a  time when the enduring truths of human faith and spirituality would be expressed in a  manner, if I may borrow his words, “thoroughly baptised into the Australian scene, blown  through by Australian winds, bathed in Australian sunshine, and even coated now and then  with Australian dust”.

 Some of those mentioned have only recently died, and we still mourn their loss:  Fred Hollows, the Human Rights medallist of 1990; Shirley Smith -  “Mum Shirl” -  whose  special place among Aboriginal Australians in this city and beyond was evident to all of us  who attended her funeral last May; “Nugget” Coombs whose breadth of vision, interests  and activities was such that, as I observed at his memorial service, there is not one of us  whose life has not been in some way touched and shaped by him, and almost invariably for  the better.

 Ladies and gentlemen, constraints of time preclude me from mentioning more than  a few individual names. We each have our own special memories of those listed here and  of those whom we each would add. What characterises them all is a dedication to the  cause of human rights which transcends mere words and is evidenced by their lives and in  their deeds. As the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission quite rightly points  out, universal declarations of any kind lack meaning without a commitment by individuals,  no less than by governments and organisations, to give them life and application.

 In that regard, it is well to remember that when, on this day in 1948, the General  Assembly proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard  of achievement for all peoples and all nations, it also urged every individual and every  organ of society to strive by teaching and education to promote respect for those rights and 

 freedoms and by progressive means, nationally and internationally, to secure their  universal and effective recognition and observance. There can be no doubt that each of  those 50 people singled out for mention and all those others whom we remember have  striven by word and deed to teach, to promote, to secure respect and observance of human  rights. So that even as we look around the world on this 50th Anniversary and recognise  how far we have to go before the Declaration is a universal reality, we are entitled to  celebrate what has been achieved over the past half century. And to acknowledge how  much is owed to the commitment, the compassion and the concerted efforts of individuals  everywhere. Their achievements, and the achievements of bodies and organisations such  as the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, provide the starting point for the  work that lies ahead.

