---
title: "Acting on principle: Labor's Human Rights Diplomacy."
date: "1998-09-15"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211462989
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DEA05%22
---

   

  

  NEWS RELEASE

  

  LAURIE BRERETON MP

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

  

 58/98

 15 September 1998

 Embargo until 1 p.m.

  

  ACTING ON PRINCIPLE: LABOR’S HUMAN RIGHTS 
DIPLOMACY

  

  

  The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today released 
Labor’s po licy on Human Rights Diplomacy.

  

 “Human rights has been a key focus of Labor’s 
foreign policy review”, Mr Brereton said.

  

 “The advancement of human rights will be a keynote 
of Labor’s diplomacy.”

  

 “This emphasis is timely as Asia' s economic and 
social crisis is generating major new challenges and opportunities in 
the field of human rights.”

  

 Key elements in Labor’s approach to human rights 
diplomacy include —

  

 * Appointment of an Ambassador for Human Rights;

  

  * Increased funding 
for human rights cooperatio n and assistance in the Asia Pacific, 
establishment of a Regional Centre for Human Rights Dialogue and Conflict 
Resolution, and additional funds for grass-roots human rights projects;

  

  * Active support 
for negotiation of a just and lasting settlement of th e East 
Timor conflict including appointment of a Special Envoy on East Timor;

  

  * A forthright 
position on the question of East Timorese self-determination and increased 
development and human rights assistance for East Timor;

  

  * Imposition of sanctions on t he Burmese military regime;

  

  * Increased support 
for the international campaign against child labour exploitation;

  

  * Development of a new human rights focussed approach to overseas aid;

  

  * A strengthened 
export control test to ensure Australian defence eq uipment is 
not used by foreign governments to violate human rights.

  

  “Labor’s human rights diplomacy will be both principled and effective. 
Support for human rights will be backed by open and frank dialogue, 
comprehensive and well resourced programs, and,  as appropriate, 
forthright action.”

  

 “Labor will make the advancement of human rights 
a core foreign policy objective as Australia moves into the new century.”

  

  Statement attached.

  

  Contact: Philip Dorling (02) 6277 4717 or 0416 203 058

  

  ACTING ON PRINCIPLE

  

  LABOR’S HUMAN RIGHTS

  DIPLOMACY

  

  STATEMENT BY THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

  LAURIE BRERETON MP

  

  15 September 1998

  

 Contents Page

 Key Initiatives 2

 Human Rights and Australian 
Diplomacy 3

 A Core Foreign Policy Objective 4

 Australian Ambassador for Human Rights 4

 Fundamental Principles 4

 UN Human Rights Framework 5

 Challenges and Opportunities in the Asia Pacific 6

 Regional Dialogue and Cooperation 6

 Regional Human Rights Initiative 7

 Regional Centre for Human Rights Dialogue   
and Conflict Resolution 7

 Human Rights Fund 7

 Centre for Democratic Institutions 8

 Bilateral Human Rights Dialogues 8

 East Timor: A Key Foreign Policy Priority 9

 Australian Special Envoy on East Timor 10

 Development and Human Rights Assistance for East Timor 10

 Human Rights and Sanctions: Burma 11

 Support for Labour Rights 12

 International Campaign against Child Labour Exploitation 12

 Codes of Conduct 13

 Overseas Development Assistance 13

 Defence Cooperation and Defence Exports 14

 Landmines 14

 International Criminal Court 15

 Human Rights Reporting 15

 Costings 16

  

 Key Initiatives

  

 In Government, Labor will pursue human rights as a core foreign policy 
objective. 

  

  Labor 
will :

  

 * Appoint an Ambassador 
for Human Rights;

  

 * Make support for human rights an integral part of Australia’s response 
to the consequences of the Asian economic crisis;

  

 * Boost funding for 
human rights cooperation and assistance in the Asia Pacific;

  

 * Establish a Regional 
Centre for Human Rights Dialogue and Conflict Resolution;

  

 * Increase funding 
for grass-roots human rights projects;

  

 * Improve transparency and accountability of Australia’s bilateral 
human rights dialogues.

  

  Labor 
will :

  

 * Give high priority to the issue of East Timor and pursue every opportunity 
to encourage a just and lasting settlement;

  

 * Maintain a forthright position on the question of East Timorese self-determination;

  

 * Seek the immediate and unconditional release of Xanana Gusmao;

  

 * Appoint a Special Envoy on East Timor to actively encourage negotiation 
of a settlement;

  

 * Increase Australian development and human rights assistance for East 
Timor.

  

  Labor 
will :

  

 * Impose sanctions 
on the Burmese military regime;

  

 * Give strong support to the International Labour Organization’s 
work to protect and advance core labour rights;

  

 * Increase Australia’s support for the international campaign against 
child labour exploitation;

  

 * Develop a new human rights focussed approach to overseas aid;

  

 * Adopt a strengthened export control test to ensure Australian defence 
equipment is not used by foreign governments to violate human rights;

  

 * Move to ratify the Ottawa landmines ban Convention as a high priority;

  

 * Publish a comprehensive report on Australia’s international human 
rights activities.

  

  

  Human Rights and Australian Diplomacy

  

 On 10 December 1998, Human Rights Day, the world will celebrate the 
50th anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations General Assembly 
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which proclaims “the 
inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all members 
of the human family”.

  

 The 50th anniversary 
of the Universal Declaration is a timely occasion to reaffirm the place 
of human rights at the heart of Australian diplomacy.

  

 Labor considers foreign 
policy must advance more than self-interest. Australia’s diplomacy 
must protect and promote our national interests -- our sovereignty, 
security, prosperity and quality of life. At the same time, Australia’s 
foreign policy must reflect and incorporate the core values of our nation.

  

 Support for an active 
and consistent pro-human rights stand is firmly grounded in fundamental 
Australian values -- the products not only of our democratic traditions, 
but also of a history upholding a strong egalitarian culture. Support 
for human rights reflects Australia’s strength as a tolerant, outward-looking, 
multicultural society.

  

 Australians care deeply 
about human rights. In an age of instant communications, no country 
is too far away for Australians not to know immediately, and often to 
see in graphic detail, when human rights violations occur. Australians 
expect their government to share their concerns and to respond in a 
principled and effective fashion.

  

 The Howard Government 
promised to give human rights high priority in its foreign policy. In 
practice, it has often acted to remove human rights from the public 
agenda of Australian diplomacy. Behind a facade of ‘quiet diplomacy’, 
the Howard Government has pushed key human rights issues to the margins 
of Australia’s foreign relations.

  

 A foreign policy which 
incorporates and reflects the core human rights values of our society 
will be more respected overseas and enjoy a greater degree of support 
within Australia. Diplomacy which neglects these values will not win 
respect at home or abroad, and will undermine Australia’s national 
interests.

  

 Respect for human rights 
brings benefits in higher standards of international behaviour and the 
contribution domestic peace and stability make to international security. 
Respect for human rights makes countries less inclined to engage in 
conflict, inhibits refugee flows and supports the alleviation of poverty 
and inequality which can fuel violence and terrorism.

  

 Effective human rights 
diplomacy fundamentally supports international and regional security, 
and Australia’s national interests.

  

  A Core Foreign Policy Objective

  

 Dramatic economic and political turmoil in East Asia is producing 
major challenges and opportunities in the human rights field which require 
new activism in Australia’s human rights diplomacy.

  

 Labor’s approach to human rights issues will be both principled 
and effective with support for human rights backed by open and frank 
dialogue, comprehensive and well resourced programs and, as appropriate, 
forthright action.

  

 Labor is determined to win the respect of other nations, especially 
in the Asia Pacific region, for a consistent, firm and distinctly Australian 
stand in support of human rights and democratic freedoms.

  

 Labor will make the protection and promotion of human rights a core 
foreign policy objective as Australia moves into the new century.

  

  Australian 
Ambassador for Human Rights

  

 Labor will appoint an Ambassador for Human Rights with responsibility 
for advancing Australia’s human rights objectives in the United Nations, 
other multilateral fora and in regional and bilateral dialogue.

  

 Responsible to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Ambassador for 
Human Rights will provide a focus for the development of policy and 
programs for the advancement of human rights, including consultation 
with human rights non-government organisations in Australia and overseas.

  

  Fundamental Principles

  

 Labor considers all human rights to be universal, equal and indivisible. 
There is no hierarchy of human rights.

  

 The basic human rights to food, shelter, health care, economic security 
and education are preconditions for human survival, dignity and the 
enjoyment of civil and political rights. Equally, respect for civil 
and political rights is critical to advancing economic and other rights.

  

 There is a symbiotic relationship between civil and political rights 
and economic rights. Each group of rights underpins the other.

  

 Labor considers all states have a fundamental duty to protect and 
promote all human rights.

  

  This duty is grounded in the public commitment of countries to the 
principles contained within the UN Char ter, the Universal Declaration 
on Human Rights and other international conventions. It is an obligation 
further underpinned by the fundamental consistency of experience across 
diverse cultures and societies in which ideals of popular sovereignty, 
equality of treatment, fairness and freedom are enduring themes.

  

 Labor considers human 
rights to be a subject of legitimate international concern and we reject 
attempts to portray this concern as interference in the internal affairs 
of other countries.

  

 Australia must respect 
the political, economic, social and cultural differences between other 
countries and ourselves. At the same time, Australian diplomacy must 
never lose sight of our core national values as a country with proud 
democratic traditions of openness and rigorous debate.

  

 Labor will be forthright 
in raising concerns over human rights violations with relevant governments 
in our region and beyond. Similarly we expect and welcome the prospect 
of international scrutiny of Australia’s domestic human rights record.

  

  UN Human Rights Framework

  

 The United Nations 
is a primary forum for protecting and promoting human rights throughout 
the world. Labor strongly supports the UN’s global human rights role, 
including its standard setting and monitoring activities.

  

 Labor will give high 
priority to efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the multilateral 
human rights framework, especially the work of the UN Commission on 
Human Rights and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.

  

 Labor will give consideration 
to the draft Universal Declaration of Human Responsibilities, but is 
concerned that any final document should reinforce the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights and in no way undermine or diminish its status as the 
keystone of the UN framework for the protection and promotion of human 
rights.

  

  Challenges and Opportunities in the Asia Pacific

  

 Events in Asia over 
the past year provide a dramatic illustration of how powerfully and 
swiftly an economic shock can give rise to major social and political 
crises. The regional economic crisis has generated a human crisis characterised 
by enormous social disruption, the loss of millions of jobs, large reductions 
in incomes and increases in the prices of basic commodities, and greatly 
reduced government expenditure on health, education and the social protection 
of the poor.

  

 Asia’s economic crisis 
raises major challenges for Australia’s development assistance programs 
which have been slashed by the Howard Government. The 1998/99 budget 
left Australia’s overseas development assistance at 0.27 per cent 
of Gross National Product — an all time low and manifestly inadequate 
response to Australia’s humanitarian obligations.

  

 The Asian economic 
crisis is also generating major challenges and opportunities in the 
field of human rights and democratic reform.

  

 Political turmoil and 
civil strife generated by economic and social crises, together with 
long-standing conflicts and disputes, have the potential to give rise 
to new human rights concerns in Australia’s region. Human rights concerns 
continue in many countries including Burma, Cambodia, China, North Korea, 
Sri Lanka, and Indonesia including East Timor, Irian Jaya and Aceh.

  

 At the same time, political 
change and reform flowing from the economic crisis have opened the possibility 
of enhanced respect for human rights and greater acceptance of international 
scrutiny of human rights issues.

  

 Respect for human rights, 
free and fair electoral processes, freedom of expression and public 
debate, maintenance of the rule of law, transparency and accountability 
in government and other institutions, are among reforms widely recognised 
to be essential to prevent harmful distortion of market processes and 
ensure greater social equality and social justice in the development 
process.

  

 In Indonesia, there 
is a new spirit of openness in political and social life which holds 
the potential for an environment in which human rights will be more 
respected and past abuses exposed.

  

 While present uncertainties 
must not be underestimated, Labor will seek to encourage these positive 
trends through bilateral and regional dialogue and appropriately targeted 
human rights programs.

  

 Labor will make support 
for human rights an integral part of Australia’s response to the consequences 
of the Asian economic crisis

  

  Regional Dialogue and Cooperation

  

 Cooperation between 
national human rights institutions is an important foundation for the 
eventual establishment of more formal regional understandings and arrangements 
for the advancement of human rights in the Asia Pacific region.

  

 Labor will work to 
further develop the regional network of national human rights commissions, 
the Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions.

  

 Labor will give high 
priority to support and assistance for institutions such as Indonesia’s 
National Commission on Human Rights (Komnas HAM) which face major new 
challenges and opportunities to advance respect for human rights.

  

 Labor will pursue the 
ratification of international conventions, including ILO Conventions 
on core labour standards, as an important element in our regional human 
rights diplomacy. Labor will provide relevant technical assistance in 
the form of expertise, grants and education, to those countries which 
seek to ratify and comply with those conventions.

  

  Regional Human Rights Initiative

  

 Labor will allocate 
an additional $9 million over 3 years to support human rights programs 
in the Asia Pacific, including technical cooperation and direct assistance 
for national human rights institutions, support for the development 
and implementation of national human rights action plans, human rights 
education and training, and institution building.

  

  Regional Centre for Human Rights Dialogue and Conflict Resolution

  

 Recognising the links 
between human rights abuse and unresolved political and social conflict, 
Labor will establish a Regional Centre for Human Rights Dialogue and 
Conflict Resolution.

  

 An independent and 
self-governing institute, the Regional Centre will actively promote 
regional dialogue and cooperation on human rights issues. It will serve 
as a centre of excellence in applied policy and research, and will seek 
to develop a regional role as a mediator and facilitator in the fields 
of human rights and conflict resolution.

  

 $4 million has been 
allocated to meet establishment and initial running costs.

  

  Human Rights Fund

  

 Many worthwhile human 
rights initiatives are best pursued on a small scale in cooperation 
with local communities and non-government organisations.

  

 Labor will allocate 
an additional $1.2 million over 3 years to the Human Rights Fund (jointly 
administered by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and AusAID) 
to support small scale, grass-roots human rights activities identified 
by Australian diplomatic missions overseas. Funding in 1997/98 was a 
modest $0.18 million.

  

 Particular emphasis will be given to projects which 
enhance the rights of women in developing countries. While the geographic 
focus of the Human Rights Fund will remain the Asia Pacific region, 
increased funding will allow further expansion of the program in Africa 
and to appropriate projects in the Middle East.

  

  Centre for Democratic Institutions

  

 Labor will continue 
current funding for the work of the Centre for Democratic Institutions 
(CDI). Labor supports the CDI’s planned involvement in democratic 
institution building in developing countries, but considers the lack 
of specific human rights training programs and of a focus on support 
for labour rights to be deficiencies in the CDI’s design and program.

  

 Labor will review the 
mandate and functions of the CDI to ensure that its work lends maximum 
support to Labor’s overall approach to human rights issues.

  

  Bilateral Human Rights Dialogues

  

 Labor will continue 
the development of bilateral human rights dialogues as an integral element 
of relations with Australia’s neighbours in the Asia Pacific.

  

 Labor’s approach 
to such dialogue will be designed to promote the universal, indivisible 
and inalienable nature of human rights, and acceptance of multilateral 
human rights conventions and mechanisms. Such exchanges should not constrain 
Australia’s ability to speak out, strongly where necessary, against 
violations of human rights.

  

 Labor considers that 
Australia’s bilateral human rights dialogues should be characterised 
by improved transparency and accountability, and incorporate enhanced 
inputs from human rights NGOs.

  

 With regard to Australia’s 
bilateral human rights dialogue with China, Labor will consider the 
inclusion of an independent human rights expert in future Australian 
human rights delegations to China. Labor will seek to liaise and coordinate 
Australia’s approach with other countries engaged in human rights 
dialogue with China with a view to strengthening the effectiveness of 
such exchanges and their capacity to deliver tangible results.

  

 Labor will actively 
explore ways to improve respect for human rights in Tibet and encourage 
dialogue between the Chinese Government and the Dalai Lama or his representatives.

  

  East Timor: A Key Foreign Policy Priority

  

 Labor will give high priority to the issue of East Timor and will 
pursue every opportunity to encourage a just and lasting resolution 
of this tragic conflict.

  

 Political change in Indonesia has created an opportunity to achieve 
progress.

  

 Labor welcomes the agreement between Indonesia and Portugal to hold 
talks on Indonesia’s proposal to grant East Timor a special status 
within Indonesia with wide-ranging autonomy. Labor strongly supports 
resumption of the All-Inclusive Intra-East Timorese dialogue convened 
under the auspices of the UN.

  

 Labor considers Indonesia’s offer of a special status for East Timor 
to be an encouraging development, but notes that substantial differences 
continue to exist between the parties, especially on the crucial issue 
of East Timorese self-determination.

  

 Labor’s view is that a just and lasting solution to the problem 
of East Timor is unlikely to be achieved without a process of negotiation 
through which the people of East Timor can exercise their right of self-determination.

  

 Any agreement on a special status and autonomy prejudicial to the 
continuing right of the East Timorese people to self-determination is 
unlikely to produce a real resolution of this conflict.

  

 Unanimously adopted at Labor’s National Conference in January 1998, 
this view is a significant development in Labor’s approach to the 
question of East Timor.

  

 Labor’s new position on East Timorese self-determination has already 
been expressed directly to the Indonesian Government in the course of 
visits to Jakarta by the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs in April 
and August this year.

  

 The Howard Government has refused to adopt this approach as a bipartisan 
Australian position.

  

 Labor considers that substantive negotiations must of necessity involve 
participation by the recognised leadership of all East Timorese groups. 
It is problematical whether any talks can achieve substantive outcomes 
in the absence of the free participation of a figure such as Xanana 
Gusmao.

  

 Labor calls for Xanana Gusmao and other East Timorese political prisoners 
to be released unconditionally without further delay.

  

 Labor considers that any process of discussion concerning the future 
of East Timor should have at its core the protection of the human rights 
of the East Timorese. Labor will give high priority to programs designed 
to protect human rights in East Timor, including support for the work 
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and calls on the Indonesian 
Government to take substantive action to ensure respect for human rights 
in East Timor.

  

 Labor welcomes the Indonesian Government’s recent withdrawal of 
approximately 1,000 troops from East Timor. Labor will actively encourage 
Indonesia to implement further substantial reductions in what continues 
to be an oppressive military and security presence in East Timor.

  

  Australian 
Special Envoy on East Timor

  

 Labor will appoint a Special Envoy on East Timor, directly responsible 
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, to actively encourage negotiation 
of a just, comprehensive and internationally acceptable settlement of 
the East Timor conflict.

  

  Development 
and Human Rights Assistance for East Timor

  

 Labor’s active support for negotiation of a lasting settlement of 
the East Timor conflict will be backed by substantially increased development 
and human rights assistance for East Timor.

  

 East Timor remains one of the most disadvantaged areas within the 
Indonesian archipelago. The possibility of a negotiated settlement of 
the East Timor question reinforces the need for significant effort to 
support basic institution building within the territory.

  

 Total Australian development assistance to East Timor since 1980 has 
amounted to over $37 million. Australian assistance to East Timor in 
1997/98 is estimated to exceed $4 million.

  

 In consultation with the Indonesian Government and East Timorese groups, 
Labor will commission an urgent survey of East Timor’s development 
needs.

  

 Labor will increase Australia’s development assistance to East Timor, 
including programs designed to improve the human rights situation on 
the ground and to support institution building, by $22 million over 
3 years.

  

  

  Human Rights and Sanctions: Burma

  

 Where appropriate, Labor supports the imposition of political and 
economic sanctions against governments which engage in gross violations 
of human rights and democratic freedoms.

  

 Burma’s military regime has persistently defied international opinion, 
refused to engage in dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League 
for Democracy, and violated human rights and democratic freedoms on 
an appalling scale.

  

 Labor will do all that we can to maximise international pressure on 
the Burmese military regime to enter into serious negotiations with 
pro-democracy opposition groups and to undertake necessary political 
and economic reform.

  

 In the absence of any significant improvement in human rights conditions 
and progress toward the establishment of democratic freedoms, Labor 
will:

  

 * actively discourage Australian trade with Burma, including closure 
of the Austrade office in Rangoon, discourage Australian companies from 
doing business in Burma, and ban new Australian investment in Burma;

  

 * actively discourage Australian citizens from visiting Burma for business 
and tourism;

  

 * suspend the issue of visas for visits to Australia by Burmese officials 
and other persons associated with the military regime; and

  

 * put the Burmese military regime on notice that diplomatic relations 
will be downgraded in the event of further deterioration of the human 
rights situation.

  

 Sanctions by Australia would send an important political message, 
not only to the Burmese military, but also to the world community, and 
would be a significant contribution to international efforts to bring 
about respect for human rights and democratic freedoms in Burma.

  

  Support for Labour Rights

  

 Labor considers issues 
of core labour standards -- the right to collective bargaining and freedom 
of association, freedom from forced or compulsory labour, freedom from 
exploitative child labour -- relate to fundamental human rights.

  

 Labor will work to 
focus world attention on governments which persist with forms of repression 
against the development of free trade unionism or allow intolerable 
labour practices such as forced labour.

  

 Labor deplores the 
Howard Government’s effective termination of Australia’s active 
participation in the International Labour Organization. This short-sighted 
action has severely diminished Australia’s capacity to protect and 
promote fundamental human rights.

  

 Labor will reinforce 
international efforts to eliminate abusive labour practices by restoring 
support for ILO technical cooperation programs and for the operation 
of the ILO’s supervisory role in relation to international labour 
standards conventions.

  

 Labour standards and 
social protection were neglected in Asia in the years of high economic 
growth preceding the current economic crisis. Little progress was made 
in advancing basic labour rights and developing social safety nets.

  

 Labor will make the 
protection and advancement of labour rights a key element in Australia’s 
response to the social dimension on the Asian economic crisis and an 
integral part of our regional and bilateral dialogue on human rights.

  

  International Campaign against Child Labour Exploitation

  

 Labor will give high 
priority to support international efforts to eradicate the exploitation 
of child labour, including exploitation of children in the sex trade.

  

 Labor will strongly 
support the ILO’s International Program on the Elimination of Child 
Labour and other initiatives designed to reduce child labour, especially 
in the Asia Pacific region. Labor will seek to ensure the new ILO Convention 
on exploitative child labour makes a substantive contribution to international 
efforts to address this enormous humanitarian problem.

  

 Labor recognises that 
the abolition of child labour requires the provision of appropriate 
educational, rehabilitation and other support programs. Labor will allocate 
an additional $12 million over 3 years to support aid programs which 
address the issue of child labour exploitation in the Asia Pacific region.

  

 Labor will explore 
the possibility of legislation to prohibit the engagement of Australians 
or Australian companies in exploitative child labour practices overseas, 
and the import into Australia of goods made by exploitative child labour.

  

  Codes of Conduct

  

 Labor will encourage 
Australian companies operating overseas to adopt public codes of conduct 
which commit them to observe international human rights standards, including 
core labour standards, and ensure that their operations do not directly 
or indirectly violate human rights or inflict unacceptable impacts on 
local communities and the environment.

  

 Labor will convene 
discussions with relevant NGOs, the corporate sector and the trade union 
movement with a view to developing appropriate codes of conduct on human 
rights, labour standards, and environmental practice.

  

  Overseas Development Assistance

  

 Australia’s overseas 
development assistance is a primary vehicle to advance human rights 
in our region and beyond.

  

 Last year’s Simons 
Committee Report on Australia’s overseas aid program was weak on human 
rights issues. The Report instead focussed on the importance of supporting 
‘good governance’, an ambiguous concept which can embrace human 
rights but is often used to refer to efficiency and accountability in 
government management rather than promotion of human rights. The Simons 
Report did not make a single recommendation on human rights.

  

 Labor considers advancement 
of the full range of human rights -- economic, social, cultural, civil 
and political rights -- must be at the heart of Australia’s overseas 
development assistance program.

  

 Labor will develop 
a new human rights focussed approach to overseas development assistance 
explicitly directed toward the realisation of human rights, including 
though --

  

 * establishment of a human rights framework for AusAID;

  

 * inclusion of human rights issues in development assistance policy 
dialogue between Australia and recipient countries;

  

 * incorporation of relevant international human rights conventions 
and principles into aid project design; and

  

 * in consultation with relevant NGOs, review of existing policy on 
conditionality of overseas development assistance.

  

  Defence Cooperation and Defence Exports

  

 Recognising the importance 
of military institutions in efforts to address human rights concerns 
in neighbouring countries, Labor will include human rights training 
and education as a significant part of Australia’s bilateral defence 
cooperation arrangements.

  

 Labor considers defence 
cooperation arrangements must be designed to enhance national and regional 
security and must not contribute to the suppression or violation of 
the human rights of the citizens of the countries with which Australia 
is cooperating.

  

 Labor will adopt a 
strengthened test to ensure Australian defence equipment is not used 
by foreign governments to suppress or violate the human rights of their 
citizens.

  

 Labor will not permit 
the export of Australian defence equipment and dual-use technology to 
countries where there is a clear identifiable risk of the proposed export 
being used for the major suppression or violation of human rights or 
fundamental freedoms of their own citizens.

  

 Labor will review the 
role of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in procedures for 
approval of defence exports to enhance consideration of human rights 
aspects of defence exports proposals.

  

  Landmines

  

 Labor is firmly committed 
to the goal of securing a truly global and effective ban on anti-personnel 
landmines. Labor has given wholehearted bipartisan support to Australia’s 
signature of the Ottawa Convention which bans the use, development, 
production, stockpiling and transfer of anti-personnel landmines.

  

 Ratification of the 
Ottawa Convention has been delayed by the Howard Government’s failure 
to introduce legislation this year to implement Australia’s obligations 
under the Convention. As a consequence of this delay, now compounded 
by the calling of the federal election, Australia may not provide one 
of the forty ratifications required to bring the Convention into force. 
(Thirty-seven countries have already ratified the Convention.)

  

 Labor will introduce 
the necessary legislation and move to ratify the Ottawa Convention as 
a high priority.

  

 Labor will energetically 
continue Australia’s work in the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva 
and in other fora to encourage all countries to join the process of 
finding a lasting, effective and truly global solution to the scourge 
of landmines. Labor will continue efforts to secure a ban on transfers 
of antipersonnel landmines which includes the major producers of landmines 
not parties to the Ottawa Convention.

  

 Labor will continue 
to give high priority in Australia’s foreign aid programs to demining 
activities and assistance to landmine victims in afflicted countries 
such as Cambodia, Laos, Afghanistan, Angola and Mozambique. Australia 
is presently committed to spend at least $100 million by 2005 for demining 
and related programs. These are important humanitarian programs which 
have Labor’s strong support.

  

  International Criminal Court

  

 Labor welcomes the 
successful conclusion of negotiations for a Statute to establish an 
International Criminal Court. The creation of such a Court is an important 
step in international efforts to deter potential perpetrators of crimes 
against humanity and to ensure justice is done when atrocities have 
been committed.

  

 Subject to parliamentary 
scrutiny in accordance with Australia’s treaty making process, Labor 
will pursue ratification of the Statute with a view to Australia providing 
one of the 60 ratifications required for entry into force.

  

  Human Rights Reporting

  

 Labor will publish 
a comprehensive report on Australia’s international human rights activities. 
Such a publication will enhance the transparency and accountability 
of Australia’s human rights diplomacy. It will be tabled in Parliament 
and subject to review by the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, 
Defence and Trade.

  

 Labor will review the 
present procedures for complying with reporting obligations under international 
human rights conventions to which Australia is a state party and take 
appropriate measures to ensure Australia’s reporting obligations are 
met in a timely and comprehensive manner.

  

  Costings

  

  1999-2000

  2000-20 01

 2001-2002  


 Totals 

  Regional Human Rights Initiative

  $3 million

  $3 million  


  $3 million

  $9 million  


  Regional Centre for Human Rights Dialogue and Cooperation

  $1 million  


  $1.5 million  


  $1.5 million

  $4 million

  Human Rights Fund

  $0.4 million

  $0.4 million

 $0.4 million

 $1.2 million

  Development and Human Rights Assistance to East Timor

  $4 million

  $8 million

  $10 million

  $22 million

  Campaign against Child Labour Exploitation

  $3 million

  $4 million

  $5 million

  $12 million

  Totals

  $11.4 million

  $16.9 million

  $19 .9 million

 $48.2 million

  

  

  

  

  dd

