---
title: "Launch of Labor's Arts Policy, Sunday 26 July 1998, Sydney: address."
date: "1998-07-26"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211461482
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2I705%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

  EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

  

  ADDRESS BY THE HON KIM C. BEAZLEY MP

  LAUNCH OF LABOR’S ARTS POLICY

  SUNDAY 26 JULY 1998

  SYDNEY

  

  

  I think it is only appropriate for this launch today that we pause 
for a moment to  reflect on the topic of uneasiness.

  

 Perhaps it is the sight 
of a glamorous crowd before me, but being invited to address the Arts 
community as a serving politician always makes me a little nervous.

  

 No-one with a sense 
of history could not be.

  

 Because as we stand 
here today, we do so as just the latest incarnation of the mutual suspicion 
and casual brutality which is the history of the relationship between 
artists and politicians.

  

 I cannot let this occasion 
go by without telling my favourite story of the relationship between 
the artist and the politician.

  

 It is of a little-known 
altercation between Henry Moore and Nikita Kruschev on one of the latter’s 
visits to London. Being shown around a collection of Henry Moore’s 
sculpture, the General Secretary of course felt compelled to denounce 
Mr Moore’s art for the bourgeois decadence it was. Bristling visibly, 
but without missing a beat, Moore responded by saying that Mr Kruschev 
should stick to the things he truly understood - like murder.

  

 The bonds of patronage 
on the one hand, and the irresistible target your average politician 
represents for an artist’s crueller senses of irony, caricature and 
satire mean that our two professions have long regarded each other with 
a well-advised wariness.

  

 The politician labours 
always in the terrifying knowledge that an artist’s work always threatens 
to outlive by many years if not centuries, a politician’s.

  

 And he or she bears 
that knowledge with only the scant consolations of those unsubtle arts 
of prisons, hired thugs and firing squads.

  

 So welcome, one and 
all to Labor’s Arts Policy Launch.

  

 The policies I launch 
today are Labor’s commitments to a vibrant Australian Arts community.

  

 They are our commitment 
to repairing the damage of Howard Government cuts - cuts to the Australia 
Council, the Australian Film Commission and the Commercial Television 
Production Fund.

  

 They are our commitment 
to improving access to the Arts outside the major cities - with initiatives 
for regional art galleries, and to develop studios for visual artists 
in regional areas.

  

 They are our commitment 
to contemporary Australian music, both in terms of our opposition to 
the parallel importation of CDs, and in terms of our Contemporary Music 
Development Fund. We are even going to allow musicians to meet the activity 
test for unemployment benefits if they are trying to get a band off 
the ground.

  

 And these policies are 
our commitment to improving funding for Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander Performing Arts, to Artbank, and to the Public Lending Rights 
scheme.

  

 All the details of our 
policies are there in the document we are here to launch today. But 
I don’t want to go into the detail of the policies, rather I want 
to talk about why we as a Labor Party are committed to the Arts in this 
country.

  

  I  suppose we are all learning anew the things we value in Australian 
society after 2½ years of Conservative Government. The Arts community 
now wears the proud distinction of having been attacked by the One Nation 
Party - always a guarantee in my book that its contribution to Australia 
is vast and indispensable. Now there you have a political echo I wondered 
if I would ever hear - what was it? “When I hear the word culture, 
I reach for my revolver”.

  

 But for Labor, these 
last 2½ years have only re-affirmed to us why we support the Arts. 
And it is not about inoculation against criticism, although we might 
come to some arrangement about that later, it is about defending the 
Australia we believe in.

  

 The last 2½ years have 
taught us that the Australia so many of us believe in needs defending, 
and it has no better defenders than those who create and nourish the 
cultural life of the nation.

  

 Our writers, painters, 
actors, musicians and performers are the constant storytellers of contemporary 
Australian life. Only in the artistic sphere are the powers of simile, 
analogy, irony and satire allowed their full sway.

  

  And in the stories they tell, there is a real power to analyse the 
changes in our society - those too small to register with most of us, 
and those too overwhelming for us to process.

  

  I think it is this analytical power Marshal McLuhan was speaking of 
whe n he said:

  

 “I think of art, at 
its most significant, as ... a distant early warning system that can 
always be relied on to tell the old culture what is beginning to happen 
to it.”

  

 Artistic expression 
tells us truths about our country, our history, and our people, and 
in this lies the answer to those who would call the Arts an indulgence. 
Those who like to call the Arts an indulgence are those who either do 
not understand those truths, or worse, are not comfortable with them.

  

 But I want us to have 
the big arguments artists lead us into. Because when we stop being provoked, 
affronted, seduced, and yes even satirised and made to look foolish 
by art, we may as well give up ever finding any deeper understanding 
of our nation - where it is going, and what is happening to it.

  

 And I want us to have 
the big arguments, because I know we can handle them. Australia is blessed 
with a national character that represents perhaps the most nourishing 
soil for artistic appreciation in the world.

  

 We Australians, probably 
as an accident of history are devotees of the irreverent. We can never 
see anything without wishing we could laugh at it. This mischief is 
everywhere in Australian life.

  

 So, too, is artistic 
achievement at the centre of how Australians view themselves. Much is 
made of Australian pride in our sporting achievements, but more often 
than not, you will find Australians identifying with our best actors, 
our successful films, and our musicians. Before meat pies and Holden 
cars, there was Nellie Melba. Australians have always seen artistic 
achievements as a fundamental part of our national identity.

  

 I am also enormously 
encouraged by the way Australian culture has been transformed by the 
flowering of indigenous art. It is a wonderful expression of a maturing 
Australian national identity, and an identity we are increasingly projecting 
confidently, proudly and powerfully to the rest of the world.

  

 The centrality of art 
to Australian identity is why it surprises me that our opponents evidently 
do not share our belief in strong Government support for the Arts, why 
they are, as elsewhere, so predictably obsessed with seeing the market 
shape the form in which we may enjoy the artistic abilities of our fellow 
Australians.

  

 That sense of irreverence 
also means Australians appreciate the way art can play with reality 
to reveal truths about that reality, and that we are a people untroubled 
by contradiction. We are not surprised when the grand narratives of 
years gone by are disrupted. It has been one of the greatest failings 
of this Coalition Government and its Prime Minister to believe that 
the Australian people cannot deal with past and present injustices courageously.

  

 So I come to what I 
think lies at the core of Labor’s special relationship with the Arts. 
I like to think it is about something Bob Ellis once said to me - I 
think it was Bob, but he certainly won’t mind me saying so - that 
Labor at least has a kissing cousin’s relationship with the deeper 
truths of Australian life.

  

 That beneath all the 
puff and bluster of daily political life, we are not the ones who try 
to govern permanently in refuge from the realities of Australian life.

  

 My job as Leader of 
the Labor Party makes me powerfully aware of the traditions that precede 
me. And I know that Labor still retains that tradition of how our Party 
was born - out of the struggle for a secure, decent, dignified and meaningful 
way of life for the Australian worker - for the vast majority of the 
Australian population.

  

 So the core of Labor 
tradition, and Labor’s place in the firmament of Australian life, 
is that we are not there to obscure realities to maintain our political 
position. We are not there trying to build little coalitions of discontent, 
cobbling all of them together into some sort of shabby and temporary 
fraternity of mutual suspicion that will get us over the line.

  

  We are not the ones out there telling Australians to fear indigenous 
peoples’ rights to their land — rights they won fair and square 
in the highest Court in the land.

  

  We are not the ones out there trying to strip away the average workers’ 
wages and condi tions — sending black shirted goons with dogs 
on chains and cans of mace to kick them out of their workplaces in the 
dead of night.

  

 We are not the ones 
out there getting ordinary Australians in the sights of a GST - to try 
and gouge more money out of the average family, and make way for some 
decent business tax relief down the road.

  

  And whatever people think of Labor, they knew we would never get out 
there and swap preferences with an outfit like One Nation. That whatever 
we might think of the Liberals an d the Nationals, we could never 
prefer a mob that want to take the vote away from our indigenous people, 
and send refugees back to the war zones they fled. But these are the 
people John Howard wanted - and still wants - in the Parliament before 
Labor people.

  

 Well now we know - after 
2½ years of John Howard - now we know the true measure of Australian 
conservatism. And I say we must never forget it.

  

 And that is what Labor 
stands against. And what we stand for is a bit of security, a bit of 
fairness, and a bit of decency in the lives of ordinary Australians. 
We draw our strength and our legitimacy from them - their struggles 
are our struggles. And we can govern for them, not in coalition against 
them.

  

 This is why Labor’s 
relationship with the Arts community goes beyond that invidious one 
of patronage, and the flippancies I started with today.

  

 It is because the best 
art cannot lie. It draws its inspiration from the people - from their 
concerns, their worries and their dreams. And it is there to tell truths 
about those people - truths that others will recognise and appreciate.

  

 That is what Labor aspires 
to - to render the truths of Australian lives in the daily business 
of Government.

  

 That is a hard thing 
to do in politics, but we know that as long as we support the Arts as 
a central part of Australian life, you will never tire of telling us 
when and where we get it wrong - in excruciating, memorable and lasting 
detail.

  

 And I suppose that’s 
something I look forward to.

  

 Thank you.

  

  

  

  LK

