---
title: "Computer language tool launched during AMEP (Adult Migrant English Program) 50th anniversary celebrations in SA."
date: "1998-11-19"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211465034
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2TUQ3%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  

  Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs   
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

  

  Computer language tool launched during    
AMEP 50th anniversary celebrations in SA

  

  MPS 150/98 

 A groundbreaking Computer 
Aided Language Learning (CALL) program to assist English language tuition 
in South Australia was unveiled today during celebrations marking the 
50th anniversary of the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP). 

 Launching the celebrations 
in Adelaide, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, 
Philip Ruddock, said the exciting new program will be used by South 
Australian AMEP provider English Language and Literacy Services (ELLS). 

 "The ability to 
speak English is one of the most important skills new migrants and humanitarian 
entrants from non-English speaking backgrounds need to develop. 

 "This new program 
will assist migrants attain this crucial ability, and will strengthen 
the Adult Migrant English Program's standing as one of Australia's key 
migrant settlement schemes". 

 Mr Ruddock said the 
AMEP is one of Australia's key settlement schemes and has helped more 
than 1.5 million migrants to settle comfortably into the Australian 
community over the years. 

 "The Coalition 
has a commitment to assisting the settlement process and as such has 
allocated $95 million per year to the AMEP. 

 "Furthermore, a 
further $8.8 million has been provided over the next two years to fund 
special preparatory programs to assist refugees and humanitarian entrants 
with their particular settlement needs". 

 Lyall Fricker AM, an 
icon in South Australian education and the State's first teacher under 
the Adult Migrant English Program, cut the celebratory cake at the 50th 
anniversary party with two of his former students. 

 The students, Duilio 
and Galdino Caon, were taught by Lyall, then a young teacher fresh from 
active service as a fighter pilot with the RAAF. 

 Mr Fricker commenced 
teaching English after experiencing communication difficulties in foreign 
countries during his service in the war. 

 After working in the 
Commonwealth Office of Education in Sydney he later returned to Adelaide 
to become Director General of TAFE in South Australia - ironically with 
responsibility for the AMEP. 

 The AMEP's 50th anniversary 
celebrations will continue throughout the year and into early 1999, 
culminating in a major international conference "The AMEP: 50 Years 
of Nation Building" to be held on 10-12 February in Melbourne. 

  Thursday, 19 November 1998   
Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715. 

  

  

  

  jy

