---
title: "Democrats launch dental policy."
date: "1998-09-15"
creators:
  - "Downey, Jim"
  - "Lees, Meg"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of LEES, SEN MEG"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211463016
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SDA05%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Senator Meg Lees

  Australian Democrats

  Parliamentary Leader

  

  Jim Downey

  Australian Democrats

  Lead Senate Candidate for Victoria

  

 15 September, 1998

 98/680

  

  DEMOCRATS LAUNCH DENTAL POLICY

  

  The Australian Democrats today launched a dental po licy for 
Australia’s future.

  

 The Democrats’ policy -   Filling the Gaps  - is based around a three year strategy to 
reduce waiting lists for dental services and to develop new ways of 
providing dental treatment to those most in need.

  

 “This strategy is a targeted, strategic and affordable 
program to provide public dental care to disadvantaged people.” Leader 
of the Australian Democrats, Senator Meg Lees said.

  

 “It provides an immediate injection of funds to 
treat people on waiting lists, with priority given to those waiting 
over 2 years for treatment and those in need of emergency care.”

  

 “In the first year of the strategy 75% of those 
currently on waiting lists would be treated. And through the pilot projects 
some of the most disadvantaged Australians could receive public dental 
services for the first time."

  

 The abolition of the Commonwealth Dental Health Program 
has reduced many Australians to living with tooth decay and constant 
dental pain and has caused the unnecessary loss of teeth for many disadvantaged 
people.

  

 An estimated 500 000 people are on waiting lists for 
dental treatment around the country with some waiting up to 5 years 
for treatment.

  

 “It is one of the most abject failures of the Howard 
Government and one which won’t easily be forgotten” Senator Lees 
said.

  

 The Democrats policy states that the Commonwealth 
Government should take a leadership role in developing a National Oral 
Health Policy and setting minimum service targets for dental treatment.

  

 “No Australian should have to wait more than 24 
hours to receive emergency dental treatment and pain relief.” Senator 
Lees said.

  

 “Dental disease is one of the most common health 
problems in the community and is largely preventable. Preventive dentistry 
results in better health outcomes and lower cost treatments.

  

 “It’s a fundamental quality of life issue,” 
said Senator Lees.

  

 for further comment: Stephen Swift 0419 867 876

 Alan Jenkins 02 6277 3203, 015 558 711

  

  Democrats Dental Policy - Key Points

  

  * The Policy outlines 
a three year strategy comprisi ng a core program to provide basic 
dental care to low income earners and several pilot projects addressing 
specific areas of need.

 * The 
Policy also addresses workforce issues and introduces an internship 
for new dental graduates. Under the internship program, dental graduates 
will gain additional experience working for a year under supervision 
in areas of need.

 * $70 
million per year is allocated to provide treatment to people currently 
on waiting lists, with priority given to people waiting over 2 years 
and those needing emergency treatment. This program is also open to 
refugees.

 * Funding 
is allocated in the form of vouchers which enable recipients to obtain 
treatment at public or private clinics. A co-payment may be required 
for private treatment.

 * The 
Pilot Projects will develop new methods of service delivery to populations 
most in need (low income earners, homebound, rural and remote, Indigenous 
and homeless people)

 * The 
policy also includes pilot programs targeting disadvantaged people from 
specific age groups at risk of oral disease (pre-school aged children, 
young adults and older Australians)

 * These 
pilot programs will develop models of service provision and data collection 
to provide a public dental health infrastructure for the future.

 * The 
Policy calls on the Commonwealth to take a leadership role in oral health 
and to develop an Oral Health Policy and fund a National Oral Health 
Survey

  

  

  

  dd

