---
title: "Australia's overseas volunteers - working for a better future. Address at the Ceremony of Appreciation for Australia's overseas volunteers, Sydney, 12 August 1998"
date: "1998-08-12"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211461901
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JE805%22
---

   

  

  Australia’s Overseas 
Volunteers Working for a Better Future

  

  Address by the Hon 
Alexander Downer, MP

  Minister for Foreign 
Affairs,

  at the

  Ceremony of Appreciation 
for Australia’s Overseas Volunteers,

  Sydney, 12 August 
1998.

  

  

  Introduction

 Returned volunteers and 
guests, executives and patrons from volunteer organisations, and Members 
of Parliament, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you all here this 
evening to the public launch of the Government’s program to recognise 
the efforts of Australian overseas volunteers.

  

 The recognition of this 
contribution is long overdue. Australian volunteers have been helping 
people in other countries for many years. Even by conservative estimates, 
well over 5,000 Australians have served overseas through specific programs 
and as individuals since the 1960s. I am delighted that the Government’s 
new initiative, the Australian Youth Ambassadors for Development program, 
will enable an additional 500 outstanding young Australian volunteers 
to have the opportunity of an exciting and challenging experience.

  

 I know you did not volunteer 
with the aim of having your work recognised. Nevertheless, the volunteer 
certificates acknowledge the valuable contribution you have made to 
Australia’s official overseas aid activities. Moreover, it is important 
for the wider community to recognise the role of volunteers in the Australian 
aid program.

  

  PNG

 The generosity of Australians 
is well known. The response to the recent tidal wave disaster in Papua 
New Guinea is just the latest example of how of Australians quickly 
react with offers of assistance to those in need. I am overwhelmed by 
how much Australians are willing to give at short notice for our aid 
activities in addition to their regular contributions of money, materials 
and personal effort.

  

 The Government also has 
reacted quickly to the crisis in Papua New Guinea. In addition to the 
tremendous efforts of the now returned, 60 strong Australian Defence 
Force medical team, the Government has provided supplies and transport 
for the relief efforts. Non-Government aid organisations are also playing 
a significant part in the delivery of Australian emergency relief activities.

  

 From here on in, the 
efforts in Papua New Guinea will need to focus on rehabilitation and 
longer-term development needs of the affected area of West Sepik. Australia 
will continue to support Papua New Guinea with this task.

  

 As you may be aware, 
the people of Papua New Guinea receive the largest single amount of 
aid from Australia, some $320 million each year, but they are by no 
means the only group who need assistance in the world today — a fact 
which many of you know first-hand.

  

  Aid and the Government: Better Aid for a Better Future

  

  The aid context

  

 What is perhaps not 
as well known is that 1.3 billion people - or one quarter of the world’s 
population - live in absolute poverty. They do not have access to the 
things most Australians take for granted: good health care, education, 
shelter and food. It is also often the case that people in developing 
countries lack the right to vote and to hold governments accountable 
for their actions.

  

 Many of these basic 
amenities and rights are denied to a vast number of people throughout 
the world, a disproportionate number of whom are women and children. 
Many of these people are uprooted by violent conflicts or natural disasters. 
Millions of children have no hope of a decent life. That is a tragedy 
of vast proportions.

  

 However daunting all 
this might sound, I fully believe that Australia’s current aid contribution 
of nearly $1.5 billion a year does make a difference.

  

  The Public’s view of aid

  

 And so, it seems, do 
many Australians. I would like to tell you some of the details of a 
national poll that shows a high level of support among Australians for 
the Government’s overseas aid program. The poll shows that 84% of 
those surveyed approved of Australia giving aid, with over half approving 
“a lot”. Another thirty percent approved “ a little”. This affirms 
my belief that the overwhelming majority of Australians want to assist 
people in developing countries.

  

 Forty-seven percent 
of those surveyed made a donation to an organisation that provides overseas 
aid in the last 12 months. This demonstrates the generosity of Australians 
and our commitment to helping people worse off than ourselves.

  

 Australia’s $1.5 billion 
aid budget is only one percent of total government expenditure. By comparison, 
social security and welfare accounts for 38%, health for 16% and education 
for 7%. In dollar terms, our aid program costs each Australian a loaf 
of bread a week. The survey results demonstrate that most Australians 
support this level of assistance: 78 percent of those surveyed said 
that they either approved of the amount of aid spent now or thought 
it should increase.

  

 Australia’s aid program 
is directly addressing the issue of poverty and is delivering results 
that help improve people’s lives.

  

  New Directions

  

 In November last year, 
the Government announced a new agenda for our aid program, after the 
first major review of the aid program for 13 years. I have made sure 
that the new aid program is directly engaged in the key tasks of poverty 
reduction and sustainable development. Australian aid is working in 
key areas that help improve people’s lives - in

  

  ·  health, 
such as preventing women from dying in childbirth and immunising children 
to ensure they survive childhood illnesses;

  

  ·  education, 
through helping children to attend school so that they can grow up to 
make a productive contribution to their own societies;

  

  ·  infrastructure, 
such as providing access to safe running water and sanitation systems, 
which in turn helps prevent disease;

  

  ·  rural 
development through helping develop sustainable agriculture and fisheries 
which enable farmers to provide sufficient and nutritious food for their 
families; and

  

  ·  governance 
which includes helping secure people’s human rights.

  

 In an increasingly globalised 
world it is also in Australia’s self interest to help assist with 
development overseas. Helping promote prosperity in developing countries 
also helps foster stability and open up trade and investment opportunities 
for Australia. Many global problems which impinge on Australia such 
as the spread of HIV/AIDS, environment problems, refugees and narcotics 
are addressed through the aid program.

  

 Australia’s aid program 
is implemented in partnership with developing countries. It is outward 
looking, open to new ideas and approaches and seeks to draw on the best 
ideas in Australia and overseas. And our aid program is identifiably 
Australian — it is both a reflection of Australian values and a projection 
of those values abroad.

  

  The valuable contribution of volunteers

  

 Volunteers like yourselves 
sum up all that is great about Australia. You are outward looking, caring, 
tolerant and committed to a better world around us. You are can-do people 
who seek no material reward for your efforts. Your aim is simple. You 
seek to improve the lives of others who through no choice of their own 
live in poverty, chaos and despair brought on by hunger, disease and 
conflict unknown in our country.

  

 You offer a sense of 
hope. You are often the first contact with Australia and Australians 
for thousands of people who face a difficult life. The image you leave 
with them is lasting and priceless. It is a picture of caring, compassion 
and kindness.

  

 What you do is also offer 
hope to thousands of Australians who watch horrifying television footage 
night after night of hopelessness and grief in the world’s troublespots. 
They make their own contributions through their wallets and through 
their thoughts and payers. You make your contribution on the ground 
where the devastation is more than a television image. For you, it is 
real. I am sure all Australians would be amazed at your achievements 
if they heard your stories, good and bad, but most importantly of your 
successes. It is those successes which make the aid program worthwhile.

  

 I am sure that you all 
feel that if you have improved things for just one person in a small 
way, your own efforts will have been worthwhile. The fact is that, between 
you all, you have touched the lives of thousands of people around the 
globe. You have made lives better and give other less fortunate than 
yourselves the strength and capacity with which to go on.

  

 You 
are the ones at the coalface of Australia’s aid program. You are the 
ones who make the legendary Australian qualities of egalitarianism, 
generosity and sacrifice real. You operate in a world without borders 
and in a world that cares above all about others. The thought of an 
isolated and uncaring Australia, I’m sure has never entered your minds. 
Through your actions you add immeasurably to Australia’s international 
reputation. That is why we are here tonight

  

 Thank you from all Australians 
for your terrific efforts.

  

  

  

  JS

