---
title: "Final contract signed for English language tuition in NSW."
date: "1998-06-11"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211460114
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GK505%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP 

  

  Final contract signed for English language tuition in NSW

  

  MPS 65/98 

  

 Contracts worth around 
$70 million have been awarded for the delivery of the Adult Migrant 
English Program (AMEP) in the Inner City and Eastern Region, and the 
Burwood, Hornsby, Newcastle and Rural NSW Region, the Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, announced today. 

  

 The contracts, between 
the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and a consortium 
led by the New South Wales Adult Migrant English Service (AMES), finalise 
the arrangements for the delivery of the AMEP in NSW for the next five 
years. 

  

 Contracts for the other 
three AMEP regions were signed during March and April. 

  

 Mr Ruddock said English 
language ability is one of the key factors in the successful settlement 
of migrants into the Australian community. 

  

 "Studies have shown 
that migrants with a low level of English language skill tend to have 
a poor employment experience and can face social isolation. 

  

 "The new service 
delivery arrangements will provide better services for clients including 
a wider choice of provider, more flexibility in service delivery options, 
and better pathways to further study or employment". 

  

 The successful consortium 
includes NSW AMES, TAFE NSW, University of New South Wales Institute 
of Languages (UNSWIL), the Board of Adult and Community Education (BACE) 
acting on behalf of ACE Providers, and Lady Gowrie Child Centre. 

  

 "The Government's 
aim in moving to open tendering was to improve the flexibility and effectiveness 
of English language tuition, while ensuring best value for money," 
Mr Ruddock said. 

  

 Mr Ruddock said advances 
in technology would help providers deliver English language services 
that are responsive to the changing needs of clients. 

  

 "The measures introduced 
by this Government will significantly improve the quality and sustainability 
of the Adult Migrant English Program and will also enable ongoing improvements 
to how English can and should be taught." 

  

 Individuals entering 
Australia under the Refugee and Humanitarian stream will also have access 
to additional preparatory tuition to prepare them for the courses. 

  

  Thursday, 11 June, 1998

  Media inquiries: Minister's Office - Brad Robinson 0419 278 715

  

  

  rw

