---
title: "Labor tightens rules for Lifetime Health Cover."
date: "1999-08-26"
creators:
  - "Macklin, Jenny"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211566083
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/04E06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  

  JENNY MACKLIN

  Federal Member for Jagajaga

  Shadow Minister for Health

  

 26 August, 1999

  

  LABOR TIGHTENS RULES FOR LIFETIME HEALTH COVER

  

  Shadow Health Minister, Ms Jenny Macklin today released the details 
of extensive amendments to the rule s for Lifetime Health Cover 
- the new system for charging health insurance premiums based on age 
at entry to a health fund.

  

 Ms Macklin said the Government proposals were unfair 
and unworkable and there was a need for extensive change.

  

 “Labor’s first goal is to protect our public hospital 
system by invalidating the funding arrangement which allow the Commonwealth 
to cut funding if private health insurance coverage increases. Under 
the Howard Government “clawback” rules the States stand to lose 
$200 million if Lifetime Health Cover sparks a sudden rise in private 
health insurance.

  

 “Secondly we will extend discounts to people under 
30 as was originally recommended by the actuaries who designed the scheme. 
We will also exempt aged and veteran pensioners below the age of 65 
instead of the arbitrary cut off of 65. Under Labor’s amendments people 
will get recognition for periods of earlier membership of a health fund.

  

 “The Labor amendments will also close two major 
rorts in the Government’s health insurance plans. Firstly, people 
who buy health insurance in the current year will have to keep it for 
3 years to be treated the same as long term members.

  

 “The Institute of Actuaries had warned that many 
people would take out insurance for a month next June to subvert the 
intent of the scheme. The Government has admitted there is a problem 
so it should support the Labor solution.

  

 “The Senate Committee which inquired into this legislation 
found support for the principles but a lot of disquiet about the details. 
It is obvious that the Government developed the rules in secret and 
failed to consider fairness and workability.

  

 “Labor supports the concept of Lifetime Health Cover 
but will be campaigning strongly to make it fair and workable, Ms Macklin 
said.

  

 For further information: Andrew Herington 0418 573 
504

 Jenny Macklin 0419 593 622

   



  

  SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS TO BE PROPOSED TO THE

  National Health (Lifetime Health Cover Amendment) 
Bill 1999

  

  Amendment 1 Review by December 2003

  

 Requires the Minister to establish an independent 
review of Lifetime Health Cover to report to Parliament before the end 
of 2003.

  

  Amendment 2  Protection of public hospital funding

  

 Invalidates the provision in the Australian Health 
Care Agreements that funding to the States for public hospitals can 
be reduced if private health insurance levels increase.

  

  Amendment 3  Reform of Re-insurance pool

  

  Requires the Minister to reform the re-insurance pool by 1 July 2000 
so that Lifetime Health Cover can work properly. Reform will send the 
signal to industr y that each fund must become more efficient 
and consumer focussed.

  

  Amendments 4,5,13,14,18 & 20  Private Health Insurance Ombudsman

  

 Gives the Private Health Insurance Ombudsman strong 
powers to remedy hardship cases and unforseen anomalies caused by the 
new scheme. Previously there was only a limited power for the Minister 
to establish regulations to cover hardship that occurred in the first 
two years.

  

  Amendment 6  Limits of low value products

  

 Prevents Funds offering policies requiring an "up 
front excess" larger than $500 or which had many excluded procedures. 
These low cost products have been used by high-income earners to avoid 
the Medicare Surcharge without offering any real coverage for private 
hospital use. Under Lifetime Health Cover they become even more attractive 
because they provide a loophole to avoid penalties for later upgrading 
coverage.

  

  Amendment 7  Discounts for Youth

  

 Gives people under 30 a 2% reduction in premium for 
every year prior to age 30 that they join the scheme.

  

  Amendments 8 to 12  Recognition of prior membership

  

 People currently without health insurance but who 
have had it for many years in the past will get credit for their past 
membership and pay a lesser penalty premium. In the example given a 
person with three years out of health insurance after the introduction 
of Lifetime Health Cover, but who had previously been a member for 6 
years would pay a penalty of $60 compared to $180 under the Government's 
proposal.

  

  Amendment 15  Suspension rules

  

 Clarifies rule on suspension so that consumers know 
where they stand.

  

  Amendment 16  Three year rule

  

 Requires that people who join the fund after its Budget 
night announcement will need to keep their cover for three years to 
gain the full benefit of being treated as long time members.

  

  Amendment 17  Refugees provision

  

 Removes the penalty for refugees under the scheme. 
They will only pay penalty premiums related to the period of time they 
have spent in Australia.

  

  Amendment 19  Aged Pensioners under 65

  

 Extends the exemption for over 65-year-olds to include 
those under 65 who are retired on Aged, widows or veterans pensions

  

  Amendment 20  Records of spouses with cover

  

 Requires proper records to be kept and spouses to 
be notified when the member ceases payment. This has been a common problem 
with marriage break ups that will become very important under Lifetime 
Health Cover.

  

  Motion on Advertising

  

 The Opposition will also move a motion which will 
require the proposed $10 million Government advertising campaign will 
need to be vetted in advance by the Australian Consumer and Competition 
Commission and the Private Health Insurance Ombudsman. It will be judged 
on the following criteria:

  

 a) That the advertisements are entirely non-political 
in nature;

 b) That the advertisements provide a full and fair 
account of the rules of

 Lifetime Health Cover

  c) That the description of the scheme is not misleading or incomplete

  d) That the advertisements 
do not create an impression that ther e is an obligation to join 
private health insurance or that access to the public hospital system 
through Medicare will be in any way reduced

 e) That 
the advertisements comply with the "Guidelines for advertising 
private health insurance" developed by the ACCC and the Private 
Health Insurance Ombudsman.

  

  [Attachment to hard copy:

 Draft: National Health Amendment (Lifetime Health 
Cover) Bill 1999 [6p]

  Held in DPL's Information Files]

  

  

  dd  1999-08-27  12:56

