---
title: "Immigration Minister announces visas extension for Kosovars."
date: "1999-10-22"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478115
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6AH06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 MPS 149/99

  

  IMMIGRATION MINISTER ANNOUNCES VISA EXTENSION 
FOR KOSOVARS

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today announced  that the visas of 450 Kosovars who will remain 
in Australia beyond the end of October will be extended for a further 
month until 30 November 1999.

  

 However, the Minister cautioned that this did not 
mean the Kosovars would be able to remain permanently in Australia.

  

 “As I have continually said, it is not a matter 
of if these people will return home but when,” the Minister said.

  

 “I have extended visas to allow those Kosovars currently 
undergoing medical treatment to complete their treatment others wishing 
to remain beyond the end of November have been asked to provide reasons 
why they should be allowed to stay longer in Australia.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said that he would review any further visa 
extensions on a month-by month basis, in consultation With the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and any claims by the 
Kosovars to stay in Australia because of protection needs would be referred 
to the UNHCR.

  

 ‘If I don’t extend the visas the remaining Kosovars 
will become unlawful non-citizens when their visas expire on 30 October. 
Under Australian law, once visas expire the person must be detained 
and removed however, I would like to avoid an outcome of this nature 
at any stage.

  

 “The Kosovars who came to Australia under Operation 
Safe Haven all agreed to temporary safe haven and also agreed to return 
home once it was deemed safe to do so by the UNHCR — that time has 
passed and it is now time for these people to return home to rebuild 
their lives in Kosovo,’

  

 Mr Ruddock reiterated that the Winter Reconstruction 
Allowance, which has been available to returning Kosovars, ceases at 
the end of October

  

 “Those Kosovars who do not leave on the last charter 
flight on 26 October will not be eligible for the allowance when they 
eventually return except for a small number currently undergoing medical 
treatment - they will receive the allowance if they leave as soon as 
they are suitably able,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 The Minister also said that he had not extended the 
visa of one Kosovar who had been charged with criminal offences and 
had breached his visa conditions.

  

  

 ENDS Friday 22 October 1999

  

 Media Enquiries: Susan Sare 0407 415 797

  

  

  jk  1999-10-26  09:39

