---
title: "Kosovo refugee - press conference."
date: "1999-05-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475213
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/I3806%22
---

   

  

  Press Conference

  

  The Hon Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Reconciliation

  

  Kosovo Refugee

  

  5 May 1999

  

  Minister:

  

 ... at the conclusion of this launch to brief you 
on the arrangements tomorrow the Qantas flight will be leaving for Kosovo 
at 3.00pm this afternoon. It will in fact be taking people from Rome, 
there are several charters that will bring people from Skopje to Rome 
where they will join the Qantas flight and we anticipate that they will 
be received in Sydney on Friday afternoon and we will give you some 
more details precisely as to the time and whereabouts in relation to 
those arrangements. As we have indicated before the arrangements will 
be that a small group of people will be available to be talked to but 
we want to preserve the privacy of most of the group and the way in 
which we will do that will be advised to you more formerly by the Department 
that are managing the arrangements for the arrival. I will be holding 
tomorrow at East Hills an opportunity to, for those who are interested 
to be able to see the facility and to walk through with me while we 
have a look at it and in relation to the arrangements that have been 
made the arrivals will go from Sydney airport to the East Hill’s facility 
where they will undertake both health checking and familiarisation and 
distribution of clothing and other personal affects, that may assist 
them while they are here. After that period of familiarisation they 
will be moved on to Brighton in Tasmania. I think the premise there 
are about to be renamed as the safe haven facility but I have seen that 
before, but I will go and visit the arrivals early next week to see 
how matters are progressing. There has been an enormous amount of interest, 
a great deal of public support which we are very grateful for. The arrangements 
are for my departmental officials were such that they were in the Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ready to resume processing within the 
48 hour period that I indicated after we had received from Madam Ogata 
a request for Australia’s involvement and of course the arrival at 
the end of this week was something I foreshadow to you at the weekend.

  

 Are there any questions?

  

  Journalist:

  

 Mr Ruddock how many flights will there need to be 
to get the 4000 here?

  

  Minister: 

  

 Well the advice I have is that there will be flights 
about one every five days initially, then one every three days. I think 
it is fairly easy to work out that, you are looking at something like 
15 to 20 flights.

  

  Journalist:

  

 What sort of condition are these people in, the people 
who ... .inaudible....?

  

  Minister:

  

 Well let me just say that Madam Ogata made it very 
clear in her advice that people are to be received as a group not individually. 
They are to be received as part of an evacuation not for permanent resettlement 
and so the screening has been on the basis of establishing priorities 
on the basis of need and women at risk, that is women who are alone 
with children have been very much the focus of our screening and then 
we have been looking at intact family groups that we are able to accommodate 
and they are those from situations in which the provision of accommodation 
and services has been the most difficult for the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees.

  

  Journalist:

  

 So how many children will be on this first flight?

  

  Minister:

  

 I don’t know precisely the number of children. But 
I would imagine there would be a significant number.

  

  Journalist:

  

 Mr Ruddock what is your reaction to the allegations 
raised by Senator Harradine at the Estimates meeting last night in regards 
to the forcible abortion-of a woman taken back to China...?

  

  Minister:

  

 Well I am not able to react to these specific claims 
that have been made. They are claims that we are now investigating. 
I think Senator Harradine last night when he raised this matter for 
the first time with officials and certainly so far as my recollection 
is concerned indirectly the first time with me, he made it, made it 
very clear that there are difficulties in being able to manage in relation 
to people who are returned a full monitoring of their circumstances, 
but that is something that he seeks. Now the point that was made by 
my officials when they were questioned on this matter are these. Firstly 
if a person has refugee claims that are, that are such, that our protection 
obligations are engaged they are not removed from Australia. So the 
people that we are talking about are people who are either people who 
have been here unlawfully and made no claims or people who have made 
claims that have been found not to warrant a protection claim. Now certainly 
the inquiries that have been made by my staff at this point in time 
indicate that no request was made for me to look at this matter for 
my personal intervention and in no circumstances one would assume that 
the return was one that you would have normally anticipated in relation 
to a person who is here unlawfully and without claim. Now we are certainly 
going to investigate to the extent that we can, I mean there are limitations 
on the extent to which you can investigate circumstances which may have 
occurred several years ago in another country, but we will endeavour 
to satisfy ourselves and my Department’s launched a full investigation 
and seeking the cooperation of Senator Harradine in relation to the 
sort of information that we may need to assist with those inquiries.

  

  Journalist:

  

 Just as a matter of principle would you condone your 
officials sending back a woman who is heavily pregnant .. .inaudible...?

  

  Minister:

  

 Well the point that was made last night was that it 
is not normal to return a person who is in their late pregnancy because 
of the difficulties in relation to aircraft requirements so these are 
matters that we need to look at in further detail. You are asking me 
as a matter of principle we would not normally return a person who is 
late in a pregnancy where it is deemed to be inappropriate that they 
should be carried on an international aircraft.

  

  Journalist:

  

 But that’s only, that’s only the aircraft that 
concerns you what about, what happens to them in China? Does that concern 
you?

  

  Minister:

  

 In relation to the issue of the claims that are made 
we observe the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees standards 
in relation to what constitutes a protection claim. And all people who 
have protection claims are entitled to put them before us and have them 
considered. They are considered by appropriate bodies. My Department 
first, then tribunals, they have the opportunity as you know, too well, 
to access our courts if they wish and some do and they have the opportunity 
to put claims to me. Now in terms of the way in which you manage these 
issues, you have to do so in terms of our obligations under the refugee 
convention. If what you are saying to me is that we have an obligation 
in Australia to take every pregnant woman from China, I think that would 
raise a number of very, very significant policy issues which not only 
would involve the Government, but the whole of the people of Australia 
I suspect.

  

  Journalist:

  

 What sort of assurances have you had, or the Australian 
Government had at any stage from the Chinese Government ..inaudible. 
... people who are returned in this condition would not be forced to 
undergo abortions? Has any assurances ever been received from the Chinese 
Government .. .inaudible...?

  

  Minister:

  

 Well I think that it would be more appropriate for 
me to wait for the full investigation in relation to the matters to 
know whether or not  

  

  Journalist:

  

 But just in general  

  

  Minister:

  

 No well not in general terms. I mean we return people 
to China who are unlawfully in Australia and who do not engage our protection 
obligations. And it is a matter of ensuring the integrity of our border 
arrangements that we do seek to return people. Now if people have a 
belief that they are going to suffer that they are going to suffer persecution 
in terms of the international convention their obligation is to put 
their claims to us, our obligation is to assess those claims and we 
do so with integrity. Now in terms of what happens to people in China 
we generally monitor the human rights issues in relation to China and 
make representations in relation to those matters.

  

  Journalist:

  

 How is it that we don’t have any …..inaudible…..?  

  

  Minister:

  

 Well you say to me why don’t we have a policy on 
pregnant woman? It is not normal in relation to immigration or humanitarian 
selection criteria to focus on an issue of that type in its generality. 
The question that is looked, is the question of whether or not, a person 
when they are in Australia, would have a well founded claim of persecution 
and that is dealt with in the context of our international obligations 
and frame work of law that operates around that international convention.

  

  Journalist:

  

 Mr Ruddock I may have missed something, but you are 
speaking of 15 to 20 flights that sounds like 4000?

  

  Minister:

  

 We are speaking about 4000 people — yes.

  

  Minister:

  

 Look these matters are looked at in context of, of 
Chinese law and I am not going to get in to the details of these matters. 
They are looked at on a case by case basis. But I think it is important 
to focus on what is in fact the nature of the policy within China and 
just to give you some examples. It is certainly clear in relation to 
Sino-Vietnamese with whom we have an arrangement that if they come to 
Australia they can be returned, that they will not be subjected to any 
forced, forced abortion. And as I understand it there are also differences 
in the way in which the policy is applied within China. And I am not 
going to get into the general discourse about what China’s policy 
is in relation to these matters. The way in which these issues are looked 
at are that if people have claims when they are in Australia in relation 
to matters that they believe constitute persecution they make those 
claims and they are dealt with within an established procedure that 
provides for proper recognition of those matters to be accorded if that 
is the application of the refugee convention.

  

  Journalist:

  

 Does the High Commissioner for Refugees consider forced 
abortion is persecution?

  

  Minister: 

  

 Well I think that is a matter you better put to their 
representative who is here today.

  

  Journalist:

  

 But surely the criteria is well known to you and your 
Department?

  

  Minister:

  

 The criteria is very broad in context of the nature 
of claims that are made and it is a highly specialised task in which 
it has become increasingly specialised because of the advent of judicial 
review. And if you would like to spend a few years looking at the case 
law in this area you would appreciate what I am saying. It is not an 
area in which people speak with precision about individual cases where 
the circumstances in each individual case have to be applied in the 
context of a  inaudible..., that is highly developed and very sophisticated.

  

  Journalist:

  

 It is a very simple issue, a very simple  

  

  Minister:

  

 No. I’m sorry no.

  

  Journalist:

  

 ...issue for Australia Minister, whether we return 
woman to China who will then face forced abortions. Is it the Australian 
Government’s policy to do that? 

  

  Minister:

  

 The question we look at is whether or not a person 
has a well founded fear of persecution now that is in relation to all 
of the circumstances. Now the assumption you have made is that the way 
in which the one child policy in China is applied, means that every 
woman and child who has, who falls pregnant, is going to be subjected 
to a forced abortion. Now as I understand it that is not, that is not 
the application of the policy in China. As I understand it. Now the 
point I am making is if it is not the case but it does happen in some 
circumstances, what you have to do is to look at what it is in the particular 
circumstances that might give rise to that contingency occurring and 
that is why clients have to be considered within a frame work in which 
the claims are …inaudible..., comprehensive and detailed way and will 
never be able to done by a Minister at a Press Conference.

  

  Journalist:

  

 So you are saying that ….inaudible.... very heavily 
pregnant woman, women could be sent back to China from Australia and 
they would not be  inaudible?

  

  Minister:

  

 I am saying that it is highly unlikely that a heavily 
pregnant woman who is unsafe to be put on an aircraft would be removed 
from Australia. It may be the case in a particular circumstance that 
somebody who has been judged not to, have engaged our protection obligations 
will be removed. That may well have happened. And that is a determination 
that is made in which people have had first the opportunity to make 
their claims, have them considered by the Department, considered by 
the Refugee Review Tribunal, the opportunity to access our courts which 
they do frequently 900 cases a year, and then they have an opportunity 
if they wish to put a claim under section 417 to me. Now in relation 
to the particular matter, no such claim I am advised came to me for 
consideration. Now we are carrying out a full investigation in relation 
to the other matters and if I have got something to say on it I will.

  

  Journalist:

  

 Do we have an agreement with Sino-Vietnamese about 
not bringing .inaudible  

  

  Minister:

  

 No we don’t have an agreement. It is a matter of 
policy in China that Sino-Vietnamese because of their immigrant or refugee 
characteristics would not be subjected to China’s one child policy. 
It is not a question you ... .inaudible... to the issue of abortion. 
There are many issues related to one child policy including issues of 
contraception, sterilisation and so on but as I understand it between 
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees where they have put 
in place a program to ensure their successful resettlement in relation 
to China, there is an understanding in relation to those matters... 
.o.k. thank you.

  

  

  

  dd

