---
title: "Radio 5AN Studio, Adelaide, 16 September 1999: transcript of doorstop [East Timor; SA ALP; Swiss canyoning tragedy]"
date: "1999-09-16"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "East Timor; SA ALP; Swiss canyoning tragedy"
  - "East Timor"
  - "SA ALP"
  - "Swiss canyoning tragedy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477133
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FFF06%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, RADIO 5AN STUDIO, ADELAIDE,

  

  Subjects: East Timor, SA ALP, Swiss Canyoning tragedy

  JOURNALIST:

 Mr 
Beazley, are you satisfied with the East Timorese rules that have been 
worked out in the UN late yesterday and overnight?

  BEAZLEY:

 Two 
things. Firstly, the young men and women in the peacekeeping force, 
or the peace enforcement force, go with the full support of the Opposition. 
We will be concerned both for them and their families back here in the 
entirety of this deployment. So, I don’t want any critical remarks 
to be taken as any indication that they, in their needs, do not have 
our full support. The second point I’d make is this: there is an unsatisfactory 
feature of it, several unsatisfactory features. One is the continuing 
participation in the whole affair of the Indonesian army and the lack 
of clarity in terms of the relationships between the peacekeeping force 
and the Indonesian army. Basically, I believe they should not be there. 
At the moment they are part of the problem. But if they are there they 
should be in cantonment because I do think at the moment we’re asking 
a force which has been giving implicit support to a large section of 
the militia for some considerable period of time to suddenly switch 
over and become a force which quietens them down. Now, while that is 
possible it is a circumstance which, to say the least, is fraught.

  JOURNALIST:

 What 
about the West Timor situation? Because, is that not going to be at 
least a military difficulty from the logistical point of view if not 
difficult for other reasons?

  BEAZLEY:

 There 
are lots of problems related to West Timor. The biggest immediate problem, 
of course, is food and the starvation of people in the camps in West 
Timor. But there is also the question of whether people are in those 
camps because they want to be or because they’re being forced to be. 
And I think one of the things that we’re going to have to do over 
the next couple of weeks, is a) draw attention to their circumstances 
and ameliorate them. And b) start to negotiate their return.

  JOURNALIST:

 But 
is there not a problem in terms of the agreement because it doesn’t 
appear that they’re going to still have the power for the peace force 
going in?

  BEAZLEY:

 No, there is no power to go across the border. The powers are substantial 
in East Timor. There’s no question about that. The United Nations 
has clothed us with the sort of power that was given to the Korean force 
many, many years ago. Any rules of engagement that we choose to put 
in place to protect the force is going to be acceptable. But there are 
those loose ends, and there are those question marks. And, quite clearly, 
one of the things that we’re going to have to do is to work out some 
mechanism of getting people who are under threat in West Timor out into 
the east. And it’s not clear how that will occur.

  JOURNALIST:

 Did we act quickly enough in getting that peacekeeping force....?

  BEAZLEY:

 We have made a complete botch of this from day one. We had good intelligence 
that the mayhem which occurred would occur. And, yet, when the Portuguese 
and others tried to question whether or not things should have been 
proceeded with at the pace that they were in the absence of an appropriate 
peacekeeping force, the evidence seems to be that we pushed their concerns 
to one side. Now, we had a viable show in East Timor up to two or three 
weeks ago. Now, it is a complete mess with an awful lot of the people 
who were going to be part of the answers in East Timor dead.

  JOURNALIST:

 What is the protocol with regard to sending in a peacekeeping force? 
Do we have to wait for the UN to give the go ahead, or could we have 
gone in earlier?

  BEAZLEY:

 It’s very hard to go in without the UN. But the point was, so many 
months ago, should we not have anticipated this when in fact we had 
the intelligence reporting that we should anticipate it. And should 
we not have then acted with the Americans and others who could put appropriate 
pressure on Indonesia to get the right level of forces in place. Now, 
in a sense, that’s water under the bridge and what we now have to 
do is to look forward with what we’ve got. But in terms of the accountability 
of things, we ought to acknowledge that, learn from it, learn from the 
consequences of that as some guide to what we’re going to have to 
do in the next little while. I’ve been using loosely the term ‘peacekeeping’ 
force. This isn’t a peacekeeping force. A peacekeeping force may yet 
come under the terms of that resolution the UN Secretary General has 
the authority to bring a recommendation of a peacekeeping force when 
it comes under UN command. What this is is UN cover, basically, for 
an Australian operation with friends. This is as tough as it will ever 
get for this country.

  JOURNALIST:

 Do you support bringing the Timorese refugees here to Australia, similar 
to the Kosovars?

  BEAZLEY:

 Look, you had to do something. You had a compound of people deeply 
under threat, many of whose relatives have been killed, some of whom 
may well have been being sought out for the same sort of treatment. 
You know, you had to act with some urgency in that sort of emergency. 
I would hope that we would settle the situation so quickly on the ground 
that they could go back. But we’ll just have to see.

  JOURNALIST:

 Mr Beazley, Mr Rann said overnight that he feels confident the branch 
stacking situation will be sorted out by your end of October deadline. 
What indications have you had while you’ve been here, in discussions, 
that that, in fact, is the case?

  BEAZLEY:

 I’ve 
had a chat with one or two since I’ve been here. I’ve been confident 
since I made that pronouncement probably a couple of weeks ago now, 
that either the South Australian Branch fixed it or the Federal Executive 
would fix it. I still stand by that

  JOURNALIST:

 And 
what indication have you had from members here, like Mr Hunter, that, 
in fact, things will be sorted out?

  BEAZLEY:

 More 
to the point, I’ve had a thorough going indication from branch members 
that they’re sick of it and they want it resolved and I think that 
now actually impinges on the thinking of everybody.

  JOURNALIST:

 And 
have you discussed that issue with Mr Hunter while you’ve been here?

  BEAZLEY:

 Not 
while I’ve been here, no. I don’t need to. I’m quite well aware 
of what is going on behind the scenes to try and put an outcome in place. 
If that doesn’t work then something else will be put in place.

  JOURNALIST:

 Have 
you tried to dissuade Mr Clarke that, in fact, his court action perhaps 
is not very helpful?

  BEAZLEY:

 I 
don’t think his court action is particularly helpful. But there it 
is. It’s happened. And there are certain consequences which flow from 
that. The point is they’ve got to settle it down. There is a substantial 
opportunity here in South Australia. This State Government is a complete 
and utter mess — a complete and utter mess and it is governing poorly. 
There is a real opportunity for Labor here and they need to seize it. 
They’ve got time to.

  JOURNALIST:

 Mr 
Beazley, press reports this morning of a spy amongst Government ranks. 
Your reaction to that?

  BEAZLEY:

 Well, 
I was surprised to see those press reports. And I’d expect, as in 
all these sorts of circumstances, and if it’s true, it’s not the 
first time, I’d expect our intelligence services to catch the person 
concerned and prosecute them.

  JOURNALIST:

 Do 
you have any information about this matter?

  BEAZLEY:

 No, 
I have no information about it.

  JOURNALIST:

 The 
canyoning inquiry in Switzerland. There is a call in Australia now for 
an independent inquiry. What do you say to those Australian families 
who want a more open process and perhaps an Australian led inquiry into 
that accident?

  BEAZLEY:

 Well, 
when this started out people were quite satisfied with the Swiss inquiry. 
But they now appear not to be. I think the tragedy of that magnitude, 
and it was a huge tragedy, taking the lives of a large number of terrific 
young Australians. If the families are unsatisfied, and they appear 
to be unsatisfied with the Swiss processes, we ought to put one in place 
of our own that they can be happy with.

  JOURNALIST:

 How 
do you see the Federal Government, for example, implementing that? Or 
from Opposition, what would you suggest?

  BEAZLEY:

 Well, 
I would suggest that if an inquiry is deemed necessary, and I think 
if the families want that inquiry they ought to put in place a normal 
inquirer, somebody with something of a judicial background assisted 
by folk who know something of the conditions in which these terrible 
events occurred. And as quickly as possible put them in touch with the 
Swiss authorities and with the location and get on with it.

  

 ends

  

  

  jy  1999-09-21  13:55

