---
title: "Time for Govt to do the right thing by East Timorese kids in Australia."
date: "1999-10-18"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477932
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/20H06%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  Senator Lyn Allison

  Australian Democrats

  Spokesperson on Schools

  

  18th October 1999 99/558

  

  

  Time for Govt to do the right thing by

  East Timorese kids in Australia

  

  

  The Government must stop depriving East Timorese children in Australia 
of  education, the Democrats said today.

  

 In Question Time this afternoon, Government Senator 
Chris Ellison admitted he did not know that Australia routinely bars 
the children of asylum-seekers from free public education.

  

 “Unless the family can come up with thousands of 
dollars each year, asylum seekers’ kids cannot get access to free 
state education until the family’s visitor visa expires,” Senator 
Allison said. “This usually means no education for the first three 
to six months that they are in Australia. Principals who defy this ban 
have been warned in the past to expect government action against them.”

  

 Senator Allison said Catholic schools often came to 
the rescue by taking on students free of charge or at minimal cost, 
but they received no government assistance.

  

 She said Timorese asylum-seekers faced further barriers 
when they finished VCE or HSC.

  

 “Because their refugee status hasn’t been determined, 
they cannot be admitted to university or TAFE without paying exorbitant 
overseas student fees,” Senator Allison said.

  

 “Even if they have been here for six years, and 
even if their parents do not have tax file numbers necessary for steady 
work, they are still treated as if they have money to bum. Yet there 
is a world of difference between an asylum-seeker and someone from the 
ranks of Asia’s upwardly mobile seeking a degree from an ‘sandstone’ 
Australian university.”

  

 “Timorese children have been living in an educational 
no-man’s land. The Australian public’s compassion for the Timorese 
in their suffering has been overwhelming. I am sure most would like 
to see the children of asylum-seekers given unimpeded access to our 
education system. Surely they have enough uncertainty to contend with 
already without their educational development being jeopardised.”

  

 Senator Ellison said he would take the questions on 
notice. “It’s disappointing that Senator Ellison, formerly a schools 
minister, didn’t know about this appalling state of affairs,” Senator 
Allison said.

  

 These issues do not apply to the recent arrivals from 
East Timor who are here temporarily on Safe Haven visas and are being 
educated at locations such as Puckapunyal.

  

  

  For further information, contact Elisabeth 
Lopez on (03) 9416 1880, or

  Senator Allison direct on 02 6277 3076 or (0407) 
691 512.

  

  

  lk  1999-10-20  11:53

