---
title: "Kosovo peace developments: transcript of press conference, 4 June 1999"
date: "1999-06-04"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476119
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7Y906%22
---

   

  

  TRANSCRIPT PHILIP RUDDOCK

  PRESS CONFERENCE 4/6/99

  Re: Kosovo Peace Developments

  

  Ruddock:

  

 Nice to see you all hear today ... well look thank 
you all very much for coming here this morning. I just wanted to make 
clear the situation in relation to the Kosovo’s who have been subject 
of an evacuation to Australia. In the context of the promising situation 
that has emerged over night in. Now obviously there is a long way to 
go, before we know whether we have a peaceful situation in Kosovo, obviously 
I’m not in a position to comment on those matters and they’re very 
much out of my hands, but the signs are very optimistic, and people 
are asking what will happen in relation to the Kosovo’s who are here 
in Australia. And people are asking what will happen, they have a visa 
for 3 months and of course they have been the subject of an evacuation 
which was to provide not only for their safety but their continued care 
and support, until they are able to return to their homes.

  

 Now the situation does look promising, but reports 
suggest that as much as 70 or 80% of the infrastructure in Kosovo could 
have been destroyed. The expectation that people will be able to return 
promptly or almost immediately would be unrealistic, we will be consulting 
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in relation to 
the way in which any return will be conducted. We will obviously be 
cognisant of the situation in Kosovo as that return is effected and 
I will have some further comments to make on those matters in time. 
Can I finally say in relation to evacuation about 2500 people have been 
brought to Australia. Of that 2500 people most of them are located in 
Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia and NSW, we are continuing 
to evacuate people, we have selected numbers of people, that evacuation 
will for the time being continue.

  

 I do anticipate as news of the peace settlement if 
it’s confirmed spreads that numbers of people may decide to stay closer 
to home but there is no indication yet that will be the case, but it 
is certainly what I would anticipate and we will be flexible in relation 
to those matters and Australia has been generous in relation to the 
way in which it has dealt with these questions. The prospect of peace 
at this time makes the evacuation more likely to be, to have been the 
appropriate and measured response to the situation but we will continue 
to put in place a program which meets the needs of those people whom 
we’ve desired to help and assist.

  

  Question:

  

 At this stage is there anytime frame…inaudible)

  

  Ruddock:

  

 No, I mean that’s the point I’m making we will 
consult with the UNHCR about when the circumstances permit for that 
to happen if you’ve got such a large part of infrastructure destroyed 
it may not be able to happen as soon as we would like

  

  Question:

  

 You say evacuations are continuing does that mean 
Australia will still be accepting more refugees or more Kosovars

  

  Ruddock:

  

 It means the evacuations about which I was speaking 
were the evacuations by Australia

  

  Question:

  

 When’s the next due in Australia

  

  Ruddock:

  

 Well the last arrived I think on Wednesday evening 
and they’re arriving about every 5 days, and I’ve outlined the program 
now as to where people were going to be settled there were further places 
at Singleton that yet have to be filled. There are places at Bandiana 
in Victoria and also at Portsea and I think that will just about conclude 
the placements

  

  Question:

  

 Are there any provisions in place should there be 
a peaceful reconciliation of some sort I mean do we have an idea of 
how a return might be organised?

  

  Ruddock:

  

  Well we would organise the return I mean some people were asking the 
question when it is safe for us to return how are we going to get back 
home. Well obviously we’ve evacuated people to Australia on a temporary 
basis we’re not go ing to leave them in the lurch in relation 
to that matter we will facilitate their return. Can I say in relation 
to the Australian Public Service, the Department of Immigration has 
asked to manage this evacuation, it did so in I think an extraordinarily 
professional way with co-operation of other government departments and 
we ought to be very proud of what we were able to achieve in a very 
short period of time and in a very professional way.

  

  Question:

  

 Will you be taking them back or will you be giving 
them some financial assistance to help them re-establish themselves?

  

  Ruddock:

  

 Well the financial support that is given by Australia 
has largely been through the UNHCR and the support that the international 
community gives to the rebuilding process will be support that is designed 
to ensure that people are treated justly and fairly and the costs of 
re-establishment are going to be there for 800,000 who have been displaced 
and many others that have been displaced internally, that would suggest 
to me that it is highly unlikely that we would be providing additional 
support outside of the framework of international support that we would 
undoubtedly be joining.

  

  Question:

  

 Are you concerned that the longer these people stay 
the more likely they are to want to stay permanently

  

  Ruddock:

  

 Look it has always been the case that such claims 
were possible and that’s one of the reasons we put in place legislation 
to put beyond doubt what was our expectation. If people were going to 
be allowed to stay longer that was a decision that the minister would 
make and I’ve made it clear that our support has been for the international 
objective in ensuring that people were able to return home. And that 
was to make abundantly clear that if you’re going to clear a people 
on the basis of their ethnicity out of their homes out of their country 
that that objective will not work and ultimately the wider purpose is 
best served by Australia joining in the effort to assist people in being 
able to re-establish their lives back home.

  

  Question:

  

 There’s an unconfirmed report in the Sydney Morning 
Herald this morning that another refugee boat may have been sighted 
off the coast

  

  Ruddock:

  

 Well they’re obviously unconfirmed reports aren’t 
they.

  

  

 ENDS

  

  

  jy  1999-06-08  12:58

