---
title: "Government to resettle displaced people from Kosovo."
date: "1999-04-22"
creators:
  - "Williams, Daryl"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474922
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NF706%22
---

   

  

  NEWS

  

  ATTORNEY- GENERAL

  THE HON DARYL WILLIAMS AM QC MP

  ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

  AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

  

 22 April 1999

  

  GOVERNMENT TO RESETTLE DISPLACED

  PEOPLE FROM KOSOVO

  

  The Government will offer priority processing for permanent resettleme nt 
under the existing Humanitarian Program to a number of displaced people 
from Kosovo who have family links in Australia.

  

 This is in addition to the 4,000 temporary refuge 
places for Kosovar displaced people, which were announced on 6 April 
1999. This offer has been paused at the request of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees while the situation in the region is 
clarified.

  

 The Government is staying in contact with the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees about the possible activation 
of its offer of temporary haven to Kosovars in light of the developing 
situation on the ground.

  

 Cases for processing under the Humanitarian Program 
will be identified through families in Australia and applications from 
people overseas will be processed, and given priority, at Australian 
missions in Vienna and Athens.

  

 While it is difficult to estimate the number of likely 
applicants, preliminary discussions with the Albanian community in Australia 
indicated that some 200 families may be resettled.

  

 Families in Australia are in the best position to 
provide physical, emotional, social, and economic support that these 
displaced people may require.

  

 Officers of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs will be meeting with the Albanian community to identify the 
people in most need, and provide advice about lodging applications.

  

 The decision to resettle family-linked cases follows 
the continued expulsion of Albanians from Kosovo. Almost 600,000 Albanians 
have now been forced from Kosovo.

  

 Canada and New Zealand have announced similar family 
resettlement programs for Kosovan refugees.

  

 Arrangements have also been made to give priority 
to existing applications for humanitarian entry of people from Kosovo.

  

 This is another illustration of the Government’s 
continued commitment to support the international community to assist 
in this tragic humanitarian crisis.

  

 Media contact: Nicholas Harford (02) 6277 7300

  

  

  

  dd

