---
title: "Alleviating poverty in Jordan."
date: "1999-09-14"
creators:
  - "Abu-Rish, Munif M."
source: ""
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477090
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SI126%22
---

  Australian Council 

  of Social Service 

  Level 2 

  619 Elizabeth St   Redfern 

  Locked Bag 4777   Strawberry Hills   NSW 2012 

  Ph (021 9310 4844   Fax [02] 9310 4822 

  cacoss@acoss.org.au> 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  4 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  . 

  l 

  . 

  . 

  0 

  ISR 

  International Council on Social Welfare   28th Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW 

  14-l 7 September, 1999, Sydney, Australia 

  Social Welfare and Social Development 

  in the New Millennium 

  Poverty and Welfare in Rural 

  Areas 

  Alleviating Poverty in Jordan 

  Presenter:   Munif M. Abu - Rish 

  Director, Social Development Department, Hashemite   Fund for Human Development 

  www.acoss.org.au I 

  Alleviating Poverty in Jordan 

  Background, Status,   the Role of the Government   and the Efforts   of 

  The Jordanian Hashemite Fund for Human Development 

  (JOHUD) 

  -. 

  Munif M. Abu-Rish 

  Social Welfare and Social Development in the New Millenium 

  2Sth Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW   International Council on Social Welfare (ICSW) 

  14 - 17 September 1999   Sydney - Australia 

  The views presented in this paper are those of the author and do not reflect views of any of the participating orFxuzationb or   psrttclpants in the conference, nor the government of Jordan. 

  Table of Contents 

  Background 

  The Salient Features of the Period of the 1980s   The Objective Conditions in Jordan   Poverty in Jordan   Causes of Poverty in Jordan 

  The Jordanian Government’s Programs to Alleviate Poverty 

  The National Aid Fund   Subsidizing Basic Commodities   Medical Services Program   Wheat Compensation Program   m Development and Employment Fund   The Effect of Economic Adjustments Program on Poverty   The Social Productivity Project   Characteristics and Analysis of the Poverty Alleviation Programs 

  The Jordanian Hashemite Fund for Human Development (JOHUD) 

  The Basis of JOHUD’s Multi-Dimensional Objectives and   Cooperation with NGOs   JOHUD’s Structural and Functional Approach   First: The Community Development Centers (CDCs) 

  Second: Support of National and Local NGOs   Third: National Campaigns   Fourth: Queen Zein Al-Sharaf Institute for Development   (ZENID)   Summary of JOHUD’s Efforts to Alleviate Poverty   Summary on Jordanian Public Efforts to Alleviate Poverty 

  Recommendations Regarding Poverty Alleviation in Jordan 

  Conclusion 

  2 

  BACKGROUND 

  It is not possible to write about Jordan without describing Jordan’s   geopolitical role as a buffer state in the Middle East region and the   different political events that negatively affected this small country’s   economic growth and development. To start with, the creation of the   state of Israel in 1948 resulted in Jordan’s population trebling over a very   short period. Historic lines of trade and communications westward were   cut off and the country had to rely more on the north-south routes   instead. At that time the Jordanian Government had limited financial   resources and its ability to raise taxes in sufficient amounts was   extremely restricted. This lead to an increasing dependency on foreign   financial aid during the difficult and politically turbulent years the   Middle East witnessed in the 1950s. 

  The calmer and more suitable years of the early sixties allowed the   country to proceed with economic planning and an expansion in the   private sector’s investment. This was, however, disrupted by another   setback Tn 1967 when Israel occupied the West Bank. Overnight, the   country lost a large proportion of its land; resources, agricultural,   industrial and historic sites. In addition large numbers of refugees fled   their homes to settle east of the Jordan River, especially in the areas of   Amman, Zarqa and Irbid - the main urban areas of Jordan. The events   that followed the 1967 war had adverse effects on the country, and it   took about five years to go back to the normal. By 1973, however, Jordan   was able to embark upon an ambitious Three-Year Development Plan,   followed by several Five-Year Development Plans. In 1990, the country   faced a third setback. Approximately 350,000 Jordanians and 

  Palestinians, who fled the Gulf countries as a result of the crisis there,   merged on Jordan within a two to three months period. The infrastructure   and public service apparatus of the country were not able to meet their   needs of housing, schooling, health services, etc. 

  In spite of the above-mentioned events, Jordan has succeeded from 1952   to 1982 to achieve a relatively rapid rate of economic development.   During the period of 1952- 66, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at a   rate of 6.5% in real terms and from 1973-76 a growth rate of 5.9%. But it   was the period of 197680 that tri ggered Jordan’s economic expansion 

  with a growth rate of 12.1%. In comparison, the period from 1980-86   averaged a mere 4.2%. During the last ten years, real growth fluctuated   between 1 to 5%, with different sources, national and international ones,   citing different figures for certain years. 

  3 

  The recession that has hit Jordan since the mid eighties can be attributed 

  to several unfavorable factors: 

  One. The retreat of Jordanian exports in world markets due to the   sharp fall in the prices of phosphate and potash worldwide.   Two. The decline in Jordanian exports to Iraq. During the early years   of the Iraq-Iran War, Iraq could pay for the large inputs from 

  Jordan. Towards the end of that war and after the Gulf Crisis,   Jordanian exports to Iraq are still limited due to obvious reasons.   Three. The drop of world oil prices affected the demand of the Gulf   States for Jordanian manpower. On the whole their numbers 

  decreased slightly and the level of remittance remained unaffected   until 1984. Remittance reached its peak in 1984, $ 1.299 billion   but decreased sharply by more than 70% after 1990.   Four. Related to the above, Jordan has become an importer of workers 

  since the early eighties. More than 300,000 workers and   housekeepers are in Jordan now, resulting in a reverse outflow of   capital.   Five. dramatic decline in budget aid. Until 198 1, foreign loans and 

  grants constituted over 54% of Jordan’s government revenue. The   drop in oil countries’ revenues, and the political events that   occurred since 1990, led to a reduction in the aid extended to   Jordan. From a high point of over $ 1.1 billion in 1983, this figure   dropped to nearly $500 million during the nineties. 

  The combination of all these factors paved the way for the economic   recession, and spurred the government to resort to less relaxed measures   of export subsidies, import control and economic protection. The   economic recession in 1985 had led to a major decline in real estate and   land prices, a dominant economic sector in Jordan. The Central Bank   reserves dropped from over $ 1.2 billion in 1980 to $ 186 million in 

  1988. 

  The salient features of the period of the 1980’s: 

  One. The aggravation of Jordan’s outstanding debt soared to $ 6.5   billion in 1988, rising as a percentage of GDP to 109% compared to   35% in 1982.   Two. Aggravation of unemployed among the educated as consequence 

  of the slackening demand of Jordanian manpower in the Gulf. The   receding economy could not create the 30,000 jobs needed annually   to absorb university graduates and those who complete their military   service. Since 1985 hundreds of engineers, doctors and other 

  3 

  professional are left without jobs, at the very time when the 

  traditional outlets for these potential emigrants (the U.S., Europe and   the Gulf) are becoming inaccessible. 

  It may be concluded that by 1985, the recession in the region had filtered   to Jordan. The country was caught, like the rest of the region, unaware of   the new conditions and had drawn its plans on the premise of the   continuation of the then existing positive trends. 

  The Objective Conditions in Jordan: 

  The inability of Jordan to depend on its own internal capabilities is   basically due to its limited natural resources. The most important   available natural resources are phosphates and potash. The arable land   does not exceed 50,000-55,000 hectares, of which only one tenth is   irrigated. Shortage of water and the poverty of most of the usable soil are   also structural constraints. 

  Besides ~ssurning the development planning, economic and civil service   functions, the Government has, until recently, taken upon itself major   responsibilities in the areas where it felt there had been market failures. It   supported prices of wheat, sugar and rice by means of subsidies and   through monopolizing the import of these commodities. This was in   addition to subsidies on petroleum products, which were then sold   domestically lower than world market prices. A substantial part of these 

  subsidies was not reported in the Government Budget because of   accounting difficulties. 

  On the whole, the performance is quite remarkable in view of the fact   that, besides the scarcity of natural resources and arable land, the country   had to overcome other major handicaps of geopolitical nature: being the   eye of the Arab-Israeli conflict, being amputated of its West Bank in 

  1967 and deprived since 1990 of the remittances of more than 350,000   skilled and highly qualified Jordanians who held jobs in the rich oil   countries of the Gulf. 

  The country’s main targets during the past fifty years have been and still   are a just solution to the Palestinian question, regional stability and   cooperation, and rapid economic, social and cultural development. 

  Poverty in Jordan: 

  5 

  “Jordan is a country that has done surprisingly well in terms of living 

  conditions of its population, considering its troubled history of economic   and demographic shocks and the scarcity of it natural resources. ” 

  “The observation that Jordan has done surprisingly well does not mean   that we think all is well with regards to living conditions. Far from it. A 

  few examples: Jordan has experienced increasing unemployment. Many   Jordanians cannot make ends meet. A quarter says that their income has   diminished form one year to the next. ” 

  From: Living Conditions in Jordan at the Eve of the Century   By Jon Pedersen and Hanssen-Bauer   14 October 1998 

  The problems of poverty and unemployment became more acute during   the late 1990s. Before that the general look in the country was more tilted   towards achieving more equality in the distribution of wealth. Such an   objective was achieved during the 1970’s when the highest 10% of the   populatien share decreased to 35.85 of the GDI in 1973 and to 28.2% in 

  1981. 

  The UNDP Human Development Report that concentrates on life   expectancy, knowledge and a decent standard of living, rated Jordan in   the 86th position in 1997 and in the 94’h position in 1998 among the   174 countries evaluated. The negative change is mainly due to the new   revised data. A position of high achievement considering the available   resources and history of the country. 

  This paper will not evaluate the internationally known methods of   measuring poverty. It will instead concentrate on the Jordanian   experience and the difficult task of measuring and identifying poverty as   well as the constraints that hinder setting unified national guidelines for   poverty alleviation programs. To exemplify this I cite the leading studies 

  on poverty in Jordan: 

  1. Poverty Pockets In Jordan 

  The Ministry of Social Development in Jordan carried out this   study in 1987. It defined abject poverty on basis of $ 57 ($ 1 = JD 0.7 1)   monthly income for a family of 7.2 persons. Absolute poverty was   determined around $ 125.5 per family. The study used a sample of 

  16,759 families and results were that only 1.5% of the population lived 

  6 

  under the abject poverty while 18.7% lived under the absolute poverty 

  line. Using the cost of living index increase of 2.5%, a complimentary   study in 1989 determined that 1.9% lived under abject poverty while   21.1% lived under the absolute poverty line. 

  Taking in consideration the difference in the cost of living between the   rural areas and urban areas, the study defined the absolute poverty line in   the urban areas at $ 133.4 and at $ 107 in the rural areas. 

  2. Towards a Nutritional Balance to Alleviate Poverty 

  In 1992, the Royal Scientific Society (Amman) issued a study based on   the same criteria as the above and defined the abject poverty line at $ 82   for a family of 6.9 and absolute poverty at $ 185. The sample used   totaled 2304 families chosen on percentage basis from the different areas   of the Kingdom. Its results concluded that 5.8% of the population lived   under the abject poverty line while 23.1% lived under the absolute   poverty line. 

  -. 

  3. The Poverty Study Report: Status and Characteristics 

  This study was published in 1992 and based its findings on the statistics   available for 1991, taking in consideration unemployment, the status of   the returnees from the Gulf and the general poverty conditions. It was   commissioned by the Prime Minister and carried out by a national   committee headed by the Minister of Social Development. It adopted the 

  same methodology of the previous studies with one exception, the   consideration to differentiate between families who pay house rent and   those who do not. 

  For those who pay rent, abject poverty line was determined at $ 86   monthly for an average family of 6.8 persons, while absolute poverty was   determined at $ 168. For those who do not pay rent absolute poverty was   at $ 144. The results showed that 6.6% lived under abject poverty while 

  21.3% lived under absolute poverty. The study then took in consideration   the increment in salaries given in 1993 to government employees and   amended its findings to read: 5.3% under the abject poverty line and   18.3% under the absolute poverty line for the year 1993. 

  4. World -Bank, Hashemite Kingdom 

  of Jordan, Poverty Assessment, 

  1994, Report No. 1267.5-Jo. 

  7 

  The study based its findings on data collected during the years 1986, 

  1987, and 1992. It measured the share of the individual instead of the   household. Abject poverty in 1992 was determined at $ 147 per person   per year and absolute poverty was determined at $ 196 per person per   year. This is way below the $ 1 per person per day used by the World 

  Bank as a minimum poverty line for consistent international comparison.   The study estimated absolute poverty to be 15%. 

  5. ESCWA: UN Economic and Social Committee for West Asia -   Assessment   of Poverty in Member States, 1996. 

  The study adopted the measurement of income and expenditures of a   family of 6.2 persons and using 177 essential food items and including   some “unnecessary” items as well. As such, it determined the line of   absolute poverty per person at $ 561 annually, ($ 585 in urban areas and   $480 in the rural areas). The absolute poverty line for an average family   was $ 290 monthly. The results showed that 24% of the population lived   under absolute poverty line. (22% in the urban areas and 29% in the rural   areas). --- 

  It is clear that the results of this study differ from the previous ones. This   can be attributed to the fact that the study evaluated real expenditure of   the family instead of a basket of needs determined by the previous   studies. It also took in consideration certain items not considered   essential for the livelihood of the individual by the previous studies. 

  6. The Royal Scientific Society: Poverty and Unemployment in Jordan,   September 1998. 

  This is the most recent study carried out. It adopted the same criteria as   set by the Ministry of Social Development in previous studies. In other   words, estimating the monetary value of a basket of essential goods   needed by an individual and by prioritizing the items of expenditure and   excluding the non-essential items. It also subtracted $ 11 per family of 

  6.1 people, which represented the monthly bread subsidy paid by the   government. Abject poverty was determined at $ 112.5 per family per   month. 

  It gave the following data on employment, unemployment and income for   1996: 

  8 

  One. Abject poverty stood at 4.5% and absolute poverty at 26% of the 

  total families in Jordan.   Two. Poor families’ expenditure is 34% less than that determined as   essential needs and the poverty gap stands at approx. $ 147 million   annually, ($ 35.8 million in 1987 and $ 86.7 in 1992.   Three. Average unemployed among the poor, who are above 15 years 

  old, was 8.85%, which is less than the 14.2%, the national average in   Jordan then. A recent study by the Ministry of Planning shows that   only 6% of the unemployed are under the absolute poverty line.   Four. Although the Governorates that host the most urban dwellers 

  (Amman, Zarqa and Irbid) have a lower percentage of poor people   compared to the rest of the country, the poor in these Governorates   represent 68% of the total population of the poor in the Kingdom. An   indicator that poverty numbers more in the urban areas. But it also   shows that the 32% poor in the rural areas represent a higher   percentage among rural inhabitants although the latter accounts only 

  21% of the total country population. In other words, the percentage of   the poor in rural areas is 39.6% totaling approx. 379.400 people   (TotaIpopulation in 1998; 4,650,OOO people) or 55,800 families, or   8.2% of the total population. 

  7. Living Conditions in Jordan at the Eve 

  of the Century. (Survey 

  implemented in 1996 and published in 1998). 

  We can summarize some of the main findings of this study by   concentrating on some indicators. 

  One. Population: Jordan is experiencing a rapid fertility decline mainly   due to age marriage and use of contraceptive increases, but population   growth is still high at 3.4%.   Two. Infrastructure and Housing: Conditions are quite satisfactory. 

  Population has good access to electricity, water, roads and other   public services.   Three. Education: Illiteracy rate is on the decrease (17%) while   dropout rate is 5%. Girls and boys have similar enrolment rate in 

  schools. Unemployment among college graduates remains a problem,   32% according to government sources.   Four. Health: Access to health services is good.   Five. Income: Wage income is most important source for 60% of 

  househ-olds. Most have secondary income. Self-employment is most   important source for only 20%. 

  9 

  Six. Labor force participation is low at 72% for men and 15% for 

  women. Female employment is at increase (1961: 3%; 1996; 15%).   More than half of the population is 15 years or younger. 

  In other words, there is good access to basic services, housing, and   infrastructure, existing along side income insufficiency and rising   unemployment. The question to be asked is; how do these observations   go together? One answer is that Jordanians enjoy their standard of living   due to the government’s role in the economy. The public sector is very   big. The World Bank estimated that it employs 65% of the labor force 

  (1996). A second interpretation is the role of remittances in the economy.   The same survey found that 14% of the households consider remittances   from relatives as one of their three most important sources of income. A   third interpretation is that the level of the infrastructure reflects the past   economic history of Jordan. 

  Other poverty assessments have been done by national and international   agencies but not published. The most important and the one many look   forward-for to be published is a UNDP study commissioned in 1998. It   was concluded and presented to the Government. So far, non-of its   contents have been revealed or discussed. 

  While all the surveys show serious concern regarding poverty, the   following observations can be made: 

  One. Non-of the surveys give exact or actual justifications or   explanations for the rising poverty and unemployment. All poverty   studies show that abject poverty rose from 1.5% in the mid-eighties to   5% in the early nineties, and that at least one fifth of the Jordanians   live under the absolute poverty line.   Two. Technical committees and groups who carry out the surveys end 

  their task with the publication of the results. This lack of continuity   hinders the efforts to develop common and advanced criteria of   poverty evaluation.   Three. Only one survey dealt with the status of the sectors living 

  above the poverty lines. Thus, the others do not give any indicators   about the general conditions of the economy or the country as a   whole. Discussing poverty without addressing wealth distribution   may highlight poverty but it does not show the relative poverty 

  situation or the causes of poverty in the country.   Five. Figures show that low income among the employed is the more   important factor for poverty and not unemployment (The unemployed 

  IO 

  are 6% of the poor while the employed are 14% or more). This is 

  greatly attributed to the family size and the ratio of dependency within   Jordan at large. A fact ignored by most studies.   Six. Average size of a poor rural family is bigger than the national family   average size. It is 9 persons as compared to 6.4; thus the total number 

  of the poor in the rural areas should be approx. 500,OO people or 10.8   of the total population, or 54% of the rural population in the country.   Seven. Last but not least, there is still an on going debate whether the   abject poverty percentage indicated in the studies commissioned by 

  the government is included in the absolute poverty one, or whether it   is over and above that. According to one senior government official it   is the latter. Hence total percentage of poverty is more than what is   indicated in most surveys.   Eight. A recent presentation (June, 1999) by a previous Minister of 

  Social Development unveiled the following statistics: Abject poverty   at 8.2%, absolute poverty at 14% and limited income people at 16%   (those who barely have basic needs but lack basic services; social   needs, communications, transportation, leisure time, etc.) 

  Causes of Poverty in Jordan 

  The causes of poverty in Jordan can be attributed to the following: 

  One. High rate of population growth, at 3.4% it is one of the highest in   the world.   Two. The unbalanced distribution of wealth and income cited before.   Three. Low per capita income from GDP. 

  Four. The continuous existence of vulnerable social groups.   Five. Low per capita productivity of the worker.   Six. Unemployment and low wages.   Seven. Inefficiency and ineffectiveness of the implemented social 

  programs and projects. 

  The Jordanian Government Programs to Alleviate Poverty: 

  One. Immediate and sectoral initiatives: This include offering direct   financial and material support to the poor. 

  Two. Overall policies and initiatives: The government policy on this   level isto liberalize the national economy and do away with obstacles   and bureaucracies that hinder development. This aims to improve and   facilitate the investment conditions in the country and to privatize 

  11 

  most of the governmental enterprises with the aim to achieve more 

  efficient productivity and services. It will also generate additional   income to cover debts of other public enterprises. 

  In the context of direct governmental intervention to alleviate poverty,   the government implemented the following four programs: 

  1. The National Aid Fund: Established in 1986, it is concerned with   extending direct financial help and loans to those classified under the   absolute poverty line. NAF granted direct financial aid to 32,000   families and gave 6944 loans till the end of 1998. The total cost till   that date was $ 104.8 million of which 85% were direct grants, 10%   loans and 5% administrative expenses. 

  NAF has reevaluated its policies and lifted the ceiling of the monthly   grant per family from $ 85 to $ 116. It is estimated that NAF has reached   only 24% of the recognized poor in the kingdom. 

  The following remarks about NAF should be mentioned: 

  One. The weak technical capabilities to reach those who really need   assistance. Most beneficiaries depend on their own initiatives and   efforts to secure approval for direct assistance or loans. Social   workers do not seek the poor families or carry out earnest fieldwork to   determine the real status of the families in question.   Two. The Fund does not extend any support to those who are employed 

  regardless of their income and economic situation. Minimum wage set   by the Government (August 1999), the first in Jordan’s history, is $   113.   Three. The support extended decreases according to a certain ratio if the 

  beneficiaries receive any other type of support. Thus, some   beneficiaries hide their actual income or do not seek employment or   other sources of support.   Four. The beneficiaries from NAF are mainly orphans below the age of 

  18, divorcees and widows, non-working women above 18 years old   with nobody to support them, the handicapped, families of prisoners   and elder people with no income or support.   2. Subsidizing Basic Commodities: this program was started in 1974. It   enabled any family that has a monthly income of less than $ 705 to buy   basic commodities, such as rice, sugar, and milk, at lower prices than that   of the market. In 1994, the estimated cost of this program was $ 22.56 

  million. The program was criticized for its inability to identify those who 

  12 

  really need such support and subsidies. The government gradually ended 

  the subsidies in 1998. 

  3. Medical Services Program: This is supposed to extend free medical   services to the public at large. In 1998, the program covered only 12%   of the population. Due to the complicated procedures of this scheme,   the program does not cover except 60% of those who are in need of   such services. 

  4. Wheat Compensation Program: This delivers direct financial   support of JD 15.3 per person annually. This was adopted as an   alternative to the policy of providing subsidized wheat products to   individuals, bakeries and other concerned with the production of   related commodities. It is estimated that only 20% of the poor   benefited from this program. 

  Small Income Generating Projects as Means to Alleviate Poverty: 

  In this -eontext there are many governmental and non-governmental,   national and international agencies and organizations working in this   field. The number of the organizations involved in funding small income   generating projects is an expression of their belief that micro and small   finance are the more effective ways to alleviate poverty. There are more   than fifteen NGOs and governmental agencies that carry out such   programs with an estimated annual funding of $ 20 million. It is   beneficial to look at the objectives and activities of the main 

  governmental agency dealing with credit schemes. 

  The Development and Employment Fund (DEF) 

  The Development and Employment Fund (DEF) commenced its   operations in 199 1 under the umbrella of the Industrial Development   Bank (IDB) - a majority government owned entity. Its objectives were set   to extend credit to the poor and unemployed. During its first year it   extended credit of $ 1.41 million. In 1992 it became independent from 

  IDB and is run by a Board of Directors headed by the Prime Minister. It   is recognized by some as the main and most important national   organization dealing with the issues of unemployment and poverty. 

  Unemployment is the more important criteria to qualify for a loan from   DEF. This organization has, since its establishment and up till 1998,   funded 5106 projects with an overall value of $ 31.6 millions. These 

  13 

  loans created approx. 10,000 job opportunities! As such the cost of each 

  job opportunity amounts to approx. $ 3525. Compared with the private   sector capital intensive industries this is a much lower cost per job   opportunity. Repayment rate of DEF loans was 76% till 1997 and   improved to 84% in 1998. This increase was mainly due to the new terms   of lending set by DEF and other intermediary organizations that   cooperate with it. 

  The more important criteria are to evaluate the effectiveness of these   loans; the sustainability of the projects, the ability to create job   opportunities, the enhancement of productivity and alleviation poverty.   On the 30th of January 1999, the results of an assessment study carried   out by the Royal Scientific Society showed the following: 

  l Only 51% of the beneficiaries from DEF loans indicated that they   generate more than $ 280 monthly from the projects funded. Seventy   Five percent allocate some of the income for family consumption.   Sixty Eight percent allocate amounts from the income to repay the   loan,%hile only 12% save some of the income generated. Thirty Two   percent of the beneficiaries reinvest some of the income in the same   project funded. 

  l Fifty two percent indicated that the project funded improved their   living standard, 38.2% indicated no effect on their living standards   and 7.8% indicated that the project funded effected them negatively. 

  l Seventy Nine percent of the repayments made are on time. This is   mostly due to the collateral demanded by DEF and the intermediary   organizations working with it. 

  l Only 26.3% of the beneficiaries received training before launching   their projects. Of those who received training, 3 1% received   professional training in the related fields of their projects, 16% in   public and private hospitals, 12.5% in the public schools and   Vocational Training Centers. The rest claimed training through their   previous work experiences. 

  l The more successful projects were those in the services sector   (especially the clinics and pharmacies), not a surprising result   considering the share of this sector in the Jordanian economy. 

  l Each funded project created an average of 2.5 job opportunities at a   cost of $ 3500 for each job. Beneficiaries employed by their own   projects were 37% of the total jobs, those who employed or hired   others were 37%, unpaid family members employed by the projects   were 19% while paid family members represented 6%. 

  l The projects’ employees according to economic sectors were : 48% in 

  the services sector, 37% in vocational or industrial projects; and 6.6%   in agricultural projects. 

  l Jordanian nationals employed by these projects represented 92%.   Average wages for the employed in these projects were very low;   22% received less than $70; 62% less than $ 140; and 7.5% received   $354 and above. 

  l Previously unemployed among the beneficiaries was 27% only. The   rest had jobs or received the loans under other family members’ name. 

  l University graduates constituted 32.5% of the beneficiaries.   l New projects represented 86% of those funded by DEF. The rest were   existing projects that received funding to expansion or to meet needs. 

  l Total amount of loans extended amounted to $ 45.25 million till the   end of 1998. 

  The Effects of Economic Adjustments Programs on Poverty 

  The incrqase of poverty during the past three years is seen by many as the   result of the economic adjustments program implemented by the   government. It is worthwhile to review the program and the government   efforts to uproot the negative effects resulting from it. 

  The objectives of the program on the short-term level are to adjust the   imbalances in the Balance of Payments and the general budget of the   government. It also aims, on the long-term level, to strengthen the   development potential and hence enhance economic growth. Most of   these measures depend on two axes: one is the supply factor and the   other is the demand factor. 

  1. Policies Regarding the Demand Factor: These include the monetary   aspects as they concentrate on improving the general budget through   increasing the revenue (increasing taxes and decreasing the expenses,   uplifting subsidiaries on commodities, decrease consumption and   depreciation and governmental investments). 

  Monetary policies aim also to decrease the inflation rate and improve the   balance of payments, improve the financial reserve of foreign currencies,   increase the interest rate, decrease the demand on loans domestically.   The overall objectives are to decrease consumption and imports and as 

  such improve the balance of payments. 

  15 

  These policies are described as stabilizing factors that will influence 

  positively the economic structure of the country and improve the supply   axis. 

  2. Policies Regarding the Supply Factor: These policies are intended to   decrease the role of the government in the economic life or cycle of   the country and depend more on the market factors to determine   prices. Most important among them are: 

  * Liberalizing financial and commercial activities. 

  l Restructuring of governmental organizations and entities.   l Sectors policies.   l Restructuring and reorganizing social policies   l Privatizing public enterprises on the basis that the private sector is 

  more capable and more efficient in managing the economy and the   distribution of available resources. 

  Although the Economic Adjustment Program was adopted initially by the   government in the mid-eighties, implementation started in 1996. The   Program’s achievements have so far been limited to the economic   stability and growth aspects. It has not resulted in the economic boom   predicted by the government. Privatization and lifting of subsidies   resulted in price increases of main food commodities and services 

  (electricity and water, etc.) which negatively effected the poor and the   middle class, thus causing an increase in the percentage of those living   under the poverty line. In order to curtail these results the government   adopted a special poverty alleviation program in 1996. 

  The Social Productivity Project (SPP) 

  The plan was announced in 1998 with the mission to eradicate poverty   and unemployment and increase productivity. It has been labeled as “The   Safety Net” that will not only address these issues but that will also end   them. It will be implemented through two phases, the first for three years 

  and the second for seven years. 

  The objectives of the first phase (1998 - 2000) can be summarized in the   following: 

  One. Alleviate poverty.   Two. Create job opportunities. 

  16 

  Three. Combat the causes of poverty on the medium and long terms. 

  In order to accomplish these objectives, the plan specified four venues: 

  One. Restructure the National Aid Fund (NAF) with the aim to cover a   bigger number of beneficiaries through reviewing the criteria and   raising the financial support extended. Supplement the income of poor   families to cover the gap between income and real need. 

  Two. Develop the infrastructure in the poverty pockets in a way that will   improve the livelihood of the Community, through availing schools,   health centers, retaining walls, and renovation of the water and   sewage systems. 

  Three. Extend small and micro credit to the poor with the purpose to   establish or expand small income generating projects. In addition, the   intermediary organizations, implementing the extension of loans, will   receive assistance to strengthen their institutional capacity. 

  -_ 

  Four. Train the poor through special programs and subsidize their   employment in the private sector companies. 

  Government Ministries and agencies started implementing (a), (b) and   (d) in 1998. Small and micro finance schemes have been designated to   three intermediary national NGOs and one private bank and mostly   initiated in 1999. The first phase of the Social Productivity Project, the   first three years, total cost will be $ 251 millions. 

  Social Productivity Project (SPP) Financial Plan   First Phase 1998 - 2000 

  ITEM $ AMOUNT 

  Infra structure 137,900,000 

  Micro and Small Finance 33,700,000 

  National Aid Fund 36,600,OOO 

  Vocational Training 6,900,OOO 

  Surveys and Coordinating Projects 3,200,OOO 

  Medical Centers 9,900,000 

  Total 228,200,OOO 

  10% Reserves 22,800,000 

  Grand Total 25 1 ,ooo,ooo 

  17 

  The allocations in the above financial plan speak for themselves when 

  compared to the set objectives for of alleviating poverty and eradicating   unemployment within three years. Only $ 70 million is allocated for   direct assistance as grants or loans, a number far below the poverty gap.   In addition, there are two other issues debated regarding the design and   implementation of the SPP. 

  The first concerns the exclusion of the non-governmental sector from   three venues: national aid, infrastructure activities and training. The   previous experiences in Jordan are witnesses to the important role of the   NGOs through cost effectiveness, capabilities and creativity. The   partnership between the national NGOs and the grass roots in Jordan,   represented by community based organizations, have resulted in better   and more effective outcome. This is not a matter of promoting the NGOs   but a fact that has to be realized, focused upon and enhanced by the   government. Unfortunately the old view that the government and NGOs   compete still exists in Jordan. This should be bypassed for a stronger   relationship for the benefit of all, especially the vulnerable poor sector of   our sociEty. 

  The second issue relates to micro finance and what is described as “best   practice” and “sustainable.” No one differs about the need for a best   practice and sustainability, the difference is whether these are   alternatives to other methods of development and whether they will be   acceptable by the targeted groups. To charge high interest rates and   duplicate the experiences of other countries is not necessarily best for   everyone; it might even be catastrophic for some. There are enough   experiences in Jordan and the region to build on. This remains a point of   debate between the funding parties and some national NGOs who have   expressed their willingness to participate if some conditions are met. . 

  It is still premature to judge the Social Productivity Project since there   are not as yet tangible results to measure. 

  Characteristics and Analysis of the Poverty Alleviation Programs 

  It is possible to identify the common features and characteristics through   the following points: 

  +3 It is estimated that $ 48 million are spent annually in Jordan on   poverty alleviation and unemployment eradication programs. Despite of   that poverty is on the rise. 

  43 The high number of government agencies, NGOs and other 

  organizations (total 52 entities - Main ones are six, 3 governmental and   3 national NGOs) that address this issue but lack coordination among   them.   43 Most of the programs offer temporarily solutions to poverty and do 

  not allocate the adequate necessary resources and efforts to eradicate   poverty.   l 3 The private sector contribution is minimal and limited to 5% of the   overall capital spent.   4+ The lack of specialized technical expertise in the areas of feasible 

  economic projects and poverty alleviation.   +3 The institutional weakness of the governmental agencies involved in   poverty alleviation.   +3 Contrary to official claims, studies have proved that more than 50% 

  of the projects funded by DEF and NAF failed economically.   4* Repayment rate on loans is less than 50% at NAF and is between   60% to 75% at DEF and other governmental agencies. 

  Additional remarks regarding poverty alleviation: 

  l Poverty and unemployment problems will not be solved except   through medium to long term plans. 

  l The state of the economy is essential to solve these two problems;   otherwise we will be only putting band-aids on a wound that needs   major treatment to heal. 

  l The role of the private sector and its enhancement is essential for a   healthy and stable economy, thus enhancing poverty alleviation. 

  l The distribution of wealth (World Bank study of 1996, shows that the   poor 20% in Jordan receive only 5.9% of the GDP, while the rich 20%   receive 50.1% of the GDP) in a more equitable way and the   guaranttee of basic services is a human right that will alleviate   poverty automatically and continuously as well. This can be expressed   by the protection of the already existing achievements in Jordan in the 

  fields of education and health, especially by expanding these services. 

  l More cooperation and coordination is needed among the NGOs   themselves and between the three sectors of the society; government,   NGOs and the private sector as well. 

  19 

  - - - . - - - _ I _ . -  - - - . - 

  The Jordanian Hashemite Fund for Human Development (JOHUD) 

  Introduction 

  JOHUD is the leading national NGO in Jordan that addresses the basic   and essential issues of development. It has been able to maintain its   preeminent role and position through continuous upgrading of its efforts   and the development of its strategy. This is achieved through a process of   evaluation that identifies both its shortcomings and achievements.   JOHUD, through its programs and projects, considers the process of   development on the community level, qualitatively and quantitatively, as   an integral part of the overall development efforts on the national level. 

  It 

  supports the activities of community-based organizations and entities and   strongly advocates citizens’ participation on all levels. 

  We point out the three stages of JOHUD’s development since its   foundation in 1977. (JOHUD carried the name, “The Queen Alia Fund   for Social Development” till February 1999).   -. 

  First: 1977 - 1984, Relief and emergency support - Welfare approach   Second: 1984 - 1995, Social development approach   Third: 1995 - till present, Socio-economic development approach 

  Although the three stages differ in their main characteristics, this does   not mean the end of all other activities of different nature that were   introduced at an earlier stage. JOHUD strategy, objectives and work is   not limited to a certain field of development but is holistic in nature; as 

  such it implements projects in all areas of development. These projects   are connecting circles within its overall national development mandate   and are by their nature integrated and aggregate. 

  The nature of each stage reflects itself on the type and level of relations   between JOHUD and the beneficiaries represented by their local   societies. It should be emphasized that the relations with national or local   NGOs represent a comer stone in its outreach program. This approach 

  represents a method of work on one level and an objective at the same   time since it strengthens and supports local entities while at the same   time it effects the targeted national sectors of the society. 

  For the purpose of this presentation, I will define the two types of entities   that JOHUD supports: 

  20 

  First: National Non-Governmental Organizations: 

  These organizations carry out services, research, project and advocates   certain policies related to specific fields. We can cite the example of   organizations that specialize in one of the following fields; women’s   issues, childhood, health, agricultural development, productive projects,   people with special needs, environment, literacy or rural development,   etc. On the national level these independent national organizations-   promote and spread certain concepts and values that relate to their field   of work. They depend for their funding on the support provided by   international agencies or organizations, whether in a direct or indirect   way. 

  Second: Community Based Organizations (CBOs) or Entities that   represent the Interest of a Specific Community.* 

  Local groups (community based) run these organizations. The entities   can be voluntary societies, clubs, cooperative societies, neighborhood   commitEes, and others that are part of the civil society. For their support   they depend on local resources and on what they receive from national   agencies or organizations. They rarely receive support from foreign or   internatio.nal bodies. 

  The Basis of JOHUD’s Multi-dimensional Objectives and   Cooperation with NGOs 

  JOHUD has exerted much effort to increase effectiveness and widen the   sphere of cooperation with the purpose to achieve distinct sustainable   development through the following: 

  1. Support and enhance the efforts of the active specialized national and   local development leaderships that have a distinguished role in the   process of building solidarity relations through voluntary work.   2. Form active functional committees based on the needs of the targeted 

  community or national domain. Their tasks commence with the   implementation of the appropriate awareness programs and specified   training that meet the needs of each targeted sector.   3. Assess the needs and identify the appropriate projects that will   maximize the use of the available local resources and capabilities.   Hence, implement the social and economic programs and projects that 

  21 

  will alleviate the living conditions and enable the individual and the 

  community to be more productive.   4. Establish and develop the income generating projects that will   enhance the achievement of self-sufficiency, autonomy and self-   reliance. The sustainability of any project is essential for the 

  augmentation of the community and targeted groups’ capabilities.   5. Achieve self-financing in order to invest the additional revenue that   will broaden the basis of partnership and upgrade the level of work,   quantitatively and qualitatively.   6. Concentrate support to local integrated projects with the aim to 

  achieve sustainable development.   7. Extend support and aid on basis of poverty level, need and ability to   manage successfully the programs and projects.   8. Base the level of support on the basis of common interests, joint 

  efforts and degree of effectiveness.   9. Advocate awareness, training, education and discussions regarding   the policies of development.   10. Expand support with the purpose to build and strengthen the 

  institntional and technical local capabilities that are not limited to a   specific topic or project.   11. Institutionalize development support within the overall integral   national outlook, efforts and strategies. 

  JOHUD’s Structural and Functional Approach 

  It is clear from the literature of development and the experiences in many   countries that in order to make development active and effective, the   concerned parties must adopt organized and clear participatory methods.   JOHUD has realized this fact from its experiences and as such   implements this principle through several means and ways on different   levels. Its work in this area represents an ideal frame of partnership that   enables all concerned to learn and teach participatory action methods in   the fields of human, economic, social and administrative development. 

  More important, JOHUD’s critical outlook enhances the level of   partnership, especially when it comes to decision making. As such, the   ideal relationship between the national, local and the specialized   organizations becomes one that considers the necessity of equal say and   participation among all groups, instead of patronizing “the receiving 

  parties.” Partnership is essential to determine the different methods of   work and to assess needs as well. This approach enabled JOHUD to   specify and select the proper programs and projects and in many cases   transform the people from recipients to active planners, implementers 

  22 

  and monitors. This would not have been possible without the active 

  participation and the strong belief that the targeted groups are able to   specify their needs and achieve them as well. We can, on basis of the   above, define four methods through which JOHUD implements the   participatory approach in support of national and local NGOs and   entities. 

  First: The Community Development Centers (CDCs) 

  JOHUD has established a network of integrated community development   centers that total (48) forty-eight so far, along with (3) three centers for   people with special needs. These centers have become responsibility   centers for integrated social development within their areas of operation.   They are managed in partnership with local NGOs and supervised by   regional councils that represent all the active local entities in the field of   development. The centers are spread over eleven Governorates; thirty-   nine (39) of which are located in the rural and Badia areas while (9) nine   are located in the main cities of the Governorates. 

  The concept behind establishing these centers is not limited to the notion   of accomplishing the tasks mentioned above, but it is meant to set an   example that can be and has been replicated by other entities. It is also to   implement the projects and programs that have solid feasibility and   effectiveness. Each center is moreover an outreach post to other areas. 

  The following are some examples of the programs and projects   implemented by the CDCs. 

  I. Community development: social services, infrastructure,   rehabilitation of cisterns, irrigation canals, public parks,   environmental activities and agricultural projects.   2. Childhood programs: Kindergartens, nurseries, children’s clubs, 

  sports club, and youth committees.   3. Women’s programs: Women’s committees, awareness and education,   vocational training, home gardens, food processing, rural markets, 

  nutritional programs, literacy classes.   4. General health and medical clinics: Health awareness, medical   campaigns that include vaccination, treatment, preventive medicine,   family planning clinics, dental clinics, and mobile clinics. 

  5. Economic empowerment: Training on needs’ assessments, design of   small projects, projects’ management, feasibility studies, financial   management and monitoring, technical training on specific projects,   and credit funds’ schemes. 

  23 

  6. Productive projects in partnership with local entities: ceramics, rug 

  weaving, industrial sewing, sheep raising, plantations and food   processing. 

  The outreach and permanent presence in the different areas of the country   is the structural approach that JOHUD has adopted to achieve the   common objectives with the local entities as well. The programs, in   partnership with the local entities, are the functional approach that   guarantees progress and addresses needs. 

  Second: Support of National and Local NGO’s 

  JOHUD’s support to other NGOs and members of the civil society is   through financial, material and/or technical assistance for specified   programs and projects. This primarily targets NGOs that are not   JOHUD’s partners in the management of CDCs. JOHUD does not limit   its assistance to its permanent local partners but acts as an umbrella   organization that sustain many activities and programs: 

  -_ 

  1. Pre-school education: 

  JOHUD, in cooperation with the Ministry of Education and UNICEF,   designed the national curriculum for kindergartens in Jordan, the “learning   through play” approach. JOHUD, with the same partners published the   theoretical and application guides for KG teachers. 

  JOHUD has also furnished more than four hundred (400) kindergartens’   classes (in addition to the 135 classes at its CDCs) in the different areas of   Jordan. It has also, for the benefit of local governmental agencies, societies   and communities, trained hundreds of teachers that work in this field. 

  2. Special education: 

  1st. JOHUD built three centers for people with special needs. They are   managed by three specialized societies. JOHUD provides technical   and financial support to the three centers. In addition, JOHUD   supports financially a number of other societies in the field of special   education with the aim to alleviate the level of their services and   activities.   2nd. JOHUD in cooperation with other societies studies the cases of 

  disabled individuals who need assistance and provide them with 

  24 

  ancillary medical equipment, (such as wheel chairs, visual and hearing 

  aids, palsy equipment, crutches, etc). The program also includes   lending out such medical equipment to citizens who need them for   temporary periods.   3rd. Each year JOHUD provides special treatment units for cerebral pulse 

  patients. This is implemented at some of JOHUD’s CDCs or at the   locations of other societies. JOHUD covers the cost of necessary   equipment and that of the physiotherapists working at these units.   4th. JOHUD furnishes resource rooms for students with special needs at 

  the schools of the Ministry of Education. 

  3. Support of NGOs in the areas of training, technical know how   and equipment. 

  JOHUD has given this aspect great importance in order to alleviate the   capabilities of the different NGOs and entities. We can summarize these   activities in the following: 

  1st. Training of trainers on projects and programs identification and -_   implementation. This raises the awareness, administrative and   technical capabilities of the societies’ members and enable them to   better implement the different development projects.   2nd. JOHUD provides social societies and centers with the necessary 

  equipment that enables them to implement the different programs and   projects. This is done after thorough examination of the society’s   status and needs assessment. It is also done with the perspective to   enable the concerned society to achieve self-reliance.   3rd. JOHUD implements workshops and training sessions that relate to 

  specific subjects. Among these subjects are; environmental issues,   field research, communication skills, special education and fund   raising.   4th. JOHUD access the societies with the necessary information that 

  helps them alleviate their performance, level of projects’   implementation, and facilitates the exchange of experiences and other   opportunities to examine projects with the purpose to make such   knowledge available to all. 

  The above mentioned activities are implemented in stages. Many national   and local NGOs benefit from these programs. It is worthwhile   mentioning that JOHUD implements such projects in cooperation 

  with 

  and in collaboration of international bodies. This type of support requires   continuity, monitoring and evaluation in order to maintain up to date 

  25 

  status with the changing economic and social conditions, and in order to 

  achieve better results in the process of institutional strengthening. 

  The benefits of this approach can be summarized in the following: 

  l Facilitate the exchange of information.   l Reduce the level of replication of programs or projects that have been   proven ineffective and to unify, at the same time, the different points   of view in the domain of social programs and projects. 

  l Confront the challenges in an integrated and participatory approach   that can reduce competition by proving that societies complement   each other in objectives and special interests. Such objectives can be   better achieved through cooperation and coordination and not   through competition. 

  Third: National Campaigns 

  JOHUD realizes the dire situation and needs of certain segments of the   society. This demands the implementation of special programs on the   national-level. As such, it organizes national campaigns in partnership   with the largest number and widest scope of participation on all levels;   governmental agencies, NGOs, cultural organizations and the private 

  sector as well. These campaigns are: 

  1. The Good Will Campaign 

  This campaign started in 1990 with the objective to encounter the needs   of the increasing number of the poorest of the poor, those segments of the   society that can not wait until the programs implemented through the   CDCs meet their needs and include them. The campaign has developed   into an annual event that covers all of Jordan. More important is the fact   that JOHUD delegates national and local NGOs, each according to its 

  geographical location or specialization, to implement the activities of the   campaign through the following: 

  1st. Local NGOs and other entities choose the beneficiaries of the   campaign. They prepare lists of the names, conditions of the   beneficiaries as well as the aid needed for every beneficiary - whether   it is a productive project, material support or a scholarship.   2nd. All the activities are implemented with the aim to strengthen the 

  NGOs relations with the targeted groups and communities. 

  26 

  3rd. Financial and material support is provided to many local NGOs. This 

  helps them achieve their objectives and alleviate the level of their   performance on both the structural and functional levels.   4th. JOHUD tries to include all aspects of the development work through   this campaign. . The activities provide assistance that meet economic, 

  cultural, medical, educational, agricultural, environmental, women,   and childhood needs. The campaign is participatory and integrated as   well as encompassing in its work. 

  2. The Queen Alia Contest for Voluntary Social work 

  For the fifth year in a row this contest is being held with the objective to   spread knowledge and raise the awareness regarding people with   disabilities. The objective is to create positive attitudes among the   general public towards this sector of the society. 

  This campaign lasts for four months and is supervised by a “Higher   Committee” that represents the different sectors of the society, first   among them the voluntary societies active in the field of special   education. The main portion of the income generated by this campaign is   allocated to the activities of these societies. 

  Fourth: Queen Zein Al-Sharaf Institute for Development (ZENID) 

  JOHUD realized through its experience the importance of providing the   necessary elements that enhance sustainable and integrated development.   It is obvious that financial resources are means to achieve objectives and   not an objective by themselves. This is contrary to what many NGOs   believe and explains to some degree why some give the material issues   greater consideration. They thrive to meet their financial obligations and   continuity instead of trying to achieve the sustainability of the effective   development programs and projects. 

  Effective NGOs should have the proper and sound planning. These   NGOs do not operate in a vacuum but each is one of many that have   common objectives and interests. To secure funding, a measure of   success from different points of evaluation should be implemented. 

  Emphasis on the technical aspects of the programs and projects while   ignoring the capabilities of the implementing agency leads to failure. It is   not because of the type of program or project but due to the weaknesses 

  27 

  in the administrative, technical, institutional and leadership capabilities 

  of the NGO. 

  Based on the above, the concept of “human development” has become   the main concept for all aspects of development. Related to this   conception, ZENID was founded to serve the different NGOs,   government agencies and the private sector by strengthening their   capabilities, a step that enables them to draw their strategies and   priorities. It is easier to solve financial problems than to solve the more   acute problems that relate to the capabilities of the society. 

  ZENID main activity is to train trainers as well as members and   employees of the NGOs. It provides the necessary advice in the areas of   organizing training programs, preparing training packages, methods of   training and techniques. Through exchange of experiences, information   and visits the training offered is not limited to the national and local   levels but is on the Arab and regional levels as well. 

  ZENID --role in building capacity, technical and administrative   capabilities can be summarized in the following points: 

  1. Advocates and supports participatory management as the most   suitable method to achieve the objectives of development on the   national and local levels.   2. Exchanges experiences among the training entities concerned with 

  implementing of all types of development programs and projects.   3. Implements special training for national and local NGOs’ members.   4. Trains trainers from Arab countries in the related fields of   development.   5. Implements studies that assess the priorities in the field of training.   6. Design the necessary training programs and packages for NGOs.   7. Develops the concepts and contents of training material. 

  8. Prepares the guides and training packages to expand the circle of   beneficiaries.   9. Spreads awareness regarding the importance and values of training.   10. Gives special efforts to training the younger generations. 

  Technically, the Institute offers training in the following areas; projects’   management, especially income generating projects designed for the   women9s sector, methods of communications with the supporting and   funding agencies, marketing techniques and evaluating marketing and 

  28 

  financial policies, community development and training of supervisors 

  and teachers in pre-school education. 

  This Institute has become a reference for all of those interested in   development work and activities in Jordan. It offers its services and   facilities to them and to the interested parties in the region as well. 

  Summary of JOHUD’s Efforts to Alleviate Poverty 

  It is more significant to elaborate on methods and tangible achievements   than to involve the reader in quantitative data. JOHUD’s efforts in the   areas of its operation are not exclusive, but have been complimentary to   that of the public sector and the local communities who are the real   initiators and achievers. The Fund, over its 22 years of work, took   development to rural residents in their areas, a method ignored by many   public and NGOs agencies and organizations. It established a permanent   presence with the aim to enhance the productive potential of the poorest   in their specific local, social and economic milieu. The achievements of   these IoZalities and their community-based organizations can only be   appreciated through material contact. The accomplishments are not   seasonable but stable and diversified; thus they can be protected. The   experience has shown that investment in the poor is a good investment   and can have greater economic as well as social impact. The attainments   of JOHUD’s approach can be summarized in the following: 

  One. Sustainable and replicable rural development at the grassroots   level have bee established.   Two. Excess of basic resources such as land, water and credit, to secure   inputs, has become accessible and expandable.   Three. The productive activities of the rural poor, and integrating 

  them in various poverty alleviation and growth schemes, is an   ongoing activity.   Four. Market opportunities and bargaining power of the rural poor have   been enhanced.   Five. Peoples participation, as means and an end in development, where 

  the poor become self-reliant and decision-makers have been firmly   incorporated and secured. 

  All these factors implied the necessity of institutional strengthening at   the grass roots level. The challenge was and still is to enhance the ability   of the people to develop fundamental policies and management skills   necessary to build their community’s human, economic, social, political 

  29 

  and cultural structures so as to take their appropriate place in the 

  country’s affairs. Sustainable development requires guidance from trained   personnel to assist with the technical skills and knowledge needed to   build institutions. The beginning point to fill gaps in policy analysis and   development management, which are the two major areas that need to be   addressed, is capacity building. Above all, a bottom-up or grass roots   effort for sustainable development was encouraged at community level.   Capacity building, as promoted by the Fund through its CDCs, addresses   all areas of economic, social, cultural and environmental processes   through a holistic approach. 

  Summary on Jordanian Public Efforts to Alleviate Poverty 

  It is obvious that the Jordanian government investments to alleviate   poverty are not humble. They have been more successful in increasing   the human capital of the poor. Public spending on education in Jordan is   relatively high (7.1%), so is expenditure on health. Yet, these   investments have yielded poor return in terms of social indicators,   poverty-on the increase and high unemployment among college   graduates. The problem in Jordan is clearly not a problem in the scale of   social investment but in the effectiveness and quality of social programs   and projects spending. 

  The actual social spending per capita in Jordan is on the increase despite   the low GDP growth during the recent years. The present adopted range   of programs by the government are clear signs that it is more than serious   about addressing poverty directly. The programs of direct assistance to   the poor as well as the Social Productivity Project are clear signs of that.   It is difficult to measure in an absolute manner to what extent these   programs have been effective in alleviating poverty. The data lacks the   potential to carry out a full poverty measure or cost effectiveness   analysis; more inquisitive work will be required to determine how public 

  spending affects the poor in Jordan. But it is possible to identify certain   traits, which characterize government assistance and poverty alleviation   programs: 

  1. The design of extensive poverty alleviation programs that can   effectively guarantee a minimum standard of living for every one has   proven to be remarkably perplexing and difficult.   2. Some programs, such as direct financial aid to the poor and public 

  social security schemes, are likely to reach part of the truly poor. 

  30 

  3. General subsidies usually occur with flow, as the non-poor will also 

  benefit.   4. Financial costs of these programs are generally high and   unsustainable. 

  Recommendations Regarding Poverty Alleviation in Jordan 

  Partnership: 

  The partnership between the government, NGOs and the private sector is   a pre-requisite for social and economic development. A recognition of   complementarily among the three sectors should replace the competition   that characterizes the present relationship. A new “social contract”   between the government, private sector and civil society should define   the methods of cooperation, role of each sector and means to engage the   public at large. 

  Economic Development   -_ 

  Development needs to be labor intensive and thus lead to the expansion   of job opportunities. Labor productivity should also be increased through   flexible wages and emphasis on skills enhancement and training. Social   security for the unemployed should be guaranteed. A measure that will   allow the employers (public, private or others) freedom to hire according   to actual needs and changing economic situations. 

  Education 

  Promote scientific, technological and technical education through   provision of adequate schooling and equipment that will enhance   practical skills as determined by the market forces. 

  Direct Financial Aid 

  Direct financial aid should replace all forms and programs of subsidies.   This should be accompanied by precise identification of the target group   and restricted to the unemployed poor. This should also be as a   complement to other anti-poverty measures and not an alternative to the 

  development projects. 

  Monitoring and Evaluation 

  Objective evaluation is rarely carried out in Jordan. All concerned 

  entities, governmental and others, should adopt a policy of monitoring   and evaluation that will include impact evaluation, beneficiaries’   satisfaction and rating those implementing it. 

  Gender 

  Gender equality and equity is basic for development and poverty.   alleviation. The needs and role of women, in particular, should be well   defined and supported. Despite recent achievements, there are still long   strides to take and many objectives to achieve in this domain. 

  Social Productivity Programs 

  Such programs should not be seen as short term but as tools for long term   alleviation of poverty. Their effectiveness requires also the following: 

  +E.. Autonomy and political support   l 3 Qualified personnel   +3 Simple and effective implementation policies   +3 Ability to provide training and consultation   Q Modern and innovative approaches to development management 

  Conclusion 

  The issue of development and poverty alleviation is a permanent and   complex challenge. Strategies for poverty alleviation have gone many   important changes and there are still many points of disagreement,   especially regarding growth and development. At the same time, we are   witnessing a more humanistic approach towards development and   poverty with emphasis on providing basic human needs and the 

  establishment of social safety nets to help the poor. Social expenditure   should be planned on basis of necessity in a changing and dynamic   environment. Meeting the needs of the poor can also be appropriate for   the expansion of productivity and not in conflict with it. 

  32 

