---
title: "Kosovo refugees"
date: "1999-04-17"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474788
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AQ606%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, SOUTH PERTH, 7 APRIL

  

  Subjects: Kosovo refugees

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 What I don’t want to see in Australia is a statement 
‘bring me your struggling, your poor, those yearning to be free and 
we’ll put them in the desert’. This is not the Australian way. As 
these 4,000 come from the traumatised situation that they confront along 
the borders of Kosovo. They must come to a community with open hearts. 
It is sensible to make the arrangement a temporary arrangement because 
maximum pressure needs to be kept on Milosevic to do the right thing 
— and that is let these people go to their homes, which is what they 
want to do. But, nevertheless, the temporary situation has to be met. 
But it needs to be met with a generous heart.

  

 So, I’ve agreed in-principle that a temporary visa 
type arrangement ought to be created that is different from the refugee 
program. But I do not agree that these people should be dispersed into 
the remote regions of this country. They ought to be provided with the 
opportunity to live as normal a life as possible pending their return 
to their homes.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Nevertheless, Mr Beazley, are you still adamant that 
they should at some stage go back?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I think it’s sensible to have that sort of arrangement. 
I mean, we don’t want to do Milosevic’s work for him. What Milosevic 
is trying to do is to drive these people out of their homes. That’s 
what he’s trying to do. We’re not in the business of facilitating 
Milosevic. But we have to be in the business of making absolutely certain 
that these folk have a decent experience. They’re traumatised people. 
They’ve witnessed deaths. They’ve witnessed murders in their families. 
They’ve witnessed the horror of being obliged to up stakes and go 
with nothing. And they’re people who were leading normal lives, the 
sorts of lives that you and I lead on a daily basis. Now, I don’t 
want them to go into an experience of Australia that is ungenerous, 
that is distant, that is only going to add to the traumas that they’ve 
already experienced.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 In six, or twelve months, or eighteen months time, 
once these people have got a taste for the Australian way of life, the 
kids have probably got into school, they may have relationships or whatever, 
will you still be standing here and saying, ‘well, look that was...it 
was buyer beware. You have to go back and we’re going to send you 
back’.

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Shouldn’t we worry about that when it occurs? Let’s 
worry about that if and when that problem arises.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 ...they’ll stay here forever.

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 And it would do no harm if they did. We’re talking 
about 4,000 people. But let’s set that to one side because that’s 
not the message we want to be sending out now. The message we want to 
be sending out now is that we stand ready in an emergency to deal with 
an emergent problem. You’ve seen the interviews with these people 
on the borders. Every single one of them wants to go home. They don’t 
want to come to Australia, they don’t want to go to Norway, they don’t 
want to go to Britain, they don’t want to go to the United States, 
they want to go home. But the countries around Kosovo cannot keep them. 
They are poor countries, they cannot do it. So, somebody has to carry 
the weight. And we have always been participants in carrying the weight. 
Sometimes we’ve been beneficiaries, too, in carrying the weight when 
other people have carried weight that might have been directed towards 
us. Now, what we need to do is to play a role in carrying the weight.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 How should we accommodate them here?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, there’s billeting opportunities, obviously. 
They are members of the Albanian community, many of whom may well have 
families in Kosovo. That’s one thing that we ought to think about. 
And there’d probably be others who, if receiving a bit of assistance 
from the Government, would be prepared to billet them. But there ought 
to be, also, available around our major cities or major regional centres 
an amount of accommodation that they could move into. Look, you’re 
not talking about vast numbers. We’re talking here about 4,000 going 
into a country with half a dozen cities of substantial population.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Should all cities share the load, then?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I think this needs to be worked out sensibly. 
But, in principle, that’s not a problem. They may, however, want to 
be located reasonably close to each other and that may be a sensible 
thing to do. But we’ve got some very big cities that are capable of 
taking what is after all quite a small number of people.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you think the Government should take more than 
4,000?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Look, I think the Government...4,000 is fine for this 
particular category. But one thing I said yesterday, and I say it again 
today, and that is that we also ought to be taking a look at our normal 
refugee program because you will find, irrespective of the desire of 
these folk to go home, you will find some who have placed themselves, 
for various reasons, in terrible danger. Irrespective of whatever the 
outcome is, in terrible danger. And we will need an adjustment to the 
normal refugee program to take account of those folk. Now, we’ve done 
that before in relation to this, we took a couple of thousand from Bosnia, 
you may remember, when that was a serious issue some time ago. And hopefully 
it won’t become a serious issue again but we did it then. And there 
will be people who, because of their political commitments and the like, 
have placed themselves in a situation where they would be uncertain 
as to what their future would be. But what we’re talking about with 
the 4,000, of course, are not people in that category. The only difficulty 
they’re experiencing is their origin: they happen to be Albanians.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Is there a danger, Mr Beazley, do you think, that, 
I mean, normal sort of Immigration vetting procedures tend to weed out 
all the undesirables? If you bring them out without the adequate checks 
and balances being done, put them into the community that there could 
be a concern that it would be a problem?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 There can be some basic checking. But, look, what 
we’ve got now are hundreds of thousands of people across the border 
from Kosovo in countries which can’t take them. People are dying. 
People are experiencing ill-health. People who have been terribly traumatised 
are not receiving treatment. Somebody has got to do something. All those 
questions are legitimate questions. But we are in an emergent position; 
the problem is right now. The problem has to be dealt with right now.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, you wouldn’t set any specific criteria to the 
people we would take?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Look, if you knew of somebody’s criminal background, 
obviously you’d weed them out and you’d attempt to deal with that. 
But look at those people coming across the borders, they’re not criminals. 
They’re just ordinary people like you and me. That’s all they are. 
And they’ve got their ordinary aspirations. And it’s as though you 
were tomorrow. . .some buffoon wandered across your threshold and stuck 
and M16 in your stomach, or in this case I suspect an AK47 and said, 
‘you’re out. Take a bundle and get out of this place and walk 50 
miles to the border and get out of the place. And take your kids with 
you while you go and, by the way, I’ve just shot your father on the 
way out’. I mean, that’s what’s happened to these people. And 
if it happened to you, you’d want somebody to be in the same position 
yourself.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you have any idea, specifically, as to where you’d 
like to see them go?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I think, yes, the major cities. That’s where 
I think they should be. That’s where you’ve got the best access 
to opportunities for looking after the kids properly in educational 
terms, it’s where you’ve got the best chance of a broad-based counselling 
service. It’s where you’ve got the infrastructure to support folk 
and it’s where you’ve also got Albanian Australians who may well 
be prepared to, if not billet these people, give them constant counselling 
that may help them though their traumas.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, Perth as well?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I don’t mind folk coming to Perth. I think 
that would be...we’re a good, open-hearted city here in Perth in Western 
Australia. But it makes sense to put people in cities, I believe.

  

  JOURNALlST:

  

 Do you absolutely draw the line at places like Learmonth 
and Curtin and....

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 My mother and father-in-law, who were in a position 
with some degrees of similarity, not complete similarity, by any means, 
ended up in Northam in tents with blankets separating them. And, no. 
Not any of that, not any more.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Not a humane way of...?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 It’s not the way to go. We’re a bigger country 
than that. We’re not pea-hearted. We are people who are capable of 
treating folk decently. And we should do that. And, as I said, to all 
intents and purposes, these people will be here temporarily. How temporarily 
we don’t know. How long this situation will take to resolve itself, 
we don’t know. Maybe pressure will come on down the track to treat 
them differently in terms of the permanency of their visa, we don’t 
know. But right now we don’t want to be giving aid and comfort to 
this bloke Milosevic to let him know that he’s succeeded in pushing 
people out of their homes. And that he now no longer has to worry about 
that. And we’ve got to operate on the basis of what is the clear preference 
of these folk themselves, which is to go home. So, a temporary visa 
is totally appropriate from that point of view. And we agree with the 
Government on that. But we part company at the point at which appears 
to be the current state of their thinking on where they should be located.

  

 ends

  

  

  

  dd

