---
title: "East Timorese refugees: let them stay until after wet season: Labor."
date: "1999-12-06"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479197
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RQJ06%22
---

   

  

  CON SCIACCA MP

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

  

  LAURIE BRERETON MP

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

  

  

 EAST TIMORESE REFUGEES - LET THEM STAY UNTIL 
AFTER WET SEASON - LABOR

  

  

  The Federal Opposition today called on the Howard Governme nt 
to allow the remaining East Timorese refugees to stay in Australia until 
the conclusion of the wet season in East Timor and the construction 
of shelter to accommodate them on their return.

  

 Labor is responding to a specific request by the East 
Timorese CNRT leadership who raised this matter with the Leader of the 
Opposition, Kim Beazley during his visit to East Timor last week. The 
CNRT leaders expressed real concern about forced repatriation before 
construction of appropriate shelter in East Timor.

  

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs Laurie Brereton 
and Shadow Minister for

 Immigration, Con Sciacca, today condemned the Howard 
Government for its indecent

 haste and lack of compassion in effectively forcing 
several hundred refugees to return to East Timor over the weekend from 
the Leeuwin Barracks in Western Australia.

  

 Mr Sciacca said that while the Howard Government may 
claim that these people voluntarily returned, there is no doubt that 
the Immigration Department - with the full support of Immigration Minister 
Ruddock, if not under his direction - did everything they could to coerce 
them into leaving.

  

 “We are not talking about illegal immigrants - we 
are talking about people that were plucked out of the living hell of 
the UNAMET compound in September”, Mr Sciacca said.

  

  

  Mr Brereton said that the United Nations and Non-Government organisations 
in East Timor were already under huge pressure in dealing with the thousands 
of refugees returning from West Timor.

  

  “The Howard Government’s unseemly haste in forci ng the 
return of East Timorese from Australia will only put more pressure on 
those trying to construct basic shelter and services now that the wet 
season has begun,” Mr Brereton said.

  

 The Shadow Ministers said that conditions in East 
Timor are extremely poor, with the UN acknowledging that water, sanitation, 
food supplies and medical services are not adequate.

  

 Mr Sciacca said that while it is understood that the 
refugees are keen to return home, some fear that conditions at the moment 
are full of risk particularly for women, children and the elderly. Supplies 
of food and water are short, water quality is poor, housing is virtually 
non-existent, and medical services are not available to most people.

  

  

 Ends

  

 Canberra, 6 December 1999

  

 For further information:

 Con Sciacca  Laurie Brereton   
 0262774548  02 6277 4717

  

  

  al  1999-12-07  09:54

