---
title: "Territory contribution to Kosovo evacuation."
date: "1999-04-13"
creators:
  - "Tambling, Grant"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - HEALTH AND AGED CARE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474679
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KR906%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Senator Grant Tambling

  Parliamentary Secretary to 

  the Minister for Health and Aged Care

  

  13.4.99 

  TERRITORY 
CONTRIBUTION TO KOSOVO EVACUATION

  A husband and wife medical 
team from Darwin have flown to Macedonia to assist in the effort to 
a  irlift Kosovar refugees to Australia, Parliamentary 
Secretary for Health and Aged Care Senator Grant Tambling said today. 

  Senator Tambling said Dr Eric (Ric) Lloyd and his 
wife Mary, a nurse, would join a team from the Australian Department 
of Immigration who would identify refugees able to travel to Australia, 
pending a decision by the United Nations High Commission on Refugees 
(UNHCR) on the refugee program for countries such as Australia. 

  “It was decided last week that Health Services 
Australia (HSA), for which I have responsibility as Parliamentary Secretary 
for Health and Aged Care, should release a doctor to accompany the Immigration 
team,” Senator Tambling said. 

  “Dr Lloyd is the Senior Medical Adviser at HSA 
in Darwin and has spent nine years doing immigration-related health 
work in Belgrade, Kuala Lumpur and Bangkok. 

  He said Mrs Lloyd was a registered nurse who had 
accompanied her husband on his overseas postings. 

  “When Dr Lloyd was chosen for this role it was 
decided he would need the assistance of a nursing sister,” Senator 
Tambling said. 

  “Therefore Mrs Lloyd was seen as the most appropriate 
person to accompany Dr Lloyd”. 

  Senator Tambling said it was expected the Lloyds 
would be in Macedonia for several weeks. 

  *Please note Dr and Mrs Lloyd 
do not yet have access to satellite communication equipment and therefore 
are not able to speak to media at present.  

   Media Contact:     
Lynne Hare 08 89813567

  

  

  jy  1999-06-04  12:12

