---
title: "ALP sells out genuine refugees: temporary refugee visas lack compassion."
date: "1999-11-22"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478794
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GSI06%22
---

   

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

  

  

 22 NOVEMBER 1999  

 99/636

  

  

  ALP sells out genuine refugees

  Temporary refugee visas lack compassion

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett the Democrats’ immigration spokesperson 
to day expressed extreme disappointment at the ALP decision to 
support temporary visas for genuine refugees who enter Australia illegally.

  

 “They can’t take the heat. They’ve admitted 
the regulations won’t work. They are putting politics before principle,” 
he said.

  

 “We should be targeting people smugglers not refugees.

  

 “The Democrats have supported Government moves to 
introduce broader powers to intercept and arrest people smugglers, however 
we oppose harsher conditions for those who have been recognised as refugees.

  

 Senator Bartlett said “The new regulations for temporary 
refugee visas will double the economic cost of refugee assessments and 
treble the human cost to genuine refugees affected by the new rules. 
“Boat people will not be stopped by temporary visas but genuine refugees 
will be hurt.

  

 “This decision will worsen the plight of a few hundred 
genuine refugees a year. It will increase immigration bureaucracy costs 
and will have no impact on the number of illegal arrivals. “This does 
nothing to stop people smuggling. Smugglers are not inclined to brief 
potential clients on the details of Australian immigration law.

  

 The new regulations mean boat people who are found 
to be genuine refugees will only receive temporarily visas. At the end 
of three years they will be required to prove their refugee status again. 
Senator Bartlett has announced he will move to disallow the new regulations. 
Today the ALP shadow cabinet responded with in-principle support for 
the Government, subject to Labor caucus approval.

  

 ‘The government tried introducing temporary protection 
visas in 1990 but abandoned the measure in 1993, in part, due to the 
large costs involved with repeat applications for permanent residence,” 
said Senator Bartlett.

  

 “The move has been condemned by Amnesty international, 
the Refugee Council of Australia, Federation of Ethnic Communities Councils, 
and Law Council of Australia and many others working in the area of 
refugee law, settlement and health.

  

  

 For interview contact, Senator Andrew Bartlett on 
0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

  

  

  

  al  1999-11-23  09:33

