---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra, 23 November 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [cricket; Timor; refugees, Olympic tickets]"
date: "1999-11-23"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "cricket; Timor; refugees"
  - "Olympic tickets"
  - "cricket"
  - "Timor"
  - "refugees, Olympic tickets"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478814
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0WI06%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  TRANSCRIPT 
OF DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

  23 NOVEMBER 
1999

  

  E & OE - Proof Only

  

  Subjects: Cricket, Timor, 
Refugees, Olympic tickets

  

  BEAZLEY:

  Well, firstly, I take great joy in, and I want to 
congratulate, my two fellow West Australians - Justin Langer and Adam 
Gilchrist - who have achieved a record performance in securing victory 
for Australia. And I congratulate Steve Waugh. He's taken two daring 
decisions as a Captain in this his first home series and they've both 
come off. And that's a terrific outcome for Australian sport and Australian 
cricket. But those two innings were full of what gives people such joy 
in following the game - grit and determination in the case of Justin, 
and great flair in the case of Adam.

  JOURNALIST:

  West Australian traits there, that you...

  BEAZLEY:

  Absolutely. In the case of Adam, of course, it's 
an absorbed trait. In the case of Justin, it's inherited. But, in both 
cases, it's what happens to you when you cross the Nullarbor. It's inspirational.

  JOURNALIST:

  What message will you be taking to the troops next 
week?

  BEAZLEY:

  The fact that all the Australian people are behind 
them in their essential international task. They have performed a task, 
not simply on behalf of Australia, but, in fact, on behalf of the international 
community. And that, above all, needs acknowledgment. And I'll also 
be taking one or two messages for folk who are West Australians there, 
and I hope I get a chance to bump into them.

  JOURNALIST:

  What do you think the reaction will be by the Government 
in Jakarta to your visit and the one of the Prime Minister?

  BEAZLEY:

  I hope it's understanding. I hope that it is taken 
in the spirit in which it is intended. It is not a statement about Indonesia 
at all. Indonesia has finally granted independence, voted for independence 
for the territory and we have, both of us, a substantial stake in a 
successful outcome to the political process which must now follow. So, 
I hope that they'll contemplate it in that light.

  JOURNALIST:

  Is there any danger it could be misconstrued as triumphalism?

  BEAZLEY: 

  Well, that depends on how we conduct ourselves. And 
I think it's very important that we stress, when we are there, that 
what is a fact. And the fact is, the magnificent professionalism of 
the Australian soldiers and others associated with the UN force has 
been a professionalism put to the service of the international community 
- the international community's concerns and international values that 
count here. And, if that point is stressed, we will evade, I think, 
any substantiated accusations of truimphalism.

  JOURNALIST:

  The ABC has leaked internal intelligence documents 
today that show, as late as last month, officials were worried about 
the local inquiry in Indonesia and whether they would destroy evidence 
or tamper with evidence. Do you think that provides impetus for Australia 
to hand over its intelligence reports?

  BEAZLEY:

  We must cooperate with the United Nations. There 
is an appropriate United Nations inquiry under way. That is the appropriate 
body to handle these things, and we should cooperate with them.

  JOURNALIST:

  Hand over all our intelligence?

  BEAZLEY:

  Well, that's what the Americans have done in relation 
to Kosovo. That's what we should do.

  JOURNALIST:

  What about the Sydney Morning Herald story? A former 
Australian diplomat over there had been warning the Government long 
and hard about the potential for danger with the militias being armed 
by the Indonesian troops. What's your response to that?

  BEAZLEY:

  Well, if you'll recollect over the last six months 
the Labor Party has been persistently warning about this. The Government 
has had its bacon saved by the intervention, finally, of the United 
States. And, I might say, continuing intervention of the United States 
in relation to refugees in West Timor - and that's very important - 
and by the sheer professionalism of the Australian armed forces who 
answered all the questions asked of them. Those two bodies - in the 
case of the defence forces and in the case of the American Government 
- have created an outcome well beyond what could have been anticipated. 
But the Government's handling of it to that point was poor to say the 
least. And it's not as though they didn't have the right advice. They 
did. But they failed. Now, there ought to be an inquiry into all this. 
We've called for that before. The reason why there should be is not 
to wander around the place finding scapegoats, but so that you can learn. 
I mean, Timor is awfully close to the area of Australia's primary strategic 
interest. We have to be able to be confident that those who make decisions 
on our behalf understand what the issues are and how they handle them. 
That's why you need to look at this not for the finding of scapegoats, 
but from learning from the experience. And this Government ought to 
be prepared to consider this. It is a problem for this Government because, 
until the Americans pulled our irons out of the fire and the great professionalism 
of the Australian soldiers was put to use, our performance and the performance 
of this Government had been very poor.

  JOURNALIST:

  Mr Beazley, are you anticipating much consternation 
in Caucus this morning about the Opposition's refugee decision?

  BEAZLEY:

  Look, we want to ensure that those folk coming to 
Australia do so in an orderly fashion. And we don't want illegal immigration 
encouraged. And we don't want profiteers to get away with it - we want 
them jailed. We want this stopped. Now, the Government has made a judgement 
about what is required to ensure that that occurs. OK, that's their 
judgement. We will see. Some of us have a degree of scepticism as to 
whether offering somebody virtually automatic entry for three years, 
whatever else is being shorn off such a visa, is actually going to be 
a deterrent. I must say it is counter-intuitive, but the Government 
says it will. The Government says it will stop people coming to this 
country illegally - well, we will see.

  JOURNALIST:

  Will you be gagging MPs such as Andrew Theophanous 
from opposing the decision?

  BEAZLEY:

  When the Labor Party Caucus makes a decision, it's 
a Caucus decision - end of story.

  JOURNALIST:

  Can I just get a comment on Olympic tickets, Mr Beazley? 
Obviously, the report last night was very damning of the SOCOG Board. 
Should more heads have rolled as a result? Nobody, in the end, has lost 
their job, and the regime continues on.

  BEAZLEY:

  We're less than a year away. I mean, I think…what 
I hope from all of this is that the SOCOG Board has now got its act 
together on the tickets, in particular, but generally speaking. It does 
seem as though they've put in place the sorts of measures that were 
pointed to by that inquiry. We're only ten months away. I mean, really, 
they've got to get on with the job. We've really got to the point now 
where we have to ensure that those thousands and thousands of people 
coming to Australia, and, the thousands in Australia who want to go 
and enjoy the Olympics, actually come through with a good experience, 
and that the meet takes place with maximum efficiency and effectiveness. 
And, really, the Board has got to get on with the job now, and I hope 
that will happen.

  JOURNALIST:

  ...a bit of flak for Labor figures...damage for NSW 
Labor?

  BEAZLEY:

  I doubt it because I think, at the end of the day, 
they've got control of their situation. But it took an awful long time 
to get to that point. And I hope, and it does seem to be the case when 
you look at the sorts of recommendations that are coming forward, I 
hope they've now addressed the weaknesses in their structure and there 
will be smooth sailing between now and the Olympics. That may be the 
triumph of hope over experience, but it's in all our interests that 
that now happens.

  ends

  

  md 1999-11-24  10:50

