---
title: "85 Chinese boat people removed from Australia today."
date: "1999-09-02"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211566304
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AIE06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 MPS 126/99

  

  85 CHINESE BOAT PEOPLE REMOVED FROM AUSTRALIA 
TODAY

  

  The Australian Government today removed 85 Chinese boat people, taking 
to 186 the number of il legal Chinese entrants removed from Port 
Hedland Detention Centre over the past two weeks, the Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said today.

  

 The Minister said that the 85 Chinese had arrived 
illegally in late May and early June.

  

 “Those involved were all from Fujian Province, and 
were expected to pay organisers up to $36,000 for their trip to Australia. 
Some paid close to $10,000 up front, while the remainder was to be paid 
by their family back in China.

  

 “These people had no lawful right to remain in Australia. 
I hope that in sending the group home it will show others from the Province 
that such journeys are pointless,” said the Minister.

  

 “People need to understand that the organisers of 
such rackets deliberately set out to defraud passengers. They must also 
realise that Australia is not a soft touch when it comes to unlawful 
arrivals.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said a press statement had been issued 
in China announcing the return of the group. He said it clearly spelt 
out to potential passengers that people who tried to enter Australia 
illegally would be detained, and that if they had no right to stay, 
would be sent back as quickly as possible.

  

 All recent unlawful arrivals along the east coast 
of Australia have now been returned to China.

  

 The Minister went on to say that, as part of Australia’s 
attempt to combat people smuggling, it was important to work closely 
with both China and Indonesia.

  

 The Minister said that his Department was working 
hard to crack down on people smuggling operations out of Indonesia, 
and that the secretary of DIMA, Mr Bill Farmer, had recently led a top-level 
delegation visit to the country.

  

 “I recently sent a top-level delegation to meet 
with officials from Indonesia’s Justice Department, Immigration Directorate, 
Foreign Affairs, Police, Customs and Defence authorities, to discuss 
strategies to combat people trafficking to Australia.

  

 “While we have developed a very close working relationship 
with China in regard to stemming the tide of unauthorised boat arrivals, 
we need to ensure that the systems we have in place with Indonesia are 
maximised.

  

 “Discussions during the visit to Indonesia focussed 
on extending existing cooperation with Defence, Immigration, Police 
and Customs authorities, and improving the exchange of information.

  

 “We also plan to work closely with Indonesia to 
develop an education/media program to promote knowledge of the dangers 
and penalties involved in people trafficking.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said this visit followed the introduction 
of recommendations recently made by the Prime Minister’s Coastal Surveillance 
Task Force.

  

 He said these included boosting the Departments presence 
at seven overseas posts and five key airports, as well as working closely 
with countries such as Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, to help them 
detect and detain traffickers.

  

 The Government continues to send a strong message 
to potential people smugglers that such illegal activities are not acceptable 
in Australia.

  

 ENDS

  

  Thursday 2 September 1999

  

  Media Inquiries: Susan Sare  (02) 6277 7860 or 0407 415 797

  

  

  dd  1999-09-03  09:50

