---
title: "Minister Vanstone drowning under weight of illegal arrivals."
date: "1999-05-20"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475680
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/21906%22
---

   

  Media Release

  The Hon Duncan Kerr MP

  Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs

  Shadow Minister for the Arts

  Federal Member for Denison

  

 20 May 1999

  

  MINISTER VANSTONE DROWNING UNDER WEIGHT OF 
ILLEGAL ARRIVALS

  

  “Labor warned the Government months ago, when  a boat arrived 
on a Cairns suburban beach, that the failure of the nation’s coastal 
security network would send the wrong message to those considering illegal 
entry to Australia,” Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs, Duncan 
Kerr said.

  

 “Two more boats carrying illegal immigrants have 
now arrived from the Indian subcontinent and the Middle-East. Obviously 
the message has been heard loud and clear, at least by people smugglers.

  

 “The Minister’s only response to the first landings 
was to stick her head in the sand. Senator Vanstone has a copy of Air 
Vice Marshall Heggens inquiry sitting on her desk but will not release 
it publicly.

  

 “The only problem is in the meantime, more and more 
boats are arriving. The whole saga is sounding more like an episode 
of ‘Yes Minister’ as the problem gets referred to yet another committee.

  

 “Amanda Vanstone’s only response is to cast around 
for other people to blame. Only yesterday Australia’s whole drugs 
problem was blamed on New South Wales Police. It is a travesty of responsible 
government.

  

 “Australians have a right to know what is going 
wrong with our coastal security and more importantly to actually see 
tangible efforts to stop these boats arriving, instead of media stunts 
by the Minister,” Mr Kerr said.

  

  

  jk  1999-05-24  11:15

