---
title: "Radio 5DN, Adelaide, 14 May 1999: doorstop [Kosovar refugees; ALP factions; GST]"
date: "1999-05-14"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Kosovar refugees; ALP factions; GST"
  - "Kosovar refugees"
  - "ALP factions"
  - "GST"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475575
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7T806%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP RADIO 5DN, ADELAIDE, 14 MAY 1999

  

  E & OE - PROOF ONLY

  

  Subjects: Kosovar Refugees, ALP Factions, GST

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, can we ask you what are your impressions 
of John Olsen’s plans to ret refugees stay in Australia, from Kosovo? 

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 I think, the Government needs to be realistic about 
this at some point. I understand the point, and we have it ourselves, 
about the situation with Slobodan Milosevic and his desire for ethnic 
cleansing, so called, and I don’t want to give any credibility to 
that. But we have said all along the Government Is going to have to 
look at this problem from within the framework of the more conventional 
refugee program as well, because there will be many associated with 
this conflict who would be at risk going home.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you think John Olsen should butt out of foreign 
policy, though?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Look, I think Premiers will say whatever they like 
and whenever they like. I am impressed that our Premiers and our opposition 
leaders around the country are being so generous-hearted in their attitude 
to people suffering from this tragedy. I wouldn’t want them buffing 
out. If you don’t agree with them, you just don’t agree with them. 
You don’t have to insult them.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 What is your opinion on the whole issue? Do you think 
they should go home?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Look, I think you do have to keep ... they do want 
to go home. Lets get that clear from the start. That is their heartfelt 
desire. Whether they can go home safely, we shall have to wait and see. 
What we have said is that a reasonable interpretation of these events, 
based on past histories, would suggest that will be a problem for a 
number. And, if that is the case, then we have to be more generous than 
normal with the refugee program.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, do you bring a message to the factions 
here in South Australia? They seem to be tearing themselves apart.

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well. I would say, if you go through political disunity, 
there is world’s best practice disunity operating in this State, and 
it is not in the Labor Party it happens to be in the Liberal Party in 
this State. I cannot think of an example where anybody in the Labor 
Party has taken Cabinet documents and dumped them on the opposition 
to enhance their position, Internally, in the Liberal Party’s fighting. 
We have no equivalent to that in our ranks.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 What about dead people on the rolls of the Labor Party? 
Surely, there is something a bit on the nose about that?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 If there is any problem associated with Party membership, 
and with any Internal disagreements, and they ought to keep those disagreements 
within the Party, then there are forums where that can be addressed. 
One of those forums is the next State Conference. So, people who have 
concerns about that, that is some place they can take it in the first 
instance, that is where it ought to go.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Some of your own backbenchers are calling for Federal 
intervention. Will they get it?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 What you have got to be careful about in these situations 
is that, firstly, the issues are kept internal. Secondly, that, as far 
as changes go, the place you start to address those are at the State 
Conference, You also have to be careful about exaggerated claims made 
to the dispute. What we need here in South Australia, and everywhere 
in the Labor Party, is a continuation of a culture of decent capacity 
to rise above disagreements for the greater good of the Party and, ultimately, 
the country. Now, from time to time, that does not occur. And I was 
very impressed about some comments made recently by Bob Carr about how 
we needed a culture of collegiality. And he is taking steps to do that 
in New South Wales and, recently, we have had some very good outcomes 
in Western Australia. I am pretty confident about all of that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, you are saying it is not a case of Federal intervention?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, what we are saying, in the first instance is 
there are processes by which these things can be addressed, and they 
ought to be addressed internally.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 How critical do you see today’s vote in the Senate 
regarding the GST and the future of the GST?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 It could be quite important, there is no doubt about 
that. But what we have been saying all along is that it is our 28 votes 
that are cast against the GST. We are the people who made the undertaking 
that we would go in and oppose it. Now, we have won the argument. There 
is no question about that. The majority of the Australian people opposed 
a GST and I just say it is up the minor Parties in the Senate to give 
that reality, and to defeat that proposition.. What we demonstrated 
further last night is that $17 billion of the surplus has been spent 
to sugarcoast it, instead of it being spent on schools, on universities, 
on hospitals, on’ all the things our community desperately needs. 
It is sugarcoating the GST, and most of the sugar goes to income earners 
in the brackets of the Prime Minister and the Treasurer.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 I see you managed to get to Adelaide without your 
road map. Well done. But what is your policy road map shaping up like?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Whenever you hear a criticism from John Howard, of 
us, know the situation is the opposite to the claim he makes. I was 
very proud of the fact, before this Budget, that John Howard felt constrained 
to describe it as an education Budget. Why? Because we have been putting 
the weights on him, as far as that Is concerned. Well, of course, It 
wasn’t. It was an education disappointment, it was a nation-building 
disappointment. But I would have thought that any fair person listening 
to what I said last night, they would have said that there was a whole 
series of ideas there about how that $17 billion worth of sugarcoating 
could have been better spent.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, how can you say you have got the support 
of the majority of Australians, when the Coalition won the last election 
on a GST?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I suppose a starting point would be that we 
got more than 51 per cent of the vote at the last election. I guess 
that is the starting point. The second point would be that the parties 
in the Senate who had expressed opposition to the GST, or in part, got 
a 60 per cent vote. And the last opinion poll I saw on it had about 
55 per cent and, if food is include in the GST, 75 per cent opposed 
to a GST. Those are, I think, all the normal ‘indices of public support 
that you get together when you are looking at whether or not a policy 
has a level of approval.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, in 25 words or less, could you give us 
your vision for Australia?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Yes, we need to be a creative nation. A nation that 
is knowledge-based, a knowledge-based society. And what this Budget 
does is - severely handicap the Commonwealth’s capacity to support 
it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, your vision, the key reforms you are looking for 
are generally education-based?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Key reforms better resourcing for higher education, 
better resourcing for training, better resourcing for research and development, 
changes to the tax system not to introduce an unfair GST, but to encourage 
investment in new ideas. Therefore, a restoration of the R & D concessions 
and a new regime in relation to capital gains tax that really rewards 
people for doing new things.

  

  

  

  dd

