---
title: "Illegal boat people returned to China."
date: "1999-06-10"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476274
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L8A06%22
---

   

  Media Release

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  

 MPS 95/99

  ILLEGAL BOAT PEOPLE RETURNED TO CHINA

  

  Eighty-three Chinese who were intercepted trying to enter Australia 
illegally off Port Kembla on 17 May have be en returned to China, 
the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
said today.

  

 Mr Ruddock said that the circumstances surrounding 
the group’s arrival mirrored those of other recent boat arrivals, 
with those on board falsely promised jobs on Olympics projects and an 
amnesty for entering the country illegally.

  

 “Already it has been made clear by the Government 
that there will be no amnesty for unlawfuls in Australia. The confirmation 
by the Opposition that they too share this view is welcome and should 
be heeded by those vulnerable to exploitation” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “The passengers paid around $20,000 AUS each to 
travel to Australia in very uncomfortable conditions. They were forced 
by the smugglers to stay in secret, cramped compartments below deck, 
and arrived hungry and tired.

  

 “They risked their life on a journey that was dangerous 
and futile.

  

 “The Government continues to actively emphasise 
its concerns about people smuggling in both Australia and China.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said that while visiting China last month, 
DIMA Secretary Mr Bill Farmer had met with representatives of China’s 
media to reiterate that illegal entrants were not welcome in Australia.

  

 “The Australian Embassy in Beijing is also issuing 
a press release in China today regarding the return of this latest group 
of boat people, in an attempt to deter future illegal immigration.

  

 “The Embassy’s press release makes it clear that 
the passengers of this vessel had been duped by the snakeheads, who 
had taken money from their passengers and given nothing in return but 
lies.

  

 “The Embassy also emphasised the close co-operation 
between Australia and China to stop illegal trafficking in human cargo,” 
said the Minister.

  

 Mr Ruddock said that in Australia, a number of initiatives 
were in place to try and stop the smuggling problem, including the creation 
of a high level taskforce to look at coastal surveillance issues, which 
is due to report back to the Government this month.

  

 In addition, the Minister said he was hopeful that 
the arrest of a number of people in Australia in relation to recent 
illegal boat arrivals would serve to discourage organisers.

  

 Mr Ruddock said he planned to introduce legislation 
to Parliament later this month that would substantially increase the 
penalties for people smuggling.

  

 Mr Ruddock added that smugglers should be aware that 
Australia and China were working closer than ever to jointly break the 
culture of illegal immigration that exists in certain parts of China.

  

 “On a number of occasions China has informed us 
that they have intercepted vessels carrying would-be illegal immigrants 
to Australia,” said the Minister.

  

 “It is imperative that we continue to effectively 
gather intelligence on boat arrivals in order to stop those behind trafficking 
operations.

  

 ENDS Thursday, 10 June 1999  


 Media Inquiries: Susan Sare (02) 6277 7860 or 0407 
415 797

  

  

  rw  1999-06-15  10:58

