---
title: "Failed protection visa applicants cost Australia millions."
date: "1999-02-13"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211469852
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/63406%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon. Philip 
Ruddock MP 

  Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs 

  

  FAILED PROTECTION 
VISA APPLICANTS COST AUSTRALIA MILLIONS

  

  MPS 26/99

  

 Failed Protection Visa 
(PV) applicants are costing Australia millions of dollars in unpaid 
fees, litigation and location and removal costs, the Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said today.

  

 Mr Ruddock said that 
at the end of December last year, failed PV applicants owed almost $2.8 
million to the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs in 
$1,000 post-Refugee Review Tribunal decision fees for the period July 
1997 to December 1998.

  

 “Thousands of failed 
PV applicants owe money to the Commonwealth following RRT confirmations 
of decisions made by my Department.

  

 "It is worth remembering 
that in 90 per cent of cases coming before the Refugee Review Tribunal 
(RRT), the RRT upholds the Department’s assessment that the individual 
is not a refugee."

  

 Mr Ruddock said about 
85 per cent of the applicants who were refused a Protection Visa by 
the Department applied for a review with the RRT.

  

 "In 1997-98 the 
RRT determined 6,506 cases and affirmed the Department’s decision 
in 90 per cent of them.

  

 “However, about 40 
per cent of people who are offered a hearing with the Tribunal to discuss 
their case decide not to attend or accept the appointment but don’t 
show up.

  

 “Furthermore, around 
15 per cent of review applicants withdraw their applications before 
they receive a decision.

  

 “Sadly, these figures 
indicate that in many instances such review is sought merely as a means 
of delaying departure from Australia.

  

 “Running costs for 
the Refugee Review Tribunal were in excess of $14 million in  1997-98, 
but if litigation and court costs are taken into account legal costs 
associated with failed PV applicants would clearly be much higher.

  

 “Litigation on immigration-related 
matters alone cost more than $9 million in 1997-98, up from $6 million 
in 1996-97, and figures suggest this cost will continue to grow.

  

 “Since 1993-94 the 
number of new refugee-related applications to the courts has risen from 
53 to nearly 470 per annum.

  

  “This generates not only significant cost, but also imposes increasing 
delays on Australians seeking access to the courts. 

  

 “Many applicants for Protection Visas know from 
the outset they are not refugees, but manipulate the process to obtain 
benefits such as the right to remain in the country and obtain work 
rights.

  

 "It is for this reason the Government introduced 
regulations to restrict work rights for applicants who have been denied 
Protection Visas by the RRT, or who lodged claims more than 45 days 
after arrival in Australia”.

  

 “These circumstances also strongly underscore 
the need for the Government’s planned reforms to limit judicial review 
through the implementation of the privative clause".

  

 Mr Ruddock said some 5,000 failed Protection Visa 
claimants are currently living in Australia illegally having overstayed 
their bridging visas.

  

 “Failed Protection Visa claimants account for 
around 10 per cent of all overstayers in Australia, and their legal 
costs and costs associated with their removal place an enormous financial 
burden on the Australian taxpayer.

  

 “In 1997-96, 80 per cent of the Department’s 
compliance budget of $50 million was spent on locating, detaining and 
removing failed PV applicants and unauthorised arrivals from Australia.

  

 “It is clear that some of these people had already 
manipulated our legal system to prolong their stay in Australia without 
regard for the costs involved and without any proper claim to be here.

  

 “Then, having exhausted all legal options to 
remain in Australia, many stayed on illegally.

  

 “However, these people should be aware the Government 
has refocused compliance activities away from employer education campaigns 
towards physically locating and removing overstayers and illegal entrants.

  

 “Substantial resources have been dedicated to 
this task and, as a result, detection rates are climbing.

  

 “This Government takes Australia’s international 
obligations to the resettlement of genuine refugees very seriously, 
and our refugee-determination process is recognised as the United High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as one of the best in the world.

  

 "However, the facts clearly show the system 
is being manipulated, and this manipulation places an unacceptable burden 
on the people of Australia and genuine

 refugees languishing in camps overseas."

 ENDS Saturday, 13 February, 1999   
Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson 0419 278 715.

  

  

  JS

