---
title: "Minister rejects report's claims on detention policy."
date: "1999-06-29"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476651
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/34B06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

  

 Tuesday 29 June 1999

 MPS 104/99

  

  MINISTER REJECTS REPORT’S CLAIMS ON DETENTION 
POLICY

  

  Claims in a Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission (HREOC) 
repo rt that government policy under which illegal entrants are 
being detained contravenes international obligations have been described 
by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
as totally unacceptable.

  

 “Current practice of detaining people who enter 
Australia illegally does not breach Australia’s international obligations, 
so it will continue as long as illegal entrants concern the community 
and government,” the Minister said. “There is no validity to claims 
in the report that we are contravening international obligations.

  

 “We have been consistently advised by the Attorney-General’s 
Department that mandatory detention of unauthorised arrivals does not 
breach international human rights obligations.

  

 “This accords with the United Nations Human Rights 
Committee’s view that detaining individuals seeking asylum does not   per se , breach 
our obligations.

  

 “Experience has shown that if people are not detained 
so that they are readily available for removal when their attempts to 
remain are unsuccessful, they will usually fail to leave and try to 
establish a new life here.

  

 “This would actively encourage others to follow 
and enter Australia illegally, and anything which even implicitly encourages 
illegal activities must be discouraged. Mandatory detention is essential 
to our overall objectives of protecting the integrity of our borders.

  

 “I must also point out that, as a matter of policy, 
we do not detain asylum seekers who have entered Australia unlawfully, 
which was a claim made in a recent Amnesty International report, although 
I stress we will continue detaining people arriving here without valid 
documents.”

  

 The Minister said that other points in the report 
relating to conditions in immigration detention centres had been addressed.

 “Conditions and detainees’ treatment in Perth, 
Port Hedland and Villawood were mentioned in the report, and of the 
94 recommendations made, 35 have been fully supported and 37 were accepted 
in part.”

  

 “And, with the Ombudsman’s office, the Department 
of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs has developed immigration detention 
standards to ensure detainees receive appropriate care. Importantly, 
the Government seeks to minimise the amount of time people are held 
in detention, by returning them to their own countries as soon as practicable.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said that detention facilities had been 
enhanced and considerable resources allocated to ensuring detainees’ 
comfort and meeting their needs. The Minister added that the Human Rights 
Commissioner Mr Sidoti had visited all detention centres since the report 
was released, and was understood to have noted improvements that had 
been made to detention facilities and services.

  

 “We take issues raised in the HREOC report very 
seriously, and readily accept responsibility for the care of detainees, 
however, I must add that detention remains mandatory for those who try 
to enter or stay in Australia illegally” Mr Ruddock concluded.

  

 ENDS

  

  

  Media inquiries:

 Susan Sare on (02)6277 2860 or 0407 415 797

  

  

  md 1999-07-01  11:19

