---
title: "Democrat comment on refugee arrivals."
date: "1999-04-09"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474651
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VT606%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats

  Spokesperson on Immigration

  

  

  DEMOCRAT COMMENT ON REFUGEE ARRIVALS

  

 9 APRIL 1999

 99/193

  

 The Australian Democrats 
have welcomed the government’s announcement regarding the arrival 
of Kosovo refugees and that they will not be housed in remote locations 
away from existing services and Albanian communities.

  

 However, Democrat Immigration 
spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett repeated the Democrats’ concern 
that the refugees must have the option to apply to stay in Australia 
if they chose.

  

 “The option of permanent 
asylum must be there. This should be part of an expanded refugee program,” 
Senator Bartlett said.

  

 “Whilst the situation 
in Kosovo is certainly a fluid and fast-changing one, the potential 
problems of the government’s insistence on allowing only temporary 
entry for Kosovars have been identified by a wide range of community 
groups with direct experience in refugee issues and with conditions 
in the Balkans,” said Senator Bartlett.

  

 “The Democrats believe 
more use should be made of the expertise, skills and contacts contained 
within the Australian community. This matter needs to be beyond politics 
as much as possible.

  

 “The Government should 
acknowledge now that we cannot rule out refugees taking up permanent 
residency in Australia.

  

 “Ideally we want people 
to return to their homes in Kosovo, but for those who want to stay, 
that option must be open.

  

 “Temporary visas for 
refugees was a policy of One Nation at the last Federal election and 
it was quite rightly condemned. It is ridiculous and mean spirited to 
limit asylum. Three months is a tourist visa not refugee status,” 
said Senator Bartlett.

  

 “It has been said 
that offering permanent places for refugees plays into Milosevic’s 
hands, however ultimately the choice must be the refugees. They are 
not just pawns in a political power game, they are individuals and families 
who must be allowed to start making their own decisions again. After 
what they have been through, if they ask to make their home here, we 
must say yes.”

  

 Senator Bartlett also 
joined calls for the number of additional places to be raised if the 
need was there in three months. “We should plan now for the possibility 
that further assistance is needed.”

  

  

 For interview contact Senator Andrew Bartlett on 
0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101

  

  

  

  

  JS

