---
title: "Opening speech for Austcare Demining Workshop, 'Austcare Demining Forum', Sydney, 18 March 1999: opening address: draft\n"
date: "1999-03-18"
creators:
  - "Sullivan, Kathryn"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474100
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SXB06%22
---

   

  

  DRAFT

  OPENING 
SPEECH FOR AUSTCARE DEMINING WORKSHOP

  Opening 
Address by The Hon Kathy Sullivan MP, Parliamentary Secretary to the 
Minister for Foreign Affairs, to the 'Austcare Demining Forum', Sydney, 
18 March 1999

  Thank you very much for inviting 
me to  day to discuss Australia’s role in the international 
campaign against landmines. I am very pleased to be spending this occasion 
with you, as people who are both actively and directly involved in the 
challenge of clearing the world of landmines and as well as dealing 
with their shocking impact on individuals and communities around the 
world.

  All of you would beare well aware of the cruel destruction 
wrought by landmines. 

  And we all share the moral imperative to abolish 
rid the world of these weapons of indiscriminate destruction. 

  We are here today because wWe share have a common 
purpose.: We share the moral imperative to rid the world of these weapons 
of indiscriminate destruction. 

  You know the facts and figures:

  Landmines kill one person every 20 minutes and - 
26,000 people are either killed or    
maimed by a landmine each year. 

  The consequences of lLandmines inflict a deep personal 
and social cost to on these victims and their   
families. 

  They alsoLandmines have national consequences in 
terms of trauma, and loss and   
maiming of human life. 

  They have regional consequences because they cause 
and exacerbate refugee flows. 

  Today, I want to reflect on the progress that has 
been made to ban landmines, and on the possibilities for international 
coordination onf practical demining assistance. There are many challenges 
in the campaign to abolish landmines and I believe we share a vision 
onf the way forward.

  Legal Instruments to ban landmines

  It is significant that I am able to talk with you 
so soon after the Ottawa Convention has entered into force, two weeks 
ago (on 1 March, 1999). NGOs and civil society were the driving force 
in drafting the Convention and for this, you can be proud. The Australian 
Government also played an important role internationally by negotiating 
a strong text for the Convention and concluding its ratification on 
14 January this year. The ratification of the   Convention on the Use, Stockpiling, 
Production  and Transfer of Anti Personnel 
Landmines and On Their Destruction  was an historic occasion which 
signalled again the Australian Government’s commitment to finding 
a lasting and comprehensive solution to the human and socio-economic 
problems caused by landmines.

  However, Wwe still have some way a distance to go 
to broaden the adherence of some countries to the Ottawa Convention. 
It is critical that countries who are the major producers, users and 
traders of landmines are signatories to legally binding instruments 
banning landmines. It is for this reason that Australia has continued 
to play a leading role in pushing for complementary negotiations for 
a ban on the transfer of landmines in the UN affiliated   Conference on Disarmament . 
The ban on transfers would cover all forms of trading and transportation, 
including transfers within borders. Such a ban, - if adopted by those 
major traditional producers and traders in landmines who have not yet 
signed the Ottawa Convention, - would represent an important step forward 
in the global battle against landmines.

  The Our Government is also engaged in following up 
the implementation of the Convention, namely through the   First Meeting of States Parties 
to the Ottawa Convention  which will be held in Maputo in Mozambique 
in May. Australia is likely to be represented by the Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, Mr Alexander Downer. The meeting will focus on transparency 
measures and compliance issues, with at least two days set aside attributed 
tofor Article 6 of the Convention which deals with international cooperation 
and assistance. It is also likely that Conference participants will 
use the meeting to encourage non-parties to the Convention to sign on. 

  The Ottawa process will also be further strengthened 
in November, when countries who are parties to the Convention meet on 
the Revised Protocol to the   Convention on Certain Conventional 
Weapons . Australia was one of the first countries to ratify the 
Protocol and we are also active in promoting its adherence in our region.

  Assistance 
for Demining Operations

  I wshould like to now turn to the role of the Australian 
Government in delivering practical assistance on the ground for demining 
operations, and. I would also like also to mention the international 
initiatives involved in coordinating practical assistance through the 
United Nations. This last point was the central theme of an internationallast 
May’s Washington conference - the ‘Conference on Global Humanitarian 
Demining’ - that I attended in Washington in May last year as Australia’s 
Special Representative on Demining.

  As you know, we are committed to spending $100 million 
on mine action activities between January 1996 and December 2005. We 
have already disbursed or committed $47 million up until 2001/2002. 
Most of this is directed to countries in our region, particularly Cambodia 
and Laos. However, significant support has also been provided to Angola, 
Mozambique and Afghanistan. 

  Australian support has been provided through a range 
of channels - including the United Nations, NGOs and Australian Defence 
Force personnel. 

  An important objective of our demining activities 
is sustainability - that is, building sustainable local capacity to 
implement demining programs. This is because of our concern to ensure 
that there is local capacity to carry out ongoing demining activities,. 
sSince many of the countries we assist still, suffer from internal conflict, 
and there is also always the risk that mines will continue to be laid 
during hostilities.

  Currently wWe are developing a formal strategy for 
landmine activities to effectively use the $53 million balance of the 
Government’s pledge by 2005, and to help speed up mine clearance. 
We will shall support mine action in countries where the presence of 
landmines impedes the rebuilding of war-torn societies, prevents the 
return of displaced populations, and inhibits the full use of land. 
Our goals include developing quality management in the field, building 
national capacity, and treating and rehabilitating the victims of landmines. 
We are also focusing on making effective use of the assistance for mine 
clearance assistance through donor coordination, and ensuring that comprehensive 
data is obtained through technical surveys.

  Another priority is investigating the pros and cons 
of providing assistance to improved forms of technology used in the 
manual clearance of mines. As you know, there is no single solution 
to mine clearance. The Its rate of mine clearance is limited by the 
technology available - hence the reliance on personnel, sniffer dogs, 
metal detectors and reinforced vehicles. We all hope for improvements 
in demining techniques. 

  I wshould also like to touch on the role of local 
Australian companies are playing their part in the development of mine 
clearance technologies. An Adelaide company, Minelab Electronics, won 
the contract to supply detectors (based on detectors used in the gold 
mining industry) to locate mines in Cambodia’s highly mineralised 
soils (based on detectors used in the gold mining industry). The Government 
has provided $1 million to the Cambodian Mine Action Centre to purchase 
the mine detectors so as to help speed up the current rate of mine clearance. 
The head of the Centre, Sam Sotha, who recently visited Australia, has 
estimated that even at the current clearance rate of 16 square kilometres 
per year, it will still take 20 to 30 years to make Cambodia significantly 
free of mines. 

  Awareness raising Activities

  I would also like to let you know that tThis month 
I will beshall visiting Mozambique to attend a regional meeting of Indian 
Ocean region countries, and I will beshall takeing the time to visit 
the UNDP demining program there. That program receives assistance from 
Australia, and also employs Australian Defence Force Personnel. In Kenya 
I will shall also be visiting the Australian -funded Red Cross Hospital 
at Lokichokkio (Pron: locky-chocky-o) in Kenya which treats victims 
of landmine injuries - many from the caused by conflict in Sudan. 
I am looking forward to meeting the committed people in the fieldthose 
who are treating the victims of landmines and carrying out mine clearance 
in Africa. 

  Through a range of activities 
Tthe Australian Government is also engaged inpromoting - through a range 
of activities - to promote our demining program. We have organised public 
displays at agricultural shows in Tasmania and Canberra and have produced 
a ran  ge of promotional materials such as a video and a 
brochure on Australia’s demining program. We have employed a film-maker 
to film our projects in the Northern of Cambodia, as part of our strategy 
to bring this issue to the attention of the Australian and international 
media. The next edition of   Focus  magazine (due out 
next week) features special articles on the Government’s campaign 
to ban landmines; and AusAID’s Internet site has a lot of information 
about our demining programs. We are also developing an global education 
video, suitable for school children, on Australia’s mine action activities. 
All these initiatives are part of the Government’s commitment to community 
education and public outreach events aimed at promoting Australia’s 
overseas aid program.

  Destroy-a-Minefield

  Another A recent initiative, of the Australian Government 
is the ‘Destroy a Minefield’, Scheme which will encourage individuals, 
schools, community groups and business to ‘adopt’ active minefields 
which have been given high priority for clearance by the United Nations. 
I would like to congratulate Austcare on winning the contract to manage 
the Destroy-a-Minefield scheme. 

  The Destroy-a-Minefield program will use $200,000 
in funds from the Princess Diana Trust Fund (from the sale of the Elton 
John "Candle in the Wind" tribute CD) and the Australian Government 
will contribute an additional $200,000 to the program. Sponsors will 
raise funds in their communities, which will ………to be used to 
clear the adopted minefield and to return the land to local populations 
for productive use. Every two dollars$2 raised by sponsors will be matched 
by one dollar$1 from the Princess Diana Trust Fund and the Australian 
Government. This will create a potential $1.2 million to clear minefields.

  International Coordination Efforts

  While it is essential that Australia continue to 
play a strong role in its own bilateral efforts to clear landmines, 
it is just as important that we coordinate our activities internationally 
to maximise our impact.

  At the Washington conference I attended in Washington 
last year (the Conference on Global Humanitarian Demining), we agreed 
on some of the elements of international coordination. This Conference 
built upon the initiative of the Secretary General of the United Nations, 
Mr Kofi Annan, in establishing the UN Mine Action Service which is the 
UN focal point for demining and all other mine -related activities and 
demining. At the Conference we affirmed that the UN should take the 
role of international coordinationr of demining activities. Australian 
funds raised through the "Destroy a Minefield" Scheme, along 
together with a substantial amount of mine action assistance from the 
Australian Government, will be channelled through the Trust Fund to 
the UN Development Program (UNDP). The UNDP is responsible for coordination 
at the country level, and focuses on building indigenous capacity for 
mine clearance.

  The Future

  I have outlined Australia’s commitment to the dual 
task of creating international legal instruments for banning landmines 
through our diplomatic efforts, and to of the delivery of practical 
assistance.

  We will shall continue to play a strong role internationally 
to encourage countries to accede to and implement the Ottawa Convention, 
and will shall also work within the Conference on Disarmament process. 

  We will shall continue to deliver our demining assistance, 
and to review the most effective means of delivering that assistance. 

  The challenges before us all are enormous. Some are 
structural. They include the problems countries face withissue of armed 
conflict, and are the reason why landmines continue to be laid. They 
also include the sheer logistics of clearing landmines, and the limits 
to the current mine clearance technology of mine clearance.

  That said, we have come a long way. The Ottawa Convention 
is now in place. Assistance for mine clearance has also increased, with 
Australia playing a central role in providing assistance to Cambodia 
and Laos.

  I would like to finishconclude 
by saying that together, we   are   making progress in raising the world’s awareness 
of the problem of landmines. We are also making progress in destroying 
landmines and making land safer for people to return to. People such 
as yourselves play an essential role in making achieving this progress 
happen. I wish you well, and hope that the your sharing of your knowledge 
and experience here at this workshop, will stimulate ideas and action 
that will help with the destruction elimination of these cruel and inhumane 
weapons.

  Thank you.

  

  

  jy  1999-07-19  13:16

