---
title: "New initiatives to stop illegal boat arrivals wins Minister Ruddock's approval."
date: "1999-06-27"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476626
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CXA06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

  Sunday 27 June 1999

  MPS 102/99 

  

  New initiatives to stop illegal boat arrivals 

  wins Minister Ruddock's approval

  

  The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural   Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today announced his department 
would significantly boost its presence at seven overseas posts and five 
key airports, as well as work closely with foreign Governments, in its 
bid to curb the trafficking of illegal human cargo. 

  The Minister's announcement followed recommendations 
made by the Prime Minister's Coastal Surveillance Task Force, which 
has examined the circumstances surrounding the recent spate of illegal 
boat arrivals to Australia. 

  "So far this financial year we have caught a 
total of 861 people trying to enter Australia illegally by boat. Measures 
currently in place to detect people smuggling activities are effective, 
however, the recommendations in this report will further enhance our 
ability to detect illegal arrivals. 

  "Every person we stop from illegally coming 
to Australia saves the Government up to $50,000. While the reality is 
that no Government can stop every single person who tries to enter Australia 
illegally, concentrating on preventing an intended arrival is certainly 
worth the investment. 

  "This is the strategy adopted in the report, 
which builds on the work my Department has been conducting in its effort 
to tackle this problem. 

  "If we can put more people on the ground and 
increase funding to countries such as Indonesia and Papua New Guinea 
to help them detect and detain would-be traffickers, we should be able 
to reduce the likelihood of these people ever reaching Australia," 
said Mr Ruddock. 

  The Minister said the Government had accepted the 
following recommendations relating to DIMA. These include: 

  An additional seven immigration compliance officers 
to be placed in key overseas missions including Shanghai, Guangzhou, 
New Delhi, Colombo, Nairobi, Pretoria and Ankara. 

  An additional five airline liaison officers to be 
placed at key international airports including Kuala Lumpur*, Bangkok*, 
Denpasar, Singapore* and Dubai. 

  $500,000 a year to be available to support strategies 
in Indonesia and Papua New Guinea to detect, detain and remove people 
attempting to enter Australia illegally. 

  A senior DIMA liaison officer to be seconded to Coastwatch. 

  DIMA and Customs to work with other agencies to ensure 
well co-ordinated responses to any illegal landings. 

  "These decisions should mean that more people 
are stopped at source rather than on our shores," said the Minister. 

  "Currently my Department has officers stationed 
overseas who are specifically trained to identify fraudulent documentation 
and who work closely with local police and immigration officials to 
identify foreign nationals who may try to enter Australia illegally. 

  "Immigration officers posted overseas also train 
local check-in staff to identify bogus documentation and carry out joint 
exercises to stop traffickers before they have a chance to get started. 

  "And to make sure we address the problem of 
trafficking as effectively as possible within the Department, I have 
created a new Branch to deal with Border Protection issues. 

  "The Branch will co-ordinate policy and work 
to further strengthen our links and co-operation with foreign governments. 
By more strategically focussing our efforts, I hope to make sure that 
we can combat people smuggling even more effectively," Mr Ruddock 
concluded. 

  * These 
are in addition to existing placements. They will ensure more e  xtensive coverage of all of flights 
to Australia.

  

  Media Inquiries:

  Susan Sare 0407 415 797 

  

  

  md 1999-06-28  18:04

