---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra, 26 August 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [youth wages; Senator Ridgeway; reconciliation; Turkey; Jeff Kennett; Ian Thorpe]"
date: "1999-08-26"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "youth wages; Senator Ridgeway; reconciliation; Turkey; Jeff Kennett; Ian Thorpe"
  - "youth wages"
  - "Senator Ridgeway"
  - "reconciliation"
  - "Turkey"
  - "Jeff Kennett"
  - "Ian Thorpe"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211566098
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3BE06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Leader of the Opposition

  

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 26 AUGUST 1999

  

  

  Subjects: Youth wages, Senator Ridgeway, reconciliation, 
Turkey, Jeff Kennett, Ian Thorpe

  

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Mr Beazley, are you concerned about any union backlash over the decision 
to support junior wage rate legislation?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, I'm always concerned about a fight in the family. It's not something 
that we actively seek or want. And, contrary to what appears in the 
newspapers in one or two areas today, it was not a factor in the decisions 
we took. I made absolutely clear what our response would be to the views 
of the Industrial Relations Commission report on youth wages when it 
came down. What Peter Reith was trying to do was this: Peter Reith was 
trying to force the Commission to find youth wages where anybody under 
the age of 21 was employed in an industry. That's what his intention 
was. And he is mounting an attack on the building industry, in particular, 
with regard to that. We said we won't have a bar of the nobbling of 
the umpire. We will not have that. The umpire should be allowed to decide 
each case on its merits, either for an advance of youth wages or a retreat. 
There's nothing in what we did yesterday that stops anybody getting 
up and making a case against youth wages or for youth wages. Peter Reith 
wanted to change that situation. We wouldn't be in it. But the important 
thing to contemplate is why we did that in relation to the wider industrial 
relations sphere. We are just about to enter into a major fight on the 
industrial legislation of the Government. There are three main points 
of disagreement. One, their impact on the rights of unions and workers 
to organise themselves for the purposes of collective bargaining. Two, 
the viability of an award system to provide a safety net for ordinary 
Australian workers. Three, the capacity of the umpire, the Industrial 
Relations Commission, to arbitrate and conciliate, both in terms of 
disputes and in relation to awards. Reith is trying to gut each one 
of those aspects of our industrial relations system. And what we did 
on youth wages we intend to do exactly on the industrial relations system. 
We will protect the umpire. We will fight for the rights of the umpire 
to intervene and arbitrate and conciliate, without being fettered by 
a Government determined to hamper it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Why don't the unions get that, then?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, I made my position absolutely clear a couple of months ago on 
this. And even before that, we said to Reith when he tried to bring 
in, tried to gazump the Industrial Relations Commission investigation 
of youth wages, we said, '  wait - wait and see what they have to say before 
you act '. So, we foreshadowed effectively then that we'd be guided 
by what the umpire decided, and I defy anyone to find a crack of light 
difference between what I said when the Industrial Relations Commission 
that made its report on youth wages and what we ended up doing. The 
unions have their own view. They have their own fish to fry and their 
own arguments to make. While we are intensely close, and we seek a close 
relationship all the time, because that adds value to the Australian 
political process, we won't always be in agreement. And when we're not 
in agreement, that's a matter of sadness for me. But what folk need 
to understand is the relationship between this Bill and where we're 
going to end up with Reith's second wave. Reith's second wave is about 
gutting the umpire in the same way as Reith's youth wages package was 
about directing the umpire to find youth wages where anyone under the 
age of 21 was employed in an industry. Make no mistake about it, this 
was part of Reith's major assault on the building industry, in particular, 
and other industries, like aspects of the transport industry, where 
there isn't really an application of youth wages. And he has been foiled 
in that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Is it worrying, though, that at least two major unions have said they 
may pull funding from the ALP?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, look, lots of people provide funds for the ALP. And you can't 
operate your policy position on the basis of funding. I mean, your first 
obligation is to the Australian people. And your first obligation is 
to devise decent policy. And if you're protecting the interests of the 
labour movement, which is part of the role of the Labor Party, you've 
got to make a sensible judgement across the board about what does that. 
You've got to look for consistency in argument. Now, I would say that 
one of the three most important arguments that we have to make is the 
argument for the unfettered Industrial Relations Commission. Now, we 
have made that argument, I think, pretty effectively as far as this 
Bill is concerned.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Senator Ridgeway's speech last night. What did you think of that as 
a piece of Parliament?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Look, I'm sorry, I wasn't here. I get to most of the maiden speeches 
of members of the Labor Party, but I didn't get to the maiden speech 
of Senator Ridgeway.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  A lot of criticism last night that many Labor 
people didn't get to the speech, whereas many of the Government, including 
many members of the House, did turn up.

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, I didn't see that, and that's a matter for them. But the simple 
fact of the matter is that Senator Ridgeway is a new member of the Parliament. 
He's come under an awful lot of pressure in the first couple of months. 
It's very easy for new members of Parliament to be awed when they're 
here, and be awed by the Prime Minister and the like. You know, I found 
myself quite awed by Malcolm Fraser when I came in until I worked out, 
after about four or five months, he was just a bloke, and that most 
Prime Ministers are just blokes at the end of the day. Some of them 
should be women. But most of them are just blokes, and blokes with about 
the same dosage of clay in their feet as all the rest of us. It takes 
a while to work that out.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Are you saying Senator Ridgeway is a bit awe-struck by the whole experience 
to the extent where, on the issue of an apology, he's perhaps misguided?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Look, I think we're making a terrible mistake on the issue of an apology, 
frankly. We have taken what was meant to be a pristine statement of 
national atonement and determination to move on, and we have sucked 
it into the vortex of the argy bargy of political trading in Canberra. 
That is just appalling. You know, John Howard's pride, or face, the 
intact nature, or otherwise, of John Howard's back, the concerns of 
the Liberal Party and the National Party over this and that, these are 
irrelevancies on this sort of issue. They're important in some things, 
but on this sort of issue it's an utter, utter irrelevancy. And we ought 
to be driven by concerns of national honour. That's what ought to be 
driving us on this matter, and, in addition to that, concerns that those 
who are of the stolen generation get some comfort in what we have to 
say to them. Because if they don't - and I mean pretty well all of them 
- if they don't feel that, what's the point?

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  But why do so many Aboriginal leaders seem to be happy with the sort 
of compromise we're heading towards?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, they might be. But what I'm going to do is to move the motion 
that we had in the clear light of day immediately after that report 
came down. That was carried by the Senate, and similar motions were 
carried by most of the State Parliaments. I think, at that point of 
time, that was a real statement, that was a real statement of the heart, 
and that's what we need here.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Turkey. Do you see there being an opportunity to perhaps bring some 
Turkish refugees from the earthquake out to Australia in a similar way 
as the Kosovars?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  I think we need to be generous within the framework of our refugee 
program, and I think we probably ought to have regard, too, to relationships 
between Turkish Australians and people who might now be suffering in 
Turkey. It's a somewhat different situation. But, nevertheless, within 
the constraints of our program, we always ought to have a generous reaction 
to tragedies like this.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Not a special program, like as in the Kosovars?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, it would have... if you actually gave weight to this situation, 
that would, in fact, be treating it specially.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Mr Beazley, Jeff Kennett provides his fans with happy snaps and a 
screen saver through his own web site. Will you be thinking of following 
suit?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Oh, yes. I'll have my own web site out there. 
You know, the Labor Party has   got a web site out there. It's going to be -   it ain't over till the fat man wins.com.au.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Just one more, Ian Thorpe last night, of course, a fourth world record 
in four evenings. What's going on there?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Oh, this guy is a genius. I always feel sorry for his competitors. 
It's like I used to feel sorry for Smokin' Joe Frasier, who was a great 
boxer who just had the bad luck to come on the scene at the same time 
as Muhammad Ali. And if he hadn't, we'd be having debates about whether 
Joe Frasier or Muhammad Ali was the best boxer there had ever been, 
in heavyweight terms. I think that's the same problem now for everybody 
in relation to Thorpedo. I mean, the fact of the matter is that this 
guy is a one-off. He's going to be very, very hard to beat. And a whole 
lot of brilliant swimmers will be in his wake. 

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  A freak, even?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well, I wouldn't say something like that, mate. That's very offensive.

  

  Ends

  

  

  lb  1999-09-01  10:19

