---
title: "Sheraton on the Park, Sydney, 17 June 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [Governor of Reserve Bank; interest rates; economy; jobs growth; junior wage rates; Bob Woods; Xing Ping - discussions with Senator Harradine]"
date: "1999-06-17"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Governor of Reserve Bank; interest rates; economy; jobs growth; junior wage rates; Bob Woods; Xing Ping - discussions with Senator Harradine"
  - "Governor of Reserve Bank"
  - "interest rates"
  - "economy"
  - "jobs growth"
  - "junior wage rates"
  - "Bob Woods"
  - "Xing Ping - discussions with Senator Harradine"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476380
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EHA06%22
---

   

  PRIME MINISTER

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER

  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP

  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

  SHERATON ON THE PARK, SYDNEY

  

  Subjects: Governor of Reserve Bank, interest rates, economy, jobs 
growth, junior wage rates, Bob Woods, Xing Ping discussions with Senator 
Harradine

  

  17 June 1999

  

  E&OE

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Pleasing sounds coming from Ian McFarlane in Melbourne 
this morning.

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Yes, I’ve heard what the Governor has said. I think 
they’re very positive comments. We don’t talk about the future level 
of interest rates but there’s no doubt that the Australian economy 
remains very strong. It also has an existence which while it’s not 
uninfluenced by what happens in the United States it has a strength 
and a resilience all of its own. It’s very important that the Australian 
people know that although we are influenced by the rest of the world, 
we really make our own luck. And we’ve made our own luck over the 
last three years and that’s why we’ve been able to stare down the 
rest of the world, particularly in Asia, why we’ve been able to maintain 
high levels of economic growth, low interest rates and low inflation. 
And the Australian community has every reason to look forward to continued 
strong levels of economic growth.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 In light of his comments are you fairly confident 
about continuing low interest rates?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, I don’t make predictions about the future 
level of interest rates. I’ve noted what the Governor has had to say 
and I think those comments will be noted by a lot of people but the 
message is unmistakable. People can look forward to very strong levels 
of economic growth and economic prosperity for some time into the future. 
It’s no fluke. We have made our own luck and it’s to the great credit 
of the Australian people and the Reserve Bank of Australia has played 
a role in that through its great management of the exchange rate.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr McFarlane says that even though we’ve had such 
strong growth it is disappointing that jobs growth hasn’t followed 
suit. What’s going wrong there?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, unemployment is a lot lower now than what it 
was three years ago. It would be lower still if we’d been able to 
get past the Labor Party changes to unfair dismissal laws. I note the 
apparent views of the Industrial Relations Commission about youth wages. 
We need to make more changes to the rules affecting labour market conditions 
in order to get further reductions in unemployment but so far the Labor 
Party in the Senate has blocked those attempts. It’s about time they 
changed their attitude and stopped just being obstructive and against 
everything that the Government’s trying to do.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Well, in light of what the Industrial Relations Commission 
has said today, is there more pressure on the Democrats to support the 
continuation of the junior wage rates?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, I’ve only read the report in a newspaper but 
our position remains firm. We would like the Senate to pass the legislation. 
That, of course, means the Labor Party too. People always light on Independents 
and the minor parties, they always let the Labor Party off.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 What about Bob Woods today - his sentence - he’s 
not going to jail, what’s your reaction to that?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 I don’t think it’s appropriate for Prime Ministers 
to comment on court verdicts and I don’t intend to say anything about 
it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Prime Minister, the World Cup cricket tonight, how 
do you think Australia will go?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Ah, now I will say something about that. Can I wish 
Steve and the boys every success. I had a late night last weekend and 
I think I’ll have another late one tonight. But they’ve staged a 
tremendous comeback and they really are hitting the peak of their form 
at the right time. But the South Africans are tough opponents and it 
will be an enthralling contest and I certainly hope our blokes win.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 In relation to the Chinese woman who had a late abortion, 
I understand Senator Harradine had met with you in regard to that. Will 
you be intervening?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, I’ve had a number of discussions with Senator 
Harradine about that and certain arrangements were entered into and 
certain commitments were given in China as a result of a number of conversations 
and exchanges. I certainly share some of the concerns that have been 
expressed about this lady. But it seems as though an understanding and 
arrangement has been worked out. And we think that is a proper basis 
for handling it and that seems to be the view of the Refugee Council. 
And I’ll continue to keep a close eye on it but I’ve certainly had 
a number of discussions with Brian Harradine about it.

  

  Thank you.

  

  [ends]

  

  

  

  dd  1999-06-21  10:34

