---
title: "Minister in the Northern Territory for immigration consultations."
date: "1999-03-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211473687
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7M506%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

  

  

  Minister in the Northern Territory   
for immigration consultations

  

 MPS 40/99 

 The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today said initiatives to 
attract more skilled migrants to Australia were having a significant 
impact in the Northern Territory. 

 In Darwin as part of 
national consultations on Australia's 1999-2000 migration program, Mr 
Ruddock said the number of migrants coming to the NT under the Skilled 
stream increased by more than 34 per cent in 1997-98 over the previous 
year. 

 "The 1997-98   Settler Arrivals  
statistical report shows that 149 people migrated to the NT through 
the Skill stream last year, up from 111 in 1996-97. 

 "In total, some 
435 migrants settled in the Northern Territory in 1997-98 compared to 
490 the previous year. 

 "NT figures reflect 
the emphasis that the Government has placed on attracting skilled migrants, 
and our determination to deliver a balanced program, especially in Australia's 
more remote and isolated areas. 

 "Initiatives designed 
to assist State and Territory Governments in their efforts to boost 
development in regional and rural Australia and the lesser populated 
states and territories have been very successful. 

 "These include 
the Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme (RSMS) which enables Australian 
employers in regional or low-growth areas to fill skilled permanent 
vacancies with overseas personnel if they cannot find suitably qualified 
workers in Australia and the State/Territory Nominated Independent (STNI) 
scheme." 

 The STNI scheme enables 
State and Territory Governments to sponsor skilled migrants and their 
families in the Independent skilled category. 

 "The Northern Territory 
has been a very successful user of the RSMS and could build on this 
success by also considering the STNI scheme," Mr Ruddock said. 

 Mr Ruddock said the 
Settler Arrivals report also showed that: 

  During this year's consultations, Mr Ruddock will meet with a wide 
cross-section of individuals and organisations including representatives 
of business, economic, industry, union, environment, welfare, planning, 
refugee, humanitar ian and ethnic community groups. 

 "I am also, for 
the first time, conducting a nation-wide round of public meetings on 
the migration program," Mr Ruddock added. 

  "I trust this will provide a unique opportunity for many Australians 
to contribute their ideas  and comments on the size and composition 
of Australia's immigration program." 

 A public meeting is 
being held in Darwin tonight at the Darwin Entertainment Centre. 

 Consultations and public 
meetings have also been held in Melbourne, Griffith, Sydney, Albury-Wodonga, 
Perth, Canberra, Brisbane, Cairns, Adelaide, Launceston and Hobart. 

  Friday, 5 March 1999   
Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson 0419 278 715 

   

  

  

  jy

