---
title: "Illegal boatpeople sent home."
date: "1999-11-27"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478987
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PDJ06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

  ILLEGAL BOATPEOPLE SENT HOME

  

  Fifty four illegal Chinese entrants who arrived by boat at Gove in 
March have been returned to China, the Minister for Immigration  
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said today.

  

 Mr Ruddock said were it not for the recent arrival 
of another 62 people on Christmas Island, Australia would have removed 
almost all PRC nationals who had arrived on boats without authority..

  

 “Illegal boat people who have no reason to stay 
in Australia will be returned as quickly as possible,’ Mr Ruddock 
said.

  

 ‘This return should send a clear message to others 
that such a journey is dangerous, futile and not worth risking their 
lives.

  

 “It should also emphasise the fact that if people 
believe the lies peddled by the people smugglers, they wilt pay the 
price when they are sent home to a possible lifetime of debt,” Mr 
Ruddock said.

  

 The return also demonstrates the strong relationship 
and cooperation that exists between the Australian and Chinese governments, 
and China’s support in the major crackdown on the people smuggling 
trade.

  

 “This removal provides an opportunity for the Government 
to remind people of the tough new penalties for people smugglers such 
as the recent introduction of 20 year jail terms for traffickers and 
fines of up to $220,000,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “In addition, unauthorised arrivals who are found 
to be refugees will now be granted a three-year temporary protection 
visa. People who are not refugees will be sent home as soon as possible.

  

 “Other recent measures include legislation introducing 
tests such as fingerprinting and palm recognition, to ascertain the 
true identity of asylum seekers, and to ensure they do not already have 
protection elsewhere, or have been refused refugee status overseas,” 
Mr Ruddock said,

  

 The Government also recently introduced legislation 
to give DIMMER and Customs officers powers to board and detain boats 
in international waters suspected of being involved in people smuggling.

  

 “This removal, combined with the new legislation, 
enables the Australian Government to send a Clear message that we will 
do everything in our power to stop people smugglers,” Mr Ruddock concluded.

  

 27 November 1999

 Media Enquires: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715

  

  

  jk  1999-12-01  12:43

