---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra, 11 October 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [Defence Reserve; East Timor; republic; political donation disclosure; John Moore]"
date: "1999-10-11"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Defence Reserve; East Timor; republic; political donation disclosure; John Moore"
  - "Defence Reserve"
  - "East Timor"
  - "republic"
  - "political donation disclosure"
  - "John Moore"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477723
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8KG06%22
---

   

  

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,

  11 OCTOBER 1999

  

  

  Subjects: Defence Reserve, East Timor, Republic, 
Political donation disclosure, John Moore

  

 E & OE - Proof Only

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Well, today we're moving a Private Member's Bill to restore reserve 
leave as an allowable matter. If you look at what Peter Reith's done 
with the Industrial Relations Act, he's undermined public health, which 
means that now you cannot get leave to donate blood. He has undermined 
national security; there is no reserve leave as an allowable matter. 
And, of course, he's undermined families by undermining the award system. 
This is a pretty good three strikes against community security in Peter 
Reith's legislation. Well, one element of that we're going to try and 
see cured today.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  What would it do? What would the Private Member's Bill do?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  What it would mean is that reservists would be able to be assured 
that, when they shifted their employer, that still within the awards 
that they operated under, there would be the possibility for them to 
secure, at no penalty to themselves, leave to serve with the reserves. 
There are other things that need to be done. We've got other Private 
Member's Bills up, as far as that is concerned, but that's the one today.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  What evidence is there that reservists are currently being denied 
that leave?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Well, there's some strange fights going on around the place. For example, 
there are areas where the awards, in fact, still cover, that the AWA, 
in a particular industry, has a slightly higher level of leave than 
the award. And so in Telstra we have a nonsense whereby the Telstra 
management is not permitting those under the award the same level of 
leave. But that's an oddball case. Mostly what's happening is that if 
the reservists work outside the public sector, it's extraordinarily 
difficult for them to get leave.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Obviously a very dangerous situation overnight on the West Timor border. 
What's your view of what went on there overnight?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Well, firstly, thankfully, we have cool heads at the head of INTERFET 
- from the Major General down. And that means that when situations like 
this emerge there is a quiet hand on the process. But the situation 
is extraordinarily dangerous. That border is obviously ill defined. 
There is obviously a view on the other side of the border that their 
border, whatever it is, is going to be, in their lights, defended. So, 
the message from this is (one) we're going to be there for a fair while, 
because this situation is going to take a long time to tamp down; and 
the second message from all of this is that we need to encourage the 
good forceful commonsense that is being applied by a very professional 
management of INTERFET.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Does it send a chill down your spine when you 
hear stories of Australian troops in open combat, in a sense, with an 
Indonesian force?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  It certainly does. And in this case, obviously, it was accidental 
that that occurred. But that is a great worry. That has always been 
one of the concerns with the deployment and it's a concern which, I 
think, all Australians would take seriously. We're there for one purpose 
and one purpose only - and that is to see the successful establishment 
of a peaceful East Timor, with the refugees back from the other side 
of the border, with the economy back to a point where people can anticipate 
a level of reasonable lifestyle, if not prosperity, and with friendship 
between the newly emerged State and Indonesia. Now, that's a very big 
call, and it's a very difficult task. 

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Should the INTERFET Commander, or the Australian Government, seek 
from Jakarta greater assurances that the TNI will adopt a policy of 
check your map first, shoot later?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Firstly, I think we need an agreed set of maps. That seems to be the 
difficulty here. The irony is that the Indonesians appear to have been 
using a Dutch map and the Australians appear to be using an Indonesian 
map. They, obviously, are going to have to negotiate out a set of agreed 
lines on that border and a bit of a protocol for operating near it. 

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Were you surprised by the level of young voter interest in registering 
to vote on the republic, and what impact will that have on the outcome, 
do you think?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  No, because I think young people are really keen on it. You know, 
the young people are difficult to mobilise politically. They're getting 
on with their lives, getting on with partnering, getting on with getting 
a job, getting on with training, so politics tends to come a long way 
down the list of preferred activities. But, in some curious way, I think 
the republic probably interests them far more than the partisan political 
conflict. And young people are terribly confident about Australian culture. 
They're very confident about Australian independence and our capacity 
to stand alone. And, so, I'm not surprised that they're keen on getting 
a vote.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  So, a big boost for the republican cause?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  I think it is, yes. I think there's no doubt about it - the republic's 
the way of the future. I think everybody agrees on that in Australia. 
I think there'd be very, very few people in this country who don't think, 
at some point of time, we'll become a republic. Our argument is that 
it should be here and now.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  What did you think of the 'no' case yesterday?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Negative. You know, a very negative, backward-looking case, and quite 
erroneous. It's sort of, it's becoming a bit like the 'no' case, a bit 
like one of those Basil Fawlty shows, you know, Fawlty Towers. And, 
so, when they get up there and say the system's perfect, you sort of 
don't mention the war. And, in this case, it's don't mention 1975 when 
it was a race between the Prime Minister and the Governor-General as 
to who sacked who first. And enormous instability, which makes it pretty 
passing strange for them to get up and criticise what is a much better 
checks and balances arrangement for relationships between the Head of 
State and the Prime Minister in a crisis under the new proposals than 
exists already.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Where did the Queen go?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Where did the Queen go in 1975? She just sat 
on the...

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  No. Where's the Queen gone now?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  From the campaign? I thought you were talking about 1975. Well, it's 
don't' mention the war about 1975 and, whatever you do, don't mention 
the Queen. I would have thought that they would have been fairly proud 
to mention the Queen. If they're monarchists, she is the Head of State. 
But they've been hiding her. They've hidden her from the Olympics. The 
Prime Minister has deliberately got her out early in the New Year, next 
year, to make sure that she's nowhere near the Olympics, to rain on 
his parade, so to speak, and the monarchists will not advocate her cause. 
Well, it just goes to show they really do understand they're a bit backward-looking.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Would you support an inquiry into ... of a letter from the office 
Bob Gibbs in Queensland?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Sorry, I'm not familiar with that.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  There was an article on AM this morning about a letter from Bob Gibbs 
... about...

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  I know nothing about that so I think I'll pass no comment on that 
one.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  Mr Reith's plans for tighter disclosure rules for donations from unions 
and employer groups. Is that a veiled attack on the Labor Party and 
one of its main sources of money?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  Well, of course it is. I mean, the main problem with Peter Reith's 
legislation in the first and second waves, and now this looks like a 
third wave, is it's basically an assault on the Australian family. Now, 
this is an assault on the political process. I suppose you start with 
the family and then you have a go at the political process. What's the 
Labor Party supposed to do? We're supposed to set up the Bluefields 
sight, are we? You remember their Greenfields trust, so I suppose the 
Labor Party, if we went down this road, would have to set up the Bluefields 
Trust to create a similar evasion of declaration that the Liberals now 
engage in. See, the big difference between us and them is you know who 
gives us money. You don't know that about them.

  

  JOURNALIST:  

  

  A bit of speculation around that Minister Moore is for the chop. Do 
you think that's a good idea?

  

  BEAZLEY:  

  

  I think it's more like the slice of the salami, isn't it. I mean, 
there's a little piece coming off Moore every week as he makes one blooper 
after another. Sooner or later, you reach the end of the salami. That's 
going to happen at some time, I suspect, this year.

  

  Ends

  

  

  al  1999-10-12  09:40

