---
title: "'Light on the hill' dinner, Australian Labor Party, Bathurst, 18 September 1999: address."
date: "1999-09-18"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477203
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CGF06%22
---

   

  

  'Light On The Hill' 
Dinner

  Laurie Brereton - 
Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Address - Australian Labor Party, Bathurst - 18 September 1999

  

  I'm very pleased that the proceeds of the raffle 
tonight are going to Caritas because no organisation has done more or 
continues to do more for the needs of East Timor than that wonderful 
NGO. What I'm going to say tonight I'd like to dedicate to Father Francesca, 
the late Father Francesca who sat in my office in March of this year 
after he'd been to see the Government, Alexander Downer. He came to 
see me to plead for peacekeepers and for adequate security to accompany 
the forthcoming ballot which would give the East Timorese the opportunity 
of deciding their future. He said that security was fundamental and 
that he had a dreadful sense of foreboding and of course he was correct 
because he was one of the first of the Catholic priests who were killed 
by the militia following the outcome of the vote. Like so many others, 
he was cut down most cruelly. 

  But amongst all the sadness you do get some good 
news as we had this morning when Leandro Isaac, who'd earlier been reported 
as dead, surfaced. I mention Leandro Isaac because he spoke to the Parliamentary 
Delegation the night before the ballot, that was Tim Fischer, Senator 
Marise Payne, Senator Vicki Bourne and myself. He came at considerable 
danger to himself, he being the principle spokesman for the CNRT, that 
is the resistance, and he briefed us all with the Australian Ambassador 
and the NGO reps who were part of our Australian UN Observer delegation. 
He expressed the view that ... or he told us that he'd been told that 
were independence to win the next day he was on the death list and when 
he said goodbye to us he had tears in his eyes and he said 'I hope I 
see you again, but I'm not sure.' I said what are you going to do and 
he said 'I'm going to vote and I'm going to go to the hills.' It was 
very nice to hear today that he's back in business. So my remarks tonight 
I'd like to dedicate to those people and everyone else who's been keeping 
up this great fight.

  This is a very broad gathering tonight but in respect 
of those who are one-eyed, dedicated Labor supporters, I can tell you 
that the Victorian election results where Labor needed fifteen seats 
to win, it looks like eight certain wins at the moment and quite possibly 
eleven, which is a much better result than we expected. (applause)

  Well, I should start by saying something about someone 
who's not here tonight and that's Jose Ramos Horta, a good friend. I 
had thought that if he were not available tonight it would be because 
he was required in Dili to lead his people along with Xanana Gusmao 
in building a free East Timor in the wake of the vote. Instead of course, 
he's still doing tonight what he's been doing for the last twenty-four 
years and that is campaigning internationally for his people. Two weeks 
ago in Dili, a senior Australian figure who was travelling there made 
a comment on the eve of the ballot in respect of the Nobel Peace Prizes 
awarded to Ramos Horta and Bishop Belo. He said he thought that the 
award to Bishop Belo was entirely appropriate, he being a fine fellow, 
but he was really disturbed about someone like Jose being credited with 
a Nobel Peace Prize. I, dare I say, contested that fairly vigorously 
because it represented what I think has been Foreign Affairs orthodoxy 
in Australia regardless of who's been in power for much too long and 
I think I should tonight pay a tribute at the outset to Jose because 
he has been the political face of the resistance. His has been the most 
thankless of tasks. He has sat outside a thousand rooms waiting for 
an audience with foreign ministers and departmental officials for near 
on a quarter of a century and he deserves a special place as someone 
who's perhaps contributed more than anyone to the fight for a free East 
Timor.

  I must say our paths didn't cross until February 
1997. That was the first time I met him personally. By then I'd had 
responsibility for the Labor Party foreign affairs policy for about 
ten months and I must say I had already formed a view about what should 
happen, what changes were necessary in respect of East Timor. Indeed 
on the eve of the meeting with Ramos Horta, I drafted a set of words 
of what I believed was necessary to redefine our stance and sent it 
across to Kim Beazley's office. Can I say that Kim as you would expect 
from a senior former Minister in the Hawke government and the Keating 
government, and I might say a former Defence Minister to boot, had some 
reservations. But let me say it takes a leader of real substance to 
allow the sort of change of position that I had in mind to go ahead, 
to be promoted through the Labor Party and Kim gave me that opportunity. 
And I must say he not only gave me the opportunity, when subsequently 
I came under attack for what some people falsely considered to be a 
heresy, it was Kim Beazley who defended me with considerable vigour, 
both inside the Caucus and out. 

  I want tonight to deal with 
the policy change that we made and the significance of it. It's significance 
because Australian foreign policy on East Timor regardless of who's 
been in power, has always had this common line, this DFAT orthodoxy; 
governments ca  me, governments go. I don't know of any area of policy 
where there has been such consistency regardless of who's in power, 
and it was always a policy supported by whoever was in Opposition at 
the time as well which made it all the harder to change, can I say. 
I took the view and the Labor Party took the view that if we broke with 
that bipartisanship it would have the effect of maximising pressure 
on the Government to join us in supporting self-determination. And it 
did have that effect, I think I can say. And I'd like, while I'm here, 
I know there are a number of people from the New South Wales ALP present, 
to acknowledge that it was at the October Conference in 1997 that the 
change was first enacted here in this State and of course it was subsequently 
adopted by the January 1998 National Conference. 

  The Howard Government responded to it in December 
1998, almost twelve months later, when John Howard wrote to President 
B J Habibie and the process began. I don't need to tell you that the 
Government has subsequently said they believed that that letter sent 
by John Howard, had a key impact on changing the attitude of Indonesia 
in bringing about the subsequent vote. 

  But I think it's worth remembering that at the time 
that letter was written, in December 1998, the East Timorese themselves 
were at that very time warning of the need for a gradual process and 
one where security was of the utmost importance. Xanana Gusmao said 
in November and December of 1998 that it should be at least a three 
to ten year process. Ramos Horta and Bishop Belo were all cautioning 
the need for security and reconciliation. To underpin the process they 
spoke variously of three years, five years, ten years, whatever it takes, 
but make sure that security is guaranteed and that we can get the people 
together so that East Timor stops fighting itself. I think it's an enormous 
tragedy that President B J Habibie agreed to put that question to the 
East Timorese on the fast track and without any safety net whatsoever. 
There was no real protection afforded the people of East Timor. 

  As you know, throughout all of this year we repeatedly 
warned the Government that it was foolish to rely upon the Indonesian 
military to maintain security. I must have put out fifty press releases 
- I've used the word obsessive and Sue has reminded me of it - but I 
was, and we have been on this. But Blind Freddy could see that you couldn't 
rely on the Indonesian military to guarantee security through this process. 
I said it til I was blue in the face and I must say I wasn't alone. 
The Government's own advisers were telling them the same sort of thing. 

  It's worth tonight bringing along the leaked Defence 
Intelligence Organisation current intelligence brief which lays that 
out, dated the 4th of March this year. Now this is the Australian Defence 
Intelligence brief on what we could expect could happen. This brings 
together all the streams of our intelligence and it advised the Government, 
John Howard and Alexander Downer on the 4th of March, that the military 
were clearly protecting and in some instances, operating with the militias, 
that the military could easily apprehend or easily control the pro-Indonesian 
militias, but that it had chosen not to do so. It outlined all of the 
connections between senior Kopassus Officers, the Special Forces, and 
the Indonesian intelligence, the chains of command through to the militias 
themselves. It said in black and white that there was no vigorous action 
by Wiranto to reign in the military implying that he, and he's the Minister 
for Defence and the head of the Armed Forces, was at the very least 
turning a blind eye. DIO warned the Australian Government that unless 
Jakarta takes firm action, military elements will continue to support 
intimidation and violence or at least won't prevent it, and it concluded 
with this ominous warning. It said 'Military personnel in East Timor 
are condoning the activities of pro-Indonesian militias who are threatening 
lives. Further violence is certain and Dili will be the focus.' 

  No one can say that we weren't 
told and of course at that very time Portugal was campaigning for peacekeepers 
as part of the agreement in New York. Stanley Roth, the US Assistant 
Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific is on the record in 
February   of this year, in other leaked material, of discussions 
with Ashton Calvert, the Head of Foreign Affairs in Australia, where 
he was saying we ought to be looking closely at peacekeepers in the 
interests of security. 

  Now it is an enormous tragedy that despite all of 
those warnings, despite all of the intelligence, the Australian response 
was to dismiss the concerns and in fact to argue strenuously at an international 
level, against the deployment of peacekeepers. Now what Australia in 
fact did was to mount international pressure on behalf of Jakarta as 
Jakarta campaigned against peacekeepers. Instead of pushing for it, 
we were working the other side of the argument and we actually sent 
officials around the world to plead that case, to say this should be 
left to the Indonesians. I asked, as I think a number of you would be 
aware, a good many questions and I must say the general response from 
Alexander Downer was to ridicule the suggestion that there should be 
peacekeepers. I must say his arguments at times became somewhat tortured 
and I'm reminded of his words on the 14th of March this year and this 
is one of his worst I think and I quote him; 'We hope there won't be 
a need for a peacekeeping force,' he said, 'because if you need a peacekeeping 
force, you need a peace to keep and peace first has to be negotiated 
and we hope that when peace is negotiated it will be a peaceful peace 
that won't require a peacekeeping force.' That's on the public record. 
What the Australian Government did was to blindly put their faith in 
the Indonesian military and they continued to do so in the face of the 
mounting evidence and all the warnings that we saw in the early part 
of this year.

  I went with Colonel Brownrigg to the scene of the 
Liquica massacre early this year in the lead up to the ballot, where 
fifty-eight men, women and children, mainly I might say women and children, 
were hacked to death with machetes. You didn't have to be a genius to 
work out that this was a very highly charged run-up to an election and 
it was likely to go off the rails, it already had. We saw the United 
Nations forced to withdraw from a number of their posts, we saw Bishop 
Belo's convoy attacked and still Australia argued against peacekeepers. 

  I might say after the Liquica massacre, to his credit, 
John Howard went to Bali and saw President Habibie, but he came home 
from that and I don't want to be too hard here, but there were so many 
echoes of Neville Chamberlain and I'm reminded of his own comments on 
his return, at the press conference that he conducted on the 28th of 
April this year and I quote him. He said this, 'There's been a strong 
commitment made by the Indonesian Government to the holding of an open 
and clean ballot. I have no reason to doubt the sincerity of the commitments 
that were made yesterday by both the President and also the other Ministers 
who were present.' He then said this 'There is no doubt that there's 
been a quantum shift so far as the assertion of control both in relation 
to the military by the Government and also the central control of the 
military in relation to its activities in East Timor. I am certainly 
satisfied from what's happened publicly, from the presence yesterday 
of General Wiranto, his participation in the discussions and the general 
attitude taken by Dr Habibie, that there is a realisation that things 
had to change, that things had begun to change. The confidence that 
I expressed was a confidence that things were infinitely better than 
they were a week or two weeks ago.' Well I think we know that collectively 
we were then continuing to fool ourselves big time. 

  So in the end, what did we see? We saw the ballot 
take place without any process of disarmament, no real pressure on Jakarta 
for peacekeepers, which might just have had an effect. We'll never know 
will we. But security was left for the ballot in the hands of the very 
people who were in fact orchestrating the violence. And at the very 
same time, the tragedy of this is that the international community was 
assuring the East Timorese that they should vote, that they could vote 
and they should vote and that they would be safe. We contributed $10 
million to an education program for the East Timorese to give them confidence 
in the process, $10 million. I've seen the posters, excuse the black 
of this, but the original of this was printed in blue, the United Nations 
colours, and it gave the UN's commitments that you'd be free to vote, 
free of fear, of violence and intimidation. That the United Nations 
would be there, before, during and most importantly, after the ballot, 
that East Timor would not be forgotten. Well, we know where we are today, 
twenty days later, there are twelve UN officials left in the whole country, 
they're locked in the now closed Australian Consulate. 

  It's fair to say that on the 
day of the ballot, the Indonesian police did maintain order. But of 
course their orders to maintain order and to disarm the militias ceased 
at midnight that night. I know that for a fact because I asked the Lieutenant 
of the Po  lice Mobile Patrol who was escorting Tim Fischer 
and myself around why suddenly all the guns were back on the street 
and he said he was powerless to take guns from anyone. That was on the 
Tuesday and of course that was the first day that things began to go 
very bad.

  I remember giving a press interview, I think it was 
the 7.30 Report, from the roof of a hotel and I was pretty uncomfortable 
because we'd had to run a couple of blockades to get there. It was a 
bit nervous. But I well recall Alexander Downer sitting comfortably 
in a studio in Australia, certainly a lot more comfortable than myself, 
describing Labor's calls for peacekeepers as hysterical, hysterical 
mind you. And it's fair to say that it was only when it was much too 
late that we began the frantic scramble. I pay tribute to John Howard 
in this instance. I mean he's been very active these past couple of 
weeks, he's done a terrific job, but how late, how very late in the 
day when it could have been done months earlier, when the pressure could 
have been put on. Now we'll never know, had that pressure been put on, 
whether Indonesia would have buckled, but they may well have. Or alternatively, 
they may have agreed to a genuine process of disarmament of the militias 
rather than to leave them roaming the countryside armed to the teeth. 
They might have even copped an international process of verification 
of such disarmament, but of course we took no such action and we'll 
never know what might have been the case had we, but we certainly know 
the result of the genocide which has resulted.

  Now of course Indonesia has finally accepted the 
inevitability of peacekeepers and when they did so the Howard Government 
heralded it as something of a triumph. I suppose we've got an audience 
tonight of people who follow this issue more closely than many and it's 
easy to be caught up in the tabloid excitement of what we've seen in 
the last forty-eight hours and what we'll see in days ahead, but this 
was no triumph can I say. We've got to look at this hard and cold in 
terms of the cost that's been involved. We don't know yet whether there's 
ten thousand dead or twenty thousand or more, we know that there's a 
couple of hundred thousand refugees, many of whom have been forcibly 
deported to West Timor and who are under enormous pressure from the 
same militias who'd been persecuting them and have killed so many of 
their leaders. We know that many, many leaders have been assassinated. 
We know that all the homes have been destroyed. We know all of the businesses 
have been looted and we know that much of Dili looks like Dresden at 
the end of the Second World War. That's what we've got on our doorstep 
and yet it was only yesterday, in spite of all those assurances from 
the international community, that the first food drops went in for people 
who are dying of malnutrition, and the first genuine aid was seen landing 
on the ground. And of course in the next couple of days we'll see the 
international peacekeeping force finally undertake the mission. 

  If the first mistake, can I say, was to blindly accept 
Indonesia's assurances that they should have responsibility for security. 
The second mistake was the one made by the United Nations this week 
not to require the rapid withdrawal of all Indonesian military personnel 
and the militias. Instead, we're going to see, in this coming week, 
our troops and those of our allies having to work alongside the very 
people who've been orchestrating the genocide. These are the people 
with blood all the way up to their elbows and beyond.

  So, that's where we are and tonight. I'm in Chifley 
territory addressing an audience of concerned people. There are a couple 
of points I want to make and make strongly. The first is the debt to 
the East Timorese. While I was up there I went with Tim Fischer and 
the other members of the Delegation and looked at a plaque in the hills 
behind Dili erected by the survivors of the 2nd/2nd Australian Commandos 
which paid tribute to the brave East Timorese who gave their all in 
support of our fellows in 1942. And I went to one of the cantonments 
and met the guerillas in the hills. I met a guerilla leader, his name 
translated into English is 'The Cobra', he'd been fighting for 24 years. 
But he was very quick to tell me that his Dad had trained in Australia 
and had parachuted back into his country with the 2nd/2nd Commandos. 

  Of course when they went in, 
East Timor was a neutral country. It was a Portuguese territory and 
Portugal was neutral. But Australia went there to head off the Japanese 
who we believed were going there and it's a matter of history that the 
Japanese then la  nded a major force and there was tremendous bloodshed. 
We lost a lot of lives but nowhere near as many as the East Timorese 
lost fighting in what had been neutral territory, fighting for us. Thirty 
thousand at least lost their lives and their families received from 
the air the pamphlets dropped by the RAAF saying thank you, we will 
always be with you. Well of course we haven't been. So we're dealing 
with some people that we owe big time, people who were betrayed in 1942, 
people who were betrayed in 1975 and people who've been betrayed again 
by the international community in terms of security for this ballot, 
in 1999. 

  I think we've got a national responsibility to make 
sure they're never betrayed again and that means we've got to take a 
leaf out of Chif's book because of course 50 years ago when he was making 
that speech 'The Light on the Hill', he had already been instrumental 
in working internationally for the freedom of Indonesia and intervening 
to protect the new Republic of Indonesia. It was Chifley who gave Evatt 
his brief and it's worth recounting that the first peacekeepers ever 
employed by the United Nations, anywhere, were employed in 1947, they 
were Australian peacekeepers, military observers, in Indonesia, in Java, 
as part of that intervention of a Labor government under Chif.

  We're going to have to live up to our obligations 
and give our most generous support. It's going to have to be humanitarian 
support on a massive scale, it's going to have to be a reconstruction 
of the infrastructure of East Timor which has been totally laid waste. 
Billions of dollars worth of destruction thanks to this rampaging mob 
of criminal thugs, and we're going to have to play a key role in the 
institution building of a free East Timor, a new independent nation 
on our doorstep that can rightfully take its place and play a key role, 
regionally in the South Pacific Forum and working alongside ourselves.

  There is one other thing I want to say tonight and 
that is about the relationship with Indonesia, because I received a 
petition during the week from the Indonesian students and the Indonesian 
community in Sydney. It's a statement of concerns regarding the East 
Timor issue and it called, as Indonesians, for the honouring of the 
decision taken by the people of East Timor in the referendum. It expressed 
profound regret at the human tragedy happening in East Timor, it condemned 
the violence and the resulting human suffering and the loss of lives 
of innocent people. It urged the Indonesian Government to live up to 
its responsibilities and take strong measures to stop the further suffering 
and it praised the concern and sympathy of the international community 
towards the people of East Timor and it went on. And I think it strikes 
a chord because it's tremendously important at the moment that Australia 
make a clear distinction between the Indonesian people on the one hand 
and the Indonesian military and the militia personnel who have been 
responsible for this horrific violence.

  I know all Australians are deeply distressed by what's 
happened, you see it on the television and everyone feels a sense of 
shame, a sense of powerlessness and a real frustration and a little 
bit of humiliation. But I think there's a special responsibility on 
all of us, particularly those of us in public office, to ensure that 
jingoism and anti-Indonesian outbursts have no place in our nation's 
response to the East Timor crisis. 

  The criminals who've directed the genocide need to 
be pursued and we've been forthright in speaking up for Australia to 
play our role in ensuring that there is an international tribunal established. 
Mary Robinson has put forward the model for that and we should be full 
square behind it. 

  But let me finish my remarks tonight by saying that 
we must ensure that any condemnation doesn't extend to the Indonesian 
people, so many of whom are as concerned about this as everyone in this 
room and who have their own democratic aspirations right on the line 
as we speak. Can I say that the tragedy of East Timor will indeed be 
even greater if the present crises wrecks Indonesia's emerging democracy 
and there will be plenty trying to do that as we speak. 

  We, of course, have got to 
do the right thing by East Timor and we will but we've also got to support 
Indonesia's democracy. We've got to make every effort, can I say, to 
avoid a destructive spiral of nationalistic rhetoric which can only 
wreck the democra  tic hopes and produce an enduring estrangement between 
our countries.

  So let's learn from the mistakes, let's apply the 
lessons, let's pick up the tradition of Chifley and let's play a role 
now, as Australians, in the establishment of a Free East Timor. Let 
us, at the same time, do everything we can to make sure that the nation 
he helped Indonesia, 52 years ago, moves on and becomes a much more 
democratic state as soon as possible, and that means when the MPR meets 
in two months time.

  I thank you very much for your attention.

  

  

  jy  1999-09-21  16:09

