---
title: "South Perth, 9 April 1999: transcript of doorstop [GST, drugs, East Timor, Kosovo]"
date: "1999-04-09"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "GST"
  - "drugs"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Kosovo"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474654
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZS606%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, 
SOUTH PERTH 9 APRIL 1999

  

  

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

  

 Subjects: GST, Drugs, 
East Timor, Kosovo

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 When John Howard first 
released his tax package I said this: the compensation for the pensioners 
would not work. The compensation that they got for wage adjustments, 
combined with the alleged compensation for the GST would converge. Yesterday, 
Treasury said exactly the same thing. It’s taken six months to get 
the truth out of John Howard’s people as far as this is concerned. 
The fact of the matter about this GST is this: it’s a smoke-screen, 
it uses the smoke-screen of tax reform to conceal what is a bad old 
tax introduced now into this country by this Government. That is why 
we oppose it 100 per cent.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 It’s interesting that 
two of the Government’s.. .two of the most respected economists who 
were expected to come out in support of the package basically withdrew 
their support for food being included. How big a blow is that to the 
Government?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 I think it’s a massive 
blow to the Government. The whole Senate exercise has been a blow. What 
do we find out? We find out this:  firstly, there will be fewer 
jobs, some 120,000 jobs. There will be lower growth. The compensation 
packages do not work. We find out all this. What this suggests is this 
is not tax reform. This is just sneaking a bad, inefficient, old-fashioned 
tax in because it hurts families and you can give money back to your 
basic supporters. That’s not tax reform. That’s not tax reform in 
this country.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 The same economists 
have suggested that if the package.. .more of the tax cuts from high 
income earners and give them to low income earners.

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 But it all ends up fiddling 
around, doesn’t it? It all ends up: how do you make this work in the 
first instance when you know in the long-term what is means is that 
ordinary Australian families are going to carry the bulk of the tax 
burden in this country. How do you fiddle the start in order to achieve 
the outcome of the end, which imposes the burden on Australian families? 
We say: don’t go down that road.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 How is it the analysis 
has differed now as to what it was six months ago?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, the analysis that 
we gave six months ago is now the analysis that everybody has given. 
The things that we said about its impact on jobs, the things that we 
said about the inadequacy of the compensation, the things that we said 
about the impact on growth. Now everybody says it. We were right then 
when we said those things about this tax. Now, what is necessary now 
is for the Senate to agree with us and say: ‘tax reform, yes. GST, 
no’.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 How much extra, though, 
do you think the compensation would need to be for pensioners if the 
GST is to come in?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 I don’t think you 
can long-term compensate. Certainly, this compensation package won’t 
do it and everybody knows that now. But, in the long-term, what this 
tax does is to shift the tax burden onto middle Australia, and you include 
pensioners, self-funded retirees as part of middle Australia. It shifts 
the tax burden to them. It also cuts growth and it cuts jobs. Now, that’s 
not sensible. This is a 1960s tax of the era in which we thought that 
jobs would grow forever and that you could afford 30 or 40 different 
taxation points before a product hit the market. That is gross inefficiency. 
It is a stupid thing to do. We are removing a small element of Australia’s 
comparative advantage to no good effect. What John Howard needs to do 
is what we are prepared to do: stick with tax reform, abandon the GST.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 How would you describe 
the Government’s chances of getting their package through unamended?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, what is revealed 
by the Senate Committee is the Government has just been misleading the 
Australian people and misleading the Senate. I cannot imagine that the 
Democrats and Senator Harradine are a bit impressed with what they’ve 
had revealed to them as they’ve sat on those various Senate Committees 
examining it. And I would just suggest to them that the simplest thing 
here is not to tinker with it, just to reject it.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Given that Senator Harradine’s 
vote may now be every bit as important, as we thought it might, are 
you worried about a deal being done?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Look, we are not in 
any deals. We have made that amply clear. We’re not in amendments, 
we are in voting this proposition down. And what our objective is, is 
to hold the Democrats to the mark, and the minor parties to the mark, 
with rejecting this element of the Government’s tax reform package. 
We say: tax reform, yes. GST, no. And we will conduct our tactics in 
the Senate in accordance with that. Now, if Senator Harradine or the 
Democrats choose to join us - good.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Are you closer to having 
it voted down?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, I don’t think 
that anyone can in all honesty sit and look at the Government’s package 
and vote for it. I think that would be a virtually impossible thing 
for anyone to do. So, I guess the fact that the Senate Committee has 
exposed the Government so utterly and completely, and the Treasury officials 
have given the lie to the Government’s suggestion that they’d compensated 
adequately, I think what we’ve got here is a situation where a sensible 
decision by the Senate would be to send this thing back to the Government 
for reconsideration.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 It seems with the drug 
summit the States and also the Commonwealth are approaching it from 
very different perspectives. How hopeful are you of getting some sort 
of practical consensus out of the summit?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, John Howard has 
said to the States that he’ll open the Commonwealth’s wallet. What 
he needs to do is to open his and the Commonwealth’s hearts. That’s 
what he needs to do. All this talk of zero tolerance and all the rest 
of it, everybody knows it’s tired political rhetoric. We’ve got 
to get down to the business of saving lives. And we’ve got to get 
down to the business of sending the people who really ought to go down 
the tube, down the tube - and those are the people who massively profit 
from the sale of illicit drugs. So, what Mr Howard has to do today, 
what Mr Howard has effectively implied is that the struggle to get the 
correct drug policies operating in Australia is now on the Commonwealth’s 
desk. That is where it should be. It should be a national response. 
And what he should be seeking from the States is help in regard to an 
essential national task. But the help has to be along the lines that 
our hearts go out to those who have become victims of all of this. For 
those who are at risk of death, that we give number one priority to 
keeping people alive.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 On that point, what’s 
your reaction to John Howard’s idea to force drug addicts into rehabilitation 
programs rather than go through the justice system?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 I think giving people 
the option of things like the NSW drug courts, or actions like the policing 
policies currently being pursued by the Victorian Police Force. I think 
it’s a very good direction. And our Paper suggests that we should 
go down that road. Expelling kids from school because they’ve got 
a drug problem is idiocy. That’s what that is, it’s idiocy, expelling 
kids from school with a drug problem. What you need to do if a kid has 
got a drug problem is to bring all the counselling that you can to convincing 
the young person that there is another way, that the depression at the 
heart of their lives is something that can be cured and that we can 
actually offer something in our society to such a young person. That’s 
what the approach should be, not pushing them out on the streets.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 The zero tolerance, 
though, is something that Governments of all political persuasions have 
latched onto over the years, both State and Commonwealth. I mean, are 
you saying it’s fool’s gold?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, when you say zero 
tolerance, then everybody says, ‘but’. It’s zero tolerance, then 
‘but’. And the ‘but’ is what’s important. We don’t want 
anybody using illicit drugs in this country, obviously. We don’t want 
that. It’s a bad thing that it’s happening and those who are purveyors 
of it should be stripped of their assets and put in gaol. That’s what 
should happen. But - here comes the ‘but’ - the ‘but’ is this: 
how can you tell somebody who has a habit and they’re in the grip 
of it, that your answer to them is to wander around telling them about 
zero tolerance. It’s meaningless. It’s babble. It’s political 
babble for a political effect. It means nothing to the families of those 
suffering and to those suffering themselves. But we do have answers, 
you know, we’ve got some very good under-funded answers out there 
in rehabilitation programs, detoxification programs, blockers like Naltrexone, 
new drugs that can bring you down from a Methadone dependency, or a 
heroin dependency, like LAMM and Bruprenorphine. I mean, these are cures 
These are solutions. They’re not a solution for everybody. Everybody 
is going to have a different solution. But they’re all there as part 
of the armoury. And that’s what we’ve now got to focus on.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Have you had much feedback 
from the Premiers on your white paper?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Our State leaders were 
interested in it. I’ve rung most of them and had a chance to have 
a chat to them about it. I think most of them would think we were on 
the right track. I’ve been pleased by the public response that there’s 
been to the propositions that we put forward. But I think the central 
proposition, the three central propositions is what everybody basically 
is now coming to agree on. Firstly, it’s a national problem, a problem 
for the Federal Government. Secondly, those who are the purveyors and 
profiteers in the illicit drug trade must be stripped of their assets 
as well as jailed, and a 100 per cent commitment to life for those who 
have the addiction. I think those three essential underpinnings are 
now pretty well out there and pretty well commonly accepted.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 What’s Australia’s 
response been to, initial evidence, anyway that the Indonesian troops 
were behind this latest massacre in East Timor?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 We’ve got to put all 
the pressure we can on the Indonesian armed forces to deal with this 
problem. Those militias were armed in the first place by the Indonesian 
military. They must now be disarmed by the Indonesian military. And 
if we’re going to get an outcome in Timor that does not involve massive 
bloodshed that is an essential precondition of it.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Is this, though, a worrying 
sign that perhaps these militia groups are going to fill in the power 
vacuum created by Indonesia withdrawing its interest from East Timor?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 That is a problem. There 
is no question about that. And that is why they must be disarmed and 
a democratic process allowed to take place. The Indonesian political 
leadership have said that they’re committed to that and that’s been 
a very welcome development. It’s necessary for the Indonesian military 
to give that practical effect on the ground. And it really cannot be 
given practical effect - we’ve learned all this over the last week 
-unless those militias are disarmed. There is only one force immediately 
in the situation that can do it and that’s the force which arms them 
in the first place, the Indonesian military. They know where the guns 
are, they should get them back.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 What, concretely, can 
Australia do, though?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, we are in there 
helping Indonesia on so many fronts, as we must do. The stability and 
progress of Indonesia is a front and centre core Australian national 
interest. The Indonesians know we feel that way. And they know that 
we are responding in all ways generously on that front. We must use 
those cards to advocate an action which I’m sure, in their hearts, 
Indonesian officials know ought to be pursued.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 On the 4,000 Kosovo 
refugees, what’s your reaction to the plan to distribute them among 
all States, keep them close to capital cities and spend $15 million?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, keep them in capital 
cities, spend what you need to spend to ensure that they are properly 
looked after and properly counselled in the period of time that they 
are here. What I’ve been really pleased about is that massive outpouring 
of the heart from my fellow Australians. I’ve received a few cables. 
And if I’ve been receiving cables the Government must have been flooded 
by them. But I’ve had local authorities getting in touch saying we 
want to help. And so many Australians have said that they want to billet 
Albanian families. Probably it’s best that they be billeted with Australians 
of Albanian origin, I’ve got to say, that’s probably the best way, 
and I’ve been very impressed with the statements that have been made 
by the community leaders in that regard. But it’s a terrific thing 
that so many Australians have warmed to it.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Jeff Kennett said Victoria 
could take 4,000 alone. Should Australia be taking more?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 The truth is we could 
all take 4,000, at least all our major capital cities could, all those 
cities over I million would absorb them very easily. I’ve pointed 
out, on a number of occasions, that 4,000 is the equivalent of about 
a quarter of the attendees of a Perth Glory match. It’s not a huge 
problem. I think it’s a start. I’ve said that we also need to look 
to the normal program as well. There are going to be situations arise 
here where it will be unsafe for some to go home. And they, therefore, 
will need to qualify as refugees and we’ll need to up our formal refugee 
intake to take account of that.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Is it the best solution 
to the problem, though? I mean, it’s been said that it’s going to 
cost over $40 million to get them out here. Shouldn’t we be spending 
that money on the ground. Putting the money into Macedonia, Albania?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Got to do both. You 
know, it’s not an either/or situation. Those countries are now overrun. 
There’s no question about that. They can’t handle it. And, even 
with all the resources going in, the area in which they’re operating 
- and basically it’s just not human living conditions - they’re 
going to have to take a substantial number out of there in order to 
be able to handle the problem there. And it’s not unreasonable that 
we should make a small contribution.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Have you sought a guarantee 
from the Government that the refugees who come over here are going to 
be voluntary? We’ve been seeing some terrible footage of refugees 
being forcibly put on the buses and planes and pushed all around Europe.

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, you’ve got to 
make sure that’s across the board, not just here. That has to be everywhere. 
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees has to look to that and I very 
much hope that that was just initial teething problems associated with 
the transfer. I mean, obviously, every effort has to be made to find 
a dissipated family. You know, we’ve got reports of families ending 
up in about five different places. Before you actually send people out 
of the area, you ought to at least make the effort to coalesce those 
families again so they all go together. All these things ought to be 
done and these are things which the Australian Government ought to be 
pointing out to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Just back on something 
you mentioned earlier with regard to expelling students from school. 
Were you making particular reference then to the private school students 
who were expelled for smoking marijuana?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Yes, I was.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 The Independent Schools 
Council this morning criticised the Prime Minister for what they call 
a hypocritical back-flip on his policy. They say you can’t espouse 
zero tolerance and then say, ‘well, it’s OK, if you do it after 
school’. What’s you’re reaction to that?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, it just goes to 
show the weakness of a pure and simple zero tolerance position. It all 
becomes zero tolerance - ‘but’. And there has to be a big time ‘but’ 
in the handling of kids in school who have got a drug problem. We have 
to be absolutely certain that they get the proper treatment and proper 
counselling when they have that drug problem. And you don’t do that 
by putting them on the streets.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Our 
Premier here is one of the greatest exponents of zero tolerance, although 
the Government here is now looking at several treatment programs. Are 
you confident that the West Australian Premier will take something positive 
out of today’s meeting?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Look, 
they’re all learning something, aren’t they? We’re all novices 
in this game. And the more you sit down and take a look at the programs 
that are available, the massively under-funded programs, the more you 
talk to young people, and others, because it’s not just young people, 
who have had a problem and who still have a problem, the more you know 
that simple political rhetoric doesn’t work. You just can’t wander 
around mouthing slogans at them. You actually have to do something. 
And the more you do something and the more you devote yourself to keeping 
people alive, then the more you move down the track of saying, ‘OK, 
zero tolerance - but. And the ‘but’ is, in fact, making people safe 
while they have their habit and doing your level best to get them off 
it.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Both 
Premier Court and Dr Gallop believe their state should be given a share 
of the personal income tax as well as the GST. Would you support something 
like that?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, 
the GST is a pup for the States. The States are being given, ostensibly, 
the product of a tax they do not have the right to levy. And that makes 
the States highly vulnerable. And the States are starting to get very, 
very nervous on many different fronts. What we said when we were about 
in Government I think is the right way to go, that is a revenue sharing 
arrangement with the States. Leave the States with the taxing powers 
they have, don’t oblige them to surrender them in the way in which 
they’re being obliged to surrender on some, and then enter into a 
revenue sharing arrangement with them and the Commonwealth level.

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 So, 
not just give them a share of the income tax, or not?

  

  BEAZLEY: 

  

 Well, 
give them a share of total Commonwealth revenue, an agreed share that 
gives them certainty for the future. That’s what we suggested in the 
last election campaign. I still think it’s the right way to go.

  

 Ends

  

  

  

  JS

