---
title: "Limited changes to asylum seeker assistance scheme\n"
date: "1999-05-11"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475405
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KH806%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 Tuesday, 11 May 1999

  

  LIMITED CHANGES TO ASYLUM SEEKER ASSISTANCE 
SCHEME

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today announce d the Asylum Seeker Assistance (ASA) Scheme would 
be extended to provide help to a limited number of people in urgent 
need of assistance during review of their failed Protection Visa applications.

  

 The ASA provides financial assistance to people who 
are unable to meet their most basic needs for food, accommodation and 
health care while their applications for Protection Visas are being 
assessed by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

  

 This Scheme is funded by the Government and administered 
by the Australian Red Cross.

  

 “It has become clear that there is a need to provide 
assistance for basic essentials to certain vulnerable people living 
in the community during the period their failed applications are under 
review by a merits review tribunal,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “Extending the ASA scheme in this way will ensure 
that people in dire need, many of whom are women and children, will 
be properly assisted during this time.

  

 “However, I must emphasise that the scheme will 
not be extended to all people who are undergoing the merits tribunal 
review process.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said assistance would continue to be unavailable 
to failed asylum seekers who are taking court action to challenge Tribunal 
decisions.

  

 “Sadly, evidence still points to high levels of 
misuse of the protection visa process by people who are not genuine 
refugees. Significant numbers of people who have no lawful right to 
remain in the country continue to pursue every legal means available 
to stay.

  

 “If people continue to refuse to accept the decisions 
of my Department and the independent merits review tribunals it is entirely 
appropriate that they are responsible for their own support.

  

 “These changes will ensure that the integrity of 
Australia’s refugee determination process is maintained”.

  

 Media inquiries

 Brad Robinson 02 6277 7860 / 0414 278 715

  

  

  cm

