---
title: "Child and migrant labour."
date: "1999-09-14"
creators:
  - "Mukadi, Sofiati"
source: ""
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477033
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5YI26%22
---

  I 

  ISR 

  CHILD AND MIGRANT LABOUR   By: Ms. Sofiati Mukadi 

  Presented on 

  International Council on Social Welfare 

  28th Asia and Pacific Regional Conference of ICSW 

  -. 

  Social Welfare and Social Development in the New Millenium 

  14-l 7 September 1999, Sydney, Australia 

  MIGRANT WORKERS AND TRADE UNIONS 

  Migrant workers are:’   a. 

  b. 

  C. 

  d. 

  e. 

  f. 

  g* 

  Merchant navy seaman in a foreign port. 

  Professional actor on a foreign tour. 

  Farm worker who crosses a nearby frontier to help with the harvest. 

  People whom creating their own business. 

  Worker who has crossed a frontier illegally. 

  Refugee. 

  International airplane pilot. 

  When we talked about migrant workers, we should ensure that it is clear which 

  groups we have in mind, because there is no perfect definition. 

  IL0 has considered migrant workers on many occasions, and has adopted the 

  Migrant 

  W6rker Employment Convention No. 97/l 949 (revised), Convention No. 

  143/l 975 (revised), the Migration for Employment Recommendation (revised) No. 

  86/1949, and the Migrant Workers Recommendation No. 151 /1975 on this 

  subject. 

  From a trade union point of view, what matters is the welfare of the migrant 

  workers and their families, together with that of the workers in the receiving 

  countries. Trade unions are not law enforcement agencies, but a consistent 

  theme of all IL0 Conventions, Recommendations, and other Pronouncements is 

  that both employers and trade unions should be associated with the formulation 

  of official policies affecting the interests of migrant workers. 

  Few migrant workers join trade unions, some of the factors which might be 

  mentioned could well include: 

  a. Ignorance of what trade unions was all about. 

  b. Reluctance to get into trouble with the employer or the police. 

  ’ Dunning Harold. Trade Litions andMgram Workers. ILO Office. Geneva 198313. 

  -_ _ . -- i 

  c. Suspicion that migrant workers were being used by trade unions for wrong 

  purposes. 

  d. Pressure from the authorities in the home country, not to get involved in any 

  political or social action in the receiving country. 

  e. Etc. 

  In the other hands, trade unions can offer some solution to migrant workers, such 

  as: 

  a. 

  b. 

  C. 

  Representation, on any problems, commission or other national body in 

  countries of emigration responsible for supervising the terms of employment 

  and work conditions. Similarly, the host countries trade union’s might seek 

  representation on parallel bodies set uy 

  standards are respected. 

  Collective Bargaining. 

  Particip&ion, in all decisions which affect t 

  3 in order to ensure that proper 

  heir working lives. 

  VISION 

  Indonesian migrant workers placement organizing is based on national system   vision to enable citizens receive the extensive working opportunity as human 

  rights implementation, including workers economics’ rights to improve living 

  standards, welfare, and increase foreign exchange acceptance. 

  MISSION 

  Build reliable migrant workers management to get more placements for skilled   migrant workers in professional way with government and non-government 

  institution’s support. 

  PURPOSES 

  Indonesian migrant workers placement purposes for 19992000 period:   a. To decrease national unemployment problem. 

  b. To increase migrant workers protection. 

  c. To improve human resources skills. 

  d. To increase foreign exchange acceptance. 

  OBJECTIVE 

  The objectives for migrant workers placement in 19992000 period: 

  1. Quantitative Objective 

  Send 2;800,000 migrant workers aboard by Indonesian Migrant Workers 

  Companies. 

  2. Foreign Exchange Acceptance Objective 

  The 2,800,OOO migrant workers placement contains 1,490,OOO formal sector 

  placements and 1,310,OCO informal sector placement, the foreign exchange 

  acceptance in this period approximately US$ 13 billion. 

  3. Qualitative Objective 

  Migrant workers placement objective in 19992000 period aimed to skilled 

  workers with gradual reduction of semi-skilled workers. 

  Skilled migrant workers placement cover these sectors: 

  a. Plantation/agriculture industries. 

  b. Manufacturing industries. 

  c. Constructions. 

  d. Services: 

  - Health. 

  - Hotels. 

  - Trading. 

  - Banking and Finances. 

  - Housekeeping’s. 

  e. Transportation’s. 

  f. Mining. 

  4. Prime Sectors 

  There are prime sectors which need special attention to be improve in the 

  future based on market opportunity, they are: agriculture, marines, services, 

  nursing, and housekeeping’s. 

  STRATEGY 

  A. Promotion-and Working Market Operation 

  1. Build good diplomatic relationship for migrant workers employment 

  placement. 

  2. Identify working market opportunity. 

  3. Make working market segmentation. 

  4. Make working market positioning. 

  B. Subsidy 

  1. Socialized migrant workers program, including: 

  a. Procedures and migrant workers condition. 

  b. Working market opportunity. 

  c. Migrant workers placement regulations. 

  d. Migrant workers obligations and rights. 

  2. Improve migrant workers placement regulations. 

  3. Establish and renew migrant workers training standards to suit the request. 

  4. Improve migrant workers professionalism. 

  6 

  C. Protections 

  1 LG*“hd I . enforcement protections.   2. Establish migrant workers demand. 

  3. Establish and renew working agreement with user’s country. 

  4. Establish insurance protection systems. 

  D. Welfare 

  1. 

  2. 

  3. 

  4. 

  5. 

  Give banking credit for migrant workers. 

  Establish remittance pattern. 

  Socialized remittance pattern and saving program to the migrant workers 

  and the family. 

  Coordinate banking institutions in remittance management. 

  Outlined migrant workers placement, salary and possible remittance. 

  -. 

  MIGRANT WORKERS INFORMATION SYSTEM 

  Indonesia has build Information Management System using telecommunication   and information technology has established to sustain the migrant workers 

  placement strategy. This system can both fasten and integrated migrant workers 

  process, as well as to protect migrant workers by real time monitoring. 

  MIGRANT WORKERS PLACEMENT PROCEDURE 

  1. Departure Procedure 

  a. Preparation Process 

  Contains registration and migrant workers candidates selection activity. 

  b. Integrated Services Process 

  Contains financial saving, passport and visa arrangement, ticketing, 

  working contract signaturement and insurance arrangement. 

  Indonesian migrant workers departure process shown in annex 1. 

  2. Arriving Procedure 

  a. Arriving Preparation Process 

  b. Back Home Return Process 

  Indonesian migrant workers arriving process shown in annex 2. 

  ~OlwNlau003 

  9Nl13WWW ‘8 9NINlWl 

  I d31S lWNOllWU3dO I A3llOd 

  31931WlS 

  SElSOdUnd ’ 

  S133dSW 3llAON033   ‘8 lWlN3WNO2ilAN3 

  I 

  NOISSIW ‘8 NOISIA 

  9Nl139ana . 

  lN3UU39WNWW   lWNOllWdtJ3dO . 

  NOIlWZINW%JO . 

  NOllWWUOJNI   ‘8 SISAlWNW   l 

  A931WwS 

  ‘8 A3llOd . 

  S133dSW 

  lN3W33Wld   1SOd 

  lN3W33Wld 

  lN3W33Wld 3kld _ 

  -- 

  ANNEX 

  INDONESIAN MIGRANT WORKERS DEPARTURE PROCESS 

  Process 

  Preparation   Process 

  Integrated   Services 

  -. 

  (Annex 1) (Annex 1) 

  Activity Activity 

  Registration Registration 

  In Charge Institution In Charge Institution 

  l l Department of manpower regional office. Department of manpower regional office.   9 Migrant Workers Sending Corporations. - 9 Migrant Workers Sending Corporations. - 

  Document   Selection 

  Open Bank   Account 

  m Department of manpower regional office.   m Migrant Workers Sending Corporations 

  Bank 

  Passport Handling Migrant Workers Sending Corporations 

  Visa Handling Migrant Workers Sending Corporations 

  Ticketing Migrant Workers Sending Corporations 

  Final Education for . Migrant Workers Sending Corporations   migrant workers m 

  NGO 

  before leaving m Related Institutions 

  I 

  Signing the   Working   Agreement (WA)   and it’s validity 

  process 

  lndonesian Migrant Workers Placement Bureau 

  Insurance Process 

  1 

  Migrant Workers Sending Corporations 

  Free departure tax Migrant Workers Sending Corporations and I   policy Indonesian Migrant Workers Placement Bureau 1 

  Source: Department 

  of Manpower, 1999. 

  INDONESIAN MIGRANT WORKERS ARRIVING PROCESS 

  Process 

  Preparation   Process 

  Back Gme 

  Sending   Process 

  (Annex 2) 

  Source: Department of Manpower, 1999. 

  Activity In Charge Institution 

  Migrant worker’s 8 Migrant Workers Sending Corporation’s   obligatory and Partner 

  rights settlement by m User   user = Migrant Worker 

  Document a Migrant Workers Sending Corporation’s 

  preparation Partner 

  n User 

  m Migrant Worker 

  Report Process . Migrant Workers Sending Corporation’s   Partner   m User   . Migrant Worker 

  Arrival checking Immigration Office and Airport 

  Arrival registration Migrant Workers Sending Corporations   And   Indonesian Migrant Workers Placement Bureau 

  Tfanspomtion to Tfa-qxlmtion Cofporation   special terminal   Arrival checking Migrant Workers Sending Corporations   And 

  Indonesian Migrant Workers Placement Bureau 

  Back Home I 

  l Indonesian Migrant Workers Placement 

  Transportation Bureau 

  m Transportation Corporation 





  -. , 

  3 

  - 

  3 

  +! 

  c 3 =:   rc   Y   6 9 

  -- 

  m   0 

  fu 

  3 

  8 

  0 

  2 

  -0   8 

  h) 

  . . 

  8 

  0 

  $ 

  -0   8 

  . . . _ . . 

  s 0 

  X 

  0 

  z 

  0 

  8 10'9 

  861-P OLO’C 661’Z 99s’ 1 6U’C OP 

  r 

  -i--- KS’6 I 6Z9’L 1 PO1 ‘9 C88’P 906X GZl’E: sz 8S0'89 0 18X 900’ 1 z O&9’ 11 C8P’9 ZO9’C 08 99P’tx 11 t7’8C S09’LZ 8P8’6 1 8LZ’P 1 9LZ’O 1 011 188% L69.C 1ZS’C VSC’C t76L’C ZPO’C s _~ --- ---- -- -. -- -- ZGZ’SCZ OZ8’9C 1 PLI;‘GL 061’9t7 CC6’92 VL9’S 1 SlZ 9LC6tT 10’3’6C 109’ I.-E 18Z’SZ SZZ’OZ 081’91 SZ ZL 134 L6t7’E 1 PS8’Z 1 ZPZ’Z 1 6S9’ 11 VOl’ll s 6PS ‘CC’S IPZ’GCC COl’ 1zz 092’8P 1 96S’ZO 1 E W&L Zl 861’S L883 lPG’9 892-L 9L0’8 CL6.8 Ol- 88P.86 lCP’60 C 06!XZl 001*sc1 Zll’OSl 16L’99 1 Ol- ___~_--__ --- L8L’CO 1 61~311 ZCL*8ZL 69C:‘ZP 1 L81’9Sl PSL’SL 1 cc- cooz zooz iooz _ oooz 6661 8661 WEIA %   uo!PWId 

  pUe JaUJJe j 

  Jolqnsul 

  asJnN 

  WloH 

  JaA!Ja 

  ueweas 

  JOl!U I 

  JayJOM hrOl3e4 ‘8 

  JOJeJado klnp heaH 

  1vlAlkJ0zi 

  JaUwWa 

  p!eumsnoH 

  1b’WtJOjNI 

  saor 

  I 

  CHILD LABOUR IN INDONESIA 

  Background 

  Child labour has always been a major concern of every adults or parents, 

  Despite national laws and international standards, child labour remains a 

  persistent problem in much of the world today. 

  Child labour as an issue, is still relatively new in Indonesia, and there is no 

  coherent and articulated child labour available yet. Working children and youth 

  data is hard to find in Indonesia, children participation in labour force is 

  considered controversial and the official data does not provide a clear picture 

  of the problem. 

  Labour force and census data indicate that the majority of children work with 

  their parents, at home doing housekeeping work, on the farm, or just selling 

  newspapers or cigarettes on the streets. 

  Child labour is a complex phenomenon and the result of many factors, of which 

  poverty seems to be the most important one. Apart from the fact that economic 

  hardship forces children on labour market (push factor) there are indications that 

  demand for cheap docile labour draws children into the labour force (pull 

  factor) .* 

  1. The Push Factor 

  A number of studies in Indonesia 3 have shown that family poverty is the most 

  important reason for working children. There is evidence that economic 

  hardship compels low-income families, usually those where the household 

  head has low educational level, to rely on their children contribution for 

  ’ LO’s 

  International Programme OR the Elimination of Child Labour Report: Child Labour in Indunesia.   1991. 13-14. 

  3 Ibid 

  3. 

  The Pull Factor 

  9 

  survival. Other factors are many parents opinion are work can be an 

  educational process, that will contribute the child development. In other 

  words, the investment in education is not consider worthwhile, the parents 

  thought children would learn and gather experience by working. 

  The existence of child labour can be explained by the fact that children have 

  little else to do: schools are unavailable, inadequate, too far away, or too 

  expensive. Employing children is in such cases merely seen as an act of 

  compassion, giving these children an opportunity to learn something and to 

  earn money to supplement the family income. 

  Children workers are in demand because they are cheap, docile and 

  considered to be better-suited types of work. 

  IMPROVED PROTECTION WORKING CHILDREN 

  Indonesia has enacted legislation to prohibit the children employment below 

  certain age and to specify conditions under which minors may work when they 

  are legally permitted to do so. The legislation in Indonesia pertaining child labour 

  is fairly progressive. However, a more thorough review shows that major part of 

  the legislation protecting child labourers is not enforceable. 

  Now, children workers can rely on the new Labour Act and its’ regulations, which 

  signed in 1997, to be forced. The Act was intended to come into force in 

  October lst , 1998, but it has been deferred until October l*+, 2000 in order to 

  allow the Act to be revised. This Act is a big leap in protecting children workers, 

  since Indonesia have ratified Convention No. 138/ 1973, about minimum age, 

  followed with other ILO’s Fundamental Human Rights Conventions. The 

  atmosphere of reformation era in Indonesia can support all ILO’s Fundamental 

  Human Rights Conventions implementation. 

  10 

  Many NGOs are establish against children workers users or to improve children 

  workers conditions, if the user can not laid off their children workers, these days. 

  The Minister of Manpower on June 29 th 1999, announced the ILO/IPEC Action 

  Programme in enforcing labour legislation and improving labour inspection 

  mechanism for child labour for the biennium 1999/2000. One objective of this 

  Programme, which the Indonesian Government and ILO’s/lPEC have agreed 

  upon, is making the Garments, Plantations and Jermal Industries in 4 selected 

  Provinces free of child labour. For this purpose the programme aims at removing 

  5,400 children from their workplaces and gives them non-formal education. This 

  Action Programme shows the Indonesian Government’s commitment to 

  implement IL0 Convention No. 138, this means Indonesia now is legally bound to 

  eliminate all child labour under 15 years progressively, except light work not 

  impeding school attendance. 

  Many of ib/IPEC activities concentrate on children in hazardous working 

  conditions and other worst forms of child labour. The IPEC activities aim at 

  preventing the entry of children in child la bour, withdrawing children from 

  exploitative and hazardous labour, providing alternatives to the children and 

  their families and at improving working conditions as a transitional measure. 

  Other programmes for the year 1999/2000 include: 

  a. Combating child labour in the jermals (fishing platforms) in North Sumatra. 

  b. Combating child labour in the footwear industry. 

  C. Combating child labour in the plantations. 

  d. Combating child labour in the hazardous work. 

  e. Assisting in revision the la bour law regarding child labour. 

  f. Study and awareness raising on child prostitution in North Sumatra. 

  g- Setting up a center for child domestic workers and devising local regulations. 

  h. A code of conduct on child labour for employers. 

  i. Awareness raising campaigns 

  j. Etc. 

  For these activities combating child labour in Indonesia for the year 1999/xx>o, 

  ILO/IPEC contributes between US$ 1.2 million. 

  11 

  Governmental actions in improving children’s protection has doing in the most 

  part of Indonesia, such as nine years compulsory education (from elementary to 

  junior secondary school), more scholarships given to the children from low level 

  income family, build free school in the poverty counties, back to school national 

  campaign, etc. 

