---
title: "Downer on Bali meeting outcome."
date: "1999-04-28"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475037
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AN706%22
---

   

  Media Release

  LAURIE BRERETON MP 

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

 28 April 1999

  

  DOWNER ON BALI MEETING OUTCOME

  

  “Foreign Minister Downer’s comments on the ABC Radio ‘AM’ 
program will give the East Timorese no confidence that they will be 
able to dec ide their future free from violence and intimidation”, 
the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, said today.

  

 “Mr Downer’s claim that the outcome of the Bali 
summit was ‘better than expected’ and his references to the still 
confidential New York agreements gloss over the stark fact that Prime 
Minister Howard failed to secure the concrete measures required to ensure 
the immediate disarming of the pro-integrationist militias which are 
continuing their violent intimidation of the civilian population in 
East Timor.”

  

 “Mr Downer claims that the issue of disarmament 
can be effectively addressed by the newly established Peace and Stability 
Commission. While the Commission may prove to be a useful element in 
efforts to promote a peaceful process of transition in East Timor, its 
ability to achieve early and effective disarmament of the militias is 
problematical at best.”

  

 “In effect this may mean that responsibility for 
disarming the militias will be moved away from the Indonesian Government 
and given to the Commission which will of necessity work through consensus. 
Disarmament by consensus with the militias holding an effective veto 
will not give the East Timorese people any confidence that the present 
wave of pro-integrationist violence and intimidation will end soon. 
The militias may eventually agree to disarm, but in all likelihood they 
will do so only after they have finished their dirty work.”

  

 “Similarly Mr Downer’s suggestion that there will 
be increased reliance on the Indonesian police rather than regular military 
units to ensure peace and security in East Timor does very little to 
build confidence. The Indonesian police have long been an integral part 
of ABRI. Police Mobile Brigades —BRIMOB - have been at the cutting 
edge of ABRI’s suppression of East Timorese independence supporters. 
According to reliable accounts, Indonesian police were present at Liqui9a 
and fired tear gas into the church thereby allowing the militia to massacre 
the refugees sheltering there.”

  

 “A number of UN civilian police acting as advisers 
to the Indonesian police falls far short of what is required to give 
terrified East Timorese any confidence that the forthcoming ballot will 
be conducted in an environment free of violence and intimidation.”

  

 “Mr Howard should have secured the unequivocal agreement 
of the Indonesian Government that they would immediately disarm the 
pro-integrationist militias and accept effective international verification 
of disarmament by a United Nations peacekeeping mission. Mr Downer’s 
claims of diplomatic triumph this morning ring very hollow indeed.”

  

 Contact: Philip Dorling (02) 6277 4717 or 0416 203 
058

  

  jk

