---
title: "Democrats seek to disallow Ruddock's new immigration plans."
date: "1999-10-28"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478257
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TGH06%22
---

   

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  

 28 OCTOBER 1999

 99/586

  

  

  Democrats seek to disallow Ruddock’s new 
Immigration plans

  

  

  Government proposals to limit refugee status to three years for on-shore 
asylum se ekers, will have little or no impact on the number of 
boat people entering Australia, while making life harder for genuine 
refugees, according to the Australian Democrats.

  

 Democrat Senator Andrew Bartlett will move a motion 
to disallow the new regulations when Parliament resumes in late November.

  

 Minister Ruddock has said Labor have given ‘in-principle’ 
support to his proposals. Senator Bartlett urged Labor to take a closer 
look at the hidden costs of Ruddock’s new immigration plans and support 
the Democrats’ disallowance.

  

 “It’s time for Labor to stand up to Ruddock’s 
anti-refugee agenda,” said Senator Bartlett, the Australian Democrats’ 
spokesperson on immigration.

  

 Senator Bartlett also rejected Minister Ruddock’s 
claims that the tough new laws would slow the numbers of boat people.

  

 “These measures will not affect people’s decision 
to attempt to escape from their own countries. Most of them don’t 
know what awaits them in Australia or have been lied to.

  

 “In many cases they have handed over their life 
savings in order to attempt a hazardous journey, which they hope will 
bring them a new life. They are under a significant risk in their homelands 
and are entitled to protection.

  

 “These measures will do little to prevent people 
smuggling whilst increasing the suffering of genuine asylum seekers,” 
said Senator Bartlett.

  

 Immigration Minister Ruddock has announced tough new 
measures against asylum-seekers, including a proposal to give unauthorised 
arrivals who are found to be genuine refugees, a three year temporary 
protection visa rather than permanent haven.

  

 “The changes would be a potential lawyers’ picnic. 
After three years here, refugees will have to undergo the same process 
all over again. This will mean duplication in costs, procedures and 
more work for lawyers,” said Senator Andrew Bartlett,

  

 “Temporary asylum was tried in 1990 and discontinued 
in 1995 because it didn’t work. One Nation brought it back as a policy 
before the last election and were broadly condemned,” said Senator 
Bartlett.

  

 “Australia had a positive record on refugees for 
many years but this has sadly deteriorated in recent times.”

  

  

 For interview contact, Senator Andrew Bartlett on 
0418 743 789

  

  

  al  1999-10-29  10:34

