---
title: "Customs Coastwatch nets more boat people."
date: "1999-11-11"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478581
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SCI06%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Minister for Justice & Customs

  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone

  Senator for South Australia

  

 163/99

 11 November 1999

  

  Customs Coastwatch nets more boat people

  

  Customs Coastwatch has detected and arranged interception of a motorised 
Indones ian vessel believed to be carrying 22 boat people, the 
Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Amanda Vanstone, announced 
today.

  

 The detection, by a Coastwatch Dash-8 aircraft, followed 
an alert generated by defence surveillance and occurred in international 
waters south of the Indonesian archipelago, about 130km from Ashmore 
Reef.

  

 Within four hours of aerial detection, the vessel 
was intercepted by the Customs vessel, Botany Bay, as it crossed into 
Australian territorial waters. The Botany Bay was specifically stationed 
at Ashmore Reef, located 800km west of Darwin and 600km north of Broome, 
in expectation of further arrivals.

  

 “I am advised that the Botany Bay issued warnings 
to the vessel to leave Australian waters, but the vessel continued and 
was shadowed by the Botany Bay until being formally intercepted as it 
neared Ashmore Reef,” Senator Vanstone said.

  

 “While the flow of boat people continues at record 
levels, it is important to again acknowledge the success of our coastal 
surveillance system in Australia.

  

 “Our coastal surveillance system is a sophisticated, 
strategically-driven operation that uses intelligence generated from 
a variety of sources, including defence, in Australia and overseas. 
It delivers the best features of a Coast Guard without additional bureaucracy 
or the huge overheads associated with a standalone service.”

  

 Senator Vanstone said officials of the Department 
of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs would interview the boat people 
in a few days when they arrived in Australia.

  

 Minister available through Kevin Donnellan 0419 400 
078

  

  

  rw  1999-11-15  11:15

