---
title: "Details of Australia's largest ever humanitarian operation announced."
date: "1999-04-09"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474650
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UU606%22
---

   

  Media Release

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 MPS 57/99

  

  DETAILS OF AUSTRALIA’S LARGEST EVER HUMANITARIAN

  OPERATION ANNOUNCED

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today ann ounced details of the operation to bring 4,000 displaced 
Kosovo Albanians to safety in Australia, with the first plane load expected 
to arrive late next week.

  

 Mr Ruddock said that following a series of high level 
discussions this week by a specially created Government task force, 
arrangements are now in place to offer these displaced people a temporary 
safe haven.

  

 “A team comprising immigration officials, interpreters 
and a representative of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees 
(UNHCR), is now standing by and will fly to Skopje in Macedonia this 
weekend.

  

 “As soon as the team arrives, it will start identifying 
those people displaced by the conflict who can be best assisted by temporary 
asylum in Australia.

  

 “The 4,000 will be selected on the basis that they 
are fit to travel and voluntarily agree to be evacuated to Australia. 
Keeping family units together will be a priority, and selection will 
be made on the advice of the UNHCR representative.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said the Government was currently finalising 
the charter of jumbo jets from one of Australia’s major carriers Qantas, 
with the first plane load of approximately 300 people expected to arrive 
late next week.

  

 “On arrival in Australia, groups will be initially 
housed at a reception centre at East Hills in Sydney for three to four 
days. Here they will undergo health screening conducted by the NSW Department 
of Health, and receive further information about their stay in Australia.

  

 “Following this, the groups will be moved to a number 
of accommodation facilities around the country, with the first group 
to be accommodated in Brighton Barracks in Tasmania. Other accommodation 
centres to be used are currently being assessed and an announcement 
will be made next week”.

  

 Mr Ruddock said on arrival at the accommodation centres, 
people will have access to a range of services from basic necessities 
such as health care, food and education, to professional trauma counselling 
and language services.

  

 “Everything will be done to ensure these people 
have access to all services they need to help them to settle and re-establish 
some normalcy in their lives.

  

 “Representatives of a number of aid agencies met 
with my Department this morning to talk about how their services could 
dovetail with those being provided by the Commonwealth.

  

 “There will be no restrictions on the movement of 
those in the centres, however, If someone decides to leave their accommodation 
they will not have access to the same level of professional support 
they will receive at the accommodation centres.

  

 “While the Australian community has been extremely 
generous in making numerous offers to house those from the affected 
region, the current conflict could continue for sometime, and provision 
of appropriate services can only be effectively provided at accommodation 
centres.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said that successfully organising the biggest 
airlift Australia had ever attempted in such a short time was due to 
the extraordinary efforts of the eight departments and authorities involved.

  

 “Arrangements are now in place to bring 4,000 people 
displaced from their homes by war, to the safe and welcoming country 
of Australia. I know that they will be warmly received.”

  

 ENDS

 Friday, 9 April1999

  

 Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson on 0419 278 715

  

  jk

