---
title: "Sydney, 18 June 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [cricket; Kosovar refugees; lamb exports]"
date: "1999-06-18"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "cricket; Kosovar refugees; lamb exports"
  - "cricket"
  - "Kosovar refugees"
  - "lamb exports"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476402
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GHA06%22
---

   

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER

  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP

  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - SYDNEY

  

  

  Subjects: Cricket, Kosovar refugees, lamb exports

  

  

  18 June 1999

  

  E&OE

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Prime Minister, what about the cricket?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Oh, what a fantastic result. We really are on a roll 
and the leadership that Steve Waugh has given has been absolutely magnificent. 
His innings last Sunday evening in the first match against South Africa 
is as good a one-day innings as I’ve ever seen and I guess there’ll 
be a lot of sleepy heads on Monday morning.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Can we have the day off?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 No, but you can all stay up, in fact, it’s almost 
a matter of national honour to stay up on Sunday night and cheer the 
team on. And I know that millions of Australians will really be getting 
behind the team. It’s a magnificent climax to what has been a great 
World Cup for Australia’s great national sport.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Howard, what is your message to Steve Waugh?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, good luck, the whole country is with you.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Are you asking employers to be lenient on Monday?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

  No, look, I don’t get into that trivia. I’m just saying that everybody 
will want the team to win and I know that there’ll be millions of 
Australians watching  the match right to the finish and I’ll 
be one of them.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Howard, what about those Kosovar refugees?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, that matter’s being handled by the Immigration 
Minister, Mr Ruddock. We have been very generous and openhearted and 
I am sure that the overwhelming majority of the refugees feel that way 
and perhaps they are embarrassed by the behaviour of [inaudible]. The 
refugees are entitled to move around this country. They are not put 
in detention. But, of course, it is for the Government to decide the 
accommodation that will be provided at government expense. Nobody in 
their situation has a right to demand which accommodation will be provided 
at government expense. The accommodation offered to them at Singleton 
is entirely appropriate, quite adequate and I hope the matter will be 
intelligently resolved and I hope that the Australian community does 
not see the attitude of this particular group as being typical of the 
attitude of the refugees in general because it plainly is not.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Is there any timetable for their departure from Australia?

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, I don’t want to get into that detail. I think 
people should, everybody should co-operate in making this work.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Prime Minister, there’s some talk this morning of 
blocking off the Homebush site to average Australians who haven’t 
got a ticket.... [inaudible].

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Look, I haven’t caught up with all the detail of 
that. You go and ask Mr Knight about that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Prime Minister, what about these lamb talks [inaudible]

  

  PRIME MINISTER:

  

 Well, in a sense no news is good news but we still 
remain fairly concerned, indeed, quite concerned and fairly pessimistic 
because there’s an enormous amount of domestic pressure being applied 
to the American administration. But there’s a very clear choice here 
for the United States and for President Clinton. If it wants to continue 
to lead the world towards freer and more open trade it must practise 
what it preaches at home. And if it imposes a quota on Australian lamb 
exports it will send an appalling signal to the rest of the world. It 
will say to the rest of the world you have a ready-made excuse for your 
own protectionist approaches. But we have done everything we can and 
we will continue to do all we can to secure a fair deal and a fair go 
for Australian lamb exporters.

  

 Thank you.

  

 [ends]

  

  

  al  1999-06-21  10:43

