---
title: "3 April 1999: transcript of doorstop [Yugoslavia, CARE Australia workers]"
date: "1999-04-03"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Yugoslavia"
  - "CARE Australia workers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474553
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1M606%22
---

   

  

  TRANSCRIPT

  

  Of

  

  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER MP

  

  Minister for Foreign Affairs

  

  DOORSTOP, 3 APRIL 1999

  

  

  SUBJECT: Yugoslavia-CARE Australia workers

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 I just want to say something about two Australians 
who have gone mining in Serbia over the last few days.

  

 The Australian Government is concerned about the two 
Australian aid workers who have gone missing in Serbia. We have made 
representations to the Government in Belgrade directly through our Ambassador 
who has been moved to Budapest, but through our Ambassador speaking 
to the Foreign Ministry we have made representations and also to the 
Yugoslav Ambassador to Australia.

  

 These people we understand, these two Australians, 
were endeavouring to leave Serbia. They tried to get across the border 
into Hungary and were unable to do so. They then moved to the Croatian 
border. They were unable to get into Croatia. There is some concern 
that they may have been detained although we are not one hundred per 
cent sure of that. We would call on the Yugoslav Government though, 
if they have detained the Australians, to release the Australians and 
allow these two aid workers to leave. These are people who have been 
looking after refugees in Yugoslavia generally; they are not political 
partisans, they are not political players. These people are people of 
good intent just trying to make a humanitarian contribution to a terrible 
humanitarian disaster. One of them is the Country Manager of CARE Australia 
for Yugoslavia and the other is the Program Officer for Kosovo, so we 
very much hope that the Yugoslav authorities if they have detained them, 
will release them and release them immediately and allow them to leave 
the country. Otherwise we would of course very much like to know of 
their whereabouts but we do remain concerned that they may have been 
detained.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 What is (inaudible)?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 I can’t tell you what States they are from and you 
can get in touch with CARE in terms of their names but one of them is 
the Country Manager for Yugoslavia for CARE Australia and the other 
is the Program Officer for Kosovo.

  

 Both of them have I understand been in Yugoslavia 
for some time. They have been actively engaged in humanitarian activities 
assisting refugees but haven’t yet assisted in Kosovo. They have been 
assisting Serbian refugees on occasions as well and frankly I think 
that for people who are doing humanitarian work they should be allowed 
to leave the country peacefully. Australia is not a combatant in this 
particular bombing activity that's taking place and there is absolutely 
no reason for these people to be detained.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

  So you have no idea where they are at the moment?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 No, we don’t know where they are. I don’t want 
to sound alarmist but I am concerned that they may have been detained. 
I don’t know that they have been detained but we believe they may 
have been detained. They have no doubt a great deal of information about 
refugee movements and the ilk. In Yugoslavia and Kosovo but they are 
not people who have any military knowledge or any military contribution 
in one way or another to make to this activity and they should be released 
if they have been detained.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 How have your representations gone to the Yugoslav 
Government?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 Well the Yugoslav Ambassador here in Australia and 
officials in the Foreign Ministry in Belgrade have been quite positive 
in their response. I understand the Ambassador has recommended that 
everything be dome to find these people or, if they have been detained, 
for them to be released and the Foreign Ministry has been prepared to 
look into the matter but our concern, of course, at this stage, is that 
nothing may come of these representations. We still don’t know where 
they are.

  

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Why has It been so long since .. ..(inaudible) told 
about this?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 Well because both, we acted to some extent on the 
advice of CARE Australia and we agreed with their advice that it would 
be better not to attract too much publicity to them in the immediate 
future and to see how we got on with our representations. But obviously, 
as you can tell, we have taken the view with CARE Australia today that 
we should say something about this because four days have elapsed since 
they were last contacted which was through a mobile phone and they haven’t 
been heard of since Now the.. are people who I understand had with them 
not just a vehicle which was a United Nations High Commission for Refugees 
vehicle but also a mobile phone and a satellite phone so we would expect 
them to have been able to make contact with the outside world and that 
they haven’t is now becoming a matter of some concern to us and we 
really feel that you know, we should say something publicly about it. 
In particular we want the Yugoslav authorities to be even more responsive 
than they have been already.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Do you think ...(inaudible) their last contact ..... 
their attitude?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 Well there was some indication that they may have 
been detained although we don’t have hard and fast information on 
that but we do know that they tried to get across the border into Hungary 
and they were turned back and they tried to get across the border into 
Croatia. We sent a consular officer who is normally based in Belgrade 
but has been evacuated to Budapest, we sent the consular officer from 
Budapest down to this border post in Croatia to see whether he could 
find out what had happened to them but the Serbian border guards said 
that they didn’t know of these people and denied that they had detained 
them at that border post. So their whereabouts is of concern to us.

  

  

  JOURNALISTS: 

  

 Do you think they might have Information that may 
be of interest to Serbians?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

  I wouldn’t have thought that they would. These after all are just 
aid workers who are non military and of course Australia isn’t a comba tant 
to what is happening in Serbia at the moment and these are Australians 
so they will have information obviously about the CARE activities within 
Yugoslavia in both Kosovo and other parts of the country and probably 
other parts of the former Yugoslavia but to our knowledge they have 
no information which would be of any particular interest to the Serbian 
authorities.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 Well Mr Downer you have seen the anger of the Serbs 
on the streets in Australia so why wouldn’t Australians over there 
be a target?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 Well I don’t know because I think that’s a non 
.... I think that some of the Serbian leaders here in Australia have 
made the point which I would only repeat and that is that those people 
are entitled to express their points of view, no one would deny the 
Serbians in Australia the opportunity to express their point of view 
but they must do so in a non violent way. If they do it in a violent 
way then obviously that is going to generate a great deal of antipathy 
from the rest of the Australian community. But I don’t think there 
is any relationship between how Serbians here in Australia, now Australian 
Serb, may feel about what’s happening in Serbia and what has happened 
to the two Australian aid workers. I couldn’t imagine any connection 
there.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 (inaudible) in that region now?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 Well I said the other day there were around five thousand 
but remember the bulk of those people are people who are dual nationals. 
There are something like seventeen hundred registered with the Australian 
Embassy in Belgrade and those people have all been contacted directly 
by the Embassy and advised to leave, most of them don’t want to leave 
they presumably don’t want to leave because they are dual nationals 
and they obviously have family and expending networks there that they 
just want to maintain.

  

  

  JOURNALIST: 

  

 The President has warned that it’s going to be an 
ongoing campaign as well in respect to that, what’s Australia’s 
attitude towards sending in ground troops?

  

  

  MINISTER: 

  

 Well our attitude is that we very much hope that the 
air campaign will be a successful campaign and we know that it’s going 
to be a long campaign. It’s been going on for quite a few days now 
already. The nature of the targets has been broadened from just anti-aircraft 
battles and those types of targets to as you know, the Interior Ministry, 
some of the infrastructure of the Milosevic regime. The sooner this 
finishes though the better but it must finish with President Milosevic 
agreeing to negotiate and to show a respect for human rights in Kosovo, 
in particular to cease the utterly appalling acts of ethnic cleansing 
that are happening in Kosovo. But we hope it won’t come to ground 
troops being used and that the aerial campaign will be effective at 
the end of the day. The decision on ground troops will be a matter for 
the NATO partners and we are not a member of NATO. Thank you.

  

  

 ENDS

