---
title: "Kosovo refugees given a use -by date for Australian haven."
date: "1999-04-22"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474959
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WE706%22
---

   

  Media Release

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats’ Spokesperson on Immigration

  

 22April 1999

 99/212

  

  Kosovo refugees given a use-by date for Australian 
haven

  

  The Australian Democrats have criticised the Government’s Temporary 
Safe Haven Legisl ation (likely to be debated in the Parliament 
tomorrow), arguing the legislation's main purpose is to give the Government 
legal standing to expel the Kosovo refugees in the future.

  

 “The legislation would create a new class of refugees 
with use-by dates. They have only temporary visas, are not allowed to 
apply for permanent residency while here, and are at the mercy of the 
Immigration Minister without right of appeal,” according to the Democrats’ 
spokesperson for immigration, Senator Andrew Bartlett.

  

 The Government has ruled out accepting any amendments 
to the legislation.

  

 “The Kosovo refugees could still come without this 
legislation. The legislation is not designed to allow 4000 Kosovo refugees 
into the country, but rather to give the Government the power to eject 
them at a future time of the Government’s choosing,” said Senator 
Bartlett.

  

 Senator Bartlett said the legislation reflected a 
drastic and dangerous departure from Australia’s usual practice in 
regard to refugees. “The Democrats are concerned this legislation 
may set a precedent. Before this legislation the only party that supported 
temporary refugee visas was One Nation.”

  

  

  Under the Temporary Safe Haven legislation:

  

  ·   Kosovo refugees would be issued with visas only for a temporary period.

  

  ·   Kosovo refugees would not be allowed to apply for permanent residency 
unless they left Australia again to apply from offshore;

  

  ·   The Minister can cancel or deny extensions on the Kosovo refugees’ 
visas at any time if, in his opinion, temporary safe haven is no longer 
necessary. This decision would not be subject to review or appeal and 
no specific criterion need to be met.

  

  ·   The Minister can refuse or cancel a visa on character grounds and 
that would automatically extend to all immediate family members. This 
can be done without notice, without appeal and without regard to natural 
justice.

  

  ·   If the legislation is passed, the temporary safe haven status could 
be used in regard to refugees from other regions in the future. It is 
not specific to the Kosovo refugees.

  

 “Our refugee program is in danger of becoming a 
three month waiting room,” Senator Bartlett said.

  

 “Most refugees will want to return home if that 
is possible but the choice of whether they do, must be in their hands 
not the Minister’s.

  

 “The refugees have already had their lives turned 
upside down and they should be allowed to make their own choice of when 
and if they return to their country.

  

 “Under this legislation, a refugee who chooses to 
come to Australia in the 4000 intake will —bizarrely - have less chance 
of a permanent home in Australia than a refugee who does not come.

  

 “The Government has shown no sign of extending the 
overall size of Australia’s refugee intake,” said Senator Bartlett.

  

  “After what these refugees have been through it woul d be 
wrong to add to their trauma and sense of displacement by ruling out 
the option of them staying in Australia permanently.

  

 “Concern about providing only temporary refuge has 
been expressed by virtually all the relevant community groups including 
the Refugee Council, Ethnic Communities Councils, and Amnesty as well 
as the Immigration Minister before he was over-ruled by the Prime Minister,” 
said Senator Bartlett.

  

 Minister Ruddock commenting on the Kosovo refugees 
2 weeks ago said, “Temporary outcomes have never been successful in 
terms of moving people, locating them for a short period of time and 
then returning them.” (AAP, 6 April 1999)

  

  The Democrats call on the Government to guarantee that no refugee 
offered safe haven in Australia will be returned to their country of 
origin against their will.

  

 For further information contact Senator Andrew Bartlett 
on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

  

  

  

  rw

