---
title: "More illegals arrive as smugglers target Australia."
date: "1999-05-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475717
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U0906%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 MPS 82/99

  

  MORE ILLEGALS ARRIVE AS SMUGGLERS TARGET AUSTRALIA

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
said the arrival of 20 il legal immigrants and three crew at Christmas 
Island overnight, and seven people and two crew at Ashmore Reef today, 
was further evidence that people smugglers were targeting Australia.

  

 Mr Ruddock said the group that arrived by boat at 
Christmas Island was believed to be mainly from the Middle East while 
the other group was thought to be from the Indian sub-continent.

  

 “Both groups will be taken to Port Hedland where 
they will be interviewed by immigration officers concerning their identity 
and the circumstances surrounding their travel to Australia.

  

 “The crew of the two vessels have been detained 
and consideration will be given to their prosecution.

  

 “The number of illegals coming to Australia by boat 
has increased by 120 per cent from 200 in the entire 1998 calendar year 
to 440 so far this calendar year,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “Put another way in 1997-98, 157 people arrived 
in Australia by boat. So far this financial year 534 people have arrived 
illegally by boat an increase of more than 240 per cent - and the year 
is not yet over.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said the Government was committed to returning 
people who had no legal right to be in Australia although it would continue 
to honour its international protection obligations.

  

 “Of the 340 illegal boat arrivals in 1997, some 
272 or 80 per cent had been returned. Of the 200 illegal arrivals in 
1998, some 159 or 80 per cent had been returned.

  

 “These people had no claim to be in Australia and 
were returned within weeks of having arrived illegally in Australia.

  

 “Many of these people had spent thousands of dollars 
- some up to $25,000 - to get to Australia and all they received for 
their money was a life threatening voyage, a period in detention and 
a return flight to their home country.”

  

 Mr Ruddock said there had also been a significant 
increase in the number of illegal immigrants arriving by air.

  

 “In 1997-98 some 1555 people had arrived illegally 
by air compared to some 2100 expected to arrive this financial year 
- an increase of about 35 per cent.

  

 The Minister said recent Government action to solve 
the people smuggling problem included:

  

  * the establishment 
by the Prime Minister of a high level taskforce to examine coastal surveillance 
issues due to report to the Government in June;

  * his leading the 
Australian delegation  to the International Symposium on Migration 
in Bangkok, attended by some 20 countries, which agreed on a series 
of measures to combat illegal people movement;

 * his 
meeting in Bangkok with China’s Assistant Foreign Minister to further 
cooperation to stop people smuggling;

 * a 
visit beginning this week by the Secretary of the Department of Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Bill Farmer, to Indonesia and China to 
discuss, among other things, further cooperation to halt people smuggling.

  

  Mr Ruddock sai d these comprehensive initiatives built on arrangements 
which his department already had in place including:

  

  * the stationing 
of immigration officers at airports overseas to check documentation 
and identify non-genuine passengers;

  * stationing more 
people  at Australian airports to identify people who arrive without 
proper documentation and arrange their speedy removal;

 * working 
closely with countries such as the UK, Canada and USA who face similar 
problems;

 * removing 
quickly from Australia people who have no right to stay;

 * proposed 
legislative changes that will help stop people exploiting Australia’s 
protection visa procedure.

  

  “The Government is committed to protecting the integrity of the 
nation’s borders and to stop the work of people smugglers who t hink 
nothing of exploiting people with the false promise of entry into Australia,” 
Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “Let me make it very clear, people who have no right 
to enter Australia will be sent home and will have nothing to show for 
their money.”

  

  ENDS Thursday, 2 0 May 1999

  

  Media inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715 

  Or DIMA Public Affairs (02) 6264 2244

  

  

  cm

