---
title: "Minister in Sydney for immigration consultations."
date: "1999-02-22"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211473379
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WH406%22
---

   

  Media Release

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

  

  MINISTER IN SYDNEY 
FOR IMMIGRATION CONSULTATIONS

  

 MPS 32/99

  

 The 
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today said initiatives to attract more skilled migrants to Australia 
were having a significant impact in New South Wales.

  

 In 
Sydney as part national consultations on Australia’s I 999-2000 migration 
program, Mr Ruddock said the number of migrants coming to NSW under 
the Skill stream increased by more than 28 per cent in 1997-98 over 
the previous year.

  

 “The 
1997-98   Settler 
Arrivals  statistical report shows that 11,287 people migrated 
to the State through the Skill stream last year, up from 8,805 in 1996-97.

  

 “However, 
it is important that Government initiatives to encourage more skilled 
migrants to settle outside of metropolitan areas are continued.

  

 “If 
NSW is serious about the benefits skilled migrants can bring to rural 
areas then it needs to participate more in programs such as the   Regional Sponsored 
Migration Scheme  (RSMS).

  

 “The 
RSMS enables Australian employers in regional or low-growth areas to 
fill skilled permanent vacancies with overseas personnel if they cannot 
find suitably qualified workers in Australia.

  

 “There 
are a number of areas where employers are unable to fill professional 
positions in regional NSW. Programs such as the RSMS can help meet this 
demand.”

  

 Mr 
Ruddock said NSW would also benefit from the decision last year to make 
all of NSW, outside of Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong, a designated 
area.

  

 “People 
in this designated area who meet certain criteria can now apply under 
the Regional Linked category to sponsor relatives to come to Australia.

  

 “Additionally, 
people who have established viable businesses in the designated area 
are able to apply for permanent residence under the Regional Established 
Business in Australia (REBA) category, if they are sponsored by an appropriate 
regional authority.

  

 “The 
Government is committed to ensuring that skilled migration to Australia 
continues to improve, so all Australians can share in these benefits”.

  

 Mr Ruddock said the   Settler Arrivals  
report also showed that:

  

  ·  Some 31.1 per cent of all permanent settlers to NSW entered 
under the Family Stream, down from 46.6 per cent last year.

  ·  The 
Humanitarian Program accounted for 11 per cent of arrivals in NSW consistent 
with last year’s figure.

  ·  Among 
the new settlers to NSW, were people from New Zealand (13.3%), the United 
Kingdom (8.7%), China (excl. Hong Kong & Taiwan) (8.3%), Hong Kong 
(SAR of China) (5.8%), and South Africa (5.6%).

  ·  The 
Non-Program migration category (mainly New Zealand citizens) attracted 
21.3 per cent of settlers, up on last year’s figure of 17.5 per cent.

  

 Mr Ruddock said during 
this year’s consultations he will meet with a wide cross-section of 
individuals and organisations including representatives of business, 
economic, industry, union, environment, welfare, planning refugee, humanitarian 
and ethnic community groups.

  

 “This is the first 
time that a nation-wide round of public meetings has been held on the 
migration program”.

  

 Consultations and public 
meetings are also being held in Melbourne, Griffith, Sydney, Adelaide, 
Perth, Canberra, Brisbane, Cairns, Darwin, Launceston and Hobart.

  

 ENDS Monday, 22 February 1999

  

  

 Media Inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715

  

  

  JS

