---
title: "East Timorese asylum seekers - end uncertainty says labor."
date: "1999-10-12"
creators:
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477741
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8PG06%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon. Con Sciacca MP

  Federal Member for Bowman

  Shadow Minister for Immigration

  Shadow Minister Assisting the Leader of the Opposition

  on Multicultural Affairs

  

  

  EAST TIMORESE ASYLUM SEEKERS - END UNCERTAINTY

  SAYS LABOR

  

  

  Labor today st rongly backed renewed calls from church and community 
groups for the Government to grant permanent residency to some 1700 
East Timorese who fled East Timor following the 1991 Dili massacre.

  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration, Con Sciacca, renewed 
calls by the Labor Party, first made in November 1998, urging the federal 
Government to expedite the individual claims of some 1700 asylum seekers 
who in some cases had now been in Australia for eight or nine years.

  

 “The time is now highly appropriate for the Federal 
Government to end the uncertainty for these traumatised people and restore 
peace of mind and a sense of security in their lives.

  

 “In many cases, these are the same people whose 
assistance has been invaluable in providing comfort and practical support 
to the displaced East Timorese in the massive humanitarian operation 
currently underway, following the recent tragic events in East Timor,” 
Mr Sciacca said.

  

 He said that he was heartened by the Government’s 
decision to seek an adjournment, last Monday, of its appeal to the full 
bench of the Federal Court against a ruling by Judge Finklestein on 
30 October 1998 in the case of East Timorese asylum seeker, Lay Kon 
Tji.

  

 Mr Sciacca said that this landmark decision found 
that the asylum seekers did not have effective protection of the Portuguese 
Government and that the continued refusal by the Australian Government 
to decline protection was unlawful.

  

 “Labor again calls on the Government to immediately 
withdraw its appeal and create a special one-off visa category to allow 
these East Timorese asylum seekers permanent residency.

  

 “I entirely agree with Sister Mary Cresp, Executive 
Director of the Australian Conference of Leaders of Religious Institutes, 
when she says that these traumatised people have now been living under 
the immense stress of uncertainty for many years and that by conducting 
the appeal during the current East Timorese crisis the Government risks 
harming Australia’s international reputation,” Mr Sciacca said.

  

 He said that Labor would co-operate with the Government 
on a bipartisan basis in ensuring that any new visa class specifically 
created to cater for this one-off circumstance would not be subject 
to exploitation by other groups.

  

 “Labor believes that any new category should be 
over and above the existing annual humanitarian intake of 12,000, so 
as not to jeopardise the chances of other genuine refugees seeking protection.

  

 ‘The Government should provide for a special visa 
category similar to that adopted by the then Labor Government in 1992 
for the citizens of the former Yugoslavia.

  

 “It is harsh and unconscionable to allow the existing 
uncertainty to continue any longer,” Mr Sciacca said

  

  ENDS

  

  Canberra, Tuesday 12 October 1999

  

  For media information:

  

  Con Sciacca  or Luke Giribon

  (02) 6277 4548    (02) 6277 4548

  0418 872 061   0411 869 816

  

  

  att  1999-10-14  10:36

