---
title: "Timor: present dilemmas, future challenges."
date: "1999-10-08"
creators:
  - "Tambling, Grant"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - HEALTH AND AGED CARE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477680
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QIJ06%22
---

   

  

  Northern Territory 
News   article: 8 October 1999

  Senator Grant Tambling

  Parliamentary Secretary to 

  the Minister for Health and Aged Care

  

  

  TIMOR: 
PRESENT DILEMMAS, FUTURE CHALLENGES  

  Australia’s response to 
the recent tragic events in East Timor reflect  s a country appalled by the horror of needless violence, 
and a country with a strong obligation to its own citizens and to those 
of the international community to   do right  and   be right.  No more, no 
less. 

  Perhaps more than elsewhere, Territorians have personified 
that spirit. They have been quick to offer aid, personnel and financial 
assistance to their neighbours most in need. I for one could not fail 
to be impressed by the actions of the many, many volunteers in our community, 
Territory government agencies, local aid organisations, and NT and Federal 
public servants involved. 

  With the Katherine floods still a recent memory, 
our mettle in times of disaster is well-tested. Once again Deputy Chief 
Minister Mike Reed has built on his special skills in that area with 
great success. 

  But it is a pity that the ALP has allowed factional 
differences to mar this outstanding record by sniping at the Prime Minister 
and the Federal Government, undermining Australia’s excellent leadership 
of the international relief and peacekeeping effort. 

  Back home, NT businesses have hit the ground running 
in their support of the 5000 defence, UNAMET and INTERFET personnel 
in East Timor. At the epicentre of activity, Territory businesses are 
perfectly positioned to lead reconstruction and humanitarian projects 
for East Timor as the situation stabilises. 

  The peacekeeping operation in East - and West - 
Timor is definitely at a critical stage. Right from the outset, difficult 
strategic decisions based on tightrope-tight situations have had to 
be made. Prior to the independence ballot, the ramifications of sending 
in a peacekeeping force in the face of Indonesian opposition made doing 
so an impossibility if the ballot was to happen at all. 

  Currently, myriad problems in accommodating refugees, 
and locating the many missing and displaced persons, ensuring their 
safety in both regions, and determining whether they were forcibly removed 
and want to return, continue to tax policy makers throughout the world. 
I am confident however that with UNAMET back on the ground the return 
of internally displaced persons will be greatly assisted by the previously 
gathered electoral enrolment information. 

  Underlining all of our actions - and those of the 
multinational force - is a mandate to restore and maintain peace and 
security in East Timor. For its part, Australia is keen to secure a 
swift and seamless transition from INTERFET to a UN peacekeeping operation 
as part of a UN Transitional Administration in East Timor. 

  But, our involvement will not end with the deployment 
of UN troops. There will be at least a two to three year transition 
to independence for the shattered East Timor. The region will require 
much continuing assistance from the Australian Government, Territory 
businesses and aid organisations. There is no doubting our willingness 
and ability to provide it - that lies at the very heart of the Australian 
psyche of mateship and wanting to pitch in and help out others in times 
of crisis. 

  Nevertheless, Australia’s role constitutes a delicate 
balancing act. In my role representing the Federal Government, I have 
been involved in high-level strategic discussions with the parties involved, 
and I appreciate the very fine margin of error in maintaining workable 
relations with both Indonesia and East Timor. Fortunately, the Australian 
Government’s response has succeeded on all counts. 

  Counterbalancing our responsibility to the emerging 
new East Timor is our on-going relationship with Indonesia. Certainly, 
recent events have placed considerable strain on our friendship with 
our nearest neighbour; as with all friendships, disagreements sometimes 
occur. But I believe that when the immediacy of the current crisis has 
passed, we will be able to work on the relationship between our two 
nations and once again draw on the great number of interests we have 
in common. 

  As the Prime Minister has 
said, Australia has a proud military tradition of never seeking to impose 
its will on others but rather a tradition of always standing up for 
what is right. The deployment to East Timor is another such example 
of this tradition -   it is in the best interests of both East Timor   and  Indonesia.

  Glimpsing light at the end of the tunnel in terms 
of East Timor independence becoming a reality, further delicate balancing 
on our part will be essential to the establishment of an East Timor 
civil administration. Independence leader Xanana Gusmao will be integral 
to those proceedings, but in the spirit of traditional Aussie mateship, 
so will we. 

  

  

  jy  1999-12-02  10:52

