---
title: "Government must guarantee safe haven for East Timorese."
date: "1999-09-08"
creators:
  - "Snowdon, Warren"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of SNOWDON, THE HON WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476921
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GUE06%22
---

   

  Media Release

  Hon. Warren Snowdon M.P.

  AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

  Member for the Northern Territory

  

 8 September 1999

  

  Government must guarantee safe haven for East 
Timorese

  

  Federal member for the Northern Territory, Warren Snowdon, today called 
on the Fede ral Government to provide an absolute guarantee that 
citizens who escaped East Timor and sought safe haven or temporary visas 
in Australia would be treated sympathetically and not thrown in a detention 
centre.

  

 “I am most pleased to hear the attitude of Chief 
Minister Burke on radio this morning saying that the Northern Territory 
would do what it could to accommodate the plight of East Timorese refugees,” 
Mr Snowdon said.

  

 “This appears to contradict Federal Government policy. 
Yesterday the office of Immigration Minister Ruddock informed me that 
East Timorese refugees would be placed in detention centres and their 
cases processed just as they would if they were ‘boat people’,” 
Mr Snowdon said.

  

 “Mr Ruddock’s office said that refugees would 
be processed in the normal manner and those that did not meet criteria 
would be ‘turned around’.

  

 “In regards to short-term visas, Mr Ruddock’s 
office said it was unlikely East Timorese would meet the criteria for 
visas and therefore these would be refused,” Mr Snowdon said.

  

 “The spokesperson said East Timorese were welcome 
to lodge an application with the Australian Embassy in Jakarta but that 
at this stage there was no proposal for a ‘safe haven’ gesture - 
that it was ‘not on the cards’.

  

 “If this is official Government policy then it is 
an outrage. This Government needs to immediately clarify its policy 
regarding East Timorese refugees and visas.

  

 “There are whole categories of other people who 
need to be considered here. There are those who may not currently be 
in East Timor - perhaps in Australia - who are on short-term visas and 
who obviously need to stay here for their safety. Or there are those 
in Kupang, or elsewhere in West Timor, or indeed elsewhere in Indonesia.

  

 “Has the Government thought about them?” Mr Snowdon 
said.

  

 “The lack of planning and foresight in this matter 
mirrors the lack of planning and foresight that has been the hallmark 
of the Government’s whole approach to the question.

  

 “The Government has been lacking in every way since 
this whole question of the referendum was mooted and this is the latest 
example of its inability to read the situation and respond.

  

 “This is an unprecedented crisis we are faced with. 
Australia has let East Timor down in the past and this policy is clear 
indication we are well and truly repeating the mistake.

  

 “Australia is obliged to do everything it possibly 
can to assist the people of East Timor. “The Government should immediately 
and unequivocally make it clear that refugees will be welcomed on our 
shores and accommodated as best we possibly can,” Mr Snowdon said. 

  

 Ends 

  

 Contact: Tony Haritos 08-8945 7400, 0417 804 878

  

  

  rw  1999-09-09  12:16

