---
title: "AUSTCARE Refugee Week highlights achievements in refugee protection."
date: "1999-10-15"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477887
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3XG06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 Friday 15 October 1999

 MPS 144/99

  

  AUSTCARE REFUGEE WEEK HIGHLIGHTS ACHIEVEMENTS 
IN REFUGEE PROTECTION

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs,  Philip 
Ruddock, said today that AUSTCARE Refugee Week provided the ideal platform 
to highlight Australia’s proud tradition of helping refugees and others 
in humanitarian need around the world.

  

 “There can be no greater evidence of this than Australia’s 
recent efforts to assist with the crises in Kosovo and East Timor,” 
said the Minister.

  

 “Our ability to respond flexibly to these situations 
meant that Australia was able to provide temporary safe haven to almost 
5,500 people in a desperate time of need.

  

 “Operations of this type had never been undertaken 
before in this country and while the learning curve was steep the outcome 
was extremely successful.

  

 “Apart from this temporary protection, the Government 
is committed to assisting refugees and provides protection through resettlement 
under Australia’s Humanitarian Program to some 12 000 people per year.

  

 “Of the 5.7 million migrants to come to Australia 
since the end of World War 2, almost 600,000 have arrived under humanitarian 
programs,” Mr Ruddock added.

  

 “The success of the Humanitarian Program reflects 
the high level cooperation that exists between the Government and non-government 
organisations. Through these partnerships, the integrity of the Humanitarian 
Program is advanced.

  

 “AUSTCARE Refugee Week brings together many of our 
partners in the non-government sector to celebrate our achievements 
and the positive contribution of refugees who have been resettled in 
Australia,” said the Minister.

  

 The Minister explained that 1999 marks the 20  th  
anniversary of the Community Refugee Settlement Scheme (CRSS), under 
which volunteer community groups assist eligible Humanitarian Program 
entrants to settle during their first six months in Australia.

  

 “In this time CRSS volunteers have assisted nearly 
60,000 humanitarian entrants. I congratulate the voluntary groups of 
the CRSS for their commitment and look forward to continuing this valuable 
relationship in the future.

  

 “All Australians should be proud of this nation’s 
efforts in assisting those in need.” Mr Ruddock concluded.

  

  ENDS

  

  

  Media Inquiries:

 Susan Sare; (02) 6277 7860 or 0407 415 797

  

 Immigration information is also available on the Internet 
at    www.immi.gov.au

  

  

  md 1999-10-19  09:23

