---
title: "East Timor: Indonesian military and militias must go now."
date: "1999-09-13"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477014
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C0F06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Laurie Brereton MP

  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

  

 13 September 1999

 105/99

  

  

  EAST TIMOR: INDONESIAN MILITARY AND MILITIAS 
MUST GO NOW

  

  The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today welcomed 
President Habibie’s annou ncement overnight that the Indonesian 
Government is prepared to accept an international peacekeeping force 
in East Timor.

  

 “This is a very positive development, but there 
is still a long way to go before peace and security are established 
and the East Timorese are able to enjoy their freedom”, Mr Brereton 
said.

  

 “It is a great tragedy that so many people had to 
die before Australia and the international community finally brought 
sufficient pressure to bear to make Jakarta begin to see sense.”

  

 “Any sense of triumphalism on the part of the Howard 
Government rings very hollow as one considers the appalling cost of 
their ready acceptance of Indonesia’s undertakings to maintain peace 
and security in East Timor.”

  

 “Indonesia’s agreement to UN peacekeepers must 
be unconditional. Foreign Minister Alatas should agree to the detail 
of peacekeeping, but there can be no negotiation about which and how 
many peacekeepers may go into East Timor.”

  

 “Implementation of peacekeeping must begin without 
delay. Food drops to refugees must commence immediately and peacekeepers 
must be on the ground in hours, not days or weeks. Any delay is likely 
to see more killing and horror.”

  

 “The international community must insist that the 
pro-integrationist militias are immediately disbanded forthwith and 
that the Indonesian military leave East Timor as soon as possible.”

  

 “The continued presence of the TNI risks further 
violence including backing for militia plans to retain control of the 
western districts of East Timor.”

  

 “Commitment of the Australian Defence Force to this 
peacekeeping operation clearly involves risk to Australian personnel. 
This risk will be significantly greater while the Indonesian military 
and militias remain in East Timor.”

  

 “The Indonesian military have no legitimate role 
in East Timor. They must go.”

  

 “Australia is duty bound to massively increase our 
humanitarian relief and assistance for the reconstruction of East Timor.”

  

 “The burning of Dili together with the destruction 
of so many towns and the territory’s infrastructure will require vastly 
greater assistance than any estimate to date. Australia must respond 
generously and without delay.”

  

  

  Contact:

  Philip Dorling (02) 6277 4717 or 0416 203 058

  

  

  lb  1999-09-14  10:48

