---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra, 25 November 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [business tax; GST; boat people; trade]"
date: "1999-11-25"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "business tax; GST; boat people; trade"
  - "business tax"
  - "GST"
  - "boat people"
  - "trade"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478951
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Z0J06%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  TRANSCRIPT 
OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,

  25 NOVEMBER 
1999

  

  E & OE - Proof Only

  

  Subjects: Business Tax, GST, 
boat people, trade

  

  BEAZLEY:

  Firstly, I would just like to congratulate Simon 
Crean for the very hard work he has done on business tax matters since 
he has had the Treasury job. Simon has been diligent in his consultation 
with the business community and he has been effective in his negotiation 
with the Government. As a result of the undertakings, we have a business 
tax package which will pay for itself and portions of it will get at 
some major tax cheats and avoiders. And that is, from our point of view, 
a very good outcome. Of course, a business tax package designed by Labor 
would have been different in some regard, but this is the Government's 
package at the end of the day. And our major concerns for the protection 
of revenue and the getting at some major tax avoidance arrangements 
have been achieved, and we are very pleased with that indeed. In the 
capital gains tax area, the Government's propositions have picked up 
a number of things the Labor Party was arguing for at the last election, 
and we have indicated for some considerable time now that we believe 
the regime needed to be changed to encourage investment. So, we are 
satisfied with the outcome. Simon Crean has done a very good job. He 
has listened to the business community, he has understood their concerns, 
and we have responded accordingly. 

  JOURNALIST:

  What has changed, though, because Labor was making 
submissions to the Senate inquiry saying that the package wouldn't pay 
for itself. I mean, why the turnaround? 

  BEAZLEY:

  Well, you will notice that in what the Government 
has agreed to there are a couple of measures essential to that particular 
concern. The first is a clause inserted in the legislation that will 
minimise the opportunities that might arise for tax avoidance in the 
arrangements that have been established in the capital gains tax regime. 
Mr Costello agreed to that change. Secondly, we now have the detail 
because he said in Parliament it amounted to his drafting instructions. 
We now have the detail of what he intends to do about two major, indeed 
massive, areas of tax avoidance in this country. We are conscious of 
the fact that these are disputed matters inside the Government. That 
has been made amply clear in leaks in recent times. Mr Costello has 
now formally committed the Government in writing to us that he will 
implement in full the matters that he has laid out in the tax avoidance 
arrangements. Hopefully, he will utilise that to end discussion within 
the Government on these matters and that will be a major step forward 
for fairness in the taxation system. 

  JOURNALIST:

  Is it a risk, though, that you are trusting them 
too much. You have signed off on clauses where you haven't actually 
seen concrete legislation drawn up. Has it been signed off by the Government? 

  BEAZLEY:

  If Mr Costello fails in this regard, it will be on 
the head of the Government. And the Government will have introduced 
a massive, unfair, cumbersome new tax in the GST, and the offsetting 
arrangements to ensure that high income earners pay their fair share 
of tax will have failed, and the chances of the Government securing 
an election victory will be negligible, in those circumstances. 

  JOURNALIST:

  Come the next election, what will be the difference 
between the Government and the Labor Party?

  BEAZLEY:

  On tax, the GST. That will be the difference between 
the Government and the Labor Party. The Government is formally committed 
to positions to roll it forward. It did not get all it wanted. It got 
most of what it wanted in the GST and the Government has come down with 
a position that they, clearly, have more to achieve as far as the GST 
is concerned. The Labor Party believes that the GST should be rolled 
back.

  JOURNALIST:

  Is there a reason for the re-assessment of the Treasurer 
and having more trust in him? It seems that that level of trust has 
not been held in the past?

  BEAZLEY: 

  It has to be said that when somebody responds to 
your questions in Parliament about the character of correspondence with 
you, and actually lays out to you formally in correspondence acceptance 
of your conditions, and includes words in it like, 'the Government is 
committed to this proposition, it is not simply a disposition on my 
part', then we have a level of firmness against which a person's word 
can be tested. Mr Costello's word and the Government's word is now completely 
engaged. Of course, they could always rat on the things that they said 
that they would do, but then it will be on their heads. And they will 
have enough trouble at the next election explaining to the Australian 
people how this awful, cumbersome, unfair tax, the GST, is operating 
upon them and, at the same time, they have to explain that they have 
let loose major areas of tax avoidance previously identified for them. 
That would be an impossible potpourri for a Government to defend. 

  JOURNALIST:

  Earlier this morning, Andrew Murray described the 
Labor Party as the Collins Class Submarines - noisy and ineffectual. 
Are those the words of a sore loser? 

  BEAZLEY: 

  The Collins Class Submarine requires a bit of work 
on it but it will be, when completed, the best conventional submarine 
in the world, when that work has been done. It has dealt with its noise 
problems. It performed exceptionally well in recent exercises in the 
north. What Murray has to explain is this - how the Democrats breached 
solemn undertakings to the Australian people in regard to the GST - 
a massive unfair tax. The GST lies at the feet of the Government. It 
also lies at the feet of the Democrats. And when it comes to spending 
money on unjustified tax packages, the Democrats signed off $17 billion 
worth of Budget surplus to the Government's GST package. A Budget surplus 
based on massive cuts to education, massive cuts to research and development, 
massive cuts to health, massive cuts to people's retirement opportunities. 
That is what the Democrats signed off on and, as a result of that, we 
now have a crisis in health, a crisis in higher education, and substantial 
problems in other areas of public provision. You will forgive me for 
saying we don't listen very hard to Senator Murray's criticisms of the 
Labor Party in this regard.

  JOURNALIST:

  How will the Labor Party deal with backlash from 
sections such as the rural constituents who are obviously unhappy with 
large sections of the tax package, namely the backdown on trusts.

  BEAZLEY:

  Well, Mr Costello has now signed off on behalf of 
the Government. There is no question that family trust arrangements, 
as practised at the moment - and there is always going to be a legitimate 
basis for trusts - but, as practised at the moment, they enable a substantial 
number of very high income people - not middle income people - very 
high income people to evade their fair share of tax. If the Government 
sticks to an agreement that they have now signed off in detail with 
the Labor Party, that should end.

  JOURNALIST:

  The Indonesian President says he has no plans to 
help Australia stem the flow of illegal boat people. Do you think it 
says something about the diplomacy with the country?

  BEAZLEY:

  Well, we have a difficult relationship with Indonesia 
at the moment, there is no question about that. And in many ways that 
difficult relationship is producing the problem that we are confronting 
now with boat people. But the Indonesian President would know that these 
activities are illegal and he would know, too, that they constitute 
trafficking in human misery. And I would hope that the Indonesian Government, 
on reflection, would adopt a different view.

  JOURNALIST:

  Do you think it is time that the Prime Minister made 
some overtures to the Indonesian President and maybe suggested meeting 
him?

  BEAZLEY: 

  I think we have a complex task ahead of us in relation 
to Indonesia. I think we have to avoid grandstanding and what we have 
to do is go through a complex building block approach. I think for a 
while we are going to have to use, from time to time, what I call second 
track diplomacy. Using non-government organisations, using the business 
community, using the substantial relationships that have built between 
academic institutions. Discerning areas of useful Government cooperation, 
like, for example, in the areas of exploitation of maritime resources, 
these sorts of things. I don't think that we will be able, in a hurry, 
to build back the relationship with Indonesia that we had, and I don't 
think that it is sensible for an Opposition Leader to pretend otherwise. 
Needless to say, it has to be very, very high on the Government's agenda, 
and they have to give a detailed consideration and utilise and assist 
the opportunities that arise from the sorts of processes I have been 
discussing. And I am not sure what the Government is doing.

  JOURNALIST:

  Mr Beazley, the green groups, the labour groups, 
and the welfare groups are criticising the Trade Minister, Mark Vaile, 
for not including them in the official group to go over to Seattle next 
week. Do you think they have a right to be concerned about the future 
of Australia?

  BEAZLEY: 

  It is always a sensible thing in major international 
conferences, be it on the environment, trade, labour relations, and 
whatever, that the Government seeks, in its delegation, a wide variety 
of advice. As I understand it, we will be, the Opposition will be associated 
with the team that goes across from this country and that is a development 
that I welcome. I would say further that I am disappointed that Mr Howard 
did not respond positively, or more positively, with a willingness to 
go himself to President Clinton's effort to get 43 countries together 
to keep the international trade agenda moving along, and I would encourage 
the Prime Minister to do that. But we are represented in that process, 
and that is all for the good.

  JOURNALIST:

  The unions, though, were quite concerned. The unions 
Greenpeace, ACOSS were quite concerned that their calls to Trade Minister, 
Mark Vaile, went unheard.

  BEAZLEY:

  Yes, well that is unfortunate that they did. What 
I would encourage them to do is to send their views across to Senator 
Cook who will be attending.

  ends

  

  md 1999-11-26  09:32

