---
title: "Indonesia's duplicity exposed as military attack refugee camp and warn of complete slaughter."
date: "1999-09-12"
creators:
  - "Snowdon, Warren"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of SNOWDON, THE HON WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476998
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/90F06%22
---

   

  Media Release

  The Hon Warren Snowdon, MP

  Australian Labor Party

  Member for the Northern Territory

  

 12 September 1999

  

  Indonesia’s duplicity exposed as military 
attack

  refugee camp and warn of complete slaughter

  

  Federal member for the Northern Territory,  Warren Snowdon, 
said Indonesia’s duplicity had been truly exposed with news today 
of a military attack on a refugee camp at Dare, just out of Dili.

  

 ‘In the SOS, news of the attack was accompanied 
by a chilling warning from the military to the people of Dare that they 
will be completely wiped out on 15 September,” Mr Snowdon said, ‘This 
comes the day after the United Nations Security Council representatives 
and Indonesian Defence Minister General Wiranto visited Dili, and truly 
exposes Indonesia’s duplicity.

  

 “The international community must act today - not 
tomorrow or the next day. What we are seeing is a planned and purposeful 
act of genocide.

  

 “The United Nations Security Council must deliver 
an ultimatum to Indonesia Today to demand at least the following:

  

  ·  insist that a peacekeeping force be immediately inserted.

  

  ·  deliver immediate relief aid via multiple airdrops to the 
internally-displaced persons in the mountain areas of East Tim or, including 
water, food and medicines.

  

  ·  provide guaranteed access to the existing refugee camps in 
both West and East Timor. People are dying in the camps through lack 
of medical supplies.

  

  ·  provide for the orderly departure of displaced persons who 
are under threat or in camps in West Timor to safe havens in Australia 
and elsewhere. Australia should take the lead and offer to take as many 
as necessary. If this involves tens of thousands of people, then so 
be it.

  

  ·  provide charter aircraft for the temporary relocation with 
guaranteed security arrangements. The relocation should take place under 
the auspices of the UNHCR.

  

  “If the Indonesian military are insistent on their desire to pursue 
a final solution, then the anger of the international community must 
be well and truly made known,” Mr Snowdon said.

  

  “The time th at it is taking the UN and the international 
community to come to terms with the crisis sees people violated and 
murdered, or dying through a lack of essentials.

  

 “Indonesia is behaving like a pariah state. It has 
clearly failed every test and the world community must say enough is 
enough, and it must do so today.

  

 “The people responsible for this go through the 
chain of command of the military. War crimes proceedings should be instituted 
immediately,” Mr Snowdon said.

  

  Note: For information relating to the attack on Dare contact East 
Timorese spokesperson Jose Gusmao (who has relatives in Dare) on 0417 
879 145.

  

  Ends Contact:

  Warren Snowdon on 0419 626 601,

  Tony Haritos 08-8945 7400,0417804878

  

  

  jk  1999-09-14  10:32

