---
title: "Minister leaves for Thailand."
date: "1999-04-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474885
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YC706%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP Minister for Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs

  

 MPS 60/99

  

  MINISTER LEAVES FOR THAILAND

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Philip 
Ruddock, will be pursuing issues related to illegal p eople movement 
during a visit to Thailand beginning tomorrow. Mr Ruddock will attend 
the International Symposium on Migration in Bangkok where he will meet 
with ministers and senior immigration officials from the Asia-Pacific 
region.

  

 The three-day symposium has been convened by the Thai 
Government to discuss the irregular and undocumented movement of people 
between countries from both a regional and global perspective.

  

 “This symposium gives governments from the region 
an important opportunity to strengthen the existing mechanisms for dialogue 
and action on all forms of intra-Asian migration,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “It gives us a timely forum to discuss further cooperation 
to combat exploitation of people n our region by smugglers and traffickers”.

  

 Mr Ruddook will take part in a panel which will discuss 
regional experiences in the area of undocumented migration.

  

 While in Thailand, Mr Ruddock will also meet with 
Mr Wu Dong he, the Assistant Foreign Minister of the People’s Republic 
of China, who will also be attending the symposium.

  

 “Australia has a long-standing relationship with 
China and has received excellent cooperation from the Chinese Government 
in its determination to combat the illegal smuggling of people” Mr 
Ruddock said.

  

 “China has informed us on a number of occasions 
of vessels they have intercepted leaving the country attempting to travel 
to Australia.

  

 “It is crucial we continue effective intelligence 
sharing on the most recent boat arrivals in an effort to establish the 
identity of the people involved and the way in which such operations 
are organised.

  

 “I look forward to this opportunity to discuss the 
arrival of these latest boats in Australia from China as well as other 
issues of mutual concern, and to furthering our important cooperative 
relationship.”

  

 Following the symposium Mr Ruddock will visit the 
Ban Don Yang Refugee Camp in Kanchanaburi Province on the Burmese border 
to obtain a first-hand experience of the situation of Burmese refugees 
in Thailand.

  

 While in Kanchanaburi Mr Ruddock will then open the 
Sangklaburi Women and Children’s Training Program and the redeveloped 
kindergarten at the Ban Un Rak Children’s Home.

  

 The training program and the kindergarten redevelopment 
have been funded through grants from AusAID and the Australian Embassy 
in Thailand’s Direct Aid Program.

  

 Mr Ruddock will also represent the Australian Government 
at the Anzac Day Dawn Service at Hellfire Pass and visit the Hellfire 
Pass Museum.

  

 Tuesday, 20 April 1999 

  

 ENDS

  

  

  

  dd

