---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra, 20 June 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [cricket; Telstra; Warren Entsch; CARE workers; GST; Democrats; cream pies; Justice Callinan; VIP planes]."
date: "1999-06-20"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "cricket; Telstra; Warren Entsch; CARE workers; GST; Democrats; cream pies; Justice Callinan; VIP planes"
  - "cricket"
  - "Telstra"
  - "Warren Entsch"
  - "CARE workers"
  - "GST"
  - "Democrats"
  - "cream pies"
  - "Justice Callinan"
  - "VIP planes"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476411
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HKA06%22
---

   

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE - 
CANBERRA,

  20 JUNE 1999

  

  E&OE-PROOF ONLY

  

  

  Subjects: Cricket, 
Telstra, Warren Entsch, Care Workers, GST, Democrats, Cream Pies, Justice 
Callinan, VIP planes

  

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Firstly, on behalf of the Opposition, and I am sure, 
really, all Australians, I want to wish Steve Waugh and the boys all 
the best for the game tonight. All of Australia will be watching right 
through to the end, hopeful of a result at least as good as the last 
couple we have been given. And tomorrow will be the least productive 
day in the Australian workforce for the entire year.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, you won’t be asking questions at Question Time, 
is that right?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 They will be slow and deliberate questions, and I 
hope they are going to be delivered with a very sore head.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 …(inaudible)...

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 That’s right.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, Telstra, an extra $314 million to win 
the votes of Harradine and Colston?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, the Government is shameless. The Government 
knows and so do the independents and so does every political party that 
the Australian people do not want their telephone company sold. Our 
people do not want it sold and they are entitled to have their way. 
What we have seen so far from Liberal Party efforts at selling Telstra 
is use of funds blatantly for political purposes to suit the Liberal 
Party. Ignobly, a great Australian asset is sold off for individuals 
in the Liberal Party to get out there and manage resources into their 
constituencies. This is one of the worst cases of pork barrelling, I 
think, that we have ever seen in Australia. Deliberate use of a great 
Australian asset for the narrow political purpose of one political party. 
The independents should have nothing to do with it, they will be shamed 
by it. They were ratted on in the last agreement, and they ought to 
learn from that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you hold out any hopes that it could be stopped 
tomorrow, that Harradine and Colston might regard it as not quite enough?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I do believe, in Senator Harradine, at least, resides 
great decency. Also in Senator Harradine resides great experience. He 
knows how he was misled during the last sale of Telstra. Once bitten, 
he ought to be twice shy as far as the sale of Telstra is concerned.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 He is said to be very happy, though. Is that not good 
for you?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 It’s not good for Australia. Look, I don’t own 
this company any more than any average Australian owns this company, 
but I am proud of it. And the fact that the company may be sold is not 
personal hurt simply to Kim Beazley, it is personal hurt to every single 
Australian.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 1.9 million Australians got in on the last share float. 
They are voting with their feet, aren’t they?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Most of them, if you see the surveys of them, don’t 
want any more sold. Admittedly, not by as heavy a percentage as those 
who don’t own shares. But still a majority of them, the last poll 
that I saw, don’t want anything more of Telstra sold, and they are 
right to think that way.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, with Parliament resuming tomorrow, will 
Warren Entsch be, again, in the Opposition’s firing line?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 He must be. The Opposition has a duty, and that is 
a duty to hold people accountable. And Ministers who are in a situation, 
whether knowingly or unknowingly, in contracts with the Federal Government, 
they have a pecuniary interests problem, and Ministers are obliged to 
uphold a ministerial code of conduct. We shouldn’t be talking about 
Entsch, he should have gone ages ago, but he is still there, and he 
is there as a symbol of John Howard’s lack of accountability. Entsch 
is going to be a famous man I can promise you that, he is going to be 
a very famous man. Every time someone like Mrs Kelly from the deli, 
sitting around her kitchen table, doing her accounts on the GST, she 
is going to remember Warren Entsch. The Government has one standard 
of accountability for its own. That is, you can get a House of Representatives 
resolution. They have another standard of accountability for Mrs Kelly 
- fill your forms out right or go to jail.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Has any further evidence emerged to incriminate Mr 
Entsch?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 What more do you need? What we have here is a situation 
where a Minister stands up and says: ‘I didn’t know I was supposed 
to declare I was a secretary or director’. He then gets up and confesses 
that, despite what the Corporation Law might say about the roles of 
secretaries and directors he has got nothing to do with managing this 
company. He then gets up and says, ‘well, I didn’t know that my 
company, of which I have 50 per cent shareholding, signed up a contract 
with the Commonwealth’. This is sort of finger print heaven. It is 
not actually securing a political result, which it ought to, and that 
is him out.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Are you any closer yet to taking a High Court challenge 
yet, or determining whether you will go to the High Court?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 We are going to hasten slowly on this. We don’t 
want to place ourselves in a position where we can’t ask questions 
of Mr Entsch. We might have been able to do that if the Government had 
acted honourably, but it hasn’t, so we have got to use, without difficulties 
associated with the sub judice rule, we have got to be able to use the 
Parliamentary forum. We also, I think, need to have a careful look at 
the Heather Hill case, because there are aspects of that which impinge 
on Entsch’s situation, and we also ought to get some decent legal 
advice. There is a lot of moral pressure on us to ensure that a case 
is taken but we have, as I understand it, 12 months from the date of 
the problem emerging, which was, I think, late March this year, 12 months 
before we run out of time to do anything about it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Have you received that legal advice yet, Mr Beazley?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, because the lawyer who is advising us, who is 
a very good lawyer indeed, is in very high demand and he has not had 
the opportunity yet to sit down and consider the new developments. But 
I would recommend, and I am surprised, indeed, that this hasn’t been 
the case so far, I would recommend reportage of that initial legal opinion. 
That was an excellent statement about Mr Entsch’s legal difficulties, 
and it ought to be there for public perusal.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Should Natasha Stott Despoja and Andrew Bartlett resign 
if they cross the floor on the tax?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Look, that is a matter for their own conscience and 
their own concerns of what is happening inside the Democrats. Clearly, 
Meg Lees very ineffective bargaining has humiliated her Party, and they 
are there licking their wounds and they are there with the horror of 
knowing that, with Mr Costello and Mr Howard, they will share responsibility 
for this wretched tax. We don’t have tax reform any more in this country. 
There is not a serious person around who believes that to be the case. 
What we have got is a major tax mess, and more complex tax law, and 
it has now got Democrat and Liberal fingerprints all over it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, is the inquiry into Mr Justice Callinan 
simply revenge for Lionel Murphy?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No it is not. The Labor Party did not initiate these 
circumstances. It is not a Labor Party judge sitting over a matter that 
caused some aspects of barrister Callinan’s activities to come to 
his attention. Nor is it the Labor Party dominating the Law Council 
of Australia who asked for an inquiry. I would have thought it was in 
both Mr Callinan’s interests and the Government’s that they cleared 
this matter up with a properly based inquiry, but such is the partisan 
character these days of this Government, they have got no fundamental 
decency when it comes to any form of accountability.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 The Yugoslavs seem very reluctant to let go of the 
CARE people. Has the Government done all it can?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, we did urge Alexander Downer to go, and he has 
now gone. We would now urge him to stay. I think it is very important 
that he stays there as long as possible, to demonstrate the seriousness 
of Australia’s concern for our two fellows and the Yugoslav national 
who was assisting them. We cannot let this go. The simple fact of the 
matter is, Australians are a generous hearted people and part of that 
generosity of spirit extends to work for voluntary aid organisations 
like CARE, and our people are everywhere, all over the globe. They are 
not spies they are people engaged in humanitarian work. We cannot let 
this one go. There is a national interest here.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 ... is calling for a reassessment of the Government’s 
strategies of these people, and basically saying the UNHCR shouldn’t 
be giving any money to Belgrade, for...

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I think the world community, non-government organisations 
who give aid, have a very direct interest in all of this, and that includes 
the UN High Commissioner on refugees. They have a direct interest in 
this. It is not right that people who are not spies should be in prison 
for this sort of activity, which is simply humanitarian. And this is 
an Australian national interest, as I said, it is broader than that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, just quickly on tax. Have you determined 
whether you will be moving any amendments to the tax bills over the 
next fortnight?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  Well,  we will certainly be engaged in an amendment associated 
with the issue of books. We, like you, have not been vouched-safe with 
our new tax act. We, like you, do not yet have the national loaf, or 
the national quiche, or the national pizza, or the national salad. We 
are all looking forward to these recipes, and I am particularly looking 
forward to the national cream pie. But we are yet to see any of this, 
so we, of course, are not in a position to know what particular amendments 
we will be moving or supporting.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 On the cream pie, should there be better protection 
for you guys, to stop that sort of thing happening?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, it was very nice pie.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you think it raises issues of security, though?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, I don’t think so. I mean, fair dinkum, this 
is a not a case of extreme malevolence here.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, it’s Mr Howard’s turn next time?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, I don’t think they would get through to Mr Howard, 
it has to be said. He is protected, and I think they would find it a 
pretty tough job getting through.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Tim Fischer suggested you should have been wearing 
an Akubra, Kim, it may not have got through.

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I don’t think it would have helped. Tim does wear 
his Akubra with great frequency, and indoors as well. He may have a 
steel reinforced Akubra, and one with shutters that, with a flick of 
a switch, can come down, or an air bag or something like that, to sort 
of knock off an incoming pie. But what I know of Tim’s Akubra, I don’t 
even think it would have been able to substantially resist the pie onslaught.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Did you get to eat much of the pie?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I got to eat a bit.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  Given the demonstrations overseas against the G8, do you take it personally?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, not at all. What I thought was very interesting, 
and I must give him public thanks for this, Hugh Morgan was actually 
chairing that show. He introduced me, then he cleaned up my face afterwards. 
It must have been the highest priced valet service I have ever had. 
I am going to be sending Hugh a note to thank him for that. But it has 
got to be said, that when you have got the Leader of the Opposition 
standing alongside the CEO of probably the world’s largest uranium 
operator, and the greenies hit the Leader of the Opposition, it has 
got to be said the team is not on top of it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Your aeroplane ride, what happened there?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, look, I am interested in this. There is growing 
evidence of not only this Government’s lack of accountability, but 
also its vindictiveness. Now, I want to know why a plane which was stationed 
there at 4.30pm, the Government knew full well what I was engaged in 
last night, I had an invitation to the Australian Rugby Union for one 
of their rare Tests in Western Australia. They had invited me to the 
official function beforehand, and to the game subsequently I could not 
board a plane at 4.30pm and attend that function. As an old rugby union 
player, I do like to see the banner erected in Perth, and when I get 
an official invitation, I take it seriously. I was told if I boarded 
that plane at 4.30pm, [yesterday], I could make it to Newcastle in time 
for these events, which kicked off at about 12 o’clock [today]. But, 
of course, I could not do the function that I was supposed to do. I 
was given no explanation. I find, also, as I fly across with Wayne Swan, 
that he has just received a letter from Senator Newman’s office informing 
him that, in future, copies of departmental press clips will no longer 
be provided to Members of the Opposition. Now, we used to do that routinely, 
when we were in office. We provided those services for our political 
opponents. It helps to have that information base going around. I can 
only assume that what is developing here is a pattern of deliberate 
destabilisation of the Opposition. That is all I can assume from this.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you think that means they are worried? The Opposition 
is making a bit of an impact then?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, we are. We are making a major impact. They know 
full well, now, that the public has turned on them and this goods and 
services tax issue vehemently. They know too, that the public does not 
agree with them on Telstra. These are two ideas in an ideas bereft government. 
It is about their only two ideas, and the public hates them. The Opposition 
happens to be pointing that out to them, and so, they are shooting the 
messenger.

  

 ends.

  

  

  lk  1999-06-22  11:00

