---
title: "Washington, D.C., 16 June 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [meeting with Charlene Barshefsky; lamb industry; suicide of senior defence intelligence officer]"
date: "1999-06-16"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "meeting with Charlene Barshefsky; lamb industry; suicide of senior defence intelligence officer"
  - "meeting with Charlene Barshefsky"
  - "lamb industry"
  - "suicide of senior defence intelligence officer"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476346
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NFA06%22
---

   

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

  THE HON. ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP

  AUSTRALIA’S MINSTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

  

  WASHINGTON, D.C.

  

  16 JUNE 1999

  

  Doorstop came just after Mr Fischer [Downer] had concluded a meeting 
with Charlene Barshefsky, the United Slates Trad e Representative

  

  MINISTER DOWNER:

  

 I’ll tell you something about my meeting with Charlene 
Barshefsky. No doubt you'd be interested in that. I took the opportunity 
with Charlene Barshefsky to reinforce the great concern Australia has 
about the possibility of restrictions on Australian lamb exports to 
the United States. Not only is this a matter of great importance to 
the Australian lamb industry - we have $100 million worth of exports 
but I made the point to Charlene Barshefsky that this will get to the 
very heart of United States leadership in the whole area of trade liberalisation. 
We want to see the United States maintain its leadership in the cause 
of trade liberalisation in opening up markets around the world. If the 
United States caves in to pressure from the domestic industry, like 
its very small lamb Industry, then that will send a very negative signal 
to the world about the commitment of the Administration to trade liberalisation. 
Just to say that Charlene Barshefsky told me that the President has 
yet to make a decision. He was still considering the matter. It is clearly 
a difficult issue, because on the one hand the United States is coming 
under pressure, not just from the sheep-meat industry, but also from 
the steel industry and others over this whole process. And that nevertheless 
the President has been impressed with the messages sent to him in recent 
telephone conversations by Mr Howard, and also the New Zealand Prime 
Minister Jenny Shipley who he spoke w. There isn’t any doubt that 
thc Administration is well aware of the strength of feeling in Australia 
and also New Zealand about this issue, but it is also true to say that 
he has yet to make a decision. And he will be making a decision taking 
into account a whole range of domestic political factors as well.

  

  Q:

  

 Did she give any indication of what a timetable might 
be for a decision, or which way the President was leaning?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 No, she didn’t. She said that for the President 
it was a very difficult decision. We had had some expectation that he 
would make the decision before he left to go overseas, to go to Europe. 
But he hasn’t made the decision. Hers got the options for a decision 
with him, but we have no idea. She did make it clear that an original 
proposal was put to the President after Mr Howard had spoken to the 
President, and Mrs Shipley had spoken to die President. The President 
sent the papers back, asking for re-consideration of the issue. Options 
have been put to the President, but we don’t have any idea. There 
is no doubt that the telephone calls from Mr Howard and Mrs Shipley 
have had a significant impact on his thinking, but whether it will have 
a sufficient impact, frankly, well that remains to be seen. Hers obviously 
under a lot of domestic political pressure on this issue. I think 1 
wouldn’t want to underemphasise the importance of that.

  

  Q:

  

 So a couple of lamb farmers are more important to 
the US than its relationship with Australia?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 Well, we don’t know what the decision is and there 
are more than a couple of lamb farmers. I think there are 70 000. And 
it doesn’t just play to the lamb industry, it plays into the steel 
industry as well. It plays into the steel industry because those senators 
who are lobbying very hard on the lamb issue are connecting it also 
to the steel issue and making it clear that if the President doesn’t 
make a decision which they would regard as favorable on lamb, then they 
will be unhelpful to the President on the issue of steel. And so it’s 
important to understand the steel issue weighs a great deal more heavily 
in the President’s mind than does the lamb issue. But look, he is 
of course very focused also on the fact that Australia and New Zealand 
feel very strongly about this. We’re the only source - I mean serious 
source of imports into the United States and imports only make up 20 
percent of the market. Eighty percent of the market is taken by the 
American lamb industry.

  

  Q:

  

 Minister, what can you tell us about the suicide of 
the senior defence intelligence officer at the Embassy here?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 Look, I can tell you very little about it. It obviously 
doesn’t fall within my portfolio, but r can just say a couple of things 
about it. First of all, this is a very tragic event. The condolences 
of the Australian Government, I’m sure of the Australian people go 
out in a very heartfelt way to his widow and to his three sons. It has 
had a significant effect on the morale of the Australian Embassy here 
in Washington. it has obviously cast, I sense, a very great depression 
and concern across the Embassy. But I can’t really say to you a great 
deal more about it, except it’s not related to the other Wispelaere 
case. It bears no relationship whatsoever to that.

  

  Q:

  

 What about to the DIO’s investigation of the Wispelaere 
case? Was there any indirect connection in that sense that he felt under 
pressure?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 I think the answer to that is a definite no.

  

  Q:

  

 Definite no?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 As I understand it, there is no relationship between 
this case at all and the Wispelaere case.

  

  Q:

  

 But what about the impact of the Wispelaere case upon 
Defence Intelligence?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 But not in relation to him. I don’t think it had 
any impact on him at all. It didn’t have any particular association 
with him, the Wispelaere case.

  

  Q:

  

 But there are suggestions that there was an investigation. 
What can you say about that?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 I can’t really, you’ll have to talk to the Defence 
Department in Canberra about that. But I’m advised that there was 
a low-level investigation into some handling procedures. But this is 
absolutely nothing to do with the Wispelaere case -- zero to do with 
that.

  

  Q:

  

 Did you know he was being investigated?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 I had been advised of that by the Defence Department 
before I spoke to you, so I am aware of that.

  

  Q:

  

 And it was nothing, none of the material that he was 
sending to Canberra was misused by Wispelaere?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 No, no, it’s nothing to do with Wispelaere -- directly, 
indirectly.

  

  Q:

  

  There’s some confusion on the issue and in particularly in the light 
that it’s been very hard to get any kind of answers on that.

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 Just to make the point that the low level investigation 
was over a handling matter, and was nothing to do with Wispelaere at 
all. Not directly or indirectly.

  

  Q:

  

 Are you concerned though, about the impact of the 
sharing of information by another, if unrelated incident like this? 
Do you think there’s going to be any nervousness among the Americans 
about it?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 No I do not think that is the case.

  

  Q:

  

 Has there been contact with the Americans about the 
case?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 Well of course, the case is being investigated by 
the American police and obviously American authorities have been involved 
but no, I don’t think it will be a matter of concern, in a security 
sense it wont be a matter of concern to the Americans. In a humanitarian 
sense I’m sure it is a matter of concern to them.

  

  Q:

  

 Did Ms. Barshefsky say what the President will be 
proposing?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 No she didn’t. I would love to have known. If I 
could answer that I could give myself a coup, not just you.

  

  Q:

  

 One question about steel: today the Senate Finance 
Committee marked up a bill (inaudible) sending it to the floor on steel. 
It includes a provision that would lower the threshold for bringing 
a 201 case, or succeeding a 201, which is the type of case involved 
with the lamb issue. What is your view in terms of that option? They’re 
saying they are going to keep it within WTO regulations.

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 Well we don’t want to see any restrictions on steel 
exports to the United States or steel imports into the United States. 
The United States has been a world leader in the cause of trade liberalisation. 
Markets have progressively been opened all around the world for United 
States businesses -- including the Australian market -- and the United 
States has done extraordinarily well in those markets. The United States 
market to be fair, has been a pretty free and open market too by the 
standards of the world. But the United States will not benefit in the 
end by placing restrictions on access to the United States market in 
an important area like steel, or in a small area -- but an important 
area to Australia and New Zealand -- like lamb. And certainly we reject 
the notion that there should be any connection between lamb and steel 
but that is apparently a decision that has been made by a number of 
Senators and is not the Administration’s preference, or choice, but 
has been forced upon them, I guess, by some Senators.

  

  Q:

  

 Would you object if the US Government made it easier 
to bring ...investigation cases, which is the kind they brought with 
lamb?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 Well, the implication of that question is that it 
would facilitate protectionist measures and we would obviously welcome 
that We welcome a continuing commitment to trade liberalisation and 
we don’t want to see the Administration or the Congress bow to populist 
pressure. It is very easy to do that, but once you start to bow into 
populist pressure on trade liberalisation issues, you are going down 
a very rocky path. More and more protection will have, in the end, a 
negative effect on the domestic economy. It will create inefficiencies 
in the domestic economy in the United States and it will lead to retaliation 
by other countries around the world. I don’t think the United States 
business community will want that. I don’t think employees here -- 
or others would want that. And I think it’s important to keep up the 
argument for trade liberalisation wherever you are -- whether you’re 
in the United States, whether you’re in Australia, or whether you’re 
in China.

  

  Q:

  

 Minister it’s been reported from East Timor that 
the referendum or the consultation there will be delayed until late 
August. Can you confirm that?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 I can’t confirm the report -- I haven’t seen the 
report. There’s some debate about whether there will be any delay 
or whether there won’t. Just to make it clear: our preference would 
be for there not to be a delay and we hope that the ballot can go ahead 
as planned on the 8  th  of August. But we’ll have to wait 
and see and that is a decision ultimately for the Secretary-General. 
But also to make the point that: there is a quantum difference between 
a delay of a matter of months, which I think would undermine the whole 
process and a delay of two or three weeks, which wouldn’t be anything 
like such a serious matter. But I think Ws best to stick to the timetable 
and to do anything we can as an international community to encourage 
the Indonesians to ensure the environment is appropriate for the ballot 
on the 8th of August. The civilian police will be going in during the 
course of this week and we think that once there is a UN civilian police 
presence in East Timor, the military liaison officers get there, the 
size of the United Nations grows some tenfold from what it is at the 
present, then there is a much better chance of the security situation 
settling down than is the case if you take one look at it at the moment.

  

  Q:

  

 Did you get any sense from Kofi Anan on which way 
he was leaning on that delay?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 No, I guess I can put this way, that Ambassador Marker 
who’s his special representative on East Timor, will be going to both 
Jakarta next week at some stage and he’ll be coming to Australia as 
well. And after he leaves Australia he will be returning to New York 
and he’ll report back to Kofi Anan. And at that stage the Secretary-General 
will be in a better position to see what the security situation is and 
what the logistical problems may be insofar as there will be some -- 
probably will be actually, but just to see what they are.

  

  Q:

  

 One last question: what is your reaction to Kosovo 
refugees in the town of Singleton and (inaudible) their conditions?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 It’s a matter for Mr. Ruddock, I think he’s had 
comments to make on that

  

  Q:

  

 What is your reaction to the Indonesians not letting 
Ramos-Horta into East Timor?

  

  MR DOWNER:

  

 That does not come as a surprise.

  

  

  dd  1999-06-18  11:39

