---
title: "Refugee program should be expanded: temporary safe haven legislation is unneccessary."
date: "1999-04-29"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475058
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0V706%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats’ Spokesperson on Immigration

 29 APRIL

 99/226

  

  Refugee program should be expanded

  Temporary Safe Haven legislation is unnecessary

  

  The Government should expand the refugee program in response to r ising 
world-wide need, according to the Australian Democrats.

  

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Democrats’ spokesperson 
for immigration criticised today’s announcement by the Minister for 
Immigration, that there would be no increase in the refugee program.

  

 “We should recognise the contributions and skills 
that refugees have always brought to Australia. The difference between 
a skilled migrant and a skilled refugee is largely a matter of the money 
they can pay for entry to Australia,” said Senator Bartlett.

  

 “The Government’s recent move to offer permanent 
resettlement in Australia to up to 200 Kosovo families is welcomed but 
this should have been in addition to the current program, not just part 
of it. This decision will just mean 200 refugee families somewhere else 
in the world miss out,” said Senator Bartlett.

  

 The Temporary Safe Haven legislation which creates 
a new class of refugees with only temporary status, was today debated 
in the Senate. The Democrats, refugee and ethnic groups have criticised 
the Government’s offer of only temporary haven in Australia to 4000 
Kosovo refugees.

  

 “It is not necessary to pass the Temporary Safe 
Haven legislation in order to let in 4000 Kosovo refugees. The legislation’s 
main purpose is to give the Government legal standing to remove the 
Kosovo refugees in the future.

  

 “The legislation creates a new class of refugees 
with ‘use-by’ dates. They have only temporary visas, are not allowed 
to apply for permanent residency while here, and are at the mercy of 
the Immigration Minister without right of appeal,” Senator Bartlett 
said.

  

 “Refugee places can be provided now without needing 
to insist on haven being temporary,” said Senator Bartlett.

  

 The Democrats have called on the Government to guarantee 
that no refugee offered safe haven in Australia will be returned to 
their country of origin against their will.

  

 “There has been an overwhelming public reaction 
to the need to offer help to displaced people from Yugoslavia. There 
has never been a better time to expand the refugee program,” said 
Senator Bartlett.

  

 For further information contact Senator Andrew Bartlett 
on 0418 743 789

  

  jk

