---
title: "Boat arrival of 352 the highest ever."
date: "1999-11-02"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478347
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZSH06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 Tuesday 2 November 1999 

 MPS 155/99

  

  BOAT ARRIVAL OF 352 THE HIGHEST EVER

  

  The arrival of 352 illegal boat people at Ashmore Reef late last night 
aboard an  Ind onesian inter-island cargo vessel is the largest 
number to have ever arrived on Australia’s shores, the Minister for 
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, announced today.

  

 The cargo vessel, located near Ashmore Reef by the 
patrol boat HMAS Dubbo, carried more than twice the previous record 
of 140 people, who arrived on Christmas Island in August.

  

 “I understand that, on being located, and after 
being told of the penalties they faced for bringing people to Australia 
illegally, the crew sabotaged the engines and the passengers started 
throwing their passports overboard.

  

 “Of the 20 women and children we understand to be 
on board, 2 women are pregnant. I understand that there are 8 doctors 
on board the vessel.”

  

 The Minister said that while details were yet to be 
confirmed, he understood that the majority of the 352 passengers were 
from the Middle East, and had been ferried to Australia by three Indonesian 
crew.

  

 “The Indonesian crew will be detained and will face 
charges under the Migration Act for bringing people illegally to Australia,” 
said Mr Ruddock. “Penalties include up to 20 years in prison and fines 
of up to $220,000.

  

 “The passengers will remain on board while arrangements 
are made for their transfer to the mainland.”

  

 The Minister said that those on board would be accommodated 
at Curtin Detention Centre where powered tent sites would be set up.

  

 “The Government has introduced a range of legislative 
changes over recent months to toughen penalties for people smugglers. 
But what is required is a national response - this means Labor supporting 
our initiatives.

  

 “The Government has been working hard to get the 
right national framework in place, and Labor needs to support it if 
they want to stop this assault on our borders” Mr Ruddock concluded.

  

 ENDS

  

  

  Media Inquiries:

 Susan Sara; 0407 415 797

  

 Immigration information is also available on the Internet 
at www.immi.gov.au

  

  

  md 1999-11-04  09:34

