---
title: "Illegal immigrant problem quickly reaching crisis proportions says opposition."
date: "1999-05-23"
creators:
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475745
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H2906%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Con Sciacca, MP

  Shadow Minister for Immigration

  Shadow Minister Assisting the Leader of the Opposition

  on Multicultural Affairs

  Federal Member for Bowman

  

  ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT PROBLEM QUICKLY REACHING

  CRISIS PROPORTIONS SAYS OPPOSITIO  N

  

  Reports of the possible thwarting of attempts by up to 2,000 Somalis 
to board a ship in Somalia bound for Australia, highlights the seriousness 
of the illegal immigrant problem facing our Country, according to Shadow 
Minister for Immigration, Con Sciacc a

  

 “The situation is fast reaching crisis proportions 
and its resolution should be towards the top of the Government agenda’, 
Mr Sciacca said

  

 “While I commend the Minister and Immigration Department 
Officials for having detected this latest attempt to infiltrate our 
Country, the situation is flow becoming a major crisis and the Government 
must provide all possible resources to address this issue’, Mr Sciacca 
Said.

  

 Mr Sciacca continued his calls for the Government 
to increase intelligence-gathering personnel at Australia’s immigration 
posts around the World to detect in particular organised people smuggling 
rackets, before they set off for Australia.

  

 Mr Sciacca said that by not providing adequate extra 
resources in both the coastal surveillance area and immigration intelligence 
gathering in overseas posts, the Government is sending a message to 
the people smugglers that Australia is an easy target.

  

 “The Government tells us that we have a $5.4 Billion 
dollar budget surplus available What is the point of having so much 
money if some of it is not used to safeguard our borders and maintain 
the integrity of our migration program?" Mr Sciacca said.

  

 “We have a wonderful reputation as a generous, open 
hearted country when it comes to providing safe haven to genuine refugees 
who suffer persecution in their own Countries Such as the Kosovo refugees.

  

 “Genuine refugees have always been welcomed into 
our Country, subject only to our refugee program constraints.

  

 “We must not however, be seen as easy target by 
either human traffickers or those who try to circumvent our migration 
program”, Mr Sciacca said.

  

 It is understood that this latest attempt to smuggle 
2,000 people into Australia from Somalia, most of whom are paying up 
to US$2,300 for the trip, is being closely monitored and should be thwarted.

  

 Over the past eight months, over 1,600 illegal migrants 
have reached our shores, both by air or sea with recent detection and 
landings taking place on Holloways Beach near Cairns, Port Kembla, Scotts 
Heads near Coffs Harbour and Ashmore Reef in the Northern Territory.

  

 Ends

  

 Sunday 23 May 1999

  

 Media inquiries:

 Con Sciacca or Luke Giribon

 0418 872 061 0411 869 816

  

  

  jk  1999-05-25  11:06

