---
title: "Immigration Minister gives more autonomy to tribunals."
date: "1999-05-11"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475422
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PI806%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 Budget 99 MPS 73/99

 Tuesday, 11 May 1999

  

  IMMIGRATION MINISTER GIVES MORE AUTONOMY TO 
TRIBUNALS

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Muiticultural Affairs today an nounced 
changes to give more autonomy to the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) and 
the newly-established Migration Review Tribunal (MRT).

  

 The MRT is a new independent organisation to review 
immigration decisions that will come into being on 1 June 1999. It replaces 
the two tiers of review currently performed by the Department’s Migration 
Internal Review Office (MIRO) and the independent Immigration Review 
Tribunal (IRT).

  

 Australia’s other merits review tribunal is the 
RRT, an independent organisation which provides merits review of departmental 
decisions to refuse or cancel a Protection Visa.

  

 In line with Government priorities, both Tribunals 
will be prescribed under the Financial Management and Accountability 
Act to ensure each Tribunal has full responsibility for financial management. 
Both the RRT and MRT will be prescribed on 1 July 1999.

  

 “Another major change will be that the Tribunals 
will now be required to reconvene to hand-down decisions to applicants 
and to take further steps to ensure specific correspondence is received 
by applicants or their representatives.

  

 “This is to avoid incidences where applicants have 
prolonged the process by denying that they received requests for information 
or documents from the tribunals”

  

 Mr Ruddock said continuation of the existing $1,000 
fee for failed RRT applications is currently under review by the Joint 
Standing Committee on Migration.

  

 “If the fee were continued it would provide partial 
cost-recovery and help offset the cost of a limited extension of the 
Asylum Seekers Assistance Scheme.

  

 “The fee only applies to non-bona fide applicants 
found not to be refugees and only after they have received their RRT 
decision - refugees do not pay it.

  

 “This post-decision fee has had a positive effect 
in reducing the number of applications from people seeking to misuse 
the system”

  

 Mr Ruddock said the MRT application fee had been set 
at $1,400, below estimated cost recovery in 1999-2000, but slightly 
higher than the combined $500 MIRO and $850 IRT fees.

  

 This takes into account the increased operating costs 
of prescribing the MRT under the FMA Act, and the strengthened requirements 
for decision hand-down and handling of key correspondence.

  

 “The bottom line is that we now have two totally 
independent review tribunals ensuring the continued integrity of Australia’s 
migration and refugee programs.

  

 “These changes should put to rest recent allegations 
propagated by some about the lack of independence of these tribunals,” 
said the Minister.

  

 Media inquiries

 Brad Robinson 02 6277 7860 / 0419 278 715

  

  

  cm

