---
title: "Minister thanks workers at East Hills."
date: "1999-06-26"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211476624
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BXA06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

  Saturday 26 June 1999

  MPS 101/99 

  

  Minister thanks workers at East Hills

  

  The Minister for Immigration 
and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today official  ly thanked those organisations involved in processing 
the almost 4,000 Kosovars who have passed through the East Hills Centre 
since their arrival in Australia. 

  Speaking at a special barbecue lunch at the Centre, 
Mr Ruddock said that since the first plane load of Kosovars touched 
down in Sydney in early May, a total of 3,919 people - 2,024 men and 
1,895 women - had been through initial processing procedures at East 
Hills. 

  Mr Ruddock said that even a cursory glance at some 
of the statistics involved in the operation at East Hills revealed the 
enormity and complexity of the task undertaken. 

  "In processing the Kosovars at East Hills, those 
involved have had to deal with the needs of people ranging in age from 
six months to 75 years of age, not to mention pregnant women, with two 
children born in Australia to date. 

  "The bulk of the group was aged between 26 and 
44 years (1,089) and 3 and12 years (1,081). However, there were also 
demands placed by the fact that 343 Kosovars were under two years of 
age. 

  "In addition, those involved have processed 
groups of over 400 in under four days to ensure the Centre was ready 
to receive the next group. It really has been an extraordinary effort 
and I want to personally thank every person who has been involved," 
the Minister said. 

  Mr Ruddock presented Certificates of Appreciation 
to the Albanian Community Volunteers, Australian Red Cross, St Vincent 
de Paul Society, Anglicare NSW and the Refugee Council of Australia. 

  He said he planned to thank groups and individuals 
at all other sites around the country in the near future. 

  "The level of support from individuals and organisations 
for the Kosovars who sought safe haven in Australia has been overwhelming," 
said the Minister. 

  "This is the largest single humanitarian evacuation 
that Australia has ever undertaken and the level of co-operation from 
the Australian community, non-government groups and other organisations 
has been nothing short of astounding. 

  "The effort, skill and sheer professionalism 
of agency and community groups along with their generosity and kindness, 
has meant the recently arrived Kosovars now feel not only safe and secure, 
but very welcome," said Mr Ruddock. 

  The Minister said a number of the Kosovars he had 
spoken to had expressed their immense gratitude to those Australians 
who had made their arrival so welcoming. 

  "All Australians should be justifiably proud 
of their contributions, as I believe we have made a real difference 
to the lives of these people," Mr Ruddock said. 

  While at East Hills, the Minister advised that up 
to 800 Kosovars would remain at East Hills rather than be transferred 
to another safe haven, now that processing tasks had been completed. 

  In addition, the Minister said that while many Kosovars 
were very keen to return home, Australia's official repatriation program 
was yet to start. 

  "These people were evacuated at the request 
of the UNHCR and clearly we will continue to consult with the UNHCR 
on when is the right time for them to return home," said the Minister. 

  "I would stress, however, that the Kosovars 
are guests in Australia and can leave if they have pressing reasons 
to do so. 

  "What we want to ensure, however, is that people 
return to a safe environment where they can resume their lives. I am 
aware of reports that up to 80 per cent of homes in Kosovo have been 
destroyed. Clearly people want to return home as soon as possible, but 
in many cases there will be no homes to return to. 

  "When the time comes for the Kosovars to return 
home, I feel sure they will take with them some very fond memories of 
Australia, as well as some enduring friendships that have been forged 
during their stay here," Mr Ruddock concluded.

  ENDS

  Media Inquiries:

  Susan Sare 0407 415 797 

  

  

  md 1999-06-28  17:56

