---
title: "Minister announces funding arrangements for migrant, refugee and humanitarian settlement services."
date: "1999-02-01"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211468410
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/N8306%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP 

  Minister for immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  

  MINISTER ANNOUNCES FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS FOR MIGRANT, REFUGEE AND HUMANITARIAN 
SETTLEMENT SERVICES

  

 MPS 
013/99

  

 The 
Minister for immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today announced arrangements for the funding of community and service 
organisations to provide settlement services for migrants, refugee and 
humanitarian entrants.

  

 Mr 
Ruddock said community and service organisations providing settlement 
services for migrant     
refugee and humanitarian entrants, will be able to apply for funding 
under the Community Settlement Services (CSS) Scheme from Monday 15 
February 1999.

  

 Advertisements 
about applications for funding under the CSS scheme will appear in major 
metropolitan daily newspapers on Saturday 13 February 1999, and details 
will also be available on the Department’s website at   http://www.immi.gov.au

  

 “Commencing 
in 1999, funding for core services for refugee and humanitarian entrants 
under the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy (IHSS) will progressively 
move to a competitive tendering and contracting basis,” Mr Ruddock 
said.

  

 “These 
services include providing initial orientation and information to new 
arrivals, early health assessment and intervention, community support 
and training support for service providers.

  

 "IHSS 
tendering may also be extended to provide material assistance, including 
initial accommodation, subject to the outcome of a review currently 
being undertaken".

  

 The 
IHSS tenders will be invited through advertisements in the major metropolitan 
daily newspapers in March 1999.

  

 CSS 
Scheme funding will be available for up to one, two or three years from 
1 October 1999. Contracts of 12 months duration and longer are also 
expected to be available under the IHSS tender process.

  

 Mr 
Ruddock said the tendering of humanitarian settlement services was the 
next stage in the continuing improvement of core services needed by 
particularly vulnerable refugee and humanitarian entrants.

  

 DIMA 
State and Territory offices will conduct information sessions during 
February and March to inform current and prospective service providers 
of the arrangements and requirements for applications for CSS Scheme 
funding and the tendering of IHSS services.

  

 Monday, 1 February 1999

  

  ENDS

  

  Media inquiries: Brad Robinson (02) 6277 7860 or 0419 278 715

  

  

  JS

