---
title: "Chechnya."
date: "1999-12-08"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479280
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZXJ06%22
---

   

  LAURIE BRERETON MP 

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

  

 154/99 

  8 December 1999

  

  

  CHECHNYA

  

  

  The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today condemned 
Russia’s military offensive in Chechnya.

  

  ‘The Russian military’s ultima tum to the residents of Grozny 
harks back to an earlier barbaric age”, Mr Brereton said.

  

 ‘The Russian military’s intensive air and artillery 
bombardment of the Chechen population clearly transgresses civilised 
norms. Such attacks breach the provisions of the Geneva Conventions 
which provide that civilians must not be the object of attack and specifically 
prohibit attacks which are intended to spread terror among civilian 
populations.”

  

 ‘The United Nations High Commission for Refugees 
has warned that there is a ‘very real risk’ that thousands of civilians 
will die if Russia continues its military offensive. Those in danger 
include not only the residents of Grozny, but far greater numbers who 
have fled the fighting and are exposed to appalling winter conditions.”

  

 “Russia’s actions had already attracted widespread 
international condemnation. United States Defence Secretary William 
Cohen yesterday told the press that Russia was ‘engaged in indiscriminate 
killings of innocent civilians on a rather substantial scale’.”

  

 “British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook has condemned 
the Russian military offensive, saying that he could not understand 
‘how Russia imagines that it can root out terrorism by attacking the 
whole of the population’. Foreign Secretary Cook also confirmed that 
the International Monetary Fund has decided not to recommend disbursement 
of the next $US 640 million tranche of the $US 4.5 billion loan agreed 
with Russia in July.”

  

 “Australia is far removed from the conflict in Chechnya. 
But as a responsible member of the international community, we are duty 
bound to make clear our opposition to what can only be considered a 
completely unacceptable assault on a civilian population.”

  

 “Australia must also be prepared to provide appropriate 
support for the UNHCR’s efforts to provide relief to the refugees 
who have fled from Chechnya to neighbouring countries.”

  

 Contact: Phillip Dorling 02 6277 4717

  

  

  al  1999-12-10  08:54

