---
title: "Refugee 'pause' provides opportunity for Australia to improve its stance."
date: "1999-04-11"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211474657
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QT606%22
---

   

  Media Release

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats’ Spokesperson on Immigration

  

 11 APRIL1999

 99/194

  

  Refugee ‘pause’ provides opportunity for 
Australia to improve its stance

  

  The suspension of plans for Australia to provide temporary refuge 
for  four thousand displaced people from Kosovo should be used 
by the federal government as an opportunity to rethink our country’s 
stance and provide a more effective and appropriate response to the 
crisis, according to the Australian Democrats.

  

 Democrat Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew 
Bartlett, said the federal government should recognise the widespread 
community criticism of the Prime Minister’s insistence on only taking 
temporary refugees.

  

 “This ‘pause’ in the relocation plan provides 
a perfect opportunity for the government to improve the appropriateness 
of our country’s response by indicating our willingness to take refugees 
on a permanent basis should any wish to seek asylum here,” Senator 
Bartlett said.

  

 “The request from the United Nations High Commissioner 
on Refugees (UNHCR) for Australia to put its plans on hold is a reflection 
of the problems involved in temporarily relocating people to the other 
side of the world, particularly on very short notice.”

  

 “Many people have pointed out in the past week that 
only offering temporary refuge is not always going to be in the interests 
of the refugee.”

  

 “History also shows that, despite best intentions, 
many people displaced by war are never able to return home.”

  

 “The Coalition government should recognise this 
reality and modify Australia’s stance to reflect the need to provide 
the opportunity for   permanent  asylum for those who want to come to Australia as 
refugees.”

  

  “It is absolutely crucial that all permanent places offered in Australia 
to refugees must be as an increase in the size of our overall refugee 
intake. Squeezing Kosovo refugees into our existing program means equally 
needy refugees from other parts of the world will miss out on their 
opportunity for resettlement, which I’m sure nobody wants to see happen.”

  

 Commenting on other matters related to the UNHCR decision, 
Senator Bartlett said the Democrats agreed with the government that 
it is too early to immediately donate the 20 million dollars to international 
relief efforts which the provision of temporary refuge for four thousand 
people was likely to cost.

  

 “However, we urge the government to keep this option 
open should the UNHCR continue to indicate it does not wish Australia 
to take temporary refugees.”

  

 Senator Bartlett concluded by saying that “regardless 
of further decisions by the UNHCR, the federal government still needs 
to be doing what it can to fast-track special humanitarian applications 
and to ensure Albanians with family connections or support in Australia 
are identified as quickly as possible.”

  

 “Exploring every option to reduce the suffering 
in the Balkans should be a priority for Parliamentarians throughout 
the world.”

  

 To arrange interview contact Senator Andrew Bartlett 
on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3861 1041

  

  

  

  rw

