---
title: "East Timor - the way ahead: speech to the Rotary Club of Sydney, Sydney, 30 November 1999"
date: "1999-11-30"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479031
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2NJ06%22
---

   

  

 Speech by

  The Minister 
for Foreign Affairs   
The Hon Alexander Downer MP  


 to the

  The Rotary 
Club of Sydney

  EAST TIMOR 
- THE WAY AHEAD

  (Sydney, 30 November 1999)

  (Check Against 
Delivery)

  

  EAST TIMOR - THE WAY AHEAD

  

  Speech by the Hon Alexander Downer, MP,   Minister for Foreign Affairs,   
  to the Rotary Club of Sydney, 30 November 1999

  

  Introduction

  

 It is a real pleasure 
to be able to address this gathering at the Rotary Club of Sydney.  
I admire greatly the work which Rotary does in Australia and overseas.  
Your ideal of service is an important one for business and the professions 
to keep in mind as together we face the forces of globalisation, and 
economic and technological change.  It is important for all Australians 
to meet these challenges in the international arena with confidence.  
Rotary can do much to help us achieve this objective through the work 
that it does in all its avenues of service - at the club level, in vocational 
work, in service to the community and in the advancement of international 
understanding, goodwill and peace.  

 Australia's relationship 
with East Timor provides an excellent example of where Australia has   
confidently met an important challenge in our region.  I would 
like to use the opportunity of my address today to talk about that relationship.  

 In doing so, I want 
to focus primarily on the future of East Timor.  This is an important 
juncture in the process that will lead to the emergence of East Timor 
as a new, independent nation in our region.  It is, therefore, 
an appropriate time to reflect on the tasks that still await us on what 
will no doubt be a long and difficult road to recovery for the new nation 
of East Timor.

  The Tasks Ahead in East 
Timor

  

 Let me begin by saying 
that Australians can be proud of the role we have taken in relation 
to East Timor.  Firstly, we helped to initiate the process that 
allowed the East Timorese people to decide their own destiny.  
Secondly, Australia worked to assist the effective implementation of 
the Tripartite Agreement of May 1999 between Indonesia, Portugal and 
the United Nations on the future of the territory.  Thirdly, we 
pressed Indonesia to halt the violence that so tragically erupted in 
the territory, and when it was clear that the Indonesian security forces 
were unable to do so, Australia organised the INTERFET multinational 
force.  Finally, under the mandate of the United Nations,  
we have led INTERFET, and helped with the associated humanitarian relief 
operations, with great effectiveness and unquestionable integrity.

 And our efforts have 
been noted and appreciated on the world stage, especially in our own 
region.  In this regard, I welcome the fact that the Commonwealth 
Heads of Government in Durban acknowledged the contribution of Commonwealth 
and other countries to INTERFET's success in restoring peace and security 
in East Timor.

 We need now to look 
to the future of East Timor.  And there, despite all the suffering, 
there is great cause for hope.

 What we have today 
is the reality of the 30 August ballot in which a clear decision by 
almost 80 per cent of East Timorese was made against autonomy within 
Indonesia, after a vote whose legitimacy has never been subject to any 
credible challenge.  We have a people who are firmly on the road 
to independence.  Much remains to be done on that journey and Australia 
is committed to assist the UN and the people of East Timor along the 
way. 

 The road-map for that 
journey, at least until 31 January 2001, is provided by UN Security 
Council Resolution 1272, adopted on 25 October.  This historic 
resolution, which I warmly welcomed, authorised the creation of the 
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).  
UNTAET is charged with establishing an effective administration and 
has a wide range of duties.  These include providing security and 
maintaining law and order, assisting in the development of civil and 
social services, ensuring the co-ordination and delivery of humanitarian 
assistance and rehabilitation, supporting capacity-building for self-government 
- which will include drafting a constitution and organising elections 
- and establishing the conditions for the sustainable development of 
East Timor.  It is a formidable and demanding list of tasks.  

 Australia has warmly 
welcomed the appointment of Mr Sergio Vieira de Mello as the Head of 
UNTAET with the position of Special Representative of the UN Secretary- 
General.  Australia is committed to assist Mr Vieira De Mello and 
his colleagues in the performance of their complex and difficult tasks.  
It is noteworthy that Resolution 1272 recognizes that, in developing 
and performing its functions under its mandate, UNTAET will need to 
draw on the expertise and capacity of Member States, UN agencies and 
other international organizations, including the international financial 
institutions.  The Resolution also sets up a trust fund to support 
the work of UNTAET.    

 Australia hopes that 
the international community will provide generous support to UNTAET 
and the Trust Fund, in cash, kind and expertise.  Just as INTERFET 
now comprises 17 diverse countries, the rehabilitation and development 
of East Timor is a truly regional and international issue.   
I will speak later about Australia's commitment to assist the people 
of East Timor.

 Resolution 1272 requests 
UNTAET to cooperate closely with INTERFET with a view to replacing INTERFET 
as soon as possible with UNTAET's military component - the Peacekeeping 
Operation, or PKO.  I have told the UN Secretary General that Australia 
would be prepared to lead the PKO if he requested that we do so, but 
that Australia would go along with whatever decision he made on its 
leadership.  This decision is clearly the responsibility of the 
Secretary General and his alone.  

 Australia's primary 
concern has been that a competent and experienced officer, one capable 
of securing wide international support for the PKO, be appointed to 
the Commander's position.  We look forward to an announcement of 
the appointment in the near future.  I have personally confirmed 
to the Secretary General that, while Australia would be an active member 
of the PKO, we are expecting to have a lower profile and a reduced number 
of troops in East Timor once the PKO is in place.  

 The Resolution stresses 
the need for UNTAET to consult and cooperate closely with the East Timorese 
people in order to carry out its mandate effectively and we have particularly 
welcomed Mr Vieira de Mello's constructive moves in this direction since 
he took up his duties in Dili on 17 November.    

 Resolution 1272 also 
stresses the importance of reconciliation.  For our part, the Australian 
Government sees the creation of UNTAET as marking a real turning point 
for the people of East Timor in their long and difficult journey towards 
recovery and  independence.  It provides a genuine opportunity 
to turn away from the divisions of the recent past and enter an era 
of reconciliation and nation-building.      Reconciliation will take courage but Australia believes 
that it is essential for the future that the people of East Timor enter 
the 21st century united in a society governed by democratic institutions.   
They can be absolutely confident of continued assistance from Australia 
to achieve this goal. 

 Similarly, Australia 
considers that it is critical to the future stability and economic development 
of East Timor that it and Indonesia let the past go and develop a broad 
relationship, based on mutual respect and a mutual interest in stability 
and development - in other words that Indonesia and East Timor live 
as good neighbours.

 Australia is very 
pleased that Xanana Gusmao, a statesman of national vision, common sense 
and compassion has clearly supported, in both word and deed, reconciliation 
among East Timorese and a new co-operative relationship with Indonesia.   
It is a cause for optimism in the future of our region that the new 
Government of Indonesia has also taken the same approach.  Australia 
is committed to support the development of such a co-operative climate.

  Human Rights

  

  Reconciliation does not mean that the human rights abuses which have 
so tragically taken place in East Timor are ignored and forgotten.   
Investigation and the bringing to justice of the perpetrators of serious 
crimes is a necessary part of the healing and reconciliation process.  
By international agreement, the investigation of abuses is a responsibility 
of the United Nations.  Australia will assist in whatever ways 
are appropriate to facilitate those investigations.

  

 The UN's Economic 
and Social Council, as the responsible body, approved a mandate for 
the UN Commission of Inquiry in East Timor (CIET) on 15 November.  
Members of the Commission arrived in East Timor on 25 November and are 
proceeding with their important work.  In addition, three UN Rapporteurs 
(for Torture, Summary Executions and Violence Against Women) visited 
East Timor from 6 to 10 November.  They are preparing a joint report 
to the UN General Assembly.   

 I also take this opportunity 
to note that the Indonesian Human Rights Commission, KOMNASHAM, a body 
that Australia has consistently supported and encouraged, has produced 
a strongly worded report from its preliminary investigation into human 
rights abuses in East Timor and has announced its intention to question 
senior military figures.  These developments are positive and highlight 
the changes within Indonesia that support the end of a culture of impunity, 
and should assist in promoting a co-operative investigatory effort into 
the abuse of human rights in East Timor.

  Aid

  

 The task of reconstruction 
in East Timor is clearly a very great challenge and will require a significant 
and co-ordinated effort over many years.  I noted with interest 
the recent report of the World Bank which called for a three year reconstruction 
effort in East Timor worth up to US$300 million.  The UN assessment 
of humanitarian aid requirements for the next nine months or so puts 
the bill at over A$300 million.  The overall costs of reconstruction 
and development are still being assessed but are likely to be upwards 
of A$100 million per year for several years.  

 These figures give 
some idea of the scale of the effort which will be required to help 
East Timor along the road to recovery. 

 I was pleased to announce 
on 22 November that Australia will contribute an additional $60 million 
this financial year to assist East Timor's humanitarian and reconstruction 
needs.  Together with the $14 million previously committed, this 
is the largest ever contribution Australia has made to an international 
humanitarian crisis.  Funding will be provided to meet many different 
needs, including repatriation and resettlement, and programs addressing 
basic education and health needs.  $3 million will also be provided 
for refugee and local communities in Indonesian West Timor to support 
emergency health, nutrition and water and sanitation programs.  

 Assisting East Timor's 
humanitarian and reconstruction needs is an area where business can 
make an important contribution too.  I wish at this point to support 
the efforts made by the Prime Minister who recently wrote to a number 
of industry associations and companies inviting them to support the 
very worthy cause of the reconstruction of East Timor.  In this 
regard, Mr Howard noted that Australian companies are well placed to 
play a role as they come from a nation with a strong, diversified economy.  
The UN-funded reconstruction effort in East Timor will provide commercial 
opportunities for Australian companies.  But there is also a place 
in this effort for the fine Australian tradition of business philanthropy.  

 In my own portfolio, 
AusAID is working with companies wishing to donate goods and services 
to achieve effective outcomes in East Timor.  I encourage you and 
your business and professional colleagues throughout Australia, and 
indeed the world, to consider whether there are ways in which you can 
help fulfil the Rotary ideal of service at the international level by 
donating goods and services to the people of East Timor.  

  Relations with Indonesia

  

 As we think about 
ways of building Australia's relations with what will become the independent 
nation of East Timor, let us also remember the important work that must 
be done in our relations with Indonesia.  There have been some 
serious tensions, but I firmly believe that the removal of East Timor 
as an irritant from the bilateral relationship with Indonesia can only 
improve ties between our two nations in the longer term - and improve 
Indonesia's international standing more broadly.    

 Australia wants a 
sound and constructive relationship with Indonesia.  I am heartened 
by the indications we have received from the new Indonesian Government 
that it wishes to see the relationship revived in a measured and careful 
way.  We share that desire.  As neighbouring countries, Australia 
and Indonesia should aim to enjoy a bilateral relationship which is 
constructive and mutually beneficial.  We have broad-ranging ties, 
including commercial relations, educational exchanges, government-to-government 
co-operation in technical fields and the whole range of people-to-people 
links which give so much substance to the relationship.  

 The underlying strength 
and durability of the relationship has been demonstrated by the fact 
that, for the most part, these aspects of the relationship have held 
up well despite the events of the past few months.  This lasting 
strength and durability provides a sound basis for renewing and revitalising 
the relationship.

  Conclusion

  

 Ladies and gentlemen, 
the process of self-determination in East Timor has been the cause of 
much sadness.  Too many innocent lives have been lost, too many 
lives shattered.

 But amidst all the 
sadness, there is cause for hope.  A people braved intimidation 
of the worst kind, and overwhelmingly voted for independence - and the 
30 August ballot is now an internationally established fact that can 
never be overturned.  We are witnessing the birth of a nation, 
perhaps the first of the new millennium.

 Australia has played 
a very constructive, and wholly creditable, role in the process that 
has led to self-determination for the people of East Timor.  Australians 
should take pride in that, just as they rightly take pride in the work 
done by Australian men and women in INTERFET.  We saw an opportunity 
to allow East Timorese to decide their own future, and we helped them 
realise that chance.  And when those who lost the ballot sought 
to overturn it through violence and intimidation, we put Australian 
lives on the line to end that suffering.

  Now the international community is faced with 
the task of working with the people of East Timor as they continue their 
journey towards recovery, reconciliat  ion and independence.  Let all of us in the international community 
take up the challenge to do what we can to assist the United Nations 
and the people of East Timor as they chart their course in the days 
and weeks and months ahead.  

  

  Let us keep the final destination firmly in our sights, and work together 
to ensure that the new, independent nation of East Timor comes into 
being with the best possible basis for taking its place in our region 
and the world.  

  

  

  jy  1999-12-06  08:49

