---
title: ""A warm embrace from across the globe", address at a Kosovar refugee fundraising function, Gold Coast City, 30 May 1999\n"
date: "1999-05-30"
creators:
  - "Sullivan, Kathryn"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475972
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RXB06%22
---

   

  

  "A 
Warm Embrace from Across the Globe"

  Address 
by The Hon. Kathy Sullivan MP, Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister 
for Foreign Affairs, at a Kosovar Refugee Fundraising Function, Gold 
Coast City, 30 May 1999.

  

  Thank you [name of MC]; [names 
of VIPs];   ladies and gentlemen. 

  It’s a great pleasure to be asked to speak at today’s 
function. As Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs, I’ve been 
involved in the Government’s efforts to provide assistance to the 
Kosovar refugees who have been fleeing the horrors that have befallen 
their homeland. I’m very aware of their situation, but also of the 
extraordinary work being done by Governments and NGOs from around the 
globe to help ease that terrible suffering. 

  But what really brought the tragedy of Kosovo home 
to me was something I guess I’ve shared with every one of you here 
today. It has been the images and stories we have seen in our newspapers 
and on our television screens every day. The old lady who was carried 
on her grandson’s back across mountain ranges to a safe haven. The 
man who lost his wife and children when their family car hit a landmine 
within sight of the border. The young boy being loaded onto a truck, 
screaming in terror for his father - the only other member of his 
family left alive - as they were temporarily separated in a refugee 
camp. 

  The scale of the problem is so huge that it is hard 
to put it in proper perspective. The latest UNHCR figures put the total 
number of refugees and displaced persons in the region at more than 
744,000 - including 229,000 in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
433,000 in Albania and 63,300 in Montenegro. 

  Three quarters of a million refugees. That’s more 
than one third of Kosovo’s pre-war population, or about the combined 
populations of Tasmania and the ACT. Its also around 12 per cent of 
the total population of the three nations providing first refuge to 
the Kosovars, which may give you some idea of the kinds of strains being 
placed on the infrastructures of those countries. And the number of 
refugees is still growing. 

  The Australian Government responded quickly to meet 
the needs of the Kosovar refugees. We’ve already provided $6 million 
to humanitarian organisations working in the region, including the United 
Nations High Commission for Refugees ($3.5 million), CARE Australia 
($500,000), the Australian Red Cross ($250,000), World Vision Australia 
($250,000), the World Food Programme ($1 million) and the International 
Committee of the Red Cross ($500,000). 

  Our assistance - provided through the emergency relief 
budget managed by the Australian Government’s overseas aid agency 
AusAID - targets the immediate relief needs of refugees and internally 
displaced persons from Kosovo. And it demonstrates, I think, the value 
of government working hand-in-hand with non-government organisations 
to deliver effective assistance to people in need. 

  Of course, the other side of Australia’s efforts 
to assist Kosovar refugees has been our operation to bring 4,000 displaced 
persons to safety in Australia. You will all, I’m sure, have shared 
with me in the delightful images we’ve seen over the past days of 
those people in their new Australian safe havens: the relief on the 
faces of the adults, the smiles of the children able to enjoy play in 
a park again. For the first time in many weeks, they have been able 
to look at the future with confidence, freed from the nightmare that 
has gripped their homeland. 

  I want to say a few words about this effort to provide 
refuge, because at every level it has involved great work by some unsung 
Australian heroes. Firstly by our immigration and humanitarian officials 
who organised the departure of the Kosovars from the Balkans. Their 
efforts were best illustrated by the fact that, following the decision 
by the UNHCR to activate the plans to grant safe haven to the refugees 
on 1 May, the first plane arrived in Sydney on 7 May. 

  Secondly, we’ve seen a fantastic effort by community 
and humanitarian workers here in Australia, who have helped ease the 
jolt of cultural transition for our new arrivals, and who have worked 
around the clock to ensure that the Kosovars have settled quickly into 
their new homes. Finally, let’s not forget the magnificent response 
of ordinary Australians, who have overwhelmed those managing the reception 
of the displaced persons with offers of assistance, and who have offered 
such a warm welcome to the Kosovars. A special mention, of course, must 
go to Australia’s own Albanian community, who have helped with interpreters 
and in so many other ways to welcome their cousins. People across Australia 
have so warmly embraced the Kosovars. 

  It has been a fantastic effort 
- the largest airlift Australia has ever attempted in so short a span 
of time. We’ve concentrated on keeping families together, and on meeting 
the special needs of the refugees, particularly their health needs. 
The task has o  nly just begun, but I don’t think I’m being premature 
in offering congratulations to all involved for a splendid effort. 

  In conclusion, I turn to what you might call the 
"sharp end" of my speech - urging you to give generously 
to this fund-raising exercise for Kosovo refugees. As Parliamentary 
Secretary, I’m only too conscious of the charitable nature of the 
Australian people - but some times, that generosity can be a little 
misdirected. So it is in the case of assistance for Kosovar refugees. 

  We’ve found that many Australians have gone out 
of their way to collect food, clothing and blankets to send to the Balkans. 
Now, that is an entirely commendable attitude. But the problem is that 
neither the Australian Government nor non-government aid agencies have 
the ability to get those unsolicited goods to the Kosovo region. Even 
if it could be done, those would not necessarily be the items most needed 
by the people there, and the cost of transportation would probably outweigh 
any benefit. 

  In fact, the most effective way for people in Australia 
to help those most in need is to make cash donations to the non-government 
aid agency of their choice. Aid agencies working in the Kosovo region 
are in the best position to determine the needs of the refugees. Many 
of those needs, with proper funding, can be met locally and provided 
to the refugees quickly and cost-effectively. 

  So if you have such items, why not think about selling 
them and other goods at a garage sale or market stall, and using the 
cash obtained to make a donation to one of the aid agencies active in 
the Kosovo region - like CARE Australia, World Vision and the Red 
Cross. Organisations like these can ensure that your money will go directly 
to the people in need, in a manner that helps them most. 

  Aid workers - many of them Australians - are 
doing an extraordinary job in the Kosovo region. They are at the front 
line in providing comfort and shelter for people who have lost everything, 
perhaps even their families. In appalling conditions, in the face of 
some of the most inhumane behaviour our century has seen, they uphold 
all that is best in human nature. 

  Ladies and gentlemen, they deserve your support. 

  

  

  jy  1999-07-19  13:08

