---
title: "Coastwatch report now overdue."
date: "1999-05-01"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475136
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RX706%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon Duncan Kerr MP

  Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs

  Shadow Minister for the Arts

  Federal Member for Denison

  

 1st May 1999

  COASTWATCH REPORT NOW OVERDUE

  

  “Justice and Customs Minister, Amanda Vanstone, has missed the deadline 
to  release her report into the recent groundings in Australia 
of two boats carrying illegal immigrants,” Shadow Justice and Customs 
Minister, Duncan Kerr said today.

  

 Mr Kerr said the Prime Minister had given Senator 
Vanstone until the end of April to submit her report of the inquiry 
into the two landings.

  

 “April has gone and still no report.

  

 “The report by Air Vice-Marshall Alan Heggen was 
supposed to have been finalised yesterday, but still no word from the 
Minister as to its release,” Mr Kerr said.

  

 “This is a matter of grave public concern. Senator 
Vanstone must come clean and reveal what events led to the boats arriving 
on Australian shores without any action being taken to intercept them.

  

 “In early March, a boat carrying 26 illegal immigrants 
arrived on a Cairns suburban beach. A local Newsagent raised the alarm, 
but it was later revealed authorities were notified at least three times 
of a suspicious boat approaching up to three days prior.

  

 “Facing the embarrassing revelations of her Department’s 
failure, Senator Vanstone was then forced to call for an inquiry into 
the matter.

  

 “Nearly a month to the day, another boat arrived, 
this time near Coffs Harbour in New South Wales, carrying at least 60 
illegal immigrants. The terms of reference for the Ministers inquiry 
were broadened to include this grounding as well.

  

 “But this wasn’t enough; the Prime Minister stepped 
in over his Minister and set up his own task force with a wider brief.

  

 “Time is up. Senator Vanstone must not be allowed 
to cover up incompetence by not releasing the report in full,” Mr 
Kerr said.

  

 Contact: Duncan Kerr 0418 125 161

  

  

  rw

