---
title: "East Timor humanitarian relief effort recognised."
date: "1999-09-20"
creators:
  - "Tambling, Grant"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - HEALTH AND AGED CARE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477235
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NYJ06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Senator The Hon. Grant Tambling

  CLP Senator for the Northern Territory

  

  

  Monday 20 September 1999 

  EAST 
TIMOR HUMANITARIAN RELIEF EFFORT RECOGNISED

  Recognising the tremendous 
humanitarian work of aid workers, charity organisations and gove  rnment agencies, Northern Territory CLP Senator Grant 
Tambling urged Australians to acknowledge and applaud the tireless support 
of the brigades of volunteers and public servants involved in the relief 
effort. 

  "The people of Darwin have opened their hearts 
to the East Timorese and have been steadfast in their support since 
their arrival in Darwin, whether through tirelessly donating their time 
or expertise, or giving generously to aid organisations with time and 
from their own pocket," said Senator Tambling. 

  "I would like to thank the many, many people, 
agencies and organisations that have been involved in the relief effort 
to date and acknowledge the supreme efforts they have made, which reflect 
the time-honoured Australian tradition of helping those in need." 

  Following near-round-the-clock health screenings 
over the weekend, many of the refugees were found to be malnourished 
and psychologically traumatised. Those with health problems have been 
hospitalised in the Northern Territory. 

  Integral to the humanitarian effort in Darwin has 
been a score of Northern Territory and Federal Government agencies, 
working in conjunction with local aid organisations to provide essential 
services to the East Timorese refugees on their arrival in the Territory 
and throughout their stay. 

  "The Reception Taskforce, under the guidance 
of The Hon Mike Reed MLA, the Northern Territory Deputy Chief Minister, 
has done a superb job of making things as comfortable, simple and painless 
as possible for the refugees," said Senator Tambling. 

  "Charity and aid organisations are playing a 
large part in the relief effort and without their tremendous support, 
life for the refugees would be much more difficult." 

  Throughout the refugees’ arrival, their accommodation 
in the temporary ‘tent city’ in the Darwin suburb of Marrara, and 
right up to their departure to safe haven sites in Victoria, New South 
Wales and Western Australia, Territorians have demonstrated the lasting 
bond that has been formed between Australian and Timorese people. 

  Following the birth of a baby to a Timorese couple, 
the newborn infant was named after the officer in charge of the tent 
city. 

  "It is important to acknowledge and applaud 
the strength and courage the East Timorese refugees have shown in such 
trying circumstances. They are exceptional people and the recognition 
they gave to the Prime Minister today at the tent city shows the feelings 
they have for all Australians," said Senator Tambling. 

  ENDS 

  Media contact: Melissa Baldwin (08) 8981 3567 / 0412 
316 362

  

  

  jy  1999-12-10  10:34

