---
title: "6PR Studio, Perth 6 May 1999: transcript of doorstop interview [Phil Coles, Industrial relations, shooting galleries, Albani refugees]"
date: "1999-05-06"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Phil Coles"
  - "Industrial relations"
  - "shooting galleries"
  - "Albani refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211475224
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/44806%22
---

   

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, 6PR STUDIO, PERTH 6 MAY 1999

  

  E & OE - PROOF ONLY

  

  Subjects:  Phil Coles, Industrial relations, 
shooting galleries, Albanian refugees

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, can we start off with the future of Phil 
Coles? What do you think should happen to him?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well Michael Knight, who of course has responsibility 
for these things, said that he is of the view that Mr Coles should step 
aside, and he is obviously putting pressure on him. My advice to Mr 
Coles is to take notice of what Mr Knight says to him.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Regards to the damage, do you think at this stage, 
500 days out, do you think there is damage?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Certainly the sponsorship is being damaged. I think 
that is very plain. It needs to be brought to an end swiftly, and the 
Interests of the games should be held paramount.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Moving onto the industrial Relations legislation, 
the Federal Industrial Relations legislation, what are the Opposition’s 
concerns about it?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, this is about two things essentially. . . .the 
independent umpire, and governing their powers the independent umpire 
on which ordinary Australian wage earners depend. And tipping the balance 
decisively against ordinary Australians, feeding their insecurity and 
making less likely that they are confident in their capacity to support 
their families and support themselves. This is the Liberal Party fighting 
against ordinary Australians — which is an ideological obsession of 
theirs. it is not necessary for the economy, and it is likely to be 
highly damaging to many millions of ordinary Australians.

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, we are going to of course look at the Bill in 
its totality. But everything that we have seen from Mr Reith’s secret 
leaked document indicates their intentions are to affect the lives of 
ordinary lower and middle income workers.. .Whenever we find anything 
in that Bill that does anything like that, you can be guaranteed that 
we will be in there opposing it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 What about secret ballots? Tony Blair has actually 
supported, or not cut those out in Britain. Are you opposed to secret 
ballots?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

  .. .the secret ballot is a facade. The essential nature of this act 
is to gut the Industrial Relations Commission, that is what it’s about. 
The so ca lled secret ballot issue is a piece of flummery.. You 
put in secret ballots - you make industrial relations issues harder 
to solve, that’s the facade. The reality is what this Government wants 
to do is to destroy the independent umpire and further tip the balance 
against ordinary Australians.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 (inaudible)

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, what I have said so far is that I applaud the 
fact that the Wayside Chapel wants to go down the road of keeping people 
alive. That has to be one of a number of objectives in a decent drugs 
policy. .And I appreciate the fact that there are out there doing that. 
But they do have to be careful however about their legal situation. 
if the police don’t approve of what they are doing, then they have 
got a real problem, I think, too, in relation to personal liability, 
in the set of circumstances that you could foresee occur in that shooting 
gallery. But we have all got to be devoted to keeping the addicts alive. 
That has to be one of the absolute fundamentals in a decent drugs policy.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 .. . in the church in Perth is also having the same 
situation happening . . .and they are saying it is common throughout 
Perth ...

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, that is quite obvious that that is occurring. 
We currently provide clean needles for those who have an addiction. 
It Is a sensible thing to do in terms of protection of the community 
arid maintaining contact with those who have an addiction in the hope 
that we might be able to point them in the way of a detoxification program. 
Personally, I think the solution to these issues lies in a whole range 
of areas: better funding for detoxification, better funding for things 
like the Naltrexone program, better education programs, but also you 
have to have some element of harm minimisation. It is far better that 
people are in an environment that you can keep in touch with them than 
not. The problem however is legal and I think the Wayside Chapel and 
others who are doing this need to look at their legal situation very 
carefully.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Are you thinking of changing legislation, or how do 
you deal with that?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I think actually if you are going to go down 
that road you have to be mindful of what the mayors are doing about 
these sorts of issues. They are trying very carefully to work their 
way through these sorts of issues, such as duty of care issues. It is 
possible, for example, that if you were to run something like this on 
a formal basis you would make yourself liable in a situation where somebody 
overdosed. Now, I’m not sure if the Wayside Chapel has properly thought 
these issues through.

  

  JOURNALIST :

  

 I’m not sure if the first plane load of Kosovar 
refugees arrive today? Are you satisfied in the way we are going to 
look after them?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Certainly it is better than putting them in the desert, 
which is what seemed to be the original intention of the Government. 
What I said to the Government is this — be generous with them in the 
terms and conditions of their entry. You must make sure that they have 
access to a decent education for the kids. I also think the Government 
has to take a generous view to the possibility that they may be here 
a bit longer than immediately is apparent, in terms of legislation, 
which has gone through. And I think we have to keep them in touch with 
the Albanian/Australian population. I just want them to have as normal 
an experience as possible while they’re here.

  

 ends.

  

  

  

  LK

