---
title: "New year offers opportunities to cement our gains."
date: "1999-01-04"
creators:
  - "Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry"
source: "AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211468041
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AO106%22
---

   

  

  AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

  MEDIA RELEASE    
   
Monday, 4 January 1999   
MR 1/99

    
  NEW YEAR 
OFFERS OPPORTUNITIES TO CEMENT OUR GAINS    
   
Statement by Mark Paterson, Chief Executive

     
The foundations laid over the past two years provide an opportunit y 
for Australia to entrench the gains already made and then build an even 
stronger economic structure.    
   
This is so even though most signs point towards a more difficult year 
ahead. It is probable that the slowdown in Asia will have a significantly 
greater effect on the Australian economy during the next twelve months 
than it did during the past year.    
   
Nevertheless, the actions taken to put the Australian economy onto a 
more productive footing are bearing fruit and with careful policy and 
a sensible continuation of the process of reform, Australia will be 
able to go from strength to strength.   
  
 The Economy    
   
The state of the Australian economy has provided the clearest possible 
evidence of the value of sound economic policy. Growth in the year to 
September was 5.0%, a growth rate anticipated by no one at the start 
of last year.    
   
And while Australia is unlikely to achieve a continuation of the extraordinary 
growth rates of the past year, it is probable that the economy will 
continue to grow at relatively strong rates.    
   
Australia is likely to remain the strongest economy in the region and 
one of the strongest throughout the whole of the OECD.   
   
Nevertheless, there are areas of concern that must be weighed in the 
balance in thinking about the year ahead.   
   
The most important area where problems are now visible is in private 
sector investment. Investment growth has been decreasing for the past 
two years so that it is probable that the level of investment will grow 
at low rates in the year ahead. Low investment will affect Australia's 
growth rate, the level of employment and the rate of improvement in 
productivity.    
   
The fall in commodity prices will have an effect on domestic income. 
There is a strong potential for slower demand for Australian output 
as world production and income levels slow. The increasing level of 
protectionist sentiment and the failure of APEC to make further progress 
are matters for concern.    
   
Irrespective of overseas trends, however, Australia's proper course 
remains clear. It is that Australia must continue with the economic 
policies it has been pursuing with so much success for the past three 
years.   
   
Firstly, public sector restraint on expenditure must be maintained. 
This has been the very foundation of Australia's economic success. Lower 
levels of unproductive spending have ensured that a greater proportion 
of Australian activity has been value adding.    
   
Secondly, market forces must continue to determine the direction of 
economic activity. The refusal of the Government to increase protection 
levels or to attempt to direct private sector activity has been crucial 
in allowing Australia to maintain strong rates of growth while other 
economies have faltered.   
   
Thirdly, the changes made to the industrial relations system have been 
essential in creating a more productive workplace culture and need to 
be extended. A proper safety net must be introduced and the annual reviews 
of award minimum rates must be ended.    
   
Fourthly, although government regulation has diminished and there is 
less red tape than has been common in the past, the changes which have 
been made are only a start and must be further developed.    
   
Fifthly, interest rates must not be increased and serious consideration 
should be given to further reductions. There is not a hint of inflationary 
pressure at this time while there are other indications of a slowdown 
in activity. A further cut in rates would provide an additional stimulus 
to confidence.   
   
However, there is more needed, and the most important change looking 
to the future is in the area of tax reform. But other changes are needed 
as well, on industry policy, labour relations, education and training 
and on immigration.   
  
 Taxation     
   
With the introduction into Parliament of the New Tax System legislation 
package in November, the Government has embarked upon a most far reaching 
reform process which will benefit the Australian community in terms 
of improved competitiveness, investment and job creation.   
   
The Government's tax reform package was carefully crafted to provide 
the most comprehensive reform consistent with the electorate's overall 
perceptions and expectations. While it did not provide every initiative 
business would have wanted, for example the abolition of payroll tax, 
it received strong endorsement from right across the business community 
including small business.   
   
ACCI's analysis demonstrated that the Government package - in contrast 
to the other parties - represented fundamental and comprehensive reform 
in terms of:

  

     
ACCI is actively participating in the Business Coalition for Tax Reform 
to ensure an effective business contribution to the various consultative 
mechanisms established by the government reviewing the practical d etail 
of design, transition and implementation phases of the GST and other 
elements of the announced package and the Review being conducted by 
John Ralph into business taxation, which will report to the Government, 
by 30 June 1999. The BCTR will also provide submissions to the various 
Senate Committees inquiring into aspects the new tax package.   
   
There is now serious concern among the business community with the prospect 
that the Government will be frustrated in implementing essential elements 
of its package because of the position being taken by a non-Government 
majority in the Senate in relation to key elements of the package.    
   
While the Government must deliver on its commitment to consult and communicate 
closely with stakeholders on the practical detail - particularly of 
the design, interpretation, transition and implementation arrangements 
of the GST - the business sector is totally opposed to undue delays 
or additional exemptions which would make compliance a nightmare and 
trigger an unravelling of the tax base.   
  
 Industry Policy    
   
As the Government signalled in its response to the 1997 Mortimer Report 
on industry programs it is essential that a "whole of government" 
approach be taken to activities affecting enterprise competitiveness 
and hence investment and job creation.   
   
Evidence emerging from the sectoral   Action Agenda  process adopted by the Government indicates that 
the "whole of government" approach is quite a challenge for 
many agencies. Pressure must be maintained to achieve the expected outcomes.   
   
Broad issues, which will influence industry policy success in 1999, 
include the following:    
  
 (i) Innovation     
   
It is clear that innovation will be the driver of economic growth and 
wealth creation in the next century. Business expenditure on R&D 
will underpin this growth and so in accordance with international best 
practice it is vital that the private sector be provided with compliance 
friendly incentives to encourage innovation. As such, ACCI has been 
concerned about suggestions of tightening eligibility criteria of the 
125% R&D tax concession. With the recent shift to a greater emphasis 
on grants, they must be applied in a user friendly and sufficiently 
flexible manner to make them accessible and meaningful to newly emerging 
innovative enterprises.   
   
ACCI will work with the Government in 1999 to make sure its proposed 
Innovation Summit is an effective grass roots mechanism that produces 
innovation policy outcomes resulting in enhanced productivity growth 
and job creation for the nation.    
  
 (ii) Regulatory reform     
   
A significant proportion of regulation imposed upon business is cumbersome, 
excessive and costly. Despite a positive response to the Small Business 
De-regulation Taskforce Report to reduce "red tape" by the 
Government in   More Time For Business , businesses are reporting that they 
have not experienced a meaningful reduction in compliance obligations.    
   
In addition, the increasing pursuit of cost recovery by governments 
has lead to spiralling cost burdens being projected onto business, particularly 
small business. Yet there has been no attempt to formulate any consistent 
delineation between public and private interest and little opportunity 
for the private sector to influence the regulatory arrangements for 
which it is now being asked to pay for as well as comply with. ACCI 
has been working closely with Commonwealth agencies on these issues 
and believes it would be appropriate to have an independent Productivity 
Commission review to clearly set formal criteria for cost recovery in 
regulatory areas.    
  
 (iii) Environment    
   
Increasingly the competitiveness of Australian industry will be challenged 
by moves to extend industry responsibility for environmental impacts 
without adequate assessment of costs and benefits or alternative solutions.    
   
While ACCI is committed to ecologically sustainable development and 
best practice environmental regulation we are concerned that wherever 
possible, industry is allowed to self regulate and best practice environmental 
management should be encouraged through incentives rather than punitive 
measures. The priority environment issues for business will be ensuring 
that climate change, the National Environment Protection Measures process, 
the notion of "extended" or "shared" producer responsibility 
and environmental reporting requirements are addressed in a manner consistent 
with industry competitiveness.   
   
  
 (iv) Australian Made Logo Scheme    
   
With the closure of the former Advance Australia Foundation in July 
1996, ACCI was asked to manage a new scheme for use of the Australian 
Made Logo. The Government owns the logo. ACCI said at the time that 
once the Government had clarified the legal definition of "Australian 
made" by changes to the   Trade Practices Act 1974  on country of origin representations, 
we would proceed to set up a new scheme. Those legislative amendments 
became effective in August 1998.   
   
ACCI has now set up an entity to run the new scheme - Australian Made 
Campaign Limited. We expect to launch the new scheme in February/March 
1999. We are waiting for approval of the Code of Practice by Government 
and the finalisation of the agreement between ACCI and the Government 
on the operating arrangements for use of the logo.    
   
This will be an exciting initiative in 1999 for business and consumers. 

  

  Labour Relations Priorities    
   
Notwithstanding the changes made to date, further labour market reform 
is required. In the short term it is important that changes be made 
to unfair dismissal laws and that junior rates provisions are retained 
in order to protect and promote employment.    
   
Without junior rate clauses in awards the ability of young people to 
move from school to work would be severely impeded, and unfair dismissal 
laws show up in all the business surveys as extremely important influences 
on employer decisions to employ or not to employ. Employers take a risk 
when they employ, and they have to be encouraged to take that risk by 
removing disincentives.   
   
In the longer term more fundamental changes to labour laws are required. 
We have to make registration of enterprise agreements a simpler, more 
user friendly process. We have to take further steps in simplifying 
awards, which remain too prescriptive, and do not represent a true safety 
net. We have to provide employers with greater protection against inappropriate 
industrial action. Overall we have to continue to refocus the labour 
relations system to provide the private sector with greater scope to 
develop competitive, productive businesses.   
  
 Education and Training    
   
There is a need to put firmly into place the announced fundamental and 
wide ranging reforms to the National Training System. These include 
the full introduction of training packages, new structured training 
arrangements for apprenticeships and traineeships and user choice principles    
   
ACCI and members will continue to be actively involved in initiatives 
which maximise pathways from school to the workplace. This involves 
strengthening schools-industry links; however, a more structured and 
coherent approach is needed if stronger links are to be forged. The 
wide range of programs and funding arrangements need to be integrated 
if the support of employers is to be realised and employers must be 
better informed about the roles which they can play.    
   
A number of important issues are also emerging concerning the future 
of the post-compulsory education and training system. Whilst ACCI and 
members support the distinct character of vocational education and training 
(VET) there is a need for seamless post-compulsory pathways which build 
on the relationship between industry and VET and reduce artificial barriers. 
ACCI and members will also be focusing on the need for a demand driven 
education system including the need to move towards student centred 
funding.    
  
 Immigration    
   
ACCI believes Australia, as a nation, an economy and a society, has 
been enriched by the immigrants from the many corners of the world who 
have come to our shores. Australia's commercial, economic and cultural 
futures should be build on three key pillars, non-discriminatory immigration, 
a stable and predictable net migration intake set over a rolling five 
year plan, and the intake set as a proportion of the Australian resident 
population.    
   
ACCI welcomes recent initiatives to adjust the composition of the intake, 
focusing on skilled and business migrants. The Chamber regards a target 
for economic migrants of 50 per cent of the program intake, subject 
to maintaining selection standards, as appropriate. While policy changes 
are an essential first step to strengthening Australia's place in the 
global migration framework, there will also need to be a substantial 
change in our strategies to win and retain economic migrants to ensure 
Australia becomes the 'destination of first choice' ahead of, the United 
States and Canada.   
   
While improving our economic migration stream is important, the overall 
immigration program also has a significant social dimension. An active 
refugee stream, which reflects our moral and legal obligations as a 
member of the world community of nations, is without question, an essential 
element of our immigration intake, as is a disciplined and rigorously 
tested family migration sub-stream.   
   
   
For further comment, please contact:   
   
Mr John Martin   
Executive Director   
02 6273 2311 (B/H)   
0418 625 450 (mobile)   
   
Mr Bryan Noakes   
Executive Director   
03 9289 5289 (B/H)   
03 9380 4828 (A/H)   
   
Dr Steven Kates   
Chief Economist   
03 9289 5289 (B/H)   
03 9578 9331 (A/H 

  

  

  

  jy

