---
title: "Wrest Point Convention Center, Hobart, 26 October 1999: transcript of doorstop [republic; East Timor; Kosovar refugees]"
date: "1999-10-26"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "republic; East Timor; Kosovar refugees"
  - "republic"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Kosovar refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478181
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TEH06%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

  

  

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, WREST POINT CONVENTION 
CENTRE,  HOBART, 26 OCTOBER 1999

  

  E & OE - PROOF ONLY

  

  Subjects: Republic, East Timor, Kosovar Refugees

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, what’s your reaction to the two polls 
... papers today showing that the ‘no’ case will get up?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, disappointment but not surprise. You’ve got 
the Prime Minister out there arguing against it and you’ve got that 
big lie at the core of the ‘no’ campaign: somehow or another, if 
you vote ‘no’, you get a directly elected president, which is, of 
course, a nonsense. If you vote ‘no’, the notion that John Howard 
would put a referendum before you any time soon would be absurd. He 
would not do that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you think the ‘yes’ campaign has fallen down 
at all?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 The ‘yes’ campaign always had a hard road to hoe. 
When you are out there advocating something positive, something to do, 
something for the country, something that provides us with a symbol 
that we could all call our own as Australians, we always find the nitpickers 
out there, working their way through it, the no sayers, who really are, 
of course, closet supporters of the existing system, as opposed to real 
supporters for change. So, it’s always hard but we’re, nevertheless, 
cheerful about it.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Your own poll, the Labor Party poll, is showing 51 
% to 36% defeat for the ‘yes’ case. What’s Labor going to do about 
it?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I’m out there trying to argue the point to 
ensure that our Labor Party supporters know what is at stake here and 
have a clear view of what the Labor Party is prepared to do, and I’m 
prepared to do as Labor Leader. What I’m saying is, treat this as 
a statement of Australian nationalism and ensure that we make the major 
change from the Monarch of another country to an Australian President 
and then put the process of presidential appointment and powers into 
another Constitutional review. And you’ll have the advantage then 
of not having 33% of the community out there automatically for ‘no’ 
because they happen to support the existing system. So, I’m saying 
let’s take this incrementally like all Constitutional change. Let’s 
make the fundamental change to a safe model, but with an Australian 
Head of State and then look at ways in which we can further develop 
that model.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you think the model is flawed?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, I don’t, actually. I think the model’s good 
and safe. You’ve got two Chief Justices and a former Governor-General 
who is, himself, of a jurist background, who point out that this is 
a safe, workable model. So, therefore, having established that it’s 
a safe, workable model the absolutely prior issue becomes, should we 
or should we not have an Australian Head of State? So, it’s a good 
model but others want a different model. Well, that’s fine. Let’s 
get this good model in place. If you had a different model in the same 
way as you could think of changing the powers of the Senate or the powers 
of the House of Representatives, let’s look at it in that context.

  

  JOURNALI  ST:

  

 But your message is the same as Labor has been pushing 
for months and months. Given these poll figures that, in fact, you only 
have a week, how are you going to fix it?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, you know the great Australian people will make 
up their own minds on this, and I am comfortable with that. I am out 
there making my argument. As far as I am concerned, my argument is made 
and people can accept it or reject it. I don’t mind. That is their 
decision. This is a referendum in which people can come to that ballot 
box with their own individual conscience and work out what it is that 
they want to do.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 So, would you consider, would the Labor Party consider 
allowing members a conscience vote on this issue?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 The Labor Party has been committed to a republic since 
1982. This particular proposition went through the Caucus and the Labor 
Party always presents a united position on policy issues. Of course, 
what individual members of the Labor Party or supporters of the Labor 
Party do in the ballot box is entirely a matter for them. But people 
need to know where the Labor Party stands, and they know it very clearly 
in this campaign. The Labor Party has, since 1982, advocated a republic.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, were you saying in there that there would 
be time, should ‘yes’ get up, for the president to open the Sydney 
Olympics?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, if we are successful and a President is to be 
appointed, I think it would be very, very difficult for John Howard 
to resist the pressure that would automatically flow through from the 
Australian people to get this thing developed and to get someone other 
than himself in the situation where they open the Olympics. The pressure 
would be enormous

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Do you believe the president should, rather than the 
Prime Minister?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I actually believe that the Australian Head of State, 
or the representative of the Australian Head of State, should open the 
Olympics. This is not a new position of mine. I have said that all along. 
It should be either the Queen or Bill Deane.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 But, should there be a ‘yes’ vote, and Australia 
votes for President next week, should the time line be changed so we 
could ... see a president opening the Sydney Olympics?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I think it would be worth a crack at it. Don’t you? 
If we had gone done down the road of saying, ‘OK, now we have matured 
enough to have an Australian Head of State’. And what is the most 
prominent event show-casing Australia over the course of the next year 
or two? It’s the Olympics. That would be a great opportunity and I 
think the pressure on John Howard would be enormous.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 ... so much trouble to have the President open the 
Olympics?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I think it is not really much trouble at all. I think 
the problem here is to make sure that we actually get an Australian 
Head of State. That is a bit of a problem. That is what we are trying 
to get through now over the course of the next week or so. Changing 
the name on the invitations is not that hard.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, to what degree does the UN decision overnight 
to send in peacekeepers ... to East Timor, to what degree ... financial 
and social pressure on Australia?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 It should help us because once it becomes a UN force, 
as opposed to simply a UN mandated force, it triggers all sorts of provisions 
in the United Nations arrangements which go to burden sharing, in terms 
of costs. I think that is not unimportant to Australia. But I think 
more important than that, is that the force which then gets blue-hatted, 
has the right sort of powers to create security on the ground. That 
will require a deal of working through to make sure that occurs. We 
have done a pretty good job, we and the others that have been associated 
with us so far, and you would want to see that capacity continue.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 If our role reduces does that negate any more the 
need to boost the defence budget?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 No, because the role will be quite substantial, nevertheless. 
That is the first point. The second point is, it is not this, really, 
which drives the requirement to increase defence spending. Probably 
more significant than this is this bow-wave of equipment replacement 
coming on over the course of the next decade. If we are going to be 
able to maintain and enhance our capabilities we are going to have to 
look to that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Should it also help us rebuild our relationship with 
Jakarta?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I think yes, I think it will. That is a difficult 
task. But one of the reasons why we need to improve the relationship 
with Jakarta is that we now not only carry the weights for ourselves, 
as far as that is concerned, and it is always commonsense, to have a 
reasonable relationship with your neighbour. Of course, we want Jakarta 
accommodated to the idea of an independent Timor and living happily 
with that. So, we want to be able to have dialogue with the Indonesians 
to point out now how much it is to Indonesia’s advantage and the good 
regard of the rest of the international community that Timor succeed. 
So, we are not just carrying the weights for ourselves, we are carrying 
the weights for other people now.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Mr Beazley, our Tasmanian Member of Parliament, Dick 
Adams, has been arguing for Kosovars to be able to stay. Do you have 
a view on that? Do you think the Government is lacking compassion on 
this ...?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I think we have got many problems with refugees and 
we need to be in a situation where we have a generous and open approach 
to them. I think in Tasmania, what we have here is the case for an expanded 
population. Now, this is the most habitable part of Australia, there 
is no doubt about that. On any objective environmental test, this is 
the most habitable part of Australia. And for Tasmania to prosper it 
needs a bigger population than it has. So, Dick has a view about the 
Kosavars. I have a view about the population of Tasmania. I think that 
in the population policies we are developing, which go both to issues 
of birth rate, as well as issues of new people coming into the country, 
Tasmania has got to play a central role.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Within terms of Kosavars specifically, do you think 
that there is a case for them to be able to remain in Tasmania?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, they did come down to this country with a certain 
set of undertakings and you always have to be a bit concerned about 
queue-jumping, in that regard. On the other hand, there are not that 
many left, are there? And I think we can have a pretty generous hearted 
of attitude.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

  On a lighter side, what do you think of Joe Aston, who, incidentally, 
says he would like to be Prime Minis ter but hasn’t decided 
which side?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Terrific. It is always nice to see somebody bubbling 
and bouncing, and particularly, as I understand, he arranged the whole 
thing. So, that was good. I mean, our kids are terrific. Why can’t 
we have one as a Head of State?

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 One last thing. Phil Cleary popped his head in here 
before. What is your view on his ... attitude towards this republic?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, Phil says that he is a republican but he is 
doing the ACM’s bidding - the Australians for a Constitutional Monarchy’s 
bidding. You know, in every great event where there is possibility of 
tragedy, there is always a court jester. I mean, Phil plays that sort 
of role for the ACM. It’s a good fun role. But we wanted a serious 
debate and we got one.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Did you refuse to debate him?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, as I understand it, ... didn’t get involved 
in the terms and conditions of the debate at all. But, as I understand 
it, what happened was the debate was set up, and we felt a relatively 
serious debate, with a leading advocate in Tasmania for the Australians 
for a Constitutional Monarchy, and of course, the bright eyed kid that 
organised it all, and a person representing the ethnic communities on 
the ‘no’ side and that we had other people on the ‘yes’ side. 
I guess our people didn’t think that it was all that necessary to 
bring the jester into the system when we have got such a good debate 
already structured with everybody properly represented.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 …(inaudible)...

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 I wasn’t aware there was a debate going on about 
Phil. But I certainly approve of the attitudes of my staff on that, 
yes. ... debate about these things.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 You were saying earlier that if we allow the ‘yes’ 
vote to get up then the opportunity is there to revise the model. Where 
do we put a stop to it? Are we going to continue to ...?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, the Australian people will always put a stop 
to it. No model can get up and no model can change without the Australian 
people approving. But what I am doing is addressing the direct election 
republicans, of which there are many, including in my political party 
and supporters of my political party. And I am pointing out a tactical 
situation to them. You are never going to get any republican model up 
while ever the republicans veto each other. Because you know this - 
there will always be 33% vote out there for the monarchists and they 
will combine with any of the dissident republicans to defeat the proposition. 
And if this is defeated then what will happen is, if there is a direct 
election model come up, people like Peter Costello will get up and say, 
we want an American style atrophy, and that will go down. I tell you 
what, if we lost this twice Australians would look so silly. And I can’t, 
as a political leader, risk that.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Just on the poll results…clearly mean that with 
only a week to go, Australia has clearly rejected the notion of a republic?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, I think we will not know that clearly until 
the day.

  

  JOURNALIST:

  

 Are we rejecting a republic or this model?

  

  BEAZLEY:

  

 Well, that is always a very difficult question to 
answer. I would say that the big lie at the heart of this campaign is 
that some how or another if you vote ‘no’ you get a directly elected 
president. It obviously has got some appeal to some people but people 
need to comprehend that it is a big lie.

  

 ends

  

  

  att  1999-10-28  09:34

