---
title: "Urgent humanitarian assistance for Timorese."
date: "1999-09-10"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242212264
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UZE06%22
---

   

  

  PRIME MINISTER

  

 10 September 1999 

  

  URGENT HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE FOR TIMORESE

  

  Like all Australians I am appalled at what has been happening in East 
Timor and the dreadful humanitarian impact it has had on the lives of 
people there. Although accurate  information is difficult to obtain 
in the current environment, we do know that a large number of people 
have been forcibly displaced from their homes and have either fled into 
the hills or have been transported into West Timor or elsewhere in Indonesia. 
Many of these people now lack water, shelter, medical supplies and food. 
Some estimates say the numbers of displaced could be as high as 150,000 
in East Timor and 100,000 in West Timor.

  

 This situation is totally unacceptable and while access 
to victims in East Timor is currently extremely difficult, the Australian 
Government is acting now to provide urgently needed help where we are 
able.

  

 Australian humanitarian aid of $3 million will be 
provided through United Nations agencies including the UN High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR), World Food Programme (WFP) and the Office for 
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to assist with the displaced 
people in East Timor and West Timor. This will provide for activities 
such as the purchase, pre-positioning in Darwin and transport of emergency 
relief supplies - blankets, plastic sheeting for emergency shelter, 
health and kitchen kits, mosquito nets and buckets. Food and water supplies 
will also be purchased.

  

 This $3 million contribution to the humanitarian situation 
in Timor is an initial response. The Australian Government stands ready 
to provide further assistance as soon as the security situation permits 
and we obtain a better picture of the needs of people throughout Timor.

  

 The Government is also working with Australian Non-Government 
Organisations (NGOs) to develop options for assisting this humanitarian 
crisis. NGO representatives met with the Australian Government’s overseas 
aid agency (AusAID) in Canberra this morning to discuss plans for the 
provision of relief assistance to displaced Timorese.

  

  

  md 1999-09-14  09:16

