---
title: "School students say Australian troops in East Timor are continuing the ANZAC spirit."
date: "1999-11-10"
creators:
  - "Kemp, David"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478548
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Z8I06%22
---

   

  

  DR DAVID KEMP, MP

  Minister for Education, Training and Youth 
Affairs

  

 K12911 

 Under embargo until midnight 10 November 1999

  

  

  SCHOOL STUDENTS SAY AUSTRALIAN TROOPS IN EAST 
TIMOR ARE CONTINUING THE ANZAC SPIRIT

  

  

  The contribution of the Au stralian troops serving in East Timor 
was one of the major themes in this year’s Simpson Prize Essay Competition, 
the details of which were today announced by the Minister for Education, 
Training and Youth Affairs, Dr David Kemp.

  

 “Young people want to learn more about Australia’s 
history as well as the current events shaping our future. It’s heartening 
to see that our young people appreciate the clear link between Australia’s 
contribution to the International Force operating in East Timor and 
the great ongoing traditions of the ANZAC spirit," said Dr Kemp.

  

 The Simpson prize is awarded annually to Year 9 secondary 
school students from each State and Territory in honour of John Simpson 
Kirkpatrick, the man with the donkey, whose bravery and compassion has 
become known as epitomising the ANZAC spirit.

  

 Students entering the competition were required to 
submit essays focussing on the significance of ANZAC Day and how they 
believed ordinary Australians during wartime demonstrated the qualities 
of courage, mateship, determination and sacrifice and how those qualities 
are still relevant today.

  

 “The Commonwealth Government created the Simpson 
Prize to encourage students to think and talk about what ANZAC Day means 
to them and to their country. At this time of year we remember all those 
who have died defending Australia during times of conflict and I have 
been extremely impressed with the level of interest our school students 
have in our ANZAC history,” said Dr Kemp.

  

 “Over 1,000 essays were submitted to the competition. 
In addition to the theme of East Timor, many students believed the values 
of the ANZAC spirit manifested itself in everyday life as shown through 
the support many local communities provided for the Kosovar and East 
Timorese refugees.”

  

 The winning students and their teacher chaperones 
will travel to Turkey from 19 27 April 2000 to attend the dawn service 
and other activities.

  

 Dr Kemp also announced prizes for the runners-up in 
each State and Territory. Their prize will be to join the study tour 
winners in Canberra in February 2000 for a two-day forum based at significant 
national institutions such as the Australian War Memorial and Parliament 
House.

  

 A list of the prize winners and runners up is attached.

  

 Media contact:  Samantha Herron (0412) 639 754 or (02) 
6277 7460

  

  Simpson Prize 1999

  

  Winning Students

  

  Northern Territory Tessa Finney-Brown, Nightcliff High School

  Queensland Birra-Li Riethmuller, Harristown State High School

  South Australia Chloe Ey, Wilderness School

  Tasmania Kate Nisbet, The Frie nds' School

 Victoria Gabrielle, Metherall, Newhaven College

 Western Australia Alysia Debowski, Presbyterian Ladies 
College

 New South Wales Laura Grumley, Gosford High School

 Australian Capital Territory Caltlin Hurley, Canberra 
Church of England Girls

 Grammar School

  

  Accompanying teachers

 Ms Janet Farrell Wilderness School, South Australia

 Ms Margaret Tudball Ivanhoe Girls Grammar School, Victoria

  

  Runners-up

  

  Northern Territory Tara Robinson, Nightcliff High School

  Queensland Naomi Jones, The Gap State Hi gh School

 South Australia Joshua Forkert, Mount BarkerHigh School

 Tasmania Sam Jackson, Clarence High School

 Victoria Holly Goodacre, St Catherine's School

 Western Australia Brendyn Nelson, Wesley College

 New South Wales James Terpeneing, Bankstown Grammar 
School

 Australian Capital Territory Ben Sakker Kelly, Lyneham 
High School

  

  Media are required to contact the schools individually to contact 
the winners.

  

  

  al  1999-11-12  09:51

