---
title: "Human rights subverted to foreign diplomacy for deported pregnant woman."
date: "1999-09-14"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211477046
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B5F06%22
---

   

  Media Release

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson

  

 14 SEPTEMBER 1999

 99/463

  

  Human Rights subverted to foreign diplomacy 
for deported pregnant woman

  

  Suggestions in the newly completed Ayres Report that the woman who 
wa s forcibly deported back to China when eight months pregnant 
was treated ‘humanely’ give a new, perverse meaning to the word 
humane, according to Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats’ 
spokesperson on immigration.

  

 “The deportation may have been legal, but that could 
reflect on the inadequacy of our laws rather than the adequacy of the 
legal enforcement,” he said.

  

 Senator Bartlett initiated the Senate Inquiry which 
is presently examining not just this case but the whole operation of 
Australia’s refugee program. The Inquiry will make an initial report 
by the 18 October.

  

 The independent report to Minister Ruddock also says 
it is inconclusive whether the termination of the Chinese woman’s 
eight and a half month pregnancy, was forced.

  

 “The issue is not just what occurred in China but 
here in Australia. Her deportation should at least have been delayed 
until after her child was born, as she repeatedly requested,” said 
Senator Bartlett.

  

 “Whether or not the termination was forced, the 
deportation was forced and the termination occurred.

  

 “It is hard to imagine any woman voluntarily having 
her eight and a half month pregnancy terminated in an operation including 
an induced labour.”

  

 Senator Bartlett commented that a termination at this 
late stage of the pregnancy could be seen as infanticide by the state.

  

 “The fact that the Immigration Minister waited until 
the Chinese President had left the country before publicising the findings 
of the Report highlights how human rights are subverted in the interests 
of diplomatic relations.

  

 “One has to ask how much this attitude infects the 
implementation of our entire refugee and immigration program.

  

 “Many Australians would be shocked at some of the 
immigration decisions that are made which are case studies in human 
tragedy, “said Senator Bartlett.

  

 For interview contact, Senator Andrew Bartlett on 
0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101

  

  

  rw  1999-09-16  10:37

