---
title: "Appointment activities in the Refugee Review Tribunal."
date: "1999-07-27"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211565390
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZHC06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  

 MPS 110/99

  

  APPOINTMENT ACTIVITIES IN THE REFUGEE REVIEW 
TRIBUNAL

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today announced the a ppointment of Mr John Godfrey as Acting 
Principal Member of the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) for a six month 
period following the departure of Dr Peter Nygh who was acting in the 
Principal Member position until 31 May 1999.

  

 “Mr Godfrey is the Deputy Principal Member of the 
RRT and was the logical choice to take up this acting appointment. He 
has a wealth of experience that he will be able to use in managing the 
RRT until a permanent appointment can be made.”

  

 Mr Ruddock also announced that twenty-one current 
full-time and part-time members of the RRT whose terms of appointment 
were due to cease shortly have been reappointed to the Tribunal.

  

 Eleven full-time member reappointments to the RRT 
have been made until 31 January 2001. The members are: Janet Wood, John 
Booth, Michael Griffin, Eraine Grotte, Pamela Gutman, Margaret Holmes, 
Chris Keher, Dinoo Kelleghan, Gary Klintworth, Kim Rosser and Peter 
Thomson. Mr Lawry Herron has been reappointed as a full-time member 
until 31 October 1999.

  

 The members reappointed to the RRT on a part-time 
basis until 31 January 2001 are:

 Wendy Boddison, Norma Ford, Janet Duckmanton, Patricia 
Leehy, Rosie Mathlin, Annemarie Nicholl, Stuart Russell, Sherine Salama 
and Ron Witton.

  

 “Mr Ruddock also said that a number of further appointments 
will be made to the Tribunal later in the year. These RRT reappointments 
will ensure that the RRT is sufficiently staffed to undertake its responsibilities.”

  

 ENDS

 Tuesday 27 July 1999

  

  

  jk  1999-07-29  10:53

