---
title: "Coastwatch finds more boat people."
date: "1999-11-05"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211478425
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F6K06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone

  Minister for Justice and Customs

  Senator for South Australia

  

  

  Friday 5 November 1999  


  COASTWATCH 
FINDS MORE BOAT PEOPLE

  A Customs Coastwatch Dash 
8 surveillance aircraft has located another vessel believed   to be attempting to bring suspected illegal immigrants 
to Australia, the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Amanda Vanstone, 
announced late today.

  Senator Vanstone said a programmed surveillance flight 
had located the vessel about 25 km west of Ashmore Reef, some 610 km 
north west of Broome and 840 km west of Darwin.

  The vessel was heading directly toward Ashmore Reef 
and the Australian Naval Patrol Boat   HMAS Wollongong , which 
was on patrol in the area, has been tasked to intercept it.

  "This detection again shows that the Government's 
coordinated approach to civil coastal surveillance is proving successful," 
she said.

  Senator Vanstone, who is also acting Minister for 
Immigration, during the absence overseas of Mr Ruddock, said that today's 
interception and the 352 persons brought into Darwin earlier today were 
"not unexpected".

  "We also have intelligence that indicates more 
can be expected," she said.

  "Coastwatch will continue to do its job to detect 
and coordinate interception of these boats, but more is needed.

  "Until the Opposition supports the Government's 
initiatives to make Australia a less-attractive destination we will 
continue to be a target for people traffickers and the boats will just 
keep on coming," Senator Vanstone said. 

  She said that today's detection also put the lie 
to the ill-founded criticisms of Australia's coastal surveillance capability 
by the Shadow Minister for Customs, Mr Duncan Kerr, earlier this week. 

  "His constant and hollow calls for an Australian 
Coast Guard completely ignore the fact that the Government has set up 
an arrangement that effectively delivers a coast guard service without 
all of the huge expenditure that would be needed to set up such a stand 
alone service.

  "Customs Coastwatch has a successful and cost-effective 
aerial surveillance capability and with its access to Customs marine 
resources, Naval vessels and Air Force planes it can deliver all the 
features of a coast guard." Senator Vanstone said.

  She said that rather than finding illegal vessels 
by accident as alleged by Mr Kerr earlier this week, Coastwatch was 
placing the resources at its disposal where they would do the most good. 

  " Mr Kerr does the dedicated men and women of 
Customs and the defence forces a disservice when he regularly passes 
off successful detections as some sort of 'lucky dip'. It was simply 
wrong when he said that the Indonesian ferry intercepted earlier this 
week was found by accident. The HMAS Dubbo was conducting a strategic 
patrol on behalf of Coastwatch when it intercepted the ferry," 
she said.

  Senator Vanstone said today's vessel would be taken 
under control   by HMAS Wollongong  and 
arrangements were being made to accommodate the people in Australia 
while their status was investigated. 

  

  

  jy  1999-12-15  14:17

