---
title: "East Timorese evacuees opt to go home."
date: "1999-12-06"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479172
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FRJ06%22
---

  

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  The Hon. Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs

  MPS 172/99

  

  EAST TIMORESE EVACUEES OPT TO GO HOME

  

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, 
today announced the departure on Sund ay and Monday of 503 East 
Timorese, who volunteered to return to their homeland.

  

 “The East Timorese were evacuated in September to 
stay until conditions in East Timor improved,” the Minister said.

  

 “The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) has provided assurances that it is now safe for the East Timorese 
to return. Indeed, over 110,000 East Timorese have already returned 
including over 1000 from Australia.

  

 “The UNHCR and aid agencies are active in East Timor 
providing assistance to those returning.

  

 “The temporary safe haven visas of those who were 
evacuated to Australia are due to expire on 8 December and we arranged 
flights back to Dili, in cooperation with UNHCR and the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), before that date,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

  Departures

 5 December Perth  213  from Leeuwin Safe Haven

 6 December MeIb/Syd 290  from Puckapunyal and East Hills 
havens

  

 “Some East Timorese who have been living in safe 
havens in Australia will not be able to return at this time because 
of health problems,” Mr Ruddock said.

  

 “People remaining will have their visas extended 
until 10 January 2000. I will review their circumstances closer to that 
date.

  

  “Those East Timorese who remain in Safe Haven care will be consolidated 
in East Hills S afe Haven in Sydney. Puckapunyal and Leeuwin Safe 
Havens will be closed by 14 December with the majority of their residents 
having returned to East Timor. The properties will then be returned 
to the Department of Defence.”

  

 Mr Ruddock also announced that the Government has 
decided to provide free flights for other East Timorese who have been 
in Australia for a much longer period awaiting the outcome of asylum 
claims.

  

 “We know many would now like to return home to help 
rebuild their country but cannot afford to do so. These people should 
contact the nearest office of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs to make arrangements.

  

 “Such returns would also be voluntary - no asylum 
seeker will be obliged to take up the offer. However, for those that 
do take up the offer, once they leave Australia their claims for asylum 
will lapse.”

  

  6 December 1999

  Media contact: Steve Ingram  0419 278715

  

  

  att  1999-12-07  11:08

