---
title: "Minister in Cairns for immigration consultations."
date: "1999-03-04"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211473660
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6M506%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  Philip Ruddock MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

  

  

  Minister in Cairns for   
immigration consultations

  MPS 39/99 

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affa irs, Philip 
Ruddock, today encouraged northern Queensland to make greater use of 
mechanisms designed to attract more skilled migrants to rural Australia, 
such as the Skill Matching Database. 

 In Cairns today as part 
of national consultations on Australia's 1999-2000 migration program, 
Mr Ruddock said programs such as the Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme 
(RSMS) had the potential to help meet demand for qualified professionals 
outside of metropolitan areas. 

 "The RSMS enables 
Australian employers in regional areas to fill skilled permanent vacancies 
with overseas personnel if they cannot find suitably qualified workers 
in Australia. 

 "From today, the 
Cape York and Peninsula Development Association will also have access 
to the Department's Skill Matching Database, which will help employers 
in the region to identify prospective migrants who have specialist skills. 

 "Our records show 
that there are a number of areas where employers are unable to fill 
professional positions in this region. Programs such as the RSMS can 
help meet that demand." 

 Mr Ruddock said these 
initiatives were having a significant impact in the State, with the 
number of migrants coming to Queensland under the Skill Stream increasing 
by more than 13 per cent in 1997-98 over the previous year. 

 "The 1997-98 Settler 
Arrivals statistical report shows that 3,578 people migrated to the 
state through the Skill Stream last year, up from 3,155 in 1996-97. 

 "In total, some 
15,095 migrants settled in Queensland in 1997-98 compared to 14,640 
the previous year. 

 "Queensland figures 
reflect the emphasis that the Government has placed on attracting skilled 
migrants, and our determination to deliver a balanced program." 

 Mr Ruddock said during 
this year's consultations on the migration program he will meet with 
a wide cross-section of individuals and organisations including representatives 
of business, economic, industry, union, environment, welfare, planning, 
refugee, humanitarian and ethnic community groups. 

 "This is the first 
time that a nation-wide round of public meetings has been held on the 
migration program. 

 "I trust this will 
provide a unique opportunity for many Australians to contribute their 
thoughts, ideas and comments on the size and composition of Australia's 
immigration program." 

 Consultations and public 
meetings are also being held in Melbourne, Griffith, Sydney, Albury-Wodonga, 
Perth, Canberra, Adelaide, Brisbane and Darwin Launceston and Hobart. 

  Thursday, 4 March 1999   
Media inquiries: Brad Robinson 0419 278 715 

   

  

  

  jy

