---
title: "People smugglers the enemy not refugees."
date: "1999-12-23"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/74M06%22
---

   

  

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Australian Democrats

  Spokesperson on Immigration

  

 23 DEC.99 

 99/721

  

  People smugglers the enemy not refugees

  

  The Australian Democrats today welcomed the announcement by the Immigration 
Minister Phillip Ruddock of  his upcoming visit to the Middle 
East, but criticised the Minister’s statements that asylum seekers 
are only genuine refugees if they apply from refugee camps.

  

 Australian Democrats spokesperson on Immigration Senator 
Bartlett said that the statements attributed to the External Reference 
Group, that those who have resources to pay people smugglers are not 
genuine refugees, surprised him.

  

 “To suggest somehow that a person who has scrapped 
together enough money to flee is not a refugee, is to contradict UNHCR 
definition of a refugee, which is used internationally to determine 
who has refugee status,” Senator Bartlett said.

  

 “In fact I’m sure that in places where there is 
reason to flee, people don’t distinguish if you have money before 
they put a bullet in your head, torture you or rape your wife and daughters.

  

 “Once again these statements don’t focus on the 
crime of people smuggling, instead they continue the ongoing vilification 
of refugees which the Minister has been engaging in for the best part 
of this year.

  

 “What he appears to be most upset about is not the 
plight of genuine refugees but the fact that these type of arrivals 
threaten the ability of the Department to decide where they accept refugees 
from.

  

 “It’s almost a white Australia policy for refugees. 
If the Minister was so concerned about the hundreds of thousands languishing 
in refugee camps, we would see a lot more accepted from the African 
and Middle Eastern countries.

  

 ‘The UNHCR recognises that people should not be 
discriminated against because of the way they arrive in a country. I 
suggest that the Minister acknowledge this and focus on means to assist 
people to safety without having to resort to paying people smugglers.

  

  Senator Bartlett said that the Australian Democrats welcomed any moves 
t o educate people in high-risk countries of the dangers of trusting 
people smugglers. But were appalled at the suggestion that people choose 
Australia as an “attractive destination”.

  

 “This statement by the Minister highlights his lack 
of understanding of what forces people to give up everything and risk 
their lives to live without fear,” Senator Bartlett concluded.

  

  Australian Democrats     http://www.democrats.org.au  

  

  For interview contact Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

  

  

  att  2000-01-11  16:24

