---
title: "Delivering equity and reconciliation through inclusive institutions. Vital Issues Seminar: Reshaping Australian institutions, Parliament House, Canberra, 1 November 2000"
date: "2000-11-01"
creators:
  - "Brennan, Frank, (priest)"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Minorities"
  - "Political participation"
  - "Treaties and conventions"
  - "Legislative process"
  - "Political violence"
  - "Bill of Rights"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Timor"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Political representation"
  - "State issue"
  - "Aboriginal reconciliation"
  - "Aboriginal land rights"
  - "South Africa"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211503435
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KTT26%22
---

  Delivering Equity and Reconciliation 
Through Inclusive Institutions

  

  Fr Frank Brennan SJ AO

  

 Vital Issues/Reshaping 
Australian Institutions Seminar

 The Theatre

 Parliament House

 Canberra

 1 November 2000

  

  I am delighted to return from East Timor to 
make a pr  esentation 
at this, the fourth of the Reshaping Australian Institutions Seminars.  
During the course of the "Reshaping" project at the Australian 
National University, I have been privileged to spend three months each 
year enjoying the academic ambience away from the parry and thrust of 
the daily politics and grind of social justice advocacy, being able 
to write books such as   Sharing the Country, One Land One Nation, Legislating 
Liberty  and   The Wik Debate .  The university's 
proximity to this place has also permitted me additional access to those 
who act most immediately in the name of the people and in the national 
interest.  I have all but concluded twenty years of advocacy for 
Aboriginal rights in the public forum.  I have taken an interest 
in the bill of rights debate and constitutional reform.  Now I 
am the Director of the Jesuit Refugee Service in East Timor where I 
observe the doings of my government and of our nation from the vantagepoint 
of a newly emerging half-island nation state.  I also witness daily 
the tragic effects of colonialism seeing these effects thrown into very 
sharp relief by a people who have fought for their freedom drowning 
in a sea of international attention, bureaucracy and concern.  
Maybe some of the insights I have gained from my work and my own mistakes 
over twenty years in advocating Aboriginal rights can help to inform 
our approach to East Timor, as well as our ongoing commitment to Aboriginal 
rights and reconciliation, and the improvement of our system of government 
for the well being of all citizens and those other persons affected 
by the decisions of our governments.  My principal theme today 
is that equity and reconciliation will most surely be delivered to and 
be accepted by disadvantaged, dispossessed or alienated citizens through 
their participation in the mainstream institutions of government, provided 
those institutions have developed sufficiently robust checks and balances.  
It is often the provision of the checks and balances that provides the 
opportunity for participation by minorities and the less powerful. The 
hallmark of real participation is ownership of resultant compromises 
in the political process.  In the Australian context at the national 
level, this demands a focus on the role of the Senate and the courts 
in prompting the populist House of Representatives to extend its attention 
beyond the concerns of the majority to accord equal protection and due 
process to the legitimate expectations of minorities.  This does 
not render the Senate and High Court undemocratic institutions; rather 
without them, the House of Representatives itself would be unable to 
deliver equity and reconciliation to the nation.

  

  I have the good fortune 
of being equally acceptable and unacceptable to the major political 
parties in this place.  During the Wik debate, John Howard said I did 
not speak for the Catholic Church, Kim Beazley said I was out of my 
depth, and Nick Bolkus under parliamentary privilege said all sorts 
of things.  So I can speak without causing further offence and 
with little prospect that anyone will allege that I am advocating some 
party political interest.  This being a lunchtime seminar, let 
me illustrate my thesis with story and reflection on issues in which 
I have had an involvement.

  

  Land rights - Goss, Keating, Howard and Harradine  

  

  The issue of land rights would never have been resolved by recommendations 
of a law reform commission, reconciliation commission or ATSIC.  
There was no prospect of land rights being delivered and maintained 
in Australia without a commitment by at least one of the major political 
parties and without the  courts having intervened making legislative 
action imperative for the good of the mining and pastoral industries 
as we as for the good of the Aborigines.

  

  Wayne Goss when premier of Queensland was the only political leader 
in recent history who set up a system for Aboriginal land claims (as 
distinct from one-off land grants) when there was no political imperative 
to do so.  In fact, it was a considerable po  litical risk to do so, given the narrowness of his margin over the 
Queensland National Party opposition.  Goss received no thanks 
for his legislation.  Aborigines knocked down the gates of Parliament 
House. The legislative outcome was 80 per cent right.  The legislative 
process was 80 per cent wrong.  Admittedly on advice from a couple 
of key Aboriginal leaders, Goss decided that if it were to be done, 
it was best that it be done quickly before there was time for the National 
Party to sow too many seeds of dissension and racial division in the 
community at large.  This tactic took no account of the fact that 
Aboriginal urban groups who were those with least to gain from the legislation 
were not included in the consultations on the strategy.  Unless 
there were some gain for them in the short circuiting of the due political 
processes, why should they be expected to sit on the sidelines while 
the Goss government enjoyed the adulation and the moral contentment 
that land rights had been legislated in Queensland with a minimum of 
fuss?  Goss's mistake was that he bypassed the most articulate, 
resourced and media savvy Aboriginal groups on the basis that they would 
get little out of a land rights package anyway.  Land rights and 
native title laws have rarely benefited directly Aborigines who live 
in cities and the major towns.  But land rights and native title 
have been issues of great symbolism for them as well as for  those 
who have more readily been able to establish native title and land rights 
claims.  Those who will lose out in any political compromise must 
be at the table if there is to be any prospect that the result will 
be owned as a definitive resolution of the issue in the public interest.  
Aborigines with little to gain from a particular campaign or policy 
will always want the assurance that the resolution of the issue at hand 
is not the final settlement of all grievances.  Instead of final 
settlements, durable interim solutions are the best achievable.  
That is why some Aborigines say it is too early for a treaty.  
The treaty will be the final corner of the jigsaw that brings the full 
picture to completion once all the other pieces are in place.  
For the powerless, their most potent political lever is often the assurance 
that the compromise does not bear their imprimatur and that there will 
be another round before the powerbrokers can close the file.

  

  Prior to the High Court's Mabo decision, Paul Keating like most people 
who had sat around the Cabinet table in this place had no commitment 
to national land ri  ghts.  The issue had died by March 1986 when it was clear that 
Brian Burke would not countenance Bob Hawke compulsorily acquiring one 
square centimetre of Western Australia no matter what Clyde Holding's 
preferred national land rights model might have said.  Back in 
1971, Aborigines had been unsuccessful in having the courts become involved 
in their grievances about land rights.  The Aborigines at Yirrkala 
upset by the prospect of bauxite mining on their land had sent petitions 
to this Parliament, those petitions now being housed in public viewing 
cases.  When turned down by the courts, they went back to the politicians.  
Gough Whitlam did something about it and Malcolm Fraser saw it through.  
The   Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976  implemented 
many of the recommendations of the Woodward Royal Commission.  
But the Act fell short on the strong veto on mining activity which Woodward 
had recommended with the observation that to deny Aborigines a veto 
over development on their land was to deny the reality of their land 
rights.  The Act was to be a model for equivalent State regimes 
but this never happened.  The move for a national scheme was stalled 
until the High Court delivered the Mabo decision in 1992.  By then 
the High Court had been well-schooled in land rights issues.  The 
bench included Justice Brennan who had been senior counsel in the Woodward 
commission and Justice Toohey who had been the first land commissioner 
in the Northern Territory.  Also the Northern Territory Government 
had adopted a "litigate or perish" approach which meant that 
the High Court docket each sittings would require all seven Justices 
to wrap their minds around the concepts of land rights, traditional 
ownership and spiritual affiliations with land.  The Northern Territory 
Government probably did more than any other source to introduce the 
High Court to the profound significance of land to Aboriginal Australians.  

  

  Of course the Mabo case would not have gone anywhere but for the intervention 
of Sir Joh Bjelke Petersen who passed the racist   Queensland Coastal Islands Declaratory Act   in 1985 in a last ditch 
attempt to thwart the litigation.  But for that Act, there may 
never have been a final determination in Mabo and then no Wik case to 
follow.  Mabo created a political imperative that government act 
- not exclusively for the benefit of Aborigines but especially for the 
benefit of miners who wanted a return to certainty in the processing 
of their mining applications.

  

  While Mabo forced Keating to act, he decided to make a virtue of necessity.  
Here was a window of opportunity for the national parliament to deliver 
equity and reconciliation for all Australians, includin  g the first Australians.  He would not have had the political 
option but for a High Court decision which required a legislative response 
so that there could be a return to certainty and workability for all 
players.  There would have to be compromise.  He would need 
to call all parties to the table.  Aborigines were the ones who 
had won the case; they would enjoy primacy at the table when the Prime 
Minister caressed the issue before the media.  But the States and 
industry were still assured their advocates at the Cabinet table.  
Sensibly Keating saw Mabo as a land management issue which would require 
co-operation with the States and with industry.  His Labor compatriot 
Goss had been through the hoops designing a land rights package acceptable 
to the local mining industry.  Keating would be prepared to compromise 
on Aboriginal demands such that States would be permitted to maintain 
their own regimes for determining mining applications and the right 
to negotiate would be suspended for low impact exploration and mining 
activities.  Keating presumed that good policy would be good politics.  
He also presumed that the Coalition would ultimately come to its senses 
and support the government's general approach.  

  

  On that Black Friday, 8 October seven years ago, Keatin  g said, "I am not 
sure whether indigenous leaders can ever psychologically make a change 
to decide to come into a process, be part of it, and take the burdens 
of responsibility which go with it."  Ten days later, he was 
praising the Aboriginal A team because "they did the courageous 
thing, took the step, seized the moment to negotiate rather than demand, 
and to sit down and work out where Aboriginal interests truly lie and 
where they could be offset against the legitimate economic interests 
of this country".  The A Team members were then branded as 
the magnificent seven by other Aboriginal leaders who claimed they had 
sold out their people.   At first blush, the Senate was a 
problem for Keating.  He did not control it.  He needed either 
the Coalition or the democrats AND the Greens on board.  The High 
Court decision was the first instrument placed in the hands of Aboriginal 
leaders giving them real bargaining power with government.  Their 
common law native title rights were buttressed by the Racial Discrimination 
Act, causing uncertainty and loss to miners. The composition of the 
Senate gave the Aboriginal leaders their second point of access to the 
political process. The A team could negotiate with Keating and a B Team 
could have a second bite of the cherry, negotiating with the Senate.  
This second phase brought Aborigines right into the full public glare 
of the political processes.  At the end of the process even Michael 
Mansell and Bob Weatherall commended the various Aboriginal leaders 
who had participated in the mainstream political processes improving 
the Bill for safe passage.  They commended the Keating government 
for its flexible approach and endorsed the legislation.  The 1993 
native title exercise in this place was the high water mark of Aboriginal 
participation in the mainstream political processes in relation to legislation 
not only in their interests but also in the economic interest of all 
Australians.  The government's lack of numbers in the Senate permitted 
a political process to play itself out bringing legitimacy to Keating 
and the A Team which they would never have enjoyed even if they had 
proposed legislation the same as the actual 1993 outcome to a Senate 
controlled by the government.  Aboriginal B Teams would have alleged 
that government had sold their people short.  And the A Team would 
have been isolated as a group of "Uncle Toms" doing the government's 
bidding.  The checks and balances provided Aborigines with real 
bargaining power at all points of the legislative process, allowing 
them to own the outcome because they were an integral part of the process.

  

  Wik with John Howard as Prime Minister was a very different situation 
than Mabo with Keating.  For the purposes of our reflections on 
equity and reconciliation, the comparison is informative.  Wik 
is a less coherent decision of the High Court than Mabo.    Mabo was 6-1 with three 
of the majority concurring in one judgment.  Wik was a 4-3 decision 
with the four in the majority writing separate opinions in which they 
disagree about some key questions of native title.  The three dissenting 
judges joined in the one decision written by Chief Justice Brennan who 
had written the main judgment in Mabo.  It was difficult to argue 
that Wik was perfectly consistent with and a natural development of 
Mabo.  While Keating thought it in the national interest that Aborigines 
be seen to be at the table negotiating the policy parameters for legislation, 
Howard saw political advantage in leaving Aboriignes outside the door.  
While Aborigines dealt closely and openly with the Prime Minister and 
those with the key votes on the cross benches of the Senate during Mabo, 
they felt excluded during the Wik process, casting their lot with the 
Opposition retaining the same legal advisers as the Labor Party and 
using a Labor candidate as a key adviser.  Though their own lawyers 
had designed the key plank of the final compromise, they disowned it 
when the politics changed in the wake of the 1998 Queensland election.  
Though Senator Harradine was able to deliver on the compromise, he did 
apologise for the exclusion of Aborigines from the last round of negotiations, 
saying, "I was concerned that if others were involved there might 
me leaks and the horses might be frightened and they'd bolt." Gatjil 
Djerrkura, Chairman of ATSIC, readily understood, saying, "We suspect 
Senator Harradine has taken the Prime Minister as far as he could to 
avoid a race based election.  I think he has demonstrated courage 
and integrity throughout this debate."  I wrote from overseas 
endorsing the Harradine compromise saying, "Given the political 
constraints, Brian Harradine delivered for Aboriginal Australia".  
Keating was outraged, calling me a "meddling priest" who had 
"saved Howard from paying the price of his folly, and made the 
Aborigines pay instead".  I thought I had played by the same 
rules as I had in Mabo.  It took two years to expose the tensions 
in Labor's position, culminating in Daryl Melham's resignation from 
the shadow ministry when Labor endorsed substantive parts of  Peter 
Beattie's compromised scheme which did not measure up to Brian Harradine's 
standard.  The aspects of Beattie's scheme allowed by the Senate 
were quite consistent with the 1993 Keating-Goss  compromise on 
native title and mining.  Nonetheless, only two of the fifteen 
contributors to the final Senate debate on 30 August 2000 were from 
the Labor side.  Hasving overstated its rhetoric in Opposition, 
the Labor Party was unable to explain publicly the consistency of its 
compromise of 2000 with its compromise of 1993.

  

  During all these land rights sagas of the last decade, the Council 
for Abo  riginal 
Reconciliation has been performing its functions, creating community 
awareness and understanding of the issues, and providing a respectful 
forum in which the diverse views of interest groups can be aired and 
assessed according to the Council's vision of  "a united Australia 
which respects this land of ours, values our Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander heritage, and provides justice and equity for all".  
But the Council has been no substitute for Aboriginal participation 
in the political processes with Aborigines being able to participate 
in the processes of the High Court and the Senate, calling the government 
and the House of Representatives to account according to the rule of 
law and the principles of equality and non-discrimination espoused by 
all major political parties.

  

  With the election of the Aden Ridgeway to the Senate in 1998, I was 
able to close most of my files on Aboriginal policy issues because for 
the first time I could rest content that not even the Howard government 
could pass a   law impacting on Aboriginal rights and interests unless Aden Ridgeway 
gave it the tick.  Ironically, industry and the Northern Territory 
government have more chance of having the Northern Territory land rights 
legislation amended when there is a Labor government in power because 
a federal Labor government convinced of industry and territory government 
concerns would readily win the support of the Coalition parties in the 
Senate.  But Labor in opposition is unlikely to approve any interference 
with existing statutory rights unless change is sought by the Aboriginal 
groups themselves.  

  

  When Aden Ridgeway joined with the Prime Minister in the motion of 
regret last year, I had no hesitation in endorsing his stand for three 
reasons.  First, I have always thought it important that non-Aboriginal 
participants in the public debate about Abori  ginal entitlements be seen to believe in the Aboriginal leaders.  
If you cannot trust them, it is time to question your motivation.  
If they cannot trust you, it is time to get out.   Second, 
the motion was a significant improvement on nothing.  Third, the 
apology debate had become simply an anti-Howard debate. Not even Paul 
Keating in his Redfern Park speech in 1992 uttered the magic word, "Sorry".   
It is an issue on which John Howard's leadership has been inadequate.  
But he has been quite consistent, reflecting the viewpoint of the silent 
majority.  When it comes to moral distinctions between being sorry 
and expressing deep sorrow and regret, the same distinctions have been 
drawn during this jubilee year by the Pope and the Australian Catholic 
bishops.  They have expressed deep and sincere regret for things 
done in the past by others in the name of the church. They have not 
said, "Sorry".  I am all for saying "sorry".  
I was one of those on Sydney Harbour Bridge delighted to see the word 
written in the sky because it expressed what was in my heart as I walked.  
But I understand those who want to stand by the distinctions.  
Formalising apology is a morally complex business.  Even in the 
South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission, there was no requirement 
that the applicant who was admitting personal liability express remorse. 
Initially this omission was strongly criticised, But in hindsight Archbishop 
Tutu concluded, "If there had been such a requirement, an applicant 
who had made a big fuss about being sorry and repentant would probably 
have been judged to be insincere, and someone whose manner was formal 
and abrupt would have been accused of being callous and uncaring and 
not really repentant. It would have been a no-win situation." 

  

  The issue of co  mpensation for the "stolen generations" has been left on 
hold by the Howard government until the courts determine a successful 
case.  The Commonwealth should waive any statute of limitations 
defence if a plaintiff have compelling evidence to establish a cause 
of action. Counsel appearing for the Commonwealth should not make false 
submissions about past government policies (as the judge found to have 
occurred in the Gunner and Cubillo litigation).  The spectacular 
failure of all test cases to date places the stolen generation issue 
in the same position as was the land rights question in 1971 after the 
unsuccessful litigation in the Northern Territory.  Then the logjam 
was broken by the Labor Party making a commitment in opposition to legislate 
for land rights and then honouring the commitment on election.  
A successful court case was another twenty years in coming. 

  

  Aboriginal access to 
the courts, the bipartisan commitment to the Racial Discrimination Act, 
and the Senate's (almost) guaranteed commitment to the maintenance of 
existing Aboriginal statutory rights provide indigenous Australians 
with a surer legal and political guarantee of equity and reconciliation 
than they enjoyed twenty years ago.  Bodies such as ATSIC and the 
Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation have their place but they are 
no substitute for the capacity to exercise legal and political power 
in the major national institutions of governance. 

  

  Bill of Rights

  

  On 2 October, the United Kingdom completed Australia's isolation from 
the rest of the common law world which has seen the wisdom of legislating 
some form of a bill of rights if only to provide judges with some bright 
line guideposts when it comes to the resolution of conflicting claims 
which otherwise will require developments of the common law to deal 
with novel situations.  In Mabo, the High Court was willing to 
acknowledge the guidance it could obtain from the international human 
rights conventions in view of the fact that disgruntled litigants could 
have access to the first optional protocol procedures in Geneva claiming 
that domestic courts had not provided relief consistent with the rights 
set down in the covenants.  Though the present government has expressed 
strong dissatisfaction with the UN human rights treaty bodies saying 
that "Australia's strategic engagement with the treaty committee 
system should be dependent on the extent to which effective reform occurs", 
the Attorney General Mr Williams has been prepared to commit the government 
to the retention of the optional protocol procedures.

  

  I wrote   Legislating Liberty   after having the opportunity to view the Supreme Court of the United 
States in action during a very busy term when the Justices wrestled 
with issues of gay rights, gender discrimination and freedom of speech 
on cable television.  Since then, the court has once again been 
drawn into the abortion controversy and has concluded its first foray 
in the euthanasia debate.  US Supreme Court processes are more 
participative than ours are, permitting almost anyone to submit a written 
amicus curiae brief.  But the transparency of the process is disguised 
to Australian ears with only 30 minutes granted to each party for oral 
argument.  The proceedings are high on theatre and often slight 
in content.  The issue for us is whether major political and moral 
controversies are best resolved delivering equity and reconciliation 
for all, with the last word being left to elected politicians or unelected 
judges.  Unelected judges may well reach the same substantive conclusion 
about the controversy as elected politicians.  But the processes 
can yield very different outcomes in terms of reconciling the losers 
to the outcome.  Abortion and euthanasia are good illustrations.  
In the political debates about these issues, it is appropriate that 
God not be brought into the public forum of a pluralistic society such 
as Australia.  But this does not preclude citizens with a religious 
view of the world from agitating their vision of the good life for all 
in the public square, even though their comprehensive world view is 
informed by their relationship with God and by their church tradition.  
Like everyone else, they will be expected to make their policy options 
comprehensible and justifiable by arguments equally accessible to all 
participants in the public forum.  There is a difference between telling 
religious people to leave their religious rationale for their position 
at the door and telling religious people that their policy preferences 
do not count because those policy preferences are informed by religious 
beliefs rather than the profit motive or the quest for power and status 
or by benign humanitarianism which are presumed to be the only things 
that count in the public forum of the tolerant pluralistic society which 
ends up tolerating only the lowest common denominator of human aspirations 
for life lived in community - all else being relegated to the private 
domain where the individual is perfectly free to sink or swim in the 
waters of rank materialism. 

  

  It is an illusion of 
reality that the United States Supreme Court can strike a balance between 
the woman's right to choose and the state interest in promoting foetal 
life using a judicially applicable criterion of 'undue burden' as if 
it were not just a political decision or a personal preference of the 
individual judge.  In   Planned Parenthood v. Casey  the middle 
votes of the present court thought they were consolidating the Court's 
task by calling upon 'the contending sides of a national controversy 
to end their national division by accepting a common mandate rooted 
in the Constitution'.   And this in a country which remains 
the most politically polarised over abortion of any country in the world.  
As a foreigner privileged to sit and watch the Court in action over 
some months, I have no doubt this was not judicial conceit; it was a 
humble, failed attempt to discharge a mandate which can never be performed 
by unelected people in a pluralistic, democratic society.  Whatever 
the rights and wrongs of abortion, its legally permissible limits have 
been further politicised and rendered unresolvable in the United States 
precisely because the issue has been constitutionalised.  In June 
this year, the judges holding the middle ground in   Casey  blew themselves apart in   Stenberg  v   Cahart,  the partial birth abortion case 
from Nebraska which struck down the laws of thirty States which prohibited 
a procedure which has the appearance of a live birth delivery except 
that the delivery is halted once the torso and limbs emerge and the 
contents of the skull are sucked out before the delivery is complete.  
Justice Kennedy turned against his former joint colleagues O'Connor 
and Souter, saying, 

  

    Casey   is premised on the States having an important constitutional role 
in defining their interests in the abortion debate. It is only with 
this principle in mind that Nebraska's interests can be given proper 
weight.  The State's brief describes its interests as including 
concern for the life of the unborn and "for the partially-born," 
in preserving the integrity of the medical profession, and in "erecting 
a barrier to infanticide."  A review of   Casey  demonstrates the legitimacy of these 
policies.  The Court should say so.  

  

  The constitutionality of partial birth abortions was upheld 5-4 with 
Kennedy convinced that two of the majority were misconstruing their 
joint precedent.  Justice Scalia fulminated that one day this decision 
of the court "will be assigned its rightful place in the history 
of this Court's jurisprudence beside   Korematsu  and   Dred Scott ."  He concluded:

  

  I cannot understand why those who acknowledge that, in the opening 
words of Justice O'Connor's concurrence, 'the issue of abortion is one 
of the most contentious and controversial in contemporary American society', 
persist in the belief that this court, armed with neither constitutional 
text nor accepted tradition, can resolve the contention and controversy 
rather than be consumed by it.  If only for the sake of its own 
preservation, the Court should return this matter to the people, where 
the Constitution, by its silence on the subject, left it - and let them 
decide, State by State, whether this practice should be allowed.  
Casey must be overruled.

  

  Commencing his epic decision in   Roe v. Wade   back in 1973  ,  Justice Blackmun said, 'Our task, of course, is to resolve 
the issue by constitutional measurement, free of emotion and predilection'.   
The spectacular failure of this effort is found in Justice Blackmun's 
last judicial utterance on the matter two decades later: 'A woman's 
right to reproductive choice is one of those fundamental liberties.  
Accordingly that liberty need not seek refuge at the ballot box ... 
I am 83 years old.  I cannot remain on this Court forever, and 
when I do step down, the confirmation process of my successor well may 
focus on the issue before us today.'   More than a dose of 
emotion and predilection in all that.  The limits of the fundamental 
liberty depend not on the ballot box directly but on the view of the 
judge chosen and confirmed by those at the ballot box.  In   Casey , 
Justice Scalia had lamented that the original abortion decision "fanned 
into flame an issue that has inflamed our national politics in general, 
and has obscured with its smoke the selection of Justices to this Court" 
ever since.  In the present presidential election, there is speculation 
that either Bush or Gore will get to nominate three new appointments 
to the court, thereby making abortion a real issue in the election campaign.

  

  It is a bold step to assume that by constitutionalising an issue everyone 
gains: the judges by becoming more important to the national life, the 
legislators by being able to sidestep the hard decisions, the unpopular 
and po  werless 
by making gains across the board nationally which could not be achieved 
locally, and the citizenry generally by being assured that there is 
a sphere of personal conduct which cannot be invaded by the state.  
But there are other ways which can be less costly for all parties.  
And when the issue impacts on all, it may be too one-dimensional a view 
of the human person to portray the issue as a conflict between the individual 
David and the Goliath State.

  

  Though anxious to retain some judicial supervisi  on of the limits placed on abortion regardless of Justice Blackmun's 
artificial trimester classifications, the majority in   Planned Parenthood v. Casey  were adamant 
that they were not restricting the domain of privacy.  In fact, 
they took the concept from   Griswold v. Connecticut  and gave it more 
florid expression with the observation, 'Our law affords constitutional 
protection to personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, 
contraception, family relationships, child-rearing, and education.  
These matters, involving the most intimate and personal choices a person 
may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity and autonomy, 
are central to the liberty protected by the fourteenth amendment.  
At the heart of liberty is the right to define one's own concept of 
existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human 
life.  Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes 
of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the state.'  
With this observation the court then, whether wittingly or unwittingly, 
opened the door to the next constitutional showdown: the right to voluntary 
assisted suicide.  After all, what would be more central to the 
defining of one's own concept of existence, meaning, the universe, and 
the mystery of human life - the whole bang lot - than the decision to 
terminate one's life free from constraint by the state.

  

  Whether in the United States or Australia, the protagonists in the 
abortion debate will never be satisfied with unelected judges having 
the final say on the limits of abortion.  Any proposal for a bill 
of rights in Australia will continue to founder on th  e rock of abortion law reform.  I would be happy to see non-discrimination 
clauses included in the Commonwealth Constitution which would permanently 
fetter the Commonwealth parliament and government from discriminating 
against people on the basis of race, gender or sexual orientation.  
I am opposed to a comprehensive constitutional bill of rights that reserves 
the determination of the most pressing legal, moral and political questions 
to the judges, who shy away from controversial balancing of interests, 
informed only by their personal values and preferences.  The only 
way the United States Supreme Court has been able, with any credibility, 
to perform the task of determining due process and equal protection 
in political and moral controversies is by designing hurdles which keep 
the judges from scrutinising laws too closely unless the affected party 
is a member of a suspect class or is invoking a fundamental right or 
liberty.  

  

  Given the creativity 
of our judges in the shaping of the common law, the vigilance of the 
Senate in scrutinising legislation, and the access of our citizens to 
the first optional protocol procedure in Geneva, I think we could have 
the best of both worlds were we immediately to legislate a Commonwealth 
Charter of Espoused Rights and Freedoms.  This charter could be 
a precursor to a statutory bill of rights.  It could be the benchmark 
against which a Senate Committee for Rights and Freedoms could scrutinise 
proposed legislation.  The Committee could complement or incorporate 
the existing Scrutiny of Bills Committee, the Regulations and Ordinance 
Committee and the Legal and Constitutional Committee.

  

  The Charter should faithfully reflect the key provisions of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  It would be the task of   the multi-party Senate 
committee to determine if a proposed  legislative override of an 
espoused right or freedom could be demonstrably justified in a free 
and democratic society like Australia.  I appreciate that such 
a device might still be defective when it comes to considering the protection 
to be afforded universally unpopular groups such as asylum seekers who 
are not treated as means rather than ends by all our major political 
parties.    The bipartisan policy of humane deterrence 
is neither humane nor a deterrent.  Detention centres in the desert 
have not worked. Now we must suffer the indignity of having the Indonesians 
decline the request of our leaders that the Indonesians provide us with 
one of their islands for the detention and processing of unauthorised 
asylum seekers.  Asylum seekers, like anyone else within the Australian 
jurisdiction, should enjoy the rights and liberties guaranteed by the 
international covenants to which Australia is a signatory.

  

  There is no need for our judges to be the   exclusive arbiters of due process and equal protection given that 
these vague constitutional terms are the gate through which adventurous 
judges can decide to visit their personal policy preferences about the 
pressing moral and political issues of the moment.  American judges, 
armed with their highly developed jurisprudence and the democratic legitimacy 
of Senate confirmation hearings, demonstrate time and again that one 
judge's animosity is simply another's rationality.  We can import 
their rationality second-hand without having to infect our own benches 
with the animosity inculcated by unelected judges trying to develop 
a judicial method for anti-majoritarian policy decisions benefiting 
those whose interests have never known special protection in the past.  
In Australia, the pace of change and the balancing of rights and the 
public interest should still lie principally with the people through 
their elected representatives, while the judges maintain the rule of 
law and avoid politics-smuggled-into-law.

  

  East Timor

  

  On 21 August 2000, Kofi Annan published a report 
he had commissioned by a panel on United Nations Peace Operations.  
It contains a forthright assessment of the challenge presented to the 
UN when it attempts to provide transitional administration as with U  NTAET in East Timor.  
The report notes:

  

  76. Until mid- 1999, the United Nations had conducted just a small 
handful of field operations with elements of civil administration conduct 
or oversight.  In June 1999, however, the Secretariat found itself 
directed to develop a transitional civil administration for Kosovo, 
and three months later for East Timor.  The struggles of the United 
Nations to set up and manage those operations are part of the backdrop 
to the narratives on rapid deployment and on Headquarters staffing and 
structure in the present report.

  

  77. These operations face challenges and responsibilities that are 
unique among United Nations field operations.  No other operations 
must set and enforce the law, establish customs services and regulations, 
set and collect business and personal taxes, attract foreign investment, 
adjudicate property disputes and liabilities for war damage, reconstruct 
and operate all public utilities, create a banking system, run schools 
and pay teachers and collect the garbage - in a wardamaged society, 
using voluntary contributions, because the assessed mission budget, 
even for such "transitional administration" missions, does 
not fund local administration itself.  In addition to such tasks, 
these missions must also try to rebuild civil society and promote respect 
for human rights, in places where grievance is widespread and grudges 
run deep.

  

  78. Beyond such challenges lies the larger question 
of whether the United Nations should be in this business at all, and 
if so whether   it should be considered an element of peace operations or should 
be managed by some other structure.  Although the Security Council 
may not again direct the United Nations to do transitional civil administration, 
no one expected it to do so with respect to Kosovo or East Timor either. 
Intra-State conflicts continue and future instability is hard to predict, 
so that despite evident ambivalence about civil administration among 
United Nations Member States and within the Secretariat, other such 
missions may indeed be established in the future and on an equally urgent 
basis.  Thus, the Secretariat faces an unpleasant dilemma: to assume 
that transitional administration is a transitory responsibility, not 
prepare for additional missions and do badly if it is once again flung 
into the breach, or to prepare well and be asked to undertake them more 
often because it is well prepared.  Certainly, if the Secretariat 
anticipates future transitional administrations as the rule rather than 
the exception, then a dedicated and distinct responsibility centre for 
those tasks must be created somewhere within the United Nations system.  
In the interim, DPKO has to continue to support this function.

  

  79. Meanwhile, there is a pressing issue in transitional civil administration 
that must be addressed, and that is the issue of "applicable law." 
In the two locales where United Nations operations now have law enforcement 
responsibility, local judicial and legal capacity was found to be non-existent, 
out of practice or subject to intimidation by armed elements.  
Moreover, in both places, the law and legal systems prevailing prior 
to the conflict were questioned or rejected by key groups considered 
to be the victims of the conflicts.

  

  In East Timor, the UN 
has approached its task of civil administration by separating ETTA (the 
East Timor Transitional Administration) from the rest of the UN machinery.  
ETTA has to work to a realistic budget such that it will be able to 
operate once the UN withdraws. ETTA cannot even afford to employ the 
same number of teachers that the Indonesians employed. The rest of the 
UN machinery operates with that flourish for international salaries 
and spending which is now legendary.  As you all know, Dili is 
full of new four wheel drives, mobile phones and computers most of which 
will have gone in a couple of years time when most of the expats have 
left town. Very few of these devices are driven by East Timorese working 
with ETTA, preparing to run the government of their new country after 
elections next year. The disparity in wage rates has created great disaffection 
in East Timor.  For example the 33 newly appointed, under-employed 
judges recently went on strike demanding a pay rise from $US 300 per 
month to $US 3,000 per month.  Such wage rates would be completely 
unsustainable in an independent East Timor.  On 10 October 2000, 
the East Timor NGOs pleaded with UNTAET that it abandon its proposed 
Civic Education Program which was to cost "$US 8,310,886 (20 per 
cent of the entire annual budget for East Timor), of which 75.5% is 
to be used as salaries for international staff or UN Volunteers and 
2.2% to be paid for Timorese staff."  The day before, CNRT 
President Xanana Gusmao announcing the conclusions of the CNRT Congress, 
said, "We are not interested in a legacy of cars and laws, nor 
are we interested in a legacy of development plans for the future designed 
by other than East Timorese."  East Timor is presently a lawmaker's 
paradise.  I recently discovered the UNTAET timber cutting guidelines 
for domestic and traditional use which included the following:

  

  "No trees to be felled within 130 times 
the difference between the highest spring tide and the lowest ebb tide 
from the coast."

  

  While present in Dili, 
many UN officials are committed to doing whatever can be done before 
the transfer of authority to the independent East Timor.  As an 
observer concerned with equity and reconciliation through inclusive 
institutions, I wonder about the wisdom of this.  As an Australian 
I wonder about the wisdom of our government participating in such processes.  
Let me give a few examples.

  

  On 10 February 2000, 
there was an exchange of notes between the Australian mission in East 
Timor and UNTAET agreeing to the continuation of the terms of the Timor 
Gap Treaty with all rights and obligations previously exercisable by 
Indonesia now being exercisable by UNTAET.  On 9 October 2000, 
Ambassador Peter Galbraith, the American Cabinet officer for Political 
Affairs (including the Timor Sea) announced that it would be desirable 
to conclude the negotiations for a new treaty with Australia before 
UNTAET concluded its mandate, thereby allowing the new government of 
East Timor to ratify the treaty immediately upon election.  No 
doubt this process has the support of some key  CNRT leaders, but 
is it wise for Australia to involve itself in such a process thereby 
risking a further politicisation of the issue by those Timorese who 
will allege that UNTAET had no authority from the free people of East 
Timor to negotiate their oil right s with the Australians?  The 
prospect of mistrust is heightened by the appointment of Jose Ramos 
Horta as Cabinet Officer responsible for Foreign Affairs but excluding 
the Timor Sea.  Though there be good reason for Australia to be 
generous with East Timor and those representing her interests, Australia 
must also have an eye to Indonesia with whom the rest of the boundary 
was negotiated, ensuring there can be no grounds for Indonesian disaffection 
with the terms of its treaty arrangements with Australia.  Why 
risk such political confusion at this stage when the interim arrangements 
work no disadvantage at all on the East Timorese who will be able to 
secure the most able negotiators when they sit down to negotiate with 
Australia?

  

  In April 2000, UNTAET 
and the Republic of Indonesia concluded a memorandum of understanding 
regarding co-operation in legal, judicial and human rights related matters.  
Though the parties agreed to transfer all persons whom the competent 
authorities of the requesting party are prosecuting, they further specified 
that "each party will have the right to refuse a request for such 
transfer if the carrying out of the legal proceedings by authorities 
of the requesting party would not be in the interests of justice".  
There is no chance that the Indonesian authorities will transfer militia 
leaders to an East Timorese court where the militia leaders could then 
be cross-examined about their activities and their relationships with 
the TNI, under the full scrutiny of the international media.  Just 
as Australians and East Timorese are dubious about the justice of Indonesian 
courts which release Eurico Gutteres from custody on a technicality, 
so too Indonesians will be dubious about the justice of newly formed 
East Timorese courts hearing charges against militia leaders.  
An UNTAET Regulation establishes panels of District Court judges with 
exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the serious crimes of genocide, 
war crimes, crimes against humanity, murder, sexual offences and torture 
committed between 1 January 1999 and 25 October 1999.  There is 
also a Deputy General Prosecutor for Serious Crimes who is in charge 
of the Department of Prosecution of Serious Crimes.  The prosecutor 
recently announced that due to a lack of resources he had to abandon 
his plans to investigate the ten most serious crimes at this stage and 
confine his attention to the four most serious crimes, namely:

  

  

  Not even the Suai Church massacre is any longer 
on the list of serious crimes to be investigated for prosecution in 
the near future.  There are over 60 persons still in custody in 
East Timor awaiting trial for offences committed over a y  ear ago.  But there 
is little prospect that the chief perpetrators and instigators will 
face trial.  ETTA has not the resources and there is no binding 
obligation on Indonesia to surrender those on the west side of the border.  
So then comes the suggestion of a UN sponsored and internationally funded 
Truth, Reception and Reconciliation Commission.  Not being under 
ETTA, such a commission would not face the same funding constraints 
as the special crimes unit.  While the special prosecutor complains 
that he has only 1.5 translators available to him, the UN proposes a 
Truth Commission with 32 commissioners and a staff of 257 costing US$4-6 
million over the two years of proposed operation.  The hope is 
that Australia will contribute to the cost of the Commission.  
An equivalent sized commission in Australia with a population more than 
20 times that of East Timor would have a staff of 5,000 and 600 commissioners!

  

  If there is no prospect 
of successful prosecution of those who committed the most serious crimes 
last year, what are the conditions in which a truth commission could 
produce good effects?  Let's start with a consideration of the 
South African process.  What is reconciliation in such a context?  
There are three elements:

  

  

  Our starting point must be a consideration 
of personal responsibility and of the limitations on the machinery of 
state.  Even in times of conflict, individuals are responsible 
for their criminal acts.  Victims and t  heir relatives have a legitimate expectation that offenders will be 
duly prosecuted and punished by the state.  Accused persons have 
a legitimate expectation that they will not be punished unless they 
have been properly tried according to law and the evidence.  Even 
during peaceful times in the most well ordered states, not all offenders 
are brought to justice.  But all suspects are accorded due process.  
Many who are rightly suspected of offences may go free under a policy 
of selective law enforcement whereby only serious offenders are brought 
to trial.  Selective law enforcement can be justified on the grounds 
of maximising limited law enforcement resources or of preserving the 
law enforcement machinery from being tainted by undue involvement in 
political affairs.

  

  Societies in transition and events such as occurred in East Timor 
last September create acute problems for the administration of the criminal 
law.  There are too many victims and offenders for even well established 
legal processes to operate jus  tly.  Offenders will have a range of defences to put, including 
compulsion and duress.  There may even be doubt about the illegality 
of some activities which were undoubtedly morally unacceptable but which 
were sanctioned by the authorities then exercising the civil power.

  

  One element of reconciliation in such a context would be the equivalent 
of an “amnesty” extended to all those putative wrongdoers who give 
themselves up by the prescribed date. The ringleaders and most serious 
violators might be processe  d through the courts while the followers and minor violators would 
be accorded the benefits of amnesty.  This element of reconciliation 
is not antipathetic to justice.  It is a principled expression 
of the limits of achievable retributive justice given the limits on 
the new machinery of state and the legitimate common good and national 
interest that justice be dispensed promptly and the rebuilding of society 
proceed untrammeled.

  

  The need for such a partial amnesty may be even greater in East Timor 
as the traditional organs of the state for prosecution, trial and punishment 
are not yet properly developed.  The underdeveloped nature of the 
country’s new court processes should not a  llow the victorious group from the popular consultation to impose 
punishments without procedural justice on their opponents, while their 
own followers remain immune from prosecution.

  

  During last year’s activities, there were criminal acts committed 
by per  sons 
on all sides.  But the militia committed more gross violations 
than those advocating independence.  Nonetheless there may be a 
political imperative for both sides to agree to a partial amnesty provided 
that the most serious offenders are duly prosecuted regardless of which 
political side they were on.

  

  The criminal acts committed last year were in the course of a political 
campaign and a situation akin to civil war.  That “civil war” 
type situation is now over.  Provided all groups want to draw the 
lin  e and 
start again in building a new society and a new state, it is appropriate 
to formalise this desire for reconciliation.  No matter what the 
differences in the past, the people and their leaders may decide it 
is time for all to commit themselves to building the new nation, judging 
it to be in the national interest and for the common good that people’s 
limited energies no longer be expended on reliving and investigating 
the past, but building a future which is based on an acceptance by all 
of the result of the popular consultation.  This aspect of reconciliation 
would require the leaders of Timorese society to accept the result as 
the will of the people and to guarantee equal protection of the law 
to all persons who, from now on, contribute to society without seeking 
to revisit the process or result of the consultation.

  

  Some argue that a formal declaration of such reconciliation may contribute 
to the confidence of the refugees in West Timor wanting to return home 
provided only that they can be assured thei  r security on return.

  

  There will continue to be acute political differences in Timorese 
society.  These differences should be entertained in the public 
forum by the establishment of a free press, political parties and the 
machinery for periodic elections.    A reconciliation process should not be seen as a substitute 
nor a cause for delaying the establishment of these mainstream processes 
for the creative resolution of differences in the public domain.  
There can be no reconciliation process or outcome unless all parties 
are at the table assured that their perspectives and concerns are considered.  
There must be consensus among all parties about process and outcomes.  
The preconditions for reconciliation are justice, recognition of legitimate 
aspirations and respect for all sincerely held perspectives.  In 
my opinion, reconciliation would not be facilitated at this time by 
the grant of total amnesty to all offenders nor by the establishment 
of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.  Such a commission cannot 
do the work of political parties and community organisations able to 
agitate and resolve differences with the benefit of a free press and 
freedom of association.  Comparisons with the South African Commission 
are erroneous.  The establishment of such a commission before the 
effective establishment of political parties participating in the electoral 
process and constituting a law making national congress able to give 
democratic legitimacy to such a commission would be similar to the establishment 
of an ANC Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa before 
elections.  Such a commission with limited legitimacy and partisan 
affiliations would be counterproductive.

    
  The Epilogue 
of the South African Constitution, entitled "National Unity and 
Reconciliation"states that the new Constitution provides 

  

  "a historic bridge between the past of a deeply divided society 
characterised by strife, conflict, untold suffering and injustice, and 
a future founded on the recognition of human rights, democracy and peaceful 
co-existence and development opportunities for all. The adoption of 
this Constitution lays the secure foundation for the people of South 
Africa to transcend the divisions and strife of the past, which generated 
gross violations of human rights, the transgression of humanitarian 
principles in violent conflicts and a legacy of hatred, fear, guilt 
and revenge.  These can now be addressed on the basis that there 
is a need for understanding but not for vengeance, a need for reparation 
but for retaliation, a need for ubuntu but for victimisation. In order 
to advance such reconciliation and reconstruction, amnesty shall be 
granted in respect of acts, omissions and offences associated with political 
objectives and committed in the course of the conflicts of the past."

     
  In 1995, 
the South African Parliament passed the Promotion of National Unity 
and Reconciliation Act which set up the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
This 15 member commission was assisted by three committees:

  

  The Committee on Human Rights Violations 

  the Committee on Reparation and Rehabilitation

  the Committee on Amnesty (consisting of 19 members)

  

  The Commission submitted its report to President Mandela on 29 October 
1998. The Committee on Amnesty has been extended. At the time of reporting, 
only 171 of the 7,127 sought amnesties had been granted. Archbishop 
Tutu who chaired the commission said it was an attempt by the people 
of South Africa to find a third way between Nuremberg and national amnesia. 
The Nuremberg approach would have absorbed the new country's energies 
and resources in putting on trial all suspected criminals from the apartheid 
era - both those who worked for the old regime and those who opposed 
it, meeting force with force. The way of national amnesia would have 
invited everyone to let bygones be bygones. Resentments would have built 
up and people would never have discovered the truth of what happened 
to their loved ones and in their history.

      
   
In his book   No Future Without Forgiveness,  Tutu gives three reasons for 
avoiding the Nuremberg option: 

  

  

  

  

  Tutu equated a total amnesty with national 
amnesia which was rejected because 

  

  

  Pursuant of s.20, Promotion of National Unity 
and Reconciliation Act 1995, an amnesty could be granted in relation 
to any act, omission or offence provided  : 

  

  . 

  The amnesty has the effect of exempting the 
person from all criminal and civil liability and exempting all others 
(including the state) from any vicariou  s liability.

      
The Constitutional Court of South Africa considered a constitutional 
challenge to the amnesty provisions in   AZAPO  v   President of South Africa  (CCT 17/96). 
The lead judgment of Deputy President Mahomed (later Chief Justice, 
now deceased) provides some fine jurisprudential reflections on the 
desirability of an "amnesty in exchange for truth" regime. 
He made brief reference to the Argentinean and Chilean commissions and 
opined: "What emerges from the experience of these and other countries 
that have ended periods of authoritarian and abusive rule, is that there 
is no single or uniform international practice in relation to amnesty. 
Decisions of states in transition, taken with a view to assisting such 
transition, are quite different from acts of a state covering up its 
own crimes by granting itself immunity. In the former case, it is not 
a question of the governmental agents responsible for the violations 
indemnifying themselves, but rather, one of a constitutional compact 
being entered into by all sides, with former victims being well-represented, 
as part of an ongoing process to develop constitutional democracy and 
prevent a repetition of the abuses." 

    


  Mahomed outlined the competing considerations for the grant of amnesty: 

  

         "[17] Every decent human 
being must feel grave discomfort in living with a consequence which 
might allow the perpetrators of evil acts to walk the streets of this 
land with impunity, protected in their freedom by an amnesty immune 
from constitutional attack, but the circumstances in support of this 
course require carefully to be appreciated. Most of the acts of brutality 
and torture which have taken place have occurred during an era in which 
neither the laws which permitted the incarceration of persons or the 
investigation of crimes, nor the methods and the culture which informed 
such investigations, were easily open to public investigation, verification 
and correction. Much of what transpired in this shameful period is shrouded 
in secrecy and not easily capable of objective demonstration and proof. 
Loved ones have disappeared, sometimes mysteriously and most of them 
no longer survive to tell their tales. Others have had their freedom 
invaded, their dignity assaulted or their reputations tarnished by grossly 
unfair imputations hurled in the fire and the crossfire of a deep and 
wounding conflict. The wicked and the innocent have often both been 
victims. Secrecy and authoritarianism have concealed the truth in little 
crevices of obscurity in our history. Records are not easily accessible; 
witnesses are often unknown, dead, unavailable or unwilling. All that 
often effectively remains is the truth of wounded memories of loved 
ones sharing instinctive suspicions, deep and traumatising to the survivors 
but otherwise incapable of translating themselves into objective and 
corroborative evidence which could survive the rigours of the law. The 
Act seeks to address this massive problem by encouraging these survivors 
and the dependants of the tortured and the wounded, the maimed and the 
dead to unburden their grief publicly, to receive the collective recognition 
of a new nation that they were wronged, and crucially, to help them 
to discover what did in truth happen to their loved ones, where and 
under what circumstances it did happen, and who was responsible. That 
truth, which the victims of repression seek so desperately to know is, 
in the circumstances, much more likely to be forthcoming if those responsible 
for such monstrous misdeeds are encouraged to disclose the whole truth 
with the incentive that they will not receive the punishment which they 
undoubtedly deserve if they do. Without that incentive there is nothing 
to encourage such persons to make the disclosures and to reveal the 
truth, which persons in the positions of the applicants so desperately 
desire. With that incentive, what might unfold are objectives fundamental 
to the ethos of a new constitutional order. The families of those unlawfully 
tortured, maimed or traumatised become mote empowered to discover the 
truth, the perpetrators become exposed to opportunities to obtain relief 
from the burden of a guilt or an anxiety they might be living with for 
many long years, the country begins the long and necessary process of 
healing the wounds of the past, transforming anger and grief into a 
mature understanding and creating the emotional and structural climate 
essential for the "reconciliation and reconstruction" which 
informs the very difficult and sometimes painful objectives of the amnesty 
articulated in the epilogue. 

     
       "[18] The alternative to the 
grant of immunity from criminal prosecution of offenders is to keep 
intact the abstract right to such a prosecution for particular persons 
without the evidence to sustain the prosecution successfully, to continue 
to kee  p the 
dependants of such victims in many cases substantially ignorant about 
what precisely happened to their loved ones, to leave their yearning 
for the truth effectively unassuaged, to perpetuate their legitimate 
sense of resentment and grief and correspondingly to allow the culprits 
of such deeds to remain perhaps physically free but inhibited in their 
capacity to become active, full and creative members of the new order 
by a menacing combination of confused fear, guilt, uncertainty and sometimes 
even trepidation. Both the victims and the culprits who walk on the 
"historic bridge" described by the epilogue will hobble more 
than walk to the future with heavy and dragged steps delaying and impeding 
a rapid and enthusiastic transition to the new society at the end of 
the bridge, which is the vision that informs the epilogue. 

  

         "[19] Even more crucially, 
but for a mechanism providing for amnesty, the "historic bridge" 
itself might never have been erected. For a successfully negotiated 
transition, the terms of the transition required not only the agreement 
of those victimised by abuse but also those threatened by the transition 
to a "democratic society based on freedom and equality". If 
the Constitution kept alive the prospect of continuous retaliation and 
revenge, the agreement of those threatened by its implementation might 
never have been forthcoming, and if it had ' the bridge itself would 
have remained wobbly and insecure, threatened by fear from some and 
anger from others. It was for this reason that those who negotiated 
the Constitution made a deliberate choice, preferring understanding 
over vengeance, reparation over retaliation, ubuntu over victimisation."

  

  "Urgent interim relief" of up to 
US$330 per person was paid to the 20,000 victims identified   by the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission. The Commission has recommended the payment of "individual 
reparation grants" of up to US$3,830 per person payable for six 
years. The total cost is expected to be US$477 million. To date, the 
government has not paid any of these reparation grants.  As time 
goes by, it is becoming more doubtful that it will.  The legitimacy 
of the Commission process is now being questioned, especially by victims 
groups who say the wrongdoers have earned immediate amnesty while their 
situation is unchanged.  The widows are still impoverished, mourning 
their loss.  All they have gained is the detail as to how their 
sons died.

  

  In South Africa, a person could apply for amnesty for an act committed 
from the time of the Sharpville massacr  e and before the inauguration of President Mandela.  Presumably 
any East Timorese amnesty would be for acts from the time of the Indonesian 
invasion (although some may argue for an earlier date in 1975) and before 
the establishment of UNTAET.  Amnesty provisions could not be considered 
for crimes such as murder, rape or inciting people to destruction. The 
conclusion of the majority report of the South African Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission states: "Reconciliation involves a form of restorative 
justice which does not seek revenge, nor does it seek impunity. In restoring 
the perpetrator to society, a milieu needs to emerge within which he 
or she may contribute to the building of democracy, a culture of human 
rights and political stability. The full disclosure of truth and an 
understanding of why violations took place encourage forgiveness."

  

  A reconciliation commission can work only if all parties have come 
to the table seeking to hear each other's stories, to own the past, 
to draw a line on that past, an  d to move on together, appreciating that the endless search for retributive 
justice will not assist in the establishment of the new nation.  
It is a mistake for foreigners to assume that last year's referendum 
was the trigger for the commencement of the reconciliation process in 
East Timor.  All parties are not yet at the table.  More than 
100,000 people are still across the border.  Last year's referendum 
produced a new list of winners and losers.  Reconciliation is only 
possible if the major players are at the table as equals, not as winners 
and losers.  Some who have committed atrocious crimes will not 
be welcome at the table (and probably will not want to come to the table) 
in any circumstances.  There is still a need for an initiative 
to bring the parties to the table.  Many wrongdoers are Indonesian 
TNI members who coerced and collaborated with key militia leaders.  
They will never come to the table.  UNTAET is not a neutral player 
in the eyes of many on the west side of the border.  Once all players 
are at the table, they will have to agree on a reconciliation process 
which can then be authorised by a government of the people with political 
legitimacy.  The compromise between reconciliation and justice 
is always imperfect in these circumstances.  There is no perfect 
model which can simply be mandated by an outside agency such as UNTAET.

  

  If UNTAET proceeds with the establishment of a Truth, Reception and 
Reconciliation Commission prior to an election, prior to the prosecution 
of serious crimes, and without representatives of the militia groups 
at the table, the resultant commission would   be the equivalent of an ANC Commission established in South Africa 
before an election and before the major parties agreed to come to the 
table seeking peace and reconciliation, while the major perpetrators 
of offences (including foreign military) were still across the border 
in (say) Zimbabwe.  Reconciliation at the local and national levels 
will work only if all players are in the circle wanting to cross the 
bridge together, putting the unfortunate past behind them, appreciating 
that everyone in the circle continues in some way to be a victim of 
that past for as long as the nation together takes to decide on the 
terms of the reconciliation-justice compromise so that both the victims 
and the culprits can walk on the "historic bridge" not hobbling, 
and not walking "to the future with heavy and dragged steps delaying 
and impeding a rapid and enthusiastic transition to the new society 
at the end of the bridge, which is the vision that informs" any 
truth and reconciliation commission. 

  

  Presently there are some p  eople who argue that the offer of amnesty is what is needed to bring 
people in the west home to the east.  But the major disincentives 
to return are on the west side of the border, not the east.  A 
promise of amnesty may be a critical part of a peace plan but it would 
require the commitment of all major political parties before the election 
if the promise were to be made prior to the installation of the first 
government in East Timor. A peace plan is different from a reconciliation 
process.  The peace plan precedes the players coming to the table.  
The reconciliation process comes after the players have come to the 
table and reached agreement on the process.  After the negotiation 
of a peace deal with those in the west and after the election, consideration 
should be given to:

  

  

  Meanwhile if ETTA lacks the resources and the 
international community the   will to resolve even the four most serious crimes in East Timor last 
year, the people of East Timor deserve to be told rather than being 
offered the false hope that a premature reconciliation commission will 
satisfy their need to call these most notorious perpetrators to account.

  

  Conclusion

  

  Whether reflecting on the quest for indigenous rights in Australia 
these last 20 years, or musing on the desirability of an Australian 
bill of rights, or wrestling with the conflicting arguments in Dili 
about a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, I am in no doubt that the 
compromises of politics which affect most the poor and powerless are 
the more palatable and ennobling when the people themselves are party 
to the political process, participating in the mainstream political 
processes, with the elected representatives of the people bearing ultimate 
responsibility for the compromises effected, being held in check by 
the courts and legislative chambers which have the constitutional warrant 
to modify populist sentiment so that it respects the legitimate aspirations 
of all persons who seek equal participation in the nation state whether 
they be dispossessed indigenous Australians or East Timorese militia 
wondering how they might ever come home.  

