---
title: "Akif alleges being beaten and stripped naked in police custody."
date: "2000-07-18"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211201791
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UU326%22
---

 Email us: frontdesk@greens.org.au

 Browse our site to find out about the Greens, our policies for upcoming State and Federal elections; and our community based campaigns.

 If you would like to help during on one of our campaigns or join the party please email us and leave your name and a contact number or address. The Australian Greens are a confederation of state and territory Greens parties - why not find out about the Greens in your area.

 Search the Database

 Home

 Search

 About/Contact Us

 Site Map/Index

 News Update & Media Releases

 Elections

 Events / Activists

 Membership & Donations

 Email a Politician

 Interactive

 Council & Conferences

 Newsletters & Magazine

 Volunteers

 State Parties

 Bob Brown's Senate Page

 18 July 2000

 Akif Alleges Being Beaten and Stripped Naked in Police Custody Kosovar refugee Akif Lutfui has told the office of Senator Bob Brown that he was beaten, abused and denied his right to a lawyer following his arrest in Hobart.

 Speaking on the phone for 30 minutes from the Immigration Detention Centre in Melbourne, Akif gave Senator Brown's staff a detailed account of his arrest and subsequent transfer to Melbourne.

 Clearly distressed, Akif explained that he was caught with the assistance of one of the nightclub security staff who grabbed him before the police arrested him.

 Once in the Hobart police station Akif alleged he was allowed to make a phone call but only managed to utter a few lines before he was forced to hang up. He was told that his phone would be broken if he did not hang up.

 Akif claimed that his repeated requests for a lawyer were ignored by police.

 Meanwhile members of the Albanian community who were trying to get a lawyer in to see Akif were told by authorities that he had to request a lawyer before one was allowed to visit him.

 Given his experiences in Kosovo, Akif was reluctant to enter a prison cell.

 He claims the police punched him to the ground with two blows

 Parliament

 Greens Charter

 Policies

 Document & Report Archive

 Members Area

 Global Greens & Links

 to his back in order to force him into the cell. He was repeatedly abused and referred to as "motherf---er" by police.

 Akif described being forced by police to strip down to his underwear and being freezing cold all night, unable to sleep and still feeling the effects of the cold 2 days later.

 He was handcuffed for the journey from Hobart to Melbourne and Akif described the humiliation of being led through the airport like a common criminal.

 Despite the ordeal, Akif managed to memorise 2 of the police officer's badge numbers.

 "If these claims are accurate this disgraceful behaviour will be condemned by all Australians. It is horrifying to think that Akif may have fled beatings and police intimidation in Kosovo only to fall victim to them here in Hobart", Senator Brown said.

 "I will be writing to both the Tasmanian Minister for Police and the Minister for Immigration Phillip Ruddock to make a formal complaint about Akif's allegations."

 "The government should launch an immediate investigation into Akif's claims", Senator Brown said.

 More information

 0417 381154

 Category: Senate Office

 Author: Steven Chaffer

 Home ----- Email ----- Contact Us ----- Legal Disclaimer

