---
title: "Democrats face Hanson's Senate challenge head on."
date: "2000-01-07"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479641
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E3M06%22
---

   

  MEDIA RELEASE

  

  Senator Andrew Bartlett

  Democrat Senator for Queensland

  

 7 JANUARY 2000

 00/07

  

  DEMOCRATS FACE HANSON’S SENATE CHALLENGE 
HEAD ON

  

  The Australian Democrats have responded to Pauline Hanson’s confirmation 
that she will run for a Senate seat a t the next Federal election.

  

 Democrat Senator, Andrew Bartlett, who will be going 
head to head with Ms Hanson for a Queensland

 Senate seat, said with Senate numbers being so finely 
balanced, the election of Pauline Hanson to the

 Senate could give her a balance of power role.

  

 “It will be up to the people of Queensland to decide 
whether Pauline Hanson gains much greater political power than she ever 
had when she was the Member for Oxley,” Senator Bartlett said.

  

 “The Democrats use the balance of power to hold 
government to account. Hanson could use the same position of power to 
hold the government to ransom.”

  

 “Pauline Hanson made some inflammatory speeches 
in the House of Representatives, but she had no impact at all when she 
voted on legislation.”

  

 “Indeed, Ms Hanson often did not bother to turn 
up at all for votes in the Parliament and had only a 70 per cent attendance 
record in 1998.”

  

 Senator Bartlett, as the Democrats’ immigration 
spokesperson, has led political opposition to the Coalition government’s 
attacks on genuine refugees.

  

 “Ironically Ms Hanson’s announcement of an attempted 
comeback comes at a time when some of her anti-refugee policies, such 
as temporary refugee visas, are being advocated and adopted by the major 
parties,” he said.

  

  “The Democ rats will continue to be a strong political voice 
for compassion and against intolerance. Ms Hanson’s attempt to return 
merely highlights how important it is that we continue to play that 
role.”

  

 Senator Bartlett also directed the Democrats’ 1998 
election campaign which focussed on the need to prevent One Nation gaining 
balance of power in the Senate.

  

 “Ms Hanson has now been abandoned by every One Nation 
state MP in Queensland, as well as virtually all of her other significant 
supporters, except of course for David Oldfield,” said Senator Bartlett.

  

 Queensland Parliament MP, Bill Feldman, Leader of 
the former One Nation MPs has openly distanced himself from the racist 
undertones of Pauline Hanson.

  

 “It will now be up to the people of Queensland to 
finish the job and distance Queensland from this legacy and prevent 
Pauline Hanson from being able to wield the significant power that a 
Senate balance of power role would bring.”

  

  Australian Democrats http://www.democrats.org.au

  

  

  att  2000-01-11  15:59

