---
title: "Attacking the UN: A dark day in Australia's history."
date: "2000-08-30"
creators:
  - "Theophanous, Andrew"
source: "Office of THEOPHANOUS, DR ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211207459
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4PA26%22
---

  PPtRLlAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 

  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

  PRESS STATEMENT 

  The Hon. DR ANDREW THEOPHANOUS, M.H.R. 

  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CALWELL 

  ATTACKING THE U.N -- A DARK DAY IN 

  AUSTRALIA’S HISTORY 

  “It will be remembered as a dark day in Australia’s history when the Government   announced it will cease cooperation with United Nations human rights treaty bodies”, the   Independent Federal Member for Calwell said last night in Parliament. 

  “While content to criticise the likes of Indonesia anid Burma. it is outrageous and   deplorable that the Australian Government should choose to discredit and denounce the   validity of UN bodies when they highlight concerns in Australia’s policy. 

  “What mandate does this Government have to openly renege on our international   commitments as guaranteed by successive governments? From the UN to Amnesty   International, to the Refugee Council, to Former PM Malcolm Fraser - it seems everyone   is criticising this Government’s performance on human rights. 

  “The Attorney-General was on television last night bragging about how wonderful   Australia’s democracy is and how we could not possibly have any breaches of human   rights. He claimed that our practices “pale into insignificance”. This is nonsense when   you consider all of the breaches which the United Nations committees have identified in   the last few years in relation to Australia. 

  “For example, the UN Committee on Human Rights recently reported against Australia’s   mandatory sentencing laws in relation to indigenous people. and also condemned the   mandatory detention of refugees as a policy inconsistent with United Nations provisions. 

  “How can the Federal Government possibly claim, especially in the light of recent events.   that Australia has no “refugee problems” which the UNHCR has a mandate to focus on?   In 195 I Australia signed a UN Convention which a.greed that detention of asylum-seekers   is not acceptable. 

  7s it so ‘insignificant’ that we have a situation where there are 3,500 asylum-seekers,   including more than 400 children, in detention centres in this country, some for up to four   years? 

  “Time and again, the Government has received recommendations from the Refugee   Council of Australia, an organisation that Minister Ruddock confirmed “is funded to have   expertise in these matters”. And yet, when this expertise highlights criticisms in   Government policy, Mr Ruddock threatens to withdraw their funding! 

  “If Australia is going to restore its previous reputation as an open and transparent   democracy, the Federal Governments must reverse these decisions. and engage in a   dialogue to find solutions for refugees and indigenous people that are fair and equitable. 

  For further information, please phone Dr Theophanous on 04 1 S-548-509. t 

  Office 6, BROADMEADOWS RAILWAY STATION COMPLEX   1100 PASCOE VALE ROAD, BROADMEADOWS, VIC. 3047   TEL. =: (03) 9302 1114 FAX.?: (03) 9302 1181 CANBERRA:a(02) 6277 4230 FAX: (02) 6277 8579   EMAIL: Andrew.Theophanous.rnp@aph.gov.au. 

