---
title: "Billboard babies judged 'anti-racist': Democrats vindicated by Human Rights Commission ruling."
date: "2000-04-03"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211481559
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/04616%22
---

  

  

  

  

   Media Releases

   Senator Andrew Bartlett Senator for Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Press Release Dated: 3 Apr 2000 Press Release Number: 00165ab Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Related: Human Rights (Domestic)

  

 Billboard babies judged 'anti-racist': Democrats vindicated by Human Rights Commission ruling   A complaint of racism against the Australian Democrats has been dismissed by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission as “frivolous, misconceived and lacking in substance.” 

 The subject of the complaint was a Democrats’ billboard advertisement in the last federal election campaign which contrasted the policy positions of the Australian Democrats and the One Nation party. 

 The billboard depicted two groups of three babies: one group were all white and the other group of three different racial origins. Underneath were the words, "Democrats or One Nation. Only one can control the Senate. You choose." 

 Democrats’ multiculturalism spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, who appeared before the Commission on behalf of the Democrats, said his party would continue to fight strongly against racism and in support of multiculturalism. 

 “Now more than ever, Australia needs a political party that will speak out strongly against attacks on refugees and migrants. The future stability of Australia is too important for us to back away from campaigning hard for a nation which accepts and welcomes diversity. 

 “This is as vital now as it was at the 1998 election. Some of One Nation’s policies have started to be adopted by the major parties, such as only giving temporary visas to some refugees. And Pauline Hanson has stated she is intending to run for the Senate at the next election, specifically targeting the Democrats and seeking the balance of power." 

 As a Queenslander, Senator Bartlett will be in direct competition with Ms Hanson should she stand for election. Senator Bartlett was national campaign director for the last election that delivered a record number of seats for the Democrats and the balance of power in the Senate. 

 "The Australian people judged the billboards at the last election and delivered a resounding vote of support for the Democrats," he said. 

 Senator Bartlett said he was particularly pleased by the finding by Commissioner John Nader QC that the billboard was in fact anti-racist. 

 The Commissioners' report found that, 

 "In fact, the poster was anti-racist. I believe it was an implied exhortation to voters to regard an Australian society made up of people of many different races and ethnic origins living in harmony as a better country than one in which everyone is racially or ethnically the same." 

 “It is appropriate that proper process is followed and people’s complaints, regardless of how frivolous or vexatious they may be, are given due consideration,” said Senator Bartlett. 

 “However, it is unfortunate that some one would try to use anti-racism laws to try to silence a message which the Commission itself found to be anti-racist.”     

    

