---
title: "Time to rethink privatised correctional facilities."
date: "2000-11-24"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211219168
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YBY26%22
---

 Time To Rethink Privatised Correctional Facilities Duncan Kerr - Shadow Minister for Justice

 Media Statement - 24 November 2000

 Printer friendly page

 "The revelations about the way in which the Woomera detention centre has been run give a clear warning that it is time to stop and review the policy of privatisation of correctional facilities," Duncan Kerr, Shadow Minister for Justice, said today.

 "Aside from asylum seekers who are held in detention centres, Commonwealth prisoners are held in State prisons, the management of which is Constitutionally a matter of State jurisdiction. While prison policy is primarily a matter for State determination, the issue of privatisation is a national concern.

 "More and more questions are being asked about the appropriateness of paying private companies to manage prisons and detention centres.

 "Serious concerns are raised by the secrecy involved in so called 'commercial in confidence' contracts, which stop the public from being able to access information about the way in which correctional facilities are run.

 "Australia has already become something of a world leader in the number of facilities which have been contracted out to private companies, many of which are from the USA or have USA parents.

 "There are too many 'horror stories' coming out of the private prison industries in the UK and the USA for Australia to blithely continue upon the path of privatisation without taking stock of where we are going.

 "There is no arguing that there were, and continue to be, serious problems in many publicly run correctional facilities. However, the bottom line in these facilities is that the Government is accountable and responsible.

 "The serious allegations arising out of the management of the Woomera detention centre raise the question of the adequacy of mechanisms of accountability and responsibility when a public function is outsourced to a business operation - and the bottom line becomes profit.

 "Before it is too late, we must stop and re-think whether the detention of people should be a commercial business," Duncan Kerr said.

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

