---
title: "Chemical restraint of deportees."
date: "2000-03-15"
creators:
  - "Price, Roger"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of PRICE, ROGER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211481027
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0C916%22
---

  Received 15 March 2000 

  ROGERPRICEMP 

  Federal Member for Chifley   PO Box 259 Mt Druitt NSW 2770 

  For Immediate Release 

  CHEMICAL RElSTRMNT OF DEPORTEES 

  Roger Price MP, Federal Member for Chifley, stongly supported the call by   Shadow Minister for Immigration, Con Sciacca, for an immediate independent 

  investlgation into allegations screened In the ABC’s Four Comers program 

  detailing the multiple uge of chemical restraints on an Algerian deportee. 

  Mr Price said   that he was very disturbeq by allegations that up to five potentially 

  dangerous doses of sedatives had been~ctmsld8md and four Intravenous   injections had actually been adminlstered to one person during his removal from   Australia. 

  “While Labor supports   the current practice of detention and swift deportation of 

  illegal immigrants from Australia, it is disgraceful and a blatant breach of human   rights that deportees have to be subjected to potentially dangerous doses of 

  sedatives in an attempt to supposedly ‘quieten them down“‘, said Mr Price, 

  “1 have place questions on the notice paper seeking Information   about the 

  authorisation of drugs, the dosage and whether or not an expert medic4 group   has approved the detail of chemloal restrainy. 

  nMinister   Ruddock’s comment to the effect that the Austmllan community expects 

  that people who are not genuine refugees or have no lawful entitlement to be 

  here should be removed quickly is certainly correct in general terms”. 

  ” I was surprised, however, at Minister Ruddock’s apparent insensitivity on hearing 

  the allegations of excessive forced sedation, I doubt that the Australian people   would endorse the lndlscriminate use of potentially dangerous doses of chemical 

  restraints on humans. I understand that the drugs used were Valium and 

  Phenergan.” 

  ‘This practice is Un-Australian’. 

  “I 

  remind the Minister that while the claims of these asylum seekers have been 

  rejected, they are still human beings - not animals, and are entitled to courtesy,   dign& and respect”. 

  “Labor will not tolerate such blatant breaches of human rights, nor will it tolerate the   Minister justifying these actions by beating his chest and claiming these actions   represent community expectations”. 

  ‘Australia has a hard won reputation as a humanitarian nation. Our reputation   should not be placed at risk by the cavalier attitude of a South African company 

  contracted to the Immigration Department to handle deportations”, 

  concluded Mr Price. 

  ENDS 

  ATTACHMENT. 

  *I273 

  MR PRICE: To ask the Minister for Immigration and   Multicultural Affairs-   (1) Are refugees legally allowed to be chemically 

  restrained while being deported; if so, under what   legislation.   (2) Has his Department developed protocols for the   chemical restraint of deportees; if so, what are the details.   (3) What are the drugs approved for administration to 

  deportees and what are the respective dosages.   (4) Has an expert medical group approved the drugs and   dosage; if so, what expert group: if not, why not. 

