---
title: "Possible drownings highlight dangers of illegal travel."
date: "2000-12-22"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211219959
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UK636%22
---

  M e! d i a 

  I e a s e 

  The Hon Philip Ruddock MP F’arllament House, Canberra ACT 2600 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Telephone: (02) 6277 7860 Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation Facsimile: (02) 6273 4 144   IPOSSIBLE DROWNINGS HIGHLIGHT DANlGE:RS OF ILLEGAL TRAVEL 

  The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. Philip Ruddock, said this   afternoon that the apparent drowning of at least three illegal boat arrivals off the   coasi: of north-western Australia was an unnecessary tragedy and of great regret. 

  A boat, originally believed to be carrying about 40 pemople, was detected yesterday al:   Lagrange Island in Admiralty Gulf off the north Kimberley coast. 

  Three of the people are believed to have drowned having attempted to swim from   Lagrange Island to other islands nearby. A Coastwatch aircraft and a Customs   vessel are s(earching nearby waters for the missing people. 

  “This) is another tragic reminder of the dangers,” Mr Ruddock said. “The peoplle   smugglers vvho organise these clandestine trips don’t care if their passengers don’t   survive the trip. The Indonesian crews are also expendable once the organisers   haven received their money. 

  “Last March we estimated that about one-third of boats attempting to bring people   illegally to Ashmore Islands did not arrive.” 

  Mr F:uddock said he was particularly disappointed that members of the Australian   community ‘were endangering the lives of their relatives by encouraging and   assisting them to come to Australia illegally. 

  “These are treacherous waters and some of the boats are not seaworthy. Given the   dangers, I find it very difficult to comprehend that Australians would willingly break   the law to help their relatives - often young children - embark on such a   dangerous and ill-advised journey. 

  “Nevertheless it has become obvious that relatives in Australia know the route, the   boa,t, the date and time of departure from Indonesia and the estimated time of arrival   at Ashmore Islands or other destinations. 

  “They are knowingly taking part in illegal operations, breaking Australian law and   putting their relatives at risk. 

  “My department will be investigating the extent of their complicity in the illegal   arrivals. They should be in no doubt that they are breaking the law.” 

  There is believed to be at least one boat still overdue from Indonesia. 

  Mr Rudclock said the Australian Government had been working hard to tell would-be   unauthorised arrivals of the dangers of travelling illegally to Australia. 

  1737 

  “I will be travelling to countries in the Middle East in Jianuary to have discussions on 

  how ‘to culrb the global problem of people smuggling and illegal immigration.” 

  22 December 2000 

  Mediia contact: Paris Kosta kos 0409 042 3’70 

