---
title: "No need for freeze on off-shore refugee program."
date: "2000-02-25"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211480564
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JTW06%22
---

  | February 2000 | Media Releases

 Immigration News

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Senator for Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration

 25/2/00

 No need for freeze on off-shore refugee program

 The Australian Democrats have condemned the Immigration Minister’s decision to freeze the off shore refugee program as a response to a rise in the number of refugee applications on shore.

 "If anything, this will increase the number of unauthorised arrivals," said Senator Bartlett, the Australian Democrats spokesperson on immigration.

 "A few thousand refugees, who originally entered illegally, is a drop in the ocean in the context of the immigration program as a whole, the population of Australia and the number of refugees being accepted by other developed countries.

 "Minister Ruddock is allowing the rise in boat people to be portrayed as a crisis, which requires an extreme response," said Senator Bartlett.

 "If the Minister felt the need to respond he should have simply expanded the refugee program by a few thousand rather than pitted refugees against refugees.

 "Freezing the off shore program will just encourage asylum seekers to try and enter illegally. It will increase rather than decrease the numbers of boat people coming to Australia. This measure will prevent genuine refugees coming to Australia legally and whip up hostility to those who apply on shore," said Senator Bartlett.

 "Minister Ruddock has always made a big deal about the difference between on shore and off shore refugees but the United Nations definition does not differentiate.

 "For some asylum seekers it is impossible to apply to Australia for refugee status from overseas.

 "For some refugees, such as those from Iraq where there is no Australian embassy, it is extremely difficult and dangerous to apply through legal channels.

 "Other developed countries such as Canada with 25 million people accepts many more refugees. Where Australia allocates only 2000 places a year for on shore asylum seekers, Canada has up to 15,000.

 "We have to shoulder our responsibility in the global community. The numbers are not high when one considers the millions of refugees in transit around the world," said Senator Bartlett.

 "The Minister is already punishing refugees who originally entered Australia unauthorised. They receive temporary three year visas rather than permanent haven and are denied access to the family reunion program.

 Senator Bartlett said, "There has been an over reaction to the increased numbers of boat people in the last year. The numbers go up and down as a result of world events, not Australia’s immigration policy."

