---
title: "Social justice and intrinsic evil: speech to St Ignatius College, Riverview.\n"
date: "2000-02-24"
creators:
  - "Kirby, Michael"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Celibacy"
  - "Catholic Church"
  - "Social justice"
  - "Prejudice"
  - "Homosexuality"
  - "Stereotypes"
  - "Aborigines"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211480505
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2HD66%22
---

 ST IGNATIUS COLLEGE

 RIVERVIEW, SYDNEY

 THURSDAY 24 FEBRUARY 2000

 SOCIAL JUSTICE AND "INTRINSIC EVIL"

 The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG *

 SOCIAL JUSTICE 

 This  famous  School  has  produced  many  of  the  leaders  of

 Australia  and  many  others  who  have  gone  on  to  honourable  and

 unsung  work  for  their  fellow  citizens.  Some  of  the  old  boys -  like

 Justice  R  P  Meagher  -  have  become  noteworthy  because  they

 speak  bluntly  and  tell  the  truth  as  they  see  it.  That  is  exactly  what  I

 want to do today.

 I attended Fort  Street  High  School,  the  oldest  public  school  in

 Australia.  Last  year  it  celebrated  its  150th  year.  It  is  also  a  famous

 School.  However,  because  of  the  river  and  other  things  that  divided

 

 *  Justice of the High Court of Australia.

 2.

 us, I grew up knowing little of this School, its masters and pupils. As

 an  Anglican,  attending  public  schools,  I  did  not  really  get  to  know

 Roman  Catholics.  In  fact  I  knew  very  few  until  I  reached  Sydney

 University.  As  it  happens,  one  of  the  first  people  I  knew,  and

 befriended  at  Sydney  University  in1956,  was  Murray  Gleeson.  He

 had attended St Joseph's College, not far from here. He had already

 shown  great  talent  as  a  debater.  That  talent  was  to  take  him  to  the

 top  of  the  legal  profession.  He  is  now  the  Chief  Justice  of  Australia.

 We  sit  together  on  the  highest  court  in  our  country.  We  are  seven

 judges who decide the biggest and most difficult legal cases. Cases

 about  the  Constitution.  Cases  about  criminal  trials.  Cases  involving

 huge sums of money and legal questions important for social justice

 in  Australia.  Perhaps  a  future  Chief  Justice  of  our  much  blessed

 country is in this School today.

 Most  of  you  will  know  of  the  decision  of  the  High  Court  in  the

 Mabo case 1 . That was a decision of the High Court which upheld the

 right of Aboriginal Australians to claim, in certain circumstances, title

 over  their  traditional  lands.  The  leading  judgment  in  that  case  was

 written  by  Chief  Justice  Gleeson's  predecessor -  Sir  Gerard

 Brennan.  He  also  is  a  leading  Catholic  layman.  His  son,  Father

 Frank  Brennan,  is  a  leader  of  the  Jesuit  Order  in  Australia.  It  would

 

 1  Mabo v Queensland [No2] (1992) 175 CLR 1.

 3.

 be hard to deny that the notions of social justice which Chief Justice

 Brennan  imbibed  in  his  upbringing  as  a  Catholic  boy  in  Queensland

 did  not  influence,  perhaps  subconsciously,  his  deep  concern  about

 social  justice  for  Aboriginal  Australians.  The  same  might  be  said

 about  our  Governor-General,  Sir  William  Deane.  Before  he  became

 Governor-General,  he  was  also  a  judge  of  the  High  Court.  In  fact,  I

 took  his  place.  I  now  sit  in  the  room  in  the  Court  in  Canberra  which

 he once occupied.

 Compassion  and  concern  for  the  advancement  and  true

 equality  of  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islanders  in  Australia  is  a

 mark of a civilised citizen. In the past, they were often killed, herded

 into shanty towns, condemned to poor education, health deficits and

 a denial of their most basic civic rights. It is a subject of praise to see

 the  enduring  concern  which  the  Catholic  Church  in  Australia  has

 taken, for a very long time, for indigenous people. For refugees such

 as  those  who  came  here  from  East  Timor  before  the  recent  change

 there.  For  the  unemployed,  alcoholics  and  the  down-and-outs.  For

 the  sick  and  dying  in  hospitals  and  hospices,  including  those  living

 with HIV and AIDS. It is a wonderful thing to learn from the example

 of  Jesus  how  we  should  understand  the  disadvantaged  in  our  midst

 and  work  in  every  way  that  we  can  for  their  basic  human  rights.

 Universal  human  rights  represent  the  moral  dimension  of  the  world

 today.  In  the  midst  of  politics  they  introduce  ethical  principles

 ordinarily consistent with those taught by the world's great religions.

 4.

 You  have  established  the  "Hot  Potato"  Club  at  this  School  to

 explore  controversial  topics.  I  praise  you  for  doing  this.  Patting

 ourselves  on  the  back  and  saying  how  good  we  are  leads  to

 complacency  and  indifference  to  others  in  need.  Those  of  us  who

 enjoy  the  privileges  of  an  outstanding  education,  have  a  moral  duty

 to  be  concerned  with  the  disadvantaged,  with  minorities  who  suffer

 unjustifiable discrimination and with the human rights of brothers and

 sisters everywhere in the world.

 Through  a  series  of  chances,  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of

 seeing the challenges of human rights close at hand:

 • I  have  worked  for  the  United  Nations  Secretary-General  in

 Cambodia.

 • I have served on the Global Commission on AIDS.

 • I  have  contributed  in  UNDP  to  the  movement  towards

 democracy  in  Malawi  and  Lesotho  and  to  the  judiciary  in

 Solomon Islands.

 • I took part in a UN Mission to South Africa concerned with that

 country's labour laws.

 • Now  I  am  working  for  UNESCO  on  the  ethical  issues  of  the

 Human  Genome  Project  -  the  largest  scientific  enterprise  in

 history.

 5.

 All  of  these  were,  and  are,  issues  that  concern  social  justice.

 But  I  want  to  speak  today  about  other  issues  of  social  justice  and

 human  rights  that  are  now  firmly  placed  on  the  agenda  of  the

 international  community.  Some  of  them  concern  topics  about  which

 the  Christian  churches  have  occasionally  been  uncomfortable  and

 even  backward  -  in  ways  that  I  believe  are  inconsistent  with  the

 example that Jesus teaches. I refer to:

 • The  role  of  women  in  society  -  including  in  the  churches  -  as

 full human beings and not simply handmaidens of men and of

 their institutions and power  2 .

 • The  predicament  of  drug-dependant  and  drug-using  persons

 who are currently treated for the most part as criminals when,

 in  many  cases,  their  problem  of  addiction  should  call  forth  a

 compassionate  and  helping  response.  Not  a  response  that

 crosses  to  the  other  side  of  the  road  and  leaves  the  drug

 dependant  on  their  own,  exposed  to  criminal  prosecution  and

 potentially exposed to the risks of HIV infection.

 

 2  H  Charlesworth,  "The  Challenges  of  Human  Rights  Law  for  Religious  Traditions"  in  M  W  Janis  and  C  Evans  (eds)  Religion  and International Law (1999), 401.

 6.

 • And  the  position  of  gays  and  lesbians,  bisexual  and

 transgender people who live in our midst but are told that they

 must  be  ashamed  of  themselves  and  that  they  must  never

 reveal this aspect of their lives. "Don't ask. Don't tell" is not just

 a  rule  for  the  United  States  military.  It  is  a  rule  which  many

 societies, and many religions, impose on people who are gay.

 "INTRINSIC EVIL" 

 When I was asked to speak to this School, I nominated as my

 topic  homophobia.  I  was  told  that  if  I  broadened  my  theme,  I  would

 be  welcome.  I  gladly  did  this  but  warned  that  the  main  thing  that  I

 wanted to speak about was homophobia. I was still invited; so now I

 am here. When I was at Fort Street in the 1950s no one spoke about

 homosexuality.  In  fact  there  was  very  little  talk  at  school  about  sex

 generally.  Sometimes  there  was  schoolboy  derision  of  certain

 colleagues  as  "poofters".  But  for  the  most  part  it  was  a  subject  well

 and truly locked up in the closet.

 I  remember  this  because  it  was  at  high  school  that  I

 discovered  that  I  was  gay.  I  also  discovered  that  my  church,  my

 school  friends  and  my  society  expected  me  to  be  thoroughly

 ashamed  of  myself.  I  was  supposed  to  keep  totally  silent  and  hide

 my feelings. There was no one, absolutely no one, that I could talk to

 about  them.  If  I  showed  them  or  tried  to  respond  to  them,  I  ran  the

 risk  of  being  caught  by  police  and  locked  up  in  gaol.  I  never  really

 accepted these attitudes. But I went along with them, as most people

 7.

 did  in  those  days.  It  was  a  lonely  time  of  denial  and  secrecy - even

 from my family.

 I have come to tell you this today for a number of reasons:

 • To  shatter,  if  I  can,  the  stereotype  that  you  may  still  have

 about  homosexuals.  Gays  and  lesbians  exist  in  every  walk  of

 life.  They  are  no  better  and  no  worse  than  other  people.  They

 have  much  the  same  problems  and  joys  and  worries  and

 hopes  as  heterosexual  people  have.  Many  of  them  still  keep

 their  sexuality  totally  secret.  That  is  their  privilege.  But  I

 believe that I have a duty to attempt to shatter the stereotypes

 and to bring home the message that gays are everywhere and

 are entitled to respect for their basic human rights.

 • I  also  want  to  give  you  this  message  because  I  wish  that

 someone had spoken in this way at my School fifty years ago.

 As  you  grow  up,  you  will  meet  people  who  are  homosexual.

 They  may  be  footballers,  musicians,  truck  drivers  or  judges.

 You  should  refuse  to  go  along  with  the  herd  mentality  that

 calls  them  "poofters",  "queers',  "faggots"  or  other  words  of

 hate.  You  should  reject  "poofter  basing",  as  the  conduct  of

 cowards.  These  are  the  attitudes  that,  in  earlier  centuries,  led

 to the burning of heretics, the Holocaust against the Jews, and

 the  genocide  in  Cambodia  and  East  Timor.  Such  wicked

 conduct  is  only  stopped  when  ordinary  people  reject  the

 philosophy  of  "don't  ask,  don't  tell"  and  accept  their  fellow

 8.

 human beings in all of their diversity. When a Thomas More or

 Martin Luther stand up for the principles they believe in. When

 a  Dietrich  Bonhoeffer,  a  Christian  Minister,  acts  in  defence  of

 the Jews and is murdered by Hitler. When a Rosa Parkes sits

 defiantly  in  the  front  of  the  bus  in  the  American  Deep  South

 amongst  the  white  people  or  a  Martin  Luther  King  proclaims

 his  dream  of  racial  equality.  Going  along  with  oppression  can

 often  be  comfortable,  friendly  and  safe.  But  ultimately  the

 Christian  example  is,  I  believe,  to  stand  up  for  the  truth.  It  is

 the truth that will make us free.

 Sometimes it takes the Christian churches a long while to see

 the  error  of  their  ways.  Ultimately  they  tend  to  get  it  right.  Martin

 Luther's  call  for  the  use  of  modern  languages  in  the  place  of  Latin

 and  sharing  the  cup  of  the  Lord  with  the  people  caused  a  terrible

 fuss  when  he  nailed  his  demands  on  the  Church  door  in  Germany.

 The  Easter  Prayer  about  the  "perfidious  Jews"  probably  reinforced

 attitudes of anti-Semitism over the centuries until it was abolished in

 my  lifetime.  Galileo  narrowly  escaped  burning  as  a  heretic  for

 teaching that the universe did not circle around the earth. The recent

 television  programme  on  the  universe  demonstrates  the  tiny

 insignificance of our planet, indeed of our sun, indeed of our galaxy,

 in the enormity of space.

 I  want  to  close  by  suggesting  another  matter  upon  which,  in

 due course, the churches will recognise the error of their ways. Last

 May  two  fine  Catholics,  Sister  Jeannine  Gramick  and  Father  Robert

 9.

 Nugent,  were  prohibited  from  continuing  their  ministry  to  a  gay  and

 lesbian  congregation  in  Maryland  in  the  United  States  of  America.

 They had done so for twenty years. They had acted with compassion

 and  kindness.  They  had  brought  the  Christian  message  to  a

 community,  many  of  whose  members  in  the  1980s  discovered  that

 they  were  suffering  from  HIV.  These  two  religious  people  were  told

 by  their  Bishop  that  they  must  cease  their  ministry  because  they

 were  not  teaching  the  authentic  doctrine  of  the  Church.  They  were

 not  instructing  their  congregation  about  what  was  described  as  the

 "intrinsic evil of homosexuality" 3 .

 "Intrinsic  evil"  is  a  very  serious  verdict.  It  goes  beyond

 "unfortunate"  or  "undesirable"  or  "misguided".  It  is  the  kind  of

 language  that  I  believe  inflames  hatred  by  outsiders  and  self-doubt

 and loathing by those involved. I for one deny that, as a gay man in

 Australia today, I am "intrinsically evil". Boringly enough, I think I am

 quite  a  good  man  -  kind  to  my  loved  ones,  to  other  human  beings

 and  to  animals.  I  have  tried  in  my  life  to  reach  out  to  the  needs  of

 others,  to  act  justly  towards  them  and,  where  I  can,  to  improve  their

 

 3  Notification  of  the  Congregation  for  the  Doctrine  of  the  Faith  concerning  Special  Representative  for  the  Secretary-General  of the  United  Nations  for  Human  Rights  in  Cambodia  Jeannine

 Gramick  SSND  and  Fr  Robert  Nugent  SDS,  May  31,  199  in Inside the Vatican, August-September 1999, 32.

 10.

 lot. I respect the human rights of others. I do not think it is too much

 to expect that others will respect my human dignity.

 To  demand  a  life  of  celibacy  of  the  millions  of  homosexual

 people  in  this  world  -  as  some  churches  do  -  is  not  only  totally

 unrealistic.  It  is  completely  unreasonable.  Indeed,  it  is  seriously

 unnatural.  It  amounts  to  an  important  rejection  of  an  aspect  of

 personhood  which  is  impossible  and  wrong  to  demand  of  most

 human beings. In my experience, few if any gay and lesbian people

 choose  their  sexuality.  It  is  like  your  gender,  your  skin  colour  or

 being  left-handed.  A  bit  like  kicking  with  the  left  foot  -  although  you

 can  eventually  choose  your  religion.  From  the  earliest  days  of

 puberty,  you  just  know  that  is  how  you  are.  And  if  that  is  how  you

 are, that is how God meant you to be.

 In the enormity of the universe - with the planets and the suns

 and the galaxies this tiny variation in a proportion of human beings, it

 is  no  big  deal.  With  the  wonderful  intelligence  that  we  were  given  at

 our  birth  and  with  the  lesson  of  love  and  reconciliation  that  we  are

 taught by our religion, we have, I believe, a duty to reject the notion

 that  homosexuals  are  "intrinsically  evil".  They  are  not.  Those  who

 say  that  they  are  carry  a  heavy  moral  responsibility  for  the  hate

 crimes,  the  bashings,  the  denigration,  the  family  rejections,  the

 11.

 despairing exposure to HIV 4  and the lonely denial that they inflict on

 others of God's family.

 OUR GUIDES 

 As  Australians  we  should  all  be  concerned  with  social  justice.

 Our  concern  should  reach  out  to  Aboriginals  and  other  indigenous

 people  in  our  country.  It  should  embrace  the  unemployed,  the

 alcoholics  and  refugees.  It  should  extend  to  women  denied  true

 equality  and  to  drug-dependent  people  who  may  be  sick,  not

 criminal.  But  it  should  also  include  people  who  are  put  down  on  the

 basis of their sexuality.

 The journey of human rights and social justice is a passage of

 enlightenment. We have come a long way; but we still have far to go.

 Do not believe that gays are "intrinsically evil". They are everywhere.

 Like me, they have jobs, long term partners, families, mortgages and

 domestic  pets.  Not  a  few  of  them  are  also  Christians  who  believe

 that the love of the Lord will ultimately get rid of talk of "intrinsic evil"

 and  replace  it  by  mutual  understanding,  acceptance  and  respect.  In

 the  meantime,  amongst  gays  and  straights,  there  is  a  need  to  stand

 

 4  D  W  Seal  and  ors,  "HIV  prevention  with  young  men  who  have  sex  with  men:  What  young  men  themselves  say  is  needed" (2000) 12 Aids Care, #1, 5.

 12.

 up  bravely  on  these  issues  and  to  confront  hatred  and  error.   As

 Thomas  More  did.  As  Dietrich  Bonhoeffer  did.  As  Rosa  Parkes  did.

 As  Martin  Luther  King  did.  They  should  be  the  patrons  of  your  Hot

 Potato Club.

 So what is our duty? It is expressed in the favourite prayer of

 His  Holiness,  the  Dalai  Lama.  It  could  as  easily  be  a  Christian

 prayer  5 :

 "For as long as space endures  And for as long as living beings remain, Until then may I too abide To dispel the misery of the world."

 

 5  The  Dalai  Lama,  Prayers  for  a  Thousand  Years  ed  E Roberts  and E Amidos (1999).

 ST IGNATIUS COLLEGE

 RIVERVIEW, SYDNEY

 THURSDAY 24 FEBRUARY 2000

 SOCIAL JUSTICE AND INTRINSIC EVIL

 The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG

