---
title: "Refugee activity tests without English language training as a sad joke says Labor."
date: "2000-05-16"
creators:
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211483009
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q1K16%22
---

 Refugee Activity Tests Without English Language Training A Sad Joke Says Labor Con Sciacca - Shadow Minister for Immigration

 Media Statement - 16 May 2000

 Federal Labor has today slammed a proposal by the Minister for Immigration, announced on Budget night, to apply mutual obligation requirements to genuine refugees on temporary visas without first providing them with basic English language training.

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Con Sciacca said that it was ridiculous to apply employment activity testing to refugees without first teaching them how to speak English.

 "I am continually amazed by Minister Ruddock's hare-brained schemes - first he wants to send illegal immigrants to pick fruit for free and steal Australian jobs - then he wants refugees to pay back their own detention costs (something we don't even require of our hardened criminals). Now he wants refugees to front up to potential employers and fill out application forms or attend job interviews without being able to speak English," Mr Sciacca said.

 Under guidelines set by Centrelink, activity tests for the unemployed may include outlining on a Newstart Allowance form up to eight attempts to find a job each week.

 "The Minister says that these new measures are expected to increase the integration of refugees into the workforce. I would like to see the Minister and some of his bureaucrats look for a job in say, Spain without being able to speak Spanish.

 "The ability to speak English is the cornerstone of anyone's ability to successfully integrate into the broader society and make a productive and lasting contribution to Australia's workforce.

 "To deny people such a basic right is akin to establishing an underclass of Australian citizens who have to live by their wits and possibly rely on the black economy or crime for their survival," Mr Sciacca said.

 Refugees on temporary visas form part of Australia's humanitarian program which cater for up to 12,000 displaced people annually.

 "In the end, these people have been accepted as genuine refugees under United Nations guidelines, with the almost certain right to permanent residency after three years. Either we accept them into society and attempt to give them the best start possible so that they can become worthwhile Australians or alternatively we shut our door to them and our international obligations.

 "It is time for the Minister to stop walking both sides of the street and make some hard decisions. I call on the Minister to immediately provide English language training and basic humanitarian assistance for these refugees so that they do not become a lasting burden on the Australian taxpayer," Mr Sciacca said.

