---
title: "Minister to launch population report during Canberra consultations."
date: "2000-12-12"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211219702
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UJ236%22
---

  

 News Room

 Minister to Launch Population Report during Canberra Consultations MPS 130/2000

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, will use the ACT round of his annual national consultations on the Government's migration and humanitarian programs on Wednesday to launch the 2000 edition of Population Flows: Immigration Aspects .

 Population Flows is an annual report that looks at population, permanent migration and temporary movements into and out of Australia. It also provides detailed statistical analysis essential to understanding the impacts of Australia's migration and humanitarian programs.

 "Debate on population and immigration issues should be based on informed discussion, not on myths and misconceptions that can spread through the community," Mr Ruddock said.

 "A publication, such as Population Flows, combined with my national consultations provides a solid base for this."

 As part of the consultation program, Mr Ruddock will also hold a public meeting to give Canberrans the opportunity to have their say on the migrant intake for the coming financial year, and discuss the migration trends affecting their region.

 During 1999-2000, 809 overseas settlers arrived in the ACT with skilled migrants accounting for nearly 35 per cent of the total.

 New Zealand continues to be the number one source of arrivals - with 124 people settling in the Canberra region. Chinese settlers made up the second largest group of arrivals with 77.

 "The public meetings are part of the Government's undertaking to administer Australia's immigration program in an open and accountable manner," Mr Ruddock said.

 "They provide an ideal forum for all Australians to contribute their ideas and comments and gives the Government community views on issues regarding refugee resettlement and other humanitarian and general migration issues.

 The consultations, which started in August, include face-to-face and public meetings in capital cities and major regional centres in all states and territories.

 12 December 2000 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

