---
title: "Minister seeks a global approach to people smuggling."
date: "2000-03-16"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211481106
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/V4316%22
---

  

 Philip Ruddock MP    Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs    Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

 Minister Seeks a Global Approach

 to People Smuggling  

 MPS 029/2000 

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, leaves today on a six-nation European visit to help strengthen the global approach to people smuggling and the illegal movement of people.

 "The illegal movement of people is a problem threatening to overwhelm many countries, as I saw during my recent trip to the Middle East," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Australia is just one of many countries suffering the social and economic cost of dealing with large numbers of people entering our borders illegally, but we are determined to promote a universal dialogue on this issue.

 "There are an estimated 21 and a half million refugees and people of concern in the world and millions more who are on the move illegally, for economic reasons.

 "Australia supports a universal approach to ease the strain on countries like Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, Syria and Jordan.

 "Even the relatively small number of people who enter Australia illegally have cost Australian taxpayers $100 million in the past year.

 "I will be visiting England, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, The Netherlands and Italy, to discuss a global approach to what is a global problem.

 "Several of these countries are also struggling to deal with people entering their borders illegally. Unless we strengthen our efforts to adopt a universal approach, this is a problem which will escalate," Mr Ruddock said.

 Mr Ruddock will seek agreement for greater cooperation on using information to disrupt trafficking routes and prosecute people smugglers, and the development of readmission agreements as a strategy to counter forum-shopping.

 The Minister will also discuss what individual countries are doing to address

 the problems of people smuggling and the illegal movement of people.

 As well as his recent visit to the Middle East, Mr Ruddock travelled to Indonesia in January and to China in October last year to discuss cooperation on the illegal movement of people.

 The Attorney General, Daryl Williams will act as Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs while Mr Ruddock is overseas.

 16 March 2000 Media Contact: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715

  

