---
title: "Minister in Hobart for consultations on migration."
date: "2000-11-17"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211508101
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2EV26%22
---

  

 News Room

 Minister in Hobart for Consultations on Migration MPS 115/2000

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock is in Hobart today (Friday) as part of his annual national consultations on the Government's migration and humanitarian programs.

 Mr Ruddock said the consultations, which includes a public meeting tonight, would give people from Tasmania the opportunity to have their say on the migrant intake for the coming financial year.

 During 1999-2000, 444 overseas settlers arrived in Tasmania. Family arrivals made up 33.8 per cent of this number and were the largest category.

 New Zealand continues to be the number one source of arrivals - with 117 people settling in Tasmania. Settlers from Asia accounted for 24.8 per cent of arrivals.

 "The public meetings are part of the Government's undertaking to administer Australia's immigration program in an open and accountable manner," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The public meetings and other consultations are also a chance to discuss Australia's population trends and the role immigration has to play.

 "They provide an ideal forum for all Australians to contribute their ideas and comments and gives the Government community views on issues regarding refugee resettlement and other humanitarian and general migration issues.

 "During the consultation process I will be meeting more than 2000 individuals and representatives from groups including State, Territory and local

 governments, business and industry groups, unions, environmental bodies, welfare organisations, church groups and representatives of Australia's migrant communities."

 Mr Ruddock said the consultations were also an opportunity for people to discuss the recent releases of Temporary Protection Visa-holders and the influx of illegal boat arrivals to Australia.

 The consultations, which started in August, include face-to-face and public meetings in capital cities and major regional centres in all states and territories.

 17 November 2000 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

