---
title: "Building new relationships across the Arafura sea: speech to a forum on Australia and East Timor."
date: "2000-05-05"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211482460
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DTF16%22
---

  . 

  LAURIE BRERETON MP 

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

  58100 5 May 2000 

  BIJILDING NEW RELATIONSHIPS ACROSS THE ARAFURA SEA 

  Attached is the text of a speech by the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie   Brereton, to a forum on Australia and East Timor, Main Committee Room, Parliament   House, Canberra, 5 May 2000. 

  Contact: Philip Dorling 02 6277 4717 or 0416 203 058 

  BUILDING NEW RELATIONSHIPS ACROSS THE 

  ARAFURA SEA 

  SPIEECH TO A FORUM ON AUSTRALIA AND EAST TIMOR 

  THE HON LAURIE BRERETON MP 

  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

  MAIN COMMITTEE ROOM 

  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

  CANBERRA 

  3 P.M., FRIDAY, 5 MAY 2000 

  CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

  It is a pleasure to speak to this forum on Australia and East Timor. 

  My focus is on Australia’s new neighbourhood -- on future relations 

  between Australia, East Timor and Indonesia. Here I want to deal 

  with the transformation resulting from East Timor’s rapid path to full 

  independence and Indonesia’s democratic transition. My primary 

  purpose is to highlight the opportunities and challenges we face in 

  building new relationships between our countries around the Arafura 

  Sea. 

  As you will be aware, Kim Beazley and myself have just returned 

  from visiting Indonesia. In Jakarta we held discussions with 

  President Abdurrahman Wahid, Vice President Megawati 

  Soekarnoputri, and senior Ministers including Foreign Minister Ali 

  Shihab, Defence Minister Juwono Sudarsono and Attorney General, 

  Marzuki Darusman. Our’s was a very positive and productive visit. 

  At each meeting we sensed a real desire on the part of our 

  interlocutors to look to the future and put relations between our 

  countries on a new and constructive basis. 

  In our private discussions and on every public occasion, we 

  empha:sised the need for Australia to seize what is an historic 

  opportunity to build a new relationship with a new and democratic 

  Indoneisia. The task ahead is not the rebuilding of the old 

  relatiortship. It is about a new beginning. As Kim Beazley put it in his 

  Jakarta. speech, we have the opportunity to put our bilateral 

  relatioriship on a new level, to reframe it in terms of neighbourliness, 

  2 

  of nations living side by side -- of “neighbours in geography and 

  neighbours in democracy.” 

  No orie should underestimate the significance of Indonesia’s 

  democratic transition. It is still a work in progress as regional conflicts 

  and tensions demonstrate and great challenges are still to be faced. 

  That said the emerging democracy is an achievement Indonesia’s 

  friends in Australia welcome and applaud. This transition’s 

  significance is also clearly understood and appreciated by East 

  Timor’s; leaders who have moved quickly to develop harmonious and 

  forwarcl-looking relations with President Wahid. 

  For Australia’s part, we must do everything possible to support 

  continued economic recovery, respect for human rights and 

  democlratic freedoms and the strengthening of Indonesia’s rule of law. 

  We must also further assist Indonesia in dealing with humanitarian 

  crises such as that in Maluku. We must do so because these things 

  are intrinsically important. And we must do so because Indonesia’s 

  democratic transition opens the opportunity to transform the character 

  and basis of our bilateral relationship. In Kim Beazley’s words earlier 

  this welek, “It provides the platform for a deeper and more rewarding 

  understanding of each other. It creates the potential to take us well 

  beyoncl the practical dimensions of our relationship, into a new 

  relationship of democracies cooperating for mutual good.” 

  The process of building a new relationship with the new Indonesia will 

  not be without its difficulties. No international relationship is all 

  3 

  smootPi sailing. Democratic politics will indeed already has 

  introduced new complexities into the relationship. The leadership of 

  both countries must resist any temptation to play to domestic galleries 

  at the expense of working to enhance our relations. Real political 

  leadership from both sides will be vital for us to move forward. 

  The other element driving the transformation of Australia’s 

  neighblourhood is East Timor’s rapid movement towards full 

  independence. Speaking late last month, UNTAET Administrator 

  Sergio de Mello foreshadowed that general elections are likely to be 

  held in the second half of next year. Earlier this week Jose Ramos 

  Horta announced that the National Council of Timorese Resistance -- 

  CNRT -- has proposed the creation of a joint commission with 

  UNTAEIT to prepare for the holding of a constitutional conference. 

  The precise timing of the final move to independence is uncertain and 

  requires progress in forming constitutional and political institutions, 

  but it is not far away. Talk of a lengthy UN transitional administration, 

  has been replaced by what is likely to be a contracted timeframe of 

  eighteen months to two years. 

  Driven by East Timorese expectations and the realities of 

  international support for the UN administration, the rapid movement 

  toward full independence brings with it enormous challenges. Very 

  few countries have suffered the level of destruction experienced by 

  East Timor last September with virtually all of its infrastructure 

  systematically and comprehensively destroyed. Seven months on 

  the internal security situation is vastly improved and the emergency 

  4 

  phases of the UN’s operations are largely over. But that still leaves a 

  very great number of East Timorese living in the most dire of 

  circumstances. 80 per cent unemployment and great social 

  disparities between the UN presence and the citizens of East Timor 

  have generated unrest and disturbances. 120,000 East Timorese 

  remain in refugee camps in West Timor. The task of reconstruction is 

  enormous. Foreign investment is urgently required. And on top of all 

  this, there is the challenge of building the democratic institutions 

  required to serve an independent state, and do so within two years at 

  most. 

  Given 1:hese daunting challenges it’s no surprise to see a growing 

  number of observers expressing disquiet about East Timor’s future. 

  At the end of his East Timor visit late last month, Portuguese Prime 

  Minister Antonio Guterres expressed “deep concern”, saying: 

  “l’he reconstruction of East Timor will not be easy. The 

  problem is not only the physical destruction, which is 

  impressive, more than I imagined, but the destruction of an 

  elconomy and the breakdown of a society. No experience exists 

  in rebuilding a society which has been destroyed in this manner 

  and with such a fragile economic and educational base. This is 

  why there is an enormous job to do.” 

  As we know, there has also been criticism of UNTAET’s performance 

  and the pace of reconstruction is said to be much too slow. I don’t 

  propose to make any comment on this issue today. It is nearly five 

  5 

  months since I last visited and before doing so, I think it preferable to 

  update my first hand impressions of the situation on the ground when 

  I next vi~sit East Timor. 

  Clearly East Timor will require a very large measure of international 

  assistance for quite some time to come. And Australia must be very 

  generous. A leaked Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade briefing 

  paper on next week’s federal budget indicates planning for the 

  provision of $150 million in assistance over four years, with $40 

  million allocated for 2000-2001. This level of aid is claimed to be 

  consistent with East Timor’s needs and absorptive capacity, but it 

  falls well short of the Australian Council for Overseas Aid’s 

  recommendation that approximately $50 million be allocated for 

  emergeince assistance, reconstruction and civil administration this 

  coming financial year. We will have to see what next Tuesday’s 

  budget brings, but I suspect Australia will need to provide more 

  humanitarian and development assistance than the government 

  presenl:ly contemplates. 

  The total volume of assistance is obviously important. At the same 

  time, we must not neglect the value of people-to-people ties. There is 

  an enormous reserviour of goodwill in Australia towards East Timor. 

  We need to harness and organise this commitment of thousands of 

  Australiians in all walks of life. Foreign policy makers increasingly 

  emphasise the importance of a “whole of government” approach to 

  internaI:ional issues. What we need here is a sustained and well- 

  organised whole of society approach. 

  Australian NGOs are making vital contributions to reconstruction and 

  development. Australian lawyers are committed to help develop East 

  Timor’s legal system. Australia’s local government is committed to 

  help b#uild local administrative structures and community-level 

  organisations. We need to think strategically about all these diverse 

  activities. We need to ensure that they bring the maximum possible 

  benefit and do not peter out over time. What we need is a sustained 

  community-to-community partnership with the East Timorese people. 

  And all along we must be constantly mindful and respectful of East 

  Timor’s hard won sovereignty. Australia can help, but at every step 

  East Timor’s leaders and people must be completely involved in all 

  decision-making. After all East Timor must determine its own future. 

  That is what self-determination is all about. 

  Succesis of course is not guaranteed. It won’t come by accident. But 

  we cannot contemplate failure. In partnership with East Timor’s 

  leadership and people, Australia is duty bound to do all we can to 

  ensure East Timor enjoys a stable and fully independent future. 

  Indonesia too has much interest in East Timor’s success. President 

  Wahid’s meetings with Xanana Gusmao have resonated 

  internationally as a genuine attempt to achieve reconciliation and 

  have done much to boost Indonesia’s international standing. All three 

  of our countries must work together to build an enduring partnership. 

  7 

  This point leads me to the primary focus of my remarks. Australia is 

  facing *the emergence of a new neigbourhood. We need to be 

  thinking ahead about building new and harmonious relationships with 

  our neighbours across the Arafura Sea. We need to think ahead 

  about the best diplomatic architecture to manage a new triangular set 

  of relationships involving Jakarta, Canberra and Dili. 

  The independent East Timor will make its own decisions about 

  international priorities. It will become the newest member of the 

  United Nations and Jose Ramos Horta has expressed strong interest 

  in his country joining the South Pacific Forum. Australia should 

  strongly support East Timor’s early admission to the Forum. It’s 

  highly desirable that an East Timorese delegation attend as 

  observers at this year’s Forum meeting in Kiribati. East Timor may 

  also seek to join ASEAN. This will be a matter for East Timor and 

  ASEAN members, but for Australia’s part we should be strongly 

  suppor:ive of East Timor’s full participation in regional meetings 

  including the ASEAN Regional Security Forum. 

  Australia will also have to think carefully and sensitively about the 

  management of our relations with East Timor. We will need to deal 

  promptly with a wide range of issues and recognise that East Timor’s 

  limited administrative resources are going to be very stretched. We 

  will have to work closely to maximise the prospects for petroleum 

  project development in the Timor Gap Zone of Cooperation -- projects 

  which have the potential to make a very substantial contribution to 

  East Timor’s economic development. 

  8 

  The great disparity in size, population and resources between 

  Australia and East Timor means this will be an asymmetrical 

  relationship. But it must always be characterised by a commitment to 

  partnership and respect. 

  Much attention has been paid over recent days to the question of 

  when and where Prime Minister Howard and President Wahid may 

  meet. For Labor’s part, we say anywhere and as soon as possible. 

  We look forward to President Wahid visiting Australia as soon as he 

  can and we have urged Prime Minister Howard to travel to Indonesia 

  at the earliest opportunity. This is a vital relationship. There really 

  shouldn’t be any argument about who visits who first. 

  What has received rather less attention in the media, however, is 

  President Wahid’s suggestion that Australia, Indonesia and East 

  Timor could establish a tripartite commission or council to facilitate 

  cooperation. The considerable merit of this idea necessitates our 

  positive consideration as East Timor moves towards independence. 

  Thought might be given to the expansion of the Australia-Indonesia 

  Development Area -- AIDA -- and its meetings into a tripartite forum 

  between Australia, Indonesia and an independent East Timor. Since 

  its 199;’ establishment, AlDA’s momentum has run into the sands as 

  a consequence of Indonesia’s economic crisis. Reconstitution as a 

  tripartite body could provide a basis a revitalised AIDA with an 

  agenda. expanded beyond issues of sub-regional economic 

  9 

  cooperation to the broad management of relations between Australia, 

  Indonesia and East Timor. 

  Alternatively, recognised the desirability of starting relationships 

  afresh, it may be preferable to retain AIDA as a bilateral Australia- 

  Indonesia body and instead explore the possible establishment of a 

  new trilateral forum. With regular ministerial meetings and officials- 

  level working groups, such a commission or council could do much to 

  promote diplomatic and economic relations between Indonesia, East 

  Timor and Australia. It could facilitate the resolution of issues and 

  provide a platform to promote cooperation in areas including fisheries 

  and resource management, environmental protection, and tourism. 

  All things considered, I am inclined to favour exploration of this idea .   for a new regional council -- perhaps titled the Council of the Arafura 

  Sea. 

  Consideration should also be given to whether Papua New Guinea 

  may wish to join. PNG has substantive bilateral relationships with 

  both Australia and Indonesia and shares a common land border with 

  Indonesia. PNG too shares an obvious interest in the promotion of 

  good neighbourly relations. Its participation would help balance the 

  obvious disparity in size between Australia and Indonesia on one 

  hand and East Timor on the other. PNG may see merit as a 

  participant in such a new grouping and I would certainly encourage 

  them. 

  IO 

  Fundamentally, the establishment of a Council of the Arafura Sea 

  would be an appropriate expression of a new sense of 

  neighbourliness. Historically the Arafura Sea has been seen as 

  dividing us from our nearest neighbours. Today we should start 

  working to build a real sense of neighbourhood in which the countries 

  of the Arafura Sea recognise each other as neighbours with common 

  interests and many opportunities for cooperation. 

  The events of the past year should allow such a new beginning, not 

  only for East Timor, not only for Australia and Indonesia, but for our 

  neighbourhood as a whole. We should seize this opportunity and 

  build a new cooperation to serve all our countries. East Timor’s 

  leaders have demonstrated real statesmanship in pursuing 

  reconciliation with Indonesia. President Wahid has reciprocated. He 

  has alslo declared his desire for a new beginning in relations with 

  Australia. The ball is very much in Australia’s court. 

  Thank you. 

  -~ --- 

