---
title: "The East Timor crisis: an Indonesian view."
date: "2000-07-05"
creators:
  - "Anwar, Dewi Fortuna"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "International relations"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Timor"
  - "Attitudes"
  - "State secession"
  - "Referenda"
  - "Overseas item"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211200965
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8UT26%22
---

  18 

  The East Timor cvisis: 

  an hdonesian view   Dewi i!kmna Anwar   Associate Director, Research, Habibie Centre, Jakarta 

  I have been asked to help lead off this two-dav seminar on a lengthy title, I must say,   “The Consequences of the Crisis over East ‘Timor, Indonesia and the Rest of the   Asia Pacific Region including Australia and Yew Zealand”. I am glad to see   “including”, instead of “and Australia and New Zealand”. I have been asked to talk 

  about the situation from an Indonesian perspective and since the East Timor crisis   is most directly related to Indonesia, I do not think. it is really possible to talk about   the future without talking very briefly about the past, particularly the immediate   past. So I will divide my discussion into four parts. The first part is a brief historical 

  background regarding Indonesia and East Timor; the second part is regarding   decisions to give two options to the East Timorese; the third will be the ballot; and   the fourth the resolution of the East Timor issue and its benefits for Indonesia and   the region. 

  Brief Historical Background 

  It is important for the world to realise that, for the Indonesian public’s 

  perceptions about the situation in East Timor, Indonesia’s entry into East Timor   was a clandestine intelligence operation. It was not carried ou; as a full military   operation which would involve regular forces, and there was very little public   discussion about it. So that there was very little knowledge among Indonesians 

  about what was happening regarding East Timor, what was the purpose, and what   Indonesia w:as doing there. This was in fact characteristic of Indonesia s involvement   in East Timor from the very beginning. There was a long drawn-out war, with very   little discussion about it in Indonesia. Because of this clandestine nature of the 

  operation, not much knowledge of the whole impact of the situation was available   to the Indonesian public. The Indonesian public was largely ignorant of and   indifferent towards the East Timorese. However, East Timor remained a very   closed area for a long time. In the past decades researchers were never allowed to go   to East Timor and do work there, and it was only quite recently that East Timor was   open to the public where journalists were allowed to go and cover the situation. So   the:re were very few facts known about East Timor in any given year and this led in 

  fact to lhe following public perceptions of Indonesia’s involvement in East Timor.   As far as the Indonesian public is concerned, iirst, Indonesia’s integration with   East Timor was the outcome of the request by the group of anti-Communist East   Timorese to end an impending civil war: 

  (a) Indonesia did not invade East Timor in order to colonise it; 

  Dewi Fo;rtuna Anwar 

  19 i 

  (b) Indonesia.5 policy towards East Timor was fully supported by the non-   Communist countries, particularly the United States and Australia, as the   necessary move to prevent the emergence of a Communist enclave; 

  (c) Indonesia spent large sums of money to develop the physical infrastructure and   other facilities, such as education, in East Timor which were lagging far behind   other provinces; 

  (d) the change of policy from full support to shafting Indonesian policy in E:ast   Timor by Western countries was seen as opportunistic by most Indonesians, to   put Indonesia down politically and economically, once the Cold War and the   fight against the Communists was over. 

  So, tlhis is the general public perception in Indonesia of Indonesia’s involvement   in E:ast Timor. There was very little understanding of the real happenings in E:ast   Timor such as rampant human rights abuses bv the military. Later the E:ast   Timorese struggled against the Indonesian Gilvernment because, after all, 

  Indonesians as a whole were also labouring under a repressive regime, but the only   centre of concern for East Timor among the Indonesian Government and the public   as a whole was the Foreign Ministry which had to continue to fight for Indonesia’s   foreign policies and to try to overcome this pebble in Indonesia’s diplomatic shoe.   So, as I said, there was little understanding and little sympathy for what was   hapipening in. East Timor, and there was just this irritation with what was seen as a   flip--flop in Western Governments’ policy which in fact, as you all know, had fillly   supported Indonesia s move into East Timor during the Cold War - atier all, the   invasion of East Timor took place a few months afte:r the fall of Saigon. That is how   the Western world changed. 

  Preside:nt Habibie’s Decisions 

  Then I come to the second part. Why did President Habibie change Indonesian   policy after 24 years and give the East Timorese a ballot with two options? It seems   that the most important cause of this was the fundamental change in Indonesian   policy, a transition from an authoritarian regime to a democracy with major   emphasis on human rights. This of course has been made possible by increasing   transparency and information about past military abuses, particularly in East Timor   and Aceh and also in West Irian, when Irian Jaya, which led to a major outcry against   the milil:ary. Related to this fundamental change of course is the economic crisis,   which had made Indonesia even more dependent on the outside world, particularly   the Western world countries. Indonesia’s continuing occupation of East Timor,   which was never recognised by the international community, was a major obstacle   in improving relations with the IVest. So the combinations of fundamental change   in the Indonesian political system and Indonesia’s economic crisis made it   increasingly impossible to sustain Indonesia’s policy in East Timor. 

  Further, I think it is important to note that President Habibie himself came with   a fresh view on East Timor unhampered by the military interests and the Foreign   Ministry’s long-term policy of arguing that East Timor was no longer an 

  20 

  The East Timor crisis: an lndonesian riew 

  international issue, no longer an issue at all that we should fret about. Habibie was   able to see clearly the situation that Indonesia’s uncompromising policy on East   Timor was not sustainable either in the short term let alone medium to long term.   The East Timor issue had badly damaged Indonesia’s international image and 

  Indones,ia’s entry into East Timor in fact violated Indonesia’s own commitment to   oppose all forms of colonialism. It is a sad fact that Indonesia, which prided itself on   being a country born out of post-colonialism, as a countrv that came out of an anti- .   colonial revolution and has in fact specifically stated in its preamble to the 

  Constitution that Indonesia opposes all sorts of colonialism, that it was accuse’d of   doing exactly the same thing in East Timor. This was never really fully understood   in the past ;!4 years but as Indonesia opened up the area in East Timor and more   and more information came out and Indonesians became much more aware of   international perceptions of what Indonesia was doing in East Timor, there was a   hea.rt sesarching into what Indonesia was doing and President Habibie himself said, 

  “What are we doing in East Timor, because this is actually violating our own   commitment to our Constitution to oppose colonialism”.   Alsol, it became quite apparent that, as Indonesia was facing an economic crisis,   East Timor had no interest in the economy that benefited Indonesia and was in fact 

  a major drain on the Indonesian economy as 96 percent of its budget came from the   central government subsidy. So, if it was very rich in natural resources, it could be   argued that Indonesia from an economic point of view probably had reason to try to   cling to it. There are rich resources but the resources do not flow into the coffers of   the central government because we know that there are some private military   interests who have been able to exploit the coffee and other resources for their own 

  ends. I don’t think that it contributes much to the national economy. And as for   Habibie himself, I think he wished to make his mark by resolving the East Timor   issue once and for all as part of his plan both to strengthen his democratic 

  credentials at home and his credentials abroad.   So the combination of this led the Indonesian Government to decide first to   offer a special autonomy to East Timor as a final solution, and later on, when it was   clear that unilaterally forcing East Timorese to accept the special autonomy as a   final solution was unlikely to be accepted, there was a suggestion that was first   announced iLn a Cabinet meeting on January 26, 1999 that Indonesia would offer the   East Timorese the choice either to accept the special autonomv and remain part of   Indonesia or to reject autonomv and return to the pre-1976 Accord, which meant 

  thalt East Timor would return to a situation as a non-self-governing territory under   the administration of Portugal. 

  The B:allot 

  Now I turn to my third part of this discussion, namely the ballot and the 

  immediate consequences. The decision to hold the ballot was enthusiastically   received by the outside world and of course by the anti-integration group in East   Timor. In Indonesia, particularly, the President was under international approval on   this issue. 

  Most of the pro-Indonesian “reformasi”, the groups who claimed to   support reform, supported the President’s position. 

  Dewi Fon~nri! Anwar 

  21 

  Dissenting voices came only from a few nationalist elements, notably from   LMegawati Sukarnoputra, Chairman of the nationalist party PDI-P (Indonesian   Democratic Party for Struggle). She was wholly opposed to the President’s two   options. But her position was not considered to be credible at the time because she   argued that E:ast Timor was part of Indonesia. It was pointed out that her father (the   late President Sukarno) had not included East Timor in Indonesia. So it .was   concluded that giving the East Timorese the two options to decide their own future   was a very important move to establish Indonesia’s democratic credentials and show   that things had really changed. 

  The Imilitary officially and formally at least supported the Government s position   but covertly mainly opposed it, as later happened. When Indonesia was preparing   for the first democratic general election since 1955 - in June 1999 - the East Tirnor   case to most Indonesians was a minor question, for after all it was very far from   Jakarta with about 500,000 people whereas Indonesia was concentrating on a 

  menera election which would involve 120 million people. Indonesia had given the 3   United Nations the authority to carry out the ballot in East Timor and left it to   UNL‘CIET (the United Nations LMission in East Timor) to do so.   The result of the ballot showed a landslide victory for the anti-integration forces   which led to tragic consequences for both East Timor and Indonesia. Pro- 

  integration forces, as you know, accused the ballot of being unfair and, supported by   the military, they carried out a campaign of destruction which led to a mass flight of   refugees to West Timor. As a result, the Indonesian mililtary stood accused by the   world community of being generally responsible for committing crimes against 

  humanity. A special National Human Rights Commission was then, in the end, set   up to try these cases and to pre-empt the establishment of an international court: of   human rights. Further, the Indonesian Govern:ment faced the threat of international   sanctions and was forced to accept an international peacekeeping force under   Australian command, which was in fact politically unpalatable to most Indonesia.ns, 

  as Australia was considered to be complicit in the victory of the anti-integration   forces. While many Indonesians believed that there was no alternative to an   international peacekeepin, 0 force, and in fact President Habibie had believed there   should be an international peacekeeping force, it was political suicide for him. ‘We   saw that the problem had become greater than we first thought so the President   (rave the green light to call in an international peacekeeping force. As I have said, ,s   this was politically unpalatable to most Indonesians who were extremely .   nationalistic on this issue. 

  So the loss of East Timor, tragic violence, international condemnation and the   humiliation elf having to accept an international peacekeeping force contributed to   President Ha.bibie’s own political downfall. Despite the fact that most had supported   the President’s policy in keeping the two options (in the ballot) the aftermath of the   ballot brought nothing except recriminations against him. 

  Indonesian nationalism was aroused by the East Timor incident and Australia   became a prime target. Indonesian and Australian diplomatic relations came to a   new low and popular public sentiment was against Australia, very different from the   past because In the past usually it was only the Government and the military that 

  22 

  became angry with Australia but the public was generally indifferent to it. This time   there .was also popular public anger against Australia. The deterioration in   Australian-Indonesian relations in the aftermath of the East Timor ballot is much   more serious and will, I think, take some time to repair. The more serious casualty   is of course in the military to military relations. The framework agreement on 

  maintaining, r security between Australia and Indonesia has been unilaterally   abrogated by Indonesia and is unlikely to be resumed in the foreseeable future.   Despite the disappointment and even anger at what many Indonesians regard as   East Timorese ingratitude the Indonesian People’s Consultative Assembly (the   M’TR) which first convened in October 1998, together with the election of our new 

  President, has ratified the results of the ballot and officially made the separation of   Indonesia and East Timor final. So, despite all the rhetoric, the Indonesian   Government has accepted that.   As feared by many, the situation in East Timor has indeed encouraged sirnilar 

  demands in other restless provinces, particularly in Aceh and Irian Jaya. Wre know   the Achenese convened the congress where they also demanded a referendum and   recently Irian Jaya has also organised a similar congress. The Government and   political elite in Jakarta has made it clear, however, that East Timor was a special   case and cannot be applied to other parts of the country. So it is very important to   understand that the history of East Timor, as Xanana has said, is very different from   the other provinces. So letting East Timor go should not lead to the 

  compartmentalisation of Indonesia.   We have understood that clearly but it is nonetheless true that the Achenese and   the Irian Jayan people have thought, if East Timor can make it work, why can’t we?   They are not ready to accept that East Timor is a special case. And both Amin Rais,   the current Chairman of the People’s Assembly and President Abdurrahman Wahid,   in a pre-election campaign, rashly made a prom.ise to support a referendum for   Aceh. They have both now retracted that promise. I think it was unfortunate that 

  during a pre-election campaign a politician should make that promise without   clearly stating that East Timor is a very different case from Aceh and Irian Jaya.   Both Aceh and Irian Jaya have always been part of Indonesia. As you know,   Indonesia is nothing more and nothing less than the former colony, the Netherlands   East Indies., and the only thing which unites us is the administrative unit which was 

  the former Netherlands East Indies. So this history has to be made very clear. 

  The Resolution of East Timor 

  Now I come to the final part of my disc ussion about the resolution for East   Ti.mor and its benefits for Indonesia and the region. Despite the mostly negative   immedliate consequences of the East Timor ballot, the medium and long term   in3pact.s for the resolution of the conflict are I think logically positive for Indonesia 

  because, as it brings to a peaceful close a most -unhappy and wasteful episode in   Indonesian history, resources can now be used to deal with many other problems   that Indonesia has. Can you imagine if Indonesia was still currently faced with the   problems of East Timor, which would engage a lot of military forces and at the same   tirne put Indonesia at odds with most of the rest of the world? Indonesia would have 

  Dewi Fortma Anwar 

  23 

  an even worse problem where it has to sort out the problems with Aceh and Irian   Jaya and so on. Indonesia cannot afford to continue this policy. It removes a major   obstacle in Indonesia’s international dealings, particularly with the Western world.   Indonesia’s diplomacy no longer has to be defensive and exclusively devoted to try 

  to sustain support for Indonesia’s policy in East Timor. Indonesia now has good   relations with most countries and its relations with Western countries will no longer   be h.eld hostage to the East Timor issue.   I think it is also very clear that while many countries at the government level,   including New Zealand and Australia, have continued to maintain close relations   with1 Inclonesia, it was increasingly difficult for politicians in New Zealand and   Australia, for example, to continue to maintain this non-critical position towards   Indonesia. Indonesian foreign policv had in fact become extremely sterile because it   was always trying to defend the indefensible and the lack of understanding by our 

  military of the international environment and the very inward-looking attitude of   the military made it more difficult for our diplomats to struggle to clean up 

  Indonesia’s tarnished international image, because every time they tried to say that   everything was getting better there were further abuses. And at a time when CNN,   the BBC and so on can report directly from the ground it is increasingly very   difficult for our Indonesian diplomats to have to go around the world and explain. 

  The revelations of military abuses in East Timor and international pressure to   bring th.e military to account has in fact helped the process of ending military   impunity in Indonesia, and of gradually bringing the military under democratic   political control. As part of the lessons learned from East Timor, Indonesia is now   fully committed to making human rights a first national priority, and a law has in   fact bee:n passed to establish a human rights court to try cases which in the past   could not be handled by ordinary civil courts, let alone by military tribunals. In the 

  past anv wrong-doing bv the military could only be tried by the military tribunals .   and usually, if there was public pressure for such a trial to be carried out, for example   the Santa Cruz incident, the military would convene an honorary council composed   of generals and they would dismiss a few generals and that would be it. There was 

  really no effort to put anybody on trial but if in rare cases they would put anybody   on trial usually it would be corporals or sergeants who would get punished. You   could rarely punish anybody above the rank of major. \Ve hope that with the   establishment of a human rights court, any crimes ,that are considered to be crimes   related to human rights abuses will be tried by the human rights court ending the   impunity and this military immunity from the civilian constitution. I think this is   very important for Indonesia to attempt to bring the military under a democratic . 

  system of control.   IDespite their disappointment with what most Indonesians mav well see as East .   Timorese ingratitude for not wishing to remain p:art of Indonesia, Indonesians in   general do wish East Timor well and would like to develop good relations with that 

  country. The Indonesian Government has made it known that if East Timor wishes,   Indonesia will support East Timor’s desire to be integrated into the ASEAN - but   only if IEast Timor wishes it and Indonesia will then support it. Indonesia wishes   East Timor to be integrated into the regional order and be part of the creation of a 

  24 

  The East Tinzo7- crisis: an Indonesian ziiew 

  zon.e of peace, freedom and neutrality (ZOPFAX,~ and adhere to the concept of a   . 

  nuclear weapon free zone (nfz) in Southeast Asia. Clearly, what would worry foreign   policymakers in Indonesia would be to have an E:ast Timor enclave which might   diverge in its foreign policy orientations from Indonesia and the rest of ASEAN   We, of course, would be very upset if suddenlv there was a military base there -   missile or nuclear - because that would be very’contrary to the regional order that   we are trying to achieve. So, Indonesia would be very interested in seeing that East   Timor is integrated into the regional order. 

  Indonesia and Australia can regain and develop a good relationship, including   security relations, step by step, avoiding grandiose and unrealistic expectations.   More countries, and I am thinking of other countries including New Zealand, can   work together to help East Timor develop into a viable democracy and a viable 

  economy. It j.s important that no one country should be seen to try to dominate East   Timor. I do not think East Timor would want to go through the experience of   leaping from. the frying pan into the fire, from domination by one big country, to   dominat:ion by another big country. There would, I think, be a regional imbalance   if one country was seen to dominate. I doubt very much that Australia is interested   in acquiring another colony! I am optimistic about future relations and in fact we   should be able to see this crisis as a possible opportunity to mend bridges and to see 

  that we can work together and develop, because Indonesia would be the one country   that would suffer the most if East Timor has another civil war - because Indonesia   would have problems at the border and have to continue to deal with a further   overflow of refugees. So, the medium to long term prospect will be something that 

  could be of benefit to both countries. 

