---
title: "Aid agreements with Cambodia."
date: "2000-05-19"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211483143
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LHJ16%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   ALEXANDER DOWNER 

  AA 00 025 19 May 2000 

  AID AGREEMENTS WITH CAMBODIA 

  Today I am pleased to announce I will sign three Memoranda of Understanding with my   Cambodian counterpart, Foreign Minister Hor Namhong, committing Australia to funding   of $28.2 million over the next 6 years. 

  The funding is representative of the Australian Government’s recognition of the   development challenges facing Cambodia. 

  Through the Cambodia-Australia Agricultural Extension Project, Australian assistance   will help farming families to increase their crop yields and farming income, so they have   surplus crops for sale and better nutrition for their families. Australians will train   agricultural extension workers who advise farmers in areas such as land preparation,   , pesticide use and diversifying and handling food crops. 

  Additional farming communities will benefit from the Agriculture Quality Improvement   Project which will improve the supply of good quality rice seed, reduce wastage in rice   milling and improve the prices received by fruit and vegetable growers. 

  These two projects are expected to improve the incom   over 350,000 farm families.   es, food security and nutrition of 

  Eighty-five per cent of Cambodians live in rural areas,   operate at a subsistence level. Parts of Cambodia regu   incomes and nutritional levels are low. 

  , but this critical sector continues to   larly have rice shortages, and rural 

  The third MOU signed today is an extension of the Criminal Justice Assistance Project,   which targets improved adherence to international human rights standards among the   judicial police, prisons and courts. The project is being extended for 15 months, while a   second phase is being considered. 

  In conjunction with these three projects, up to twenty Australian specialists will live in   Cambodia and work closely with their Cambodian colleagues, strengthening the already   very positive Australia - Cambodia relationship. 

  All of these projects are part of the $37.9 million 2000-01 development assistance   program for Cambodia announced in the recent Budget. The program emphasises the need   to balance reconstruction and rehabilitation needs with the longer-term need to develop a   sustainable economy and the human resources to manage it. 

  Other areas of assistance in Cambodia include health, education and training, landmine   clearance, food aid and refugee resettlement and community development through non-   government organisations. Australia is the third largest bilateral aid donor to Cambodia. 

  PIXNOM PENH, CAMBODIA 

  Media contacts: James Baker: (Ministerial) 02 6277 7500 / 0419 206 890   Fionna Douglas: (AusAID) 02 6206 4960 / 0412 804 489 

  Media releases and speeches are available on AusAID’s internet site www.ausaid.gov.au 

  -- -. --.- - -~ 

