---
title: "Labor calls for independent investigation into chemical restraint usage."
date: "2000-03-14"
creators:
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211481008
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9T016%22
---

  Labor Calls For Independent Investigation Into Chemical Restraint 
Usage

  

  Con Sciacca - Shadow Minister for Immigration

  

  Media Statement - 14 March 2000

  

  Shadow Minister for Immigration, Con Sciacca, 
today called for an immediate independent investigation into allegations 
screened in last night's ABC's Four Corners program detailing the multiple 
use of chemical restraints on an Algerian deportee.

  

  Mr Sciacca said that he was very disturbed by 
allegations that up to five potentially dangerous doses of sedatives 
had been considered and four intravenous injections had actually been 
administered to one person during his removal from Australia.

  

  "While Labor supports the current practice 
of detention and swift deportation of illegal immigrants from Australia, 
it is disgraceful and a blatant breach of human rights that deportees 
have to be subjected to potentially dangerous doses of sedatives in 
an attempt to supposedly 'quieten them down'.

  

  "Minister Ruddock's comment to the effect 
that the Australian community expects that people who are not refugees 
or have no lawful entitlement to be here should be removed quickly is 
certainly correct in general terms.

  

  "I was surprised, however, at Minister Ruddock's 
apparent insensitivity on hearing the allegations of excessive forced 
sedation. I doubt that the Australian people would endorse the indiscriminate 
use of potentially dangerous doses of chemical restraints on humans. 
I understand that the drugs used were Valium and Phenergan.

  

  "I remind the Minister that while the claims 
of these asylum seekers have been rejected, they are still human beings 
- not animals.

  

  "Labor will not tolerate such blatant breaches 
of human rights, nor will it tolerate the Minister justifying these 
actions by beating his chest and claiming these actions represent community 
expectations.

  

  "I call on the Government to assure the 
Australian public that the practice of forced sedation is not widespread 
and used only as a last resort. Further, I call on the Government to 
conduct an independent investigation NOT a departmental investigation 
- as it has indicated - without delay, before a tragedy occurs.

  

  "Australia has a hard won reputation as 
a humanitarian nation. Our reputation should not be placed at risk by 
the cavalier attitude of those contracted to the Immigration Department 
to handle deportations," Mr Sciacca said.

  

  Authorised by Gary Gray, 19 National Circuit, 
Barton ACT 2600.

  

