---
title: "Defence recognises first anniversary of peace keeping deployment to East Timor."
date: "2000-09-20"
creators:
  - "Dept of Defence"
source: "DEPT OF DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211212743
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J5G26%22
---

 Department of Defence Media Release

 20/09/2000 Departmental 263/00

 PACC 263 /00 Wednesday, 20 September 2000

  

 DEFENCE RECOGNISES FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF PEACE KEEPING DEPLOYMENT TO EAST TIMOR

 The first anniversary of Australia’s military deployment to East Timor marked an important milestone for our United Nation’s peace keeping record, the Chief of the Army, Lieutenant-General Peter Cosgrove, said today.

 Recalling the important role played by Australian Defence Force personnel in restoring peace to the East Timorese, Lieutenant-General Cosgrove said he believed everyone who had taken part in the International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) operation and those Australians serving with UNTAET could reflect on their achievements with a strong sense of pride.

 "I am amazed by the resilience of the East Timorese people as they labour to re-build their shattered country. Of course, the re-building work will continue for years to come and those Australians currently serving with the UNTAET Peace Keeping Force are helping to create an environment in which this can occur.

 Lieutenant-General Cosgrove praised the professionalism and commitment of the Australian Defence Force personnel and peace-keepers from 21 other countries who served with INTERFET. The integration of the forces of 22 nations was the key to INTERFET’s success.

 In achieving its mandate for peace and security in East Timor, INTERFET succeeded in providing a credible and deterrent security presence in all parts of the country, preventing armed violence by the militia groups and developing with Indonesia agreed procedures for border management along the border with West Timor.

 However, LTGEN Cosgrove was concerned for the future of East Timorese refugees who were still suffering from poor living conditions in makeshift border camps in West Timor. "I hope those East Timorese that wish to be repatriated to their former homes can do so as quickly as possible," he said.

  

  

 Background:

 At its peak the INTERFET force comprised approximately 9800 personnel, including 4500 Australians. The

 operation began early on September 20, 1999, when transport aircraft flew an advance party of Australian INTERFET soldiers into Dili Airport. Currently, approximately 1500 Australian Defence personnel are serving with the UNTAET force in East Timor.

 Contact:

 Tina Turner 0410 626742

 Issued by Public Affairs and Corporate Communication, Department of Defence, Canberra, ACT, 2600 Media releases area available by email if you register at the Defence Media Centre at www.defence.gov.au

 [ Defence Home ] [ back to top ]

