---
title: "Australia welcomes outcomes of consultative group on Indonesia meeting in Tokyo."
date: "2000-10-18"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211218906
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M4P26%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   ALEXlANDER DOWNER 

  AA 00 44 18 October 2000 

  AUSTRQLIA WELCOMES OUTCOMES OF CONSULTATIVE GROUP ON   INDONESIA MEETING IN TOKYO 

  I welcome the constructive outcomes of the Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI) meeting   concluding in Tokyo today. In the mefeting the international community pledged strong   support :for Indonesia’s program of economic reform and democratisation. 

  I am pleased that Australia has been able to announce a pledge of around $120 million for   2000 - 2 00 1. This confirms our commitment to providing practical assistance to support the   Indonesian Government’s reform efforts. 

  Australia welcomes the Indonesian delegation’s constructive responses to donor concerns   expressed during the meeting. 

  The Group called attention to the implortance of implementing the economic reform program   agreed between the International Monetary Fund and the Indonesian Government. Particular   emphasis was placed on the need for quick progress in debt restructuring, asset sales, legal   reforms and SIrestry. Also emphasised was the importance of carefully managing the   decentralisation process. Progress in these areas is crucial to building the confidence needed 

  for substantia:l new investment in Indonesia and ongoing economic recovery. 

  Participants a’lso emphasised the link ‘between the security situation in Indonesia and renewed   investor confidence. Australia, along ~with many dele,gations, expressed its concern about the   situation in West Timor and the need for Indonesian authorities to establish effective security   there. This is an essential pre-condition if refugees are to be repatriated and resettled free of 

  fear and intimidation. 

  If signifiicant Iprogress is made towards resolving the security situation in West Timor,   Australi’s is ready to provide substantial support towards a credible international plan of   assistance for the retigees in West Timor. 

  Through its overseas development program, Australils will work with the Government of   Indonesia on 

  two major development challenges. They are: improving the effectiveness,   transparency and accountability of institutions and civil society; and, responding to the needs   of vulnerable groups by meeting acute humanitarian needs and helping to build more   sustainable livelihoods for poor communities. 

  Implementing the Indonesian Government’s extensive reform program is a major challenge   and will require continued commitment by Indonesia and the international community. The   outcomes of the CGI meeting in Tokyo are an expres’sion of that commitment. 

  Media Contarcts: James Baker (Ministerial) 02 6277 7500 / 0419 206 890   Fionna Douglas (AusAID) O;! 6206 4960 / 0412 804 489 

  Media releases and speeches are available on AusAlD’s internet site www.ausaid.gov.au 

