---
title: "Another boat intercepted near Ashmore Islands."
date: "2000-07-11"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211201234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AXZ16%22
---

 11 July 2000

 Another boat intercepted near Ashmore Islands Customs Coastwatch today co-ordinated with Defence to intercept a vessel carrying 33 suspected boat people near Ashmore Islands, the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Amanda Vanstone, said today.

 The vessel, a motorised Indonesian fishing vessel, was detected by the Navy’s Fremantle class HMAS Gawler which was patrolling the area, about 800km west of Darwin.

 The people consisted of 32 men and one woman. In addition, five crew members were aboard.

 It was the second vessel in two days to be found containing suspected boat people, with 30 people discovered yesterday on a similar vessel near Ashmore Islands.

 Senator Vanstone said the HMAS Gawler, the HMAS Geraldton and the ACV Wauri were currently patrolling waters off north-west Australia in a co-ordinated program of maritime surveillance directed by Customs Coastwatch.

 "Coastwatch has arranged for strong patrol activity in the north-west waters, which are a high-risk area for boat people. In particular, the ACV Wauri is now on long-term patrol in the area," Senator Vanstone said.

 "A total of 25 vessels with boat people have been located in Australian waters this year, with all detained before reaching the mainland."

 The origin of the people aboard has yet to be determined. They will be handed to officials of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs when they reach the mainland.

 It is expected that the HMAS Gawler and the HMAS Geraldton will assist with transporting people to the mainland, however these arrangements are yet to be finalised.

  Return to Index 

