---
title: "Perth: Transcript of doorstop interview, 22 November 2000: Petrol, BAS, Australian Dollar, Woomera, education."
date: "2000-11-22"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211219071
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/57X26%22
---

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Petrol, BAS, Australian Dollar, Woomera, Education

 Transcript - Perth - 22 November 2000

 Printer friendly page

 E & OE - Proof Only

 BEAZLEY: John Anderson and Peter Costello commence the 'let's introduce Peter Costello to regional Australia' tour today. And they do so against a background where the National Party in Mr Anderson's own constituency is writing to us with a plea to the heart. Peter Costello is in a position to answer that plea. And that plea goes to relief on fuel prices. So, if Mr Costello's trip to the bush is going to have any meaning at all, it has to be concluded, not simply with an answer to the views the Labor Party has been expressing on this, but an answer now to the National Party in John Anderson's own constituency. They say on fuel prices 'enough. You can do something about it. Deal with it now'.

 JOURNALIST: ...that Peter Costello is heeding the concerns of the Business Activity Statement and the complexity that people complain about.

 BEAZLEY: A few months ago, when I said that part of the Labor Party's rollback would be to look at ways at making the implementation of that tax simpler. And when I said that, Peter Costello challenged me to say where and refused to budge one inch. A couple of days ago, John Howard was saying, 'well, we have to look at ways of making the Business Activity Statement simpler'. We say, pick up on the views that we expressed now months ago. The Business Activity Statement and the implementation of the GST associated with it, is wrecking small businesses in this country. They cannot withstand the pressure that is upon them. And they have to get some relief. It has got to be made simpler. And the challenge for Howard, Costello and the rest of them is to work out ways in which they can make it simpler instead of just standing on their digs and saying that everything is perfect. Everything is not perfect with a Business Activity Statement and they need relief.

 JOURNALIST: And they're not even on common ground as it is, anyway, by the looks of it.

 BEAZLEY: So, it would seem. But the simple fact of the matter is that for the ordinary small businesses in this country, their life has been made hell. All over this country, and it was particularly emphasised for me recently as I travelled through the Federal electorate of Kalgoorlie, one small business after another came up saying either that they couldn't do it, or, and this was the case with most of them, hours and hours and hours of their time had to be spent filling these things out accurately. There has got to be a simple way.

 JOURNALIST: While we're on economic matters, any comments on the Aussie dollar and the new low that it's reaching?

 BEAZLEY: The Aussie dollar will continue to fall while ever we have a reputation internationally that we are not in touch with the new economy. Investment in education,

 investment in research and development, investment in our industries, these are the critical things with will change the international view of the value of the Australian currency. Mr Howard must start to address these issues. He's ignored them far too long.

 JOURNALIST: On Woomera, Mr Ruddock says that there has already been an investigation into the nurse's claim of a cover up of abuse there. What's your response to that?

 BEAZLEY: Mr Ruddock affects surprise and lack of knowledge about what is happening in the Woomera detention centre. He should not be surprised and he should not have a lack of knowledge. And if he has a lack of knowledge about what is going on there, then it ought to be incorporated within Mr Flood's investigation. The terms of reference of Mr Flood's investigation have to be expanded to include all the issues associated with the privatisation of that facility. And whether or not there are some problem endemic in the way in which the Woomera facility is operating. Now, we have to have detention centres associated with the possibility that some of the claims for refugee status are false and all those claims have to be investigated anyway. But we do not need to damage our international reputation by incompetence, ignorance and malevolence in the way in which that activity is being conducted. Mr Flood is doing an investigation. His terms of reference should be expanded. Ministers should not be being surprised by what is going on in their facilities, they should have full knowledge.

 JOURNALIST: Can you detail the way in which the terms of reference should be expanded? Is it just that or...

 BEAZLEY: The terms of reference are cast very narrowly to the incident. We believe the terms of reference should be wider to consider the whole management issue associated with them.

 JOURNALIST: And you think it may be a symptom of it the fact that it's a private institution rather than a Government one?

 BEAZLEY: It may well be. That may well be the case. In which case, Mr Flood ought to be able to settle our minds on everything, not just on the narrow issue, albeit appalling though it is, that he is dealing with.

 JOURNALIST: On the BP refinery, how concerned should West Australians be about the threat to employment?

 BEAZLEY: I'm concerned by what they have had to say. But I'm also concerned about petrol prices. What we've been concentrating on today is the main cause of at least the Australian controlled component, if you like, of petrol prices. And I believe the focus should be on that.

 JOURNALIST: Is it a bullying tactic?

 BEAZLEY: They will always defend their patch. And there ought to be a question mark over the vehemence with which everybody defends their patch. And there are factors involved in petrol prices which are beyond Government. There's no doubt about that. And competition in the market happens to be one of them. But that's on issue. The principal issue for today, and for the next couple of months, is the impact of the excise on petrol prices. That's something that without question a Government can affect. Whether or not the legislation that is proposed will achieve those outcomes from the other end, if you like, well, that's a matter always for argument. There is no matter for argument at all that the next excise adjustment

 will affect the price of fuel.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… schools?

 BEAZLEY: The Labor Party will not act in a way that shuts down Catholic schools, poor Aboriginal schools, poor Christian schools, Greek schools and deprives state schools of effectively 12 per cent of their income. We're not going to act in that way in our approach to the Government's school legislation. What we will do is move amendments that eliminate the discrimination against state schools and eliminate the cornucopia of money that has been handed out to the category one schools. If we can't get those amendments through, we will prosecute the issue right up to the next election campaign. That is the correct way to handle this in a way that doesn't damage the lives of kids, doesn't damage the education system overall.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

