---
title: "Donation in Dili, hot in Balibo."
date: "2000-12-18"
creators:
  - "Fischer, Tim"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of FISCHER, TIM, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211219837
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CH336%22
---

  TKM FISCHER MP 

  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR FARRER 

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  DONATION IN DILI, HOT IN BALIBO   In downtown Dili yesterday Tim Fischer MP presented a $1,000 royalty proceeds personal   cheque to the Jesuit Refugee Service. 

  Father Frank E3rennan SJ, formerly of Canberra and Sydney and now based in East Timor,   happily received the cheque on behalf of the Jesuit Refugee Service and said every bit helps. 

  Speaking at Albury on his return, Tim Fischer MP, said that the proceeds were from further   sales of the book he wrote Seven Days in East Timor: Ballot and BuZZets, published by Allen   and Unwin. 

  “It has now sold over 5,000 copies in ten months with royalty proceeds going to various   charities,” Mr Fischer said. 

  “Actually, after making the presentation, Father Frank Brennan and I happ.ily swapped books,   his on the Wik; Debate and mine on the East Timor Ballot saga, both interesting Christmzs   rea.ding ! ” 

  Army 1RAR Visit 

  “During the visit I took the opportunity to join up with my old battalion, the First Battalion   Royal Australian Regiment, on the East Timor/West Timor border at Balibo. 

  It was terrif’lc to see the soldiers in good form and good morale, one big difference is’ the   intemet email connection available at BHQ on rotation to allow continuing, contact with   families and friends. 

  I was pleased to meet up with Lieutenant Michael Chant of Leeton and Townsville who years   ago had partnered a debutanteat a Leeton Deb Ball, where I received the Debs. His support   platoon was down at a beach location near Batugade and again soldiers where in fine fettle   and getting on with the job.” 

  Nfr Fischer adlded that it was 32 years since he was last with 1RAR in an overseas operational   situation, as some would say almost ‘Boer War’, but as some would spell almost ‘Bore War’! 

  “I was happy to extend seasons greetings to those working hard in East Tirnor and I tnus:: say   I enjoyed the visit, although it was very hot and humid, nevertheless doing positive and   interesting things at my own pace and choosing is always en-joyable,” Mr Fischer added. 

  Statement ends   Contact: Tim Fischer (Monday -- 02 602 1 3264) 

  1.8 December ZOO0 

  ---- 

  -- 

  ---- 

  ParHament House, Canberra, ACT 2600 

  Tclcphonc: (02) 6277 4447 Ikzsimilc: (02) 6277 8543 

  E-mail: Tim.Fischcr.MP(@aph.gov.au 

