---
title: "NSW Young Labor Annual Conference: address Sydney, 12 August."
date: "2000-08-12"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211205549
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SQ626%22
---

 NSW Young Labor Annual Conference Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Address - Sydney - 12 August 2000

 Printer friendly page

 Check Against Delivery

 Delegates.

 I was eighteen years old when I first represented my local branch at what was then known as the New South Wales ALP Youth Council, a.k.a. Young Labor.

 It's very nice to be invited back to the organisation that in a political sense spawned you --which more than anything else allowed you to develop your bearings, to begin to understand your contemporaries, friend and foe alike, and to learn the fundamentals of political ringcraft.

 At the outset today I want to pay tribute to Young Labor for the vital role you play -- the campaign horsepower you so effectively apply, to the successive generations of leadership you have enjoyed and the great many who have followed in the footsteps of the Keatings, the Carrs and us all.

 I'm now in my fifth year as Labor's foreign policy spokesperson. I've served in this role as Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs for a longer period than any of my predecessors on either side of politics.

 I've got to admit it's a dubious distinction being the longest serving Shadow Foreign Minister. Being the real thing would be infinitely preferable. But as opposition goes, there are some compensations.

 Foreign affairs is very rarely dull. Things are always happening. Change is constant. And the stakes can be very high indeed.

 I had cause yesterday to reflect on our immediate neighbourhood over the last eighteen months. In that time we have seen the East Timorese exercise their long denied right of self-determination and now take the fast track to independence. We have seen extraordinary political change in Indonesia with the demise of President Habibie, the election of President Wahid, the sacking of General Wiranto, and now Suharto charged with corruption. And all the while, a terrible conflict rages in Indonesia's Maluku Islands with thousands of deaths and hundreds of thousands of refugees.

 In the South Pacific, we've seen the triumph of Fiji's Labor Party and we've witnessed the tragedy of the coup against Mahendhra Chaudhry and his Government. Next door in the Solomon Islands longstanding ethnic conflict and international neglect have brought about a slide into a protracted conflict and the threat of absolute disaster for this poor island state.

 With this pace of change, one seizes every opportunity for consultations, to stay in touch and observe first hand what is happening on our doorstep and beyond.

 Yesterday I flew back from a short visit to East Timor where I met East Timorese leaders Xanana Gusmao and Jose Ramos Horta, and the UN Administrator Sergio de Mello.

 East Timor's immediate humanitarian emergency has eased, but one cannot underestimate the daunting challenges as the East Timorese struggle to rebuild their destroyed infrastructure, establish basic social services, build from scratch a new economy, and develop the fundamental institutions of a democratic society. Security along the border with East Timor remains absolutely critical, as the tragic deaths of UN peacekeepers in clashes with pro-Indonesian militias demonstrate.

 The visit reinforced my absolute belief that Australia is duty bound to generously assist the East Timorese as they build their independent future. Australia needs to be comprehensively engaged in supporting economic and social development and the creation of democratic institutions.

 The visit also allowed me convey to the East Timorese leadership our Party's National Conference Resolution committing Labor to a settlement of the maritime boundary in the Timor Gap based on lines of equidistance between Australia and East Timor.

 It's a policy approach, unanimously adopted by National Conference, which will allow a settlement giving East Timor the full benefit of the gas and petroleum resources of the Timor Gap. It will be a very important contribution to East Timor's financial viability and independence. It has the potential to substitute economic viability in the place of aid dependency. This is an honourable approach for Australia to take and it will deliver a just outcome for the East Timorese.

 With our next federal election likely to precede East Timor's formal independence, and in any case the need for passage of domestic legislation through our Senate, Labor's approach is a guarantee of a fair deal for the East Timorese, one that will give them the best opportunity to stand on their own feet.

 For me East Timor has been a major concern over the past three years. I expect it will continue to be so for a long time. But it is also proper to focus on the broader foreign policy picture, to think about Australia's place in the world and our long-term national interests.

 In all probability we are about fourteen months from the next federal election. My task in foreign affairs is to ensure that Labor is fully prepared and well positioned to advance our agenda as soon as the electorate entrusts us with the responsibility of government.

 Our Hobart National Platform set the broad framework for the foreign policy of a Beazley Labor Government.

 It is our key statement of political and policy intent. It is a document setting out our principles, our commitments, and our fundamental priorities.

 Nothing in it is more important than our commitment to engagement with Asia. We reaffirm: "Labor considers that no more important foreign policy issue faces Australia than advancing our engagement with Asia. Australia is inextricably linked with Asia. We contribute to both the security and prosperity of Asia, just as the region profoundly contributes to Australia's

 prosperity and security. Labor is unapologetically committed to our nation's future with Asia."

 Our focus on Asia is not exclusive, but it's our considered judgment that the pursuit of closer involvement with our neighbours must be a fundamental foreign policy and political commitment.

 And in this we are in sharp contrast with the Howard Government.

 They are now in their fifth year, and it's appropriate to take an extended look at the reality of engagement with Asia, Howard style. And it's clear that no recent Australian Government has been so little committed or concerned about how our country is perceived and regarded by our neighbours.

 Be it the 1996 cancellation of the DIFF aid programs, the slashing of our foreign aid effort to a historic low, that deliberately ambiguous response to Pauline Hanson's One Nation, the mean-spiritedness towards to indigenous reconciliation, or Howard's strident opposition to an Australian Republic, and the ill-conceived notion of Australia as a regional Deputy for the United States, we have seen consistent disregard for how our neighbours perceive and regard us. Time and again, the Coalition have reinforced Asian perceptions of the insular, White Australia of old.

 We have also seen a pointed rejection of Australia pursuing special relationships with Asian countries, the deliberate stressing of our cultural separateness from Asia, and a heavy emphasis on military capability as a foundation for regional influence. The key proposition is that Australia should only engage with Asia on our own terms -- that we are different and separate from Asia, that Asia must accept us as we are, and we really don't care what Asia thinks.

 As approaches go, this is profoundly counterproductive. Time and again Howard emphasises areas of contrast between Australia and our Asian neighbours - never the things we have in common. He has done enormous damage to Asian perceptions of us.

 And, as if to compound all the negative images they have generated, the Howard Government has also managed to wreck Radio Australia, a key to building positive regional perceptions of Australia.

 Prior to winning power, the Coalition said it was unequivocally committed to maintain Radio Australia's funding. Both Tim Fischer and Alexander Downer expressed strong support for Radio Australia as our country's voice in Asia. After the election, it was a very different story indeed.

 Instead of maintaining Radio Australia's broadcasting capability, the Government first proposed to axe the whole service. No regard was paid to the potential impact on our image in Asia, or the impact on Asian elites long reliant upon Radio Australia as an authoritative source of news and information.

 In the face of a storm of protests and Labor's establishment of a Senate inquiry into the broadcaster's future, the Government backtracked and Radio Australia was allowed to survive. But its budget was slashed. Its most modern and powerful transmitters on the Cox Peninsula were turned off. As a consequence Radio Australia is no longer heard in much of Southeast Asia. It can't be heard in South Asia. Our regional voice in Asia has largely

 disappeared.

 One might have thought that subsequent events -- Asia's economic meltdown, the political turmoil in Indonesia or even the East Timor crisis -- might have seen the government reconsider the stupidity of its approach. But not for a moment. Instead they have proceeded to dispose of the Cox Peninsula transmitters at a fraction of their value to a private broadcaster, and to a Christian fundamentalist broadcaster at that. They have done so at the very time when Eastern Indonesia is wracked with religious conflict.

 This gross incompetence and neglect of the national interest is difficult to overestimate. And now this week we hear that the Government proposes to restore a small part of Radio Australia's funding and lease time on the Cox Peninsula transmitters from the Christian broadcaster. All this folly might be amusing were it not so damaging for our national interests.

 Most recently the Government has been similarly foolish in its endorsement of the US National Missile Defence scheme under consideration by the Clinton Administration. NMD is a system with the potential to trigger a new nuclear arms race likely to include China and India. Along the way it has the potential to gravely undermine global disarmament and non-proliferation agreements. In embracing NMD, the Howard Government has signalled to our neighbours that Australia doesn't care about the regional and global security implications, and that whatever the United States does is fine with Canberra. For John Howard the old phrase "all the way with LBJ" still applies.

 Our Party's National Conference commitment declared nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation to be key priorities for a Beazley Government. In their pursuit, we will take an independent view of Australia's strategic situation and our national interests. In the context of the ANZUS Alliance, that means being honest with our friends. When necessary it means telling them if we think they're embarking on something ill considered and likely to be very counterproductive. We did so in the 1980s when Ronald Reagan was pursuing his "Star Wars" missile shield. We told the Americans then that it was a bad idea. We did so very clearly and very firmly. And our Alliance with the US went on from strength to strength.

 Our National Conference decision commits Labor to review any Australian involvement in NMD through the Pine Gap Satellite Relay Ground Station or other arrangements. Our judgment is that Australia should not support or be involved in NMD research, in its development or in its trials.

 In concluding my remarks today, let me say next year's federal election will afford a clear choice in foreign policy. On one side there is an insular Government inclined to stand aloof from Asia, indifferent to regional perceptions of us, and prepared to subordinate strategic judgment to Washington. On the other side is an Opposition wholeheartedly committed to pursue closer engagement with Asia and determined to take an independent stand based on our own national interests. It will be a choice between a Prime Minister who looks at Asia without enthusiasm or ambition and a Beazley-led Labor Government building a new future for our country with Asia.

 We are determined to see Australia back on track, to repair and restore our standing in Asia. Having spent these last years in the foreign policy shadows, getting ready for the challenges

 of government and drawing down on three decades of parliamentary experience, I can assure you nothing could afford me more satisfaction than to devote all my energy and determination in undertaking this task.

 Thank you.

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

