---
title: "Liberal Women's conference at the Liberal Party Convention, Melbourne Convention Centre, Bellarine Room, Friday 14 April 2000: address [biennial gathering for the Liberal Party; social policy; welfare reform; women; Rosemary Calder]"
date: "2000-04-14"
creators:
  - "Newman, Jocelyn"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "biennial gathering for the Liberal Party; social policy; welfare reform; women; Rosemary Calder"
  - "biennial gathering for the Liberal Party"
  - "social policy"
  - "welfare reform"
  - "women"
  - "Rosemary Calder"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211482040
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F2A16%22
---

  ADDRESS TO THE LIBERAL WOMEN’S CONFERENCE 

  AT THE LIBERAL PARTY CONVENTION 

  BY 

  SENATOR THE HON JOCELYN NEWMAN 

  MINISTER FOR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES 

  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE STATUS 

  OF WOMEN 

  MELBOURNE CONVENTION CENTRJ3 

  BELLARINE ROOM 

  FRIDAY 14 APRIL 2000 

  r 

  Thank you Deirdre (Flint) for your very warm words of welcome. I’m delighted to 

  be here this morning at this important biennial gathering for the Liberal Party. 

  Although we’re all involved in one way or another, in the wider convention this 

  week, it’s a pleasure for me to be part of this special, women’s event. 

  Today, I’m here in three guises, so to speak. 

  First, as a member of our great Liberal Party, serving as a Senator representing   Tasmanians in the federal parliament. 

  Second, as a Cabinet Minister, in this case Minister for Family and Community   Services - a portfolio that spends around $50 billion a year - or a third of Budget 

  outlays - on social security payments and related services. Perhaps, more than 

  many ministries, mine represents some of the most pressing issues that directly   affect the lives of so many women. 

  Third, as the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Status of Women. This 

  means that I am very closely involved in all the policies that affect women, right 

  across the government. 

  I’m very proud of what has been achieved for women since the Howard   Government came to office. But I’m the first to admit, there’s still a lot to do, and 

  that includes reforming our welfare system. As you know, reforming social policy   is a number one priority for the Government, and welfare reform is an important 

  part of this. These are among the main areas of discussion and debate at this 

  weekend’s convention. 

  These issues of social policy are of vital importance to all Australians- but 

  particularly women. The ultimate goal in social policy is to ensure that all 

  Australians have the opportunity to maximise their social and economic potential. 

  When I appointed the welfare reform Reference Group, headed up by Patrick   McClure from Mission Australia, I asked them to advise us on how to improve the 

  welfare system, to reflect today’s realities. We already have the Group’s interim   report and they have come up with some exciting and creative new directions. 

  Whilst this is still only an interim report and I am not committed to any 

  particular direction, I do believe we have to stem the growing tide of long term 

  welfare dependence in this country. 

  I also believe that when the taxpayer fulfils their obligations by providing the 

  social safety net for Australians in genuine need, then people getting that support 

  should involve themselves in community or economic life in some way, if they 

  possibly can. The best outcome for unemployed people, for example, is to get into 

  paid work. For others, it might involve doing some volunteer work, or studying or 

  training. 

  Of course, I’m not saying that people make a deliberate choice to depend on the 

  welfare system for a lifetime. And I’m very aware that women’s life stages, in 

  particular - with the long periods of bringing up children - mean women often 

  have a genuine and justified need for financial and other support. 

  2 

  But we need to ensure that women who are engaged in the important job of 

  parenting are supported to maintain their workforce, training or community links 

  to enable them to have choices about returning to work and balancing their work 

  and family responsibilities. 

  And we’ll continue to offer that helping hand. That is part of our Liberal tradition 

  and the Liberal philosophy. 

  Another important focus of our Government’s policy development for women is   supporting women into leadership roles. Ensuring that women are able to bring 

  their abilities and their perspectives into decision making roles in our country is, 

  I believe, a priority issue. To support this goal the Commonwealth Government   has introduced a number of practical initiatives which are intended to increase 

  the number of women appointed on merit in both the public and private sectors. 

  Women now occupy 30.9% of the positions on Commonwealth bodies and boards   where the Government has total control over the appointment. The proportion of 

  women on private sector boards has doubled over the past five years from 4% in 

  19995 to 8.3% in 1999. But we still have a way to go. 

  By leading by example, the government hopes the private sector will continue to 

  boost female numbers on its boards. Not as a token gesture, but because it 

  makes good business sense to have half the consumers, half the clients, half the 

  population represented in the decision-making process. 

  I am pleased that my colleagues such as Joe Hockey are also promoting this 

  issue. We need to celebrate and support the women who are making a difference   in new roles - just this week my colleague, Alexander Downer, has appointed a 

  woman to be our new ambassador to Cambodia. This brings to a total of 17 the 

  number of women appointed by this Government as Heads of Mission. 

  I want to pay tribute to my long-time friend and colleague, Kathy Sullivan, who, 

  as you know, won’t be standing for parliament again. First elected as a Senator 

  for Queensland in May 1974, Kathy went on to the House of Representatives ten 

  years later. By the end of March last year, Kathy broke Dorothy Tangney’s record 

  as Australia’s longest serving female member of the federal parliament. 

  With her magnificent record as a backbencher, as a shadow minister and as a 

  Parliamentary Secretary, we are all very sorry to be losing Kathy. She’s been a 

  great role model for Liberal women thinking about entering politics. And I know 

  she’d join me in encouraging more women to nominate, and to build on the 

  Party’s strong record of women’s representation in the parliament - one that 

  Labor Party women, with their Emily’s list, and their quotas, can never hope to 

  match. 

  The various women’s groups of the Liberal Party , working together with the wider 

  party membership, have already made a valuable contribution towards getting   women in to Parliament. 

  3 

  As you know, the issue of encouraging and supporting women who wish to stand 

  for parliament is considered so important that, in 1993, the Federal Council of 

  the Liberal Party gave overwhelming support for the establishment of a network of 

  supporters dedicated to assisting women candidates, known as the Liberal   Women’s Forum. The Forum, chaired by Dame Margaret Guilfoyle aims to 

  encourage women to join and be active in the Liberal Party and to seek positions 

  of responsibility and decision making. The Forum operates through the women’s   sections in all States and the ACT to raise the profile of women candidates and to 

  assist them in campaigns for preselection and election to winnable seats. 

  Until Kathy Sullivan stood down recently we had a historic five female 

  Parliamentary Secretaries and 4 female Ministers. With Kathy’s departure, Kay   Patterson has been given a double load by the Prime Minister. We have plenty of 

  women in our society who have much to offer - we need to continue to encourage 

  them to come forward and use their talents in public life. As women in the 

  Liberal Party, we need to make sure that we continue to make progress on this 

  issue. We can identify potential candidates, encourage them to apply for pre- 

  selection, help them through that process and help them to win an election. We 

  need to ensure that we rally together to achieve this aim. I urge you all to direct 

  your energies towards this important task. 

  I’m proud that our Government has given strong national leadership to the 

  prevention of domestic violence, just as we took a strong stand on the issue of 

  guns - both issues of great importance to women. 

  Not only have we dedicated $50 million through the Partnerships against   Domestic Violence Initiative but we have made sure that we have placed these 

  issues centre stage of the government’s agenda, across portfolios. In particular   we have recognised the need for perpetrators to be accountable for their actions   and for recognition and support to be given to the impact of violence on children 

  as witnesses. We are also engaging key community and church leaders in 

  playing a leadership role. 

  This week, Senator Herron said in the Senate that the issue of indigenous family 

  violence is the most pressing issue in indigenous Australia. He acknowledged that   this Government is addressing this through the $6million being provided through   my portfolio specifically for indigenous projects. We have been aware that   appalling acts of physical brutality and sexual violence are occurring in some of 

  our indigenous communities. We have listened to what women have said about   this. For too long, no-one has been prepared to act to prevent the pain and injury 

  and the deaths that have resulted from the violence that indigenous women have 

  suffered. Through this funding, we are showing our commitment to supporting   the efforts of indigenous communities to stop family violence. 

  Before I conclude let me draw your attention to two significant announcements of 

  importance to women. 

  4 

  - 

  First, my colleague, the Attorney-General, Darryl Williams, has this week 

  introduced legislation which fulfils our election promise made in 1998. This new 

  Bill promises a more secure financial future for separating couples. Under the 

  legislation, the Family Court now has the power to enforce and ensure its orders 

  on superannuation splits. This is a fundamental reform to our system and a 

  major step forward in creating fairer financial futures for women. We are also 

  continuing to look at other issues for women and superannuation as part of our 

  commitment to the long term financial security of women. 

  The second announcement of major significance for women is the appointment of 

  the new head of the Office of the St,atus of Women. I am delighted to be able to 

  inform you today that Rosemary Calder has been appointed to this position. With 

  this appointment we have a woman (who, coincidentally, is from Victoria) who 

  comes with significant achievements and skills to provide leadership to help drive   women’s policy. Currently Rosemary is a member of the Senior Executive Service   in the Department of Human Services in Victoria. She has worked in this 

  Department for ten years during which time she has provided both management   and leadership in areas including Aged Care, Community Services and Mental   Health Services. Rosemary has a background in the media having worked as a 

  journalist. This will be a great strength in ensuring that we are able to 

  communicate our messages to women - we have much to say and be proud of, 

  and we need it to be heard. Rosemary brings policy expertise across both social 

  and economic policy, at the national and the international level. She has worked 

  as the Chief Executive of the Australian Council on the Ageing as well as 

  participating in a range of community activities as a volunteer. This includes 

  working with refugee women and with child and family organisations. With this 

  range of skills and experience Rosemary is well placed to understand the 

  challenges for women in Australia, to help shape the policies of the Government   to reflect the needs of women and to lead the Office of the Status of Women. 

  I welcome Rosemary to her new role and look forward to working with her on the 

  challenges ahead in making a difference to the lives of Australian women 

  As women in Australia we have many opportunities but not all women share in 

  these opportunities and are able to make the choices which would help them to 

  achieve and participate in our community. 

  The Government will continue to pursue good economic and social policy to 

  further the opportunities of all women - whether they be mothers on their own 

  with children, women with disabilities, older women, women from differing   cultural or religious backgrounds. We want all women in Australia to be able to 

  share in these opportunities. I look forward to working towards this achievement. 

  ENDS 

