---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra, 13 April 2000: transcript of doorstop interview [Telstra; United Nations; Kosovar refugees; diesel rebate; taxation; cricket; private health funds; business tax] \n"
date: "2000-04-13"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Telstra; United Nations; Kosovar refugees; diesel rebate; taxation; cricket; private health funds; business tax"
  - "Telstra"
  - "United Nations"
  - "Kosovar refugees"
  - "diesel rebate"
  - "taxation"
  - "cricket"
  - "private health funds"
  - "business tax"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211482008
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U1A16%22
---

  Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview

  

  Subjects: Telstra, United Nations, Kosovar Refugees, Diesel Rebate, 
Taxation, Cricket, Private Health Funds, Business Tax

  

  Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 13 April 2000

  

  E & OE - Proof Only

  

  JOURNALIST: Just firstly on the Telstra deal 
that is being done with the Hong Kong based company. Does that raise 
alarm bells, do you think, about Telstra selling its interests offshore?

  

  BEAZLEY: No, this is a joint venture with an 
Asian company. That exactly proves the point that we have been making 
- and, indeed, the Chairman himself made, over the weekend - that being 
in part-Government ownership does not necessarily prevent you from making 
good substantial business deals. Which is a point that we have made, 
and these events amplify the point that we have made. We always run 
a careful line over the business activities of Telstra to make sure 
that what is going on does not place them in breach of the Act, and 
this manifestly doesn't. 

  

  JOURNALIST: Does it take away, though, some of 
the power that…should have over what Telstra does with its business 
decisions?

  

  BEAZLEY: They are always going to have to be 
in a situation where they joint venture with overseas companies to do 
things in other people's markets. That is an important attribute for 
them. It is part of their international activity. So, we wouldn't argue 
that they ought not to do that. But the point is, you know, they can 
do it with a poultice of cash. They don't need to sell shares in themselves 
to be able to do these sorts of things, which is what the flexibility 
they are supposed to gain by running down Government ownership. It just 
amplifies the point we have made - that we can be confident that Telstra 
can conduct itself in a healthy fashion whilst, at the same time, being 
an essential part of Australian nation building. 

  

  JOURNALIST: Doesn't this illustrate, also, that 
perhaps Government having any input into the shackle around Telstra's 
neck that it would be far better to make more profit than to be a more 
commercially successful enterprise without Government to run it?

  

  BEAZLEY: Telstra is not just another company. 
Telstra has been built up over the years by the Australian taxpayers 
to serve particular Australian interests. And it has got to balance 
its activities as a company, and the forward looking steps that it has 
taken in a number of areas whilst, at the same time, acknowledging there 
is an expectation that they are going to deliver services to a country 
which is extremely difficult to serve. Australia is one of the toughest 
environments for establishing communications of any description, including 
telephony. So there is a major nation building role on Telstra. That 
is what the Australian people expect of it. It is not just another company. 

  

  JOURNALIST: Mr Howard has effectively told the 
UN to butt out, saying: 'It is time the Kosovars went home. We have 
been very generous'. Yet, two weeks ago, Mr Ruddock cited a UN Committee, 
saying it is now safe and appropriate to return. The Government seems 
to be picking and choosing what they want from the UN.

  

  BEAZLEY: That is right. They are like magpies 
when it comes to dealing with UN reports. You know, on the one hand, 
we take strong stands on international human rights issues. The moment 
there is a whisper of criticism, we come back at the UN like, you know, 
one of the latter day dictatorships. Well, it is not good enough. One 
of the reasons why we signed up to the United Nations was because we 
believed that there were such things as international human values that 
cross boundaries. And we have been very good international citizens 
over the years. And it is a shame that this Government is sullying our 
reputation as far as that is concerned. Now, as far as the Kosovar refugees 
are concerned, it is true that they came into this country on the basis 
that they would leave now. And it is not inappropriate that they should 
leave now. But, at the same time, we have got big hearts and we are 
not dealing with huge numbers of people, and we can afford to be reasonably 
generous, I would say, in our treatment of them. At least to the extent 
of looking at their situation case by case.

  

  JOURNALIST: But the Head of the UN Administration 
has warned Australia not to send the refugees back, saying it could 
hamper the rebuilding process within Kosovo. They are calling on Australia 
not to force the refugees to return. Shouldn't they be allowed to stay? 

  

  BEAZLEY: Well, I think we, as I said, we ought 
to be looking at each of these refugees on a case by case basis. Now, 
I know that when they came they signed undertakings that they would 
return when the Australian Government determined that they should. And 
that they would not use their situation in this country to have themselves 
looked at individually on a case by case basis. And I guess what I am 
saying is that the comments by the UN officials merely amplify the point 
that it would be a decent and generous thing, if not necessarily a legal 
requirement, a decent and generous thing for Mr Ruddock now to sit down 
and allow them to go through a process on a case by case basis. 

  

  JOURNALIST: So, you think they should be allowed 
to leave voluntarily rather than to force them?

  

  BEAZLEY: Well, I think that these things can 
be done with a deal of gentleness, and to this point they have been, 
but I think we have stepped over that line, and with so few left now. 
Apparently, a number of them coming from the areas of a different ethnic 
composition where there is a question mark over security in those particular 
regions there is a case now just to allow them to go through a process 
of having themselves reviewed individually on their own application. 

  

  JOURNALIST: Just on the diesel rebate issue, 
that the boundaries and maps that were released yesterday. Is that going 
to create an administrative nightmare as such for..?

  

  BEAZLEY: We are going to see the dipstick police 
out there. When John Howard said that what he was aiming at was simplicity 
in the tax system, now what we have got is exactly the opposite. You 
know, when people voted for John Howard, they didn't expect charisma, 
they didn't expect all that much vision, but they did expect competence. 
They expected competence. They didn't expect him to go out and botch 
aged care policy, and botch, big time, taxation. Now, what we have seen 
this last week from John Howard is him cobbling together taxes on taxes 
and trying to get a response to that in relation to petrol. Cobbling 
together ad hoc, top-up arrangements to deal with huge numbers of people 
who are disadvantaged by the GST. And now we see this extraordinary 
mapping of Australia with thin grey lines going down highways and areas 
massively disadvantaged by finding themselves on one particular side 
of the line. And it doesn't take Einstein to sit down and take a look 
at those maps and work out some of the rorts that are going to be put 
in place based on the opportunities that arise from that. This is one 
botched tax change. 

  

  JOURNALIST: ...on the Democrats rather than..?

  

  BEAZLEY: Well, John Howard legislated on this 
basis. If John Howard had not proceeded with this tax package in this 
form, he would have had a magnificent surplus now - a) to give the Australian 
people a bit of a tax cut, b) to start funding our education system 
properly, and c) to start fixing up the public hospitals. We would be 
a much happier and better off nation. 

  

  JOURNALIST: Just listening to the cricket controversy, 
is there a danger that some of this mud is going to stick and perhaps 
Australia is going to be implicated inadvertently through this entire 
affair? I mean, it is already harked back to incidences earlier ... 
to involving Australia.

  

  BEAZLEY: Look, I am sorry for Hansie Cronje. 
You know, nobody likes to see a person go out of cricket this way. He 
is a young man, and he will be scarred with this for the rest of his 
life. So, I do feel sorry seeing those pictures of him on the front 
page. You know, the cricket administrators have obviously got to be 
tough to deal with these sorts of situations. Cricket followers, fans 
like myself, but more broadly than just me, millions, literally, around 
the world have got to be confident that cricket is cricket. That the 
integrity of the game is preserved. And this is a sorry affair and it 
is obviously going to get worse. I guess the only silver lining that 
I would see in this, or aspects of a silver lining, would be, obviously, 
the administrators are going to be tougher as a result. Secondly, the 
Indian sub-continent is now one of the major financial hubs of international 
cricket, maybe even more profitable than here in Australia, and they 
are going to have substantial influence on international cricket in 
the years to come. So, it is good to see that the Indian police are 
up to the game. That the Indian police are actually dealing with this 
thing seriously.

  

  JOURNALIST: But does it raise doubts about Australia's 
credibility? I mean, questions have been asked about our own players 
with… and match fixing in the past.

  

  BEAZLEY: Well, no. Not with match fixing. Our 
players were reported that offers had been made to them to engage in 
that sort of activity and that was investigated. I have forgotten what 
the outcome of that particular investigation was in Pakistan, though 
they were the objects of it. Nobody has suggested that Australia has 
engaged in match fixing.

  

  JOURNALIST: A bit of research this morning showing 
that no-one understands the private health insurance rebate scheme to 
come into effect 1st July. Maybe it should be delayed for six months? 
It seems to be a big problem with the Government's focus on attempts 
to boost funding with membership within private health funds. 

  

  BEAZLEY: Look, the Government boasts mightily 
about it, but what was the purpose in doing this? What was the purpose 
in uniquely subsidising health insurance as opposed to any other form 
of insurance? That it would relieve burdens on the public hospital system? 
It doesn't. People are signing up to minimum rates private health cover 
which relieves the public hospital not one bit. We do not have in this 
country, as we have in education, where there is a distinct private 
sector and distinct public sector. We are all in the public sector, 
all of us. And some of us choose to have a private sector additive. 
So, in so far as these huge millions of dollars have gone into the private 
health system instead of the public, you need to ask questions whether 
the character of the insurance that is being taken out is really going 
to offer any relief at all. And I will lay you London to a brick it 
won't. 

  

  On another matter, I am very disturbed to see 
reports, in one of the newspapers today, that Peter Costello is walking 
back from agreements that he entered into with us that ensured that 
his tax package for business remained in balance. Now, as Leader of 
the Labor Party, I would be mortally offended if any agreement we had 
was welshed on. But that is just me. More importantly, the point of 
that agreement was so that ordinary middle income Australian taxpayers 
would know that the massive new taxes they are paying was not going 
to subsidise a business tax break. Now, if these reports are true, that 
is exactly what will happen. It will mean that the Government is going 
soft on tax avoidance. And the poor old PAYE family taxpayer is now 
going to carry, with not much relief, a massive burden from a massive 
new tax that they must pay huge amounts on because as family people 
they have got virtually no discretionary income. That would be a major 
black mark across Mr Costello's … both his Budget, his integrity, 
and the Government's integrity in relation to the Australian people. 
Well, we will watch very carefully what happens with this legislation 
when it emerges. 

  

  Ends

  

  Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, 
Barton ACT 2600.

  

