---
title: "Australia and the Middle East: resumption of public hearings."
date: "2000-09-13"
creators:
  - "Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade"
source: "JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE AND TRADE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211209616
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LCE26%22
---

  PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA 

  Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade 

  Foreign Affairs Sub-Committee Hon DAVID JULL, MP 

  CHAIRMAN 

  MEDIA RELEASE   13 September 2000 

  AUSTRALIA AND THE MIDDLE EAST 

  Resumption of Public Hearings 

  Announcmg the resumption of public hearings in Canberra for the Committee’s review of   Australia’s Relations with the Middle East, the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Sub-   Committee, David Jull MP, said that events in the Middle East continue to be closely watched   in Australia. He added- 

  “The Committee has been closely monitoring the progress and setbacks in the various tracks of   the peace process, and is keen to speak with organisations and individuals who have a   contribution to make towards unlderstanding how Australia c:m assist that process.” 

  The hearing in Canberra on Thursday 14 September 2000 is open to the public, and will be   held from 9.15am to 3.45pm   in   House of Representatives Committee Room 2Rl 

  (Second Floor)   Parliament House   CANBERRA 

  Mr Jull explained-“The program begins with a resumption of evidence from the Department   of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Australia’s international aid. agency, AusAID. The terms of   reference for the review are very wide-ranging, and we need to ensure that we examine all the   key aspects of the relations between Australia and countries of the Middle East region-for   example, -the increasing trade opportunities, social and cultural links, Australia’s strategic 

  interests and the impact of regional tensions and instability”. 

  The second part of the program consists of taking evidence from three non-government   organisations-the Australian Council for Overseas Aid, the Refugee Council of Australia and   Amnesty International Australia. Mr Jull commented- 

  “Australia’s aid program to the region has several points of focus-through support for the   United Nations Relief and Works Agency, support for Australian NGOs and bilateral   assistance. The Committee is keen to examine the effectiveness of these aid strategies.” 

  “The hearing will also enable the Committee to discuss refugee and human rights issues raised   by the Re-fugee Council and Amnesty International.” 

  The program for the hearing is attached, in addition to the review’s official terms of reference.   Media representatives and members of the public are most welcome to attend the hearing. For   further infbrmation, please contact: 

  David Ju.11 MP, Chairman (Canberra) 6277 2182 

  Cliff Lawson, Sub-Committee Secretary (Canberra) 61277 4306 

  Telephone: 02 6277 2313   Facsimile: 02 6277 2221 PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

  Email: jscfadt @ aph.gov.au CANBERRA ACT 2600 

  To inquire into and report on Australia’s relations with Middle East nations and the 1Persia.n 

  Gulf states, with particular reference to: 

  . Opportunities for, and impediments to, expanding Australia’s trade relationship with the   Mid.dle East and the Persian Gulf states; 

  . Australia’s contribution to the Middle East peace process, and the prospects for resolution   of the Arab-Israeli conflict; 

  . The role of the United Nations, and Australia’s involvement, in promoting regional   stability for the Middle East and the Persian Gulf states, including consideration of the   United Nations weapons inspection program and the impact on Iraq of intemationally-   app:lied sanctions; 

  . Australia’s defence relationship with the Middle East and Persian Gulf regions, and the   scope for promoting Australia’s strategic interests; 

  s The impact of destabilising influences in the region, including the potential production of   weapons of mass destruction. 

  . Progress on the adoption of human rights principles in 1:he region; and 

  . Social and cultural linkages: given the levels of migration to Australia from the Middle   East and some Persian Gulf States, with particular reference to the Australian aid program   towards the Middle East and the training programs for students from the region. 

  Referred by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, 8 February 2000 

  Thursday 14 September 2000 

  PUBLIC HEARING ., 

  AfUSTRALIA’S RELATIONS WITH 

  THE MIDDLE E.4ST 

  Committee Room 2Rl   Parliament House   CANBERRA 

  9:15am - 3:45pm 

  PROGRAM 

  9:15am - 11:OOam Department of Foreign Afhirs and Trade/AusAID   (Submission No. 61,61a, 61b) 

  1l:OOam - 12:15am Australian Council for Overseas Aid   (Submission No. 70) 

  1:30pm - 2:40pm Amnesty International   (Submission No. 79) 

  2:40pm - 3:45pm Refugee Council of Australia   (Submission No. 10) 

