---
title: "Australia sends 73 Chinese boat people home."
date: "2000-01-28"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211479889
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L2Q06%22
---

   

  

  Media Release

  The Hon Philip Ruddock, MP

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

  

  

  MPS 011/2000 

  

  Australia 
Sends 73 Chinese   
Boat People Home

  Seventy-three people who landed 
illegally a  t Christmas Island on 21 December last year were 
returned to China today, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural 
Affairs, Philip Ruddock said today. 

  They were flown from Port Hedland in Western Australia, 
where they had been held in immigration detention, directly to China. 
This brings to 158 the number of Chinese boat people removed from Australia 
in the past three months. 

  Mr Ruddock, who returned earlier this week from a 
visit to five countries in the Middle East, said the removal of the 
illegal arrivals showed once again the value of cooperation between 
countries that are determined to end people smuggling rackets. 

  "The return of the 73 illegals demonstrates 
the strong relationship that exists between the Australian and Chinese 
governments - and China's support in the major crackdown on the people 
smuggling trade," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "This undertaking was given to me during my 
visit to China last year. 

  "After my recent discussions with officials 
in Jordan, Syria, Pakistan, Turkey and Iran, I am more than ever convinced 
that it is possible to take concerted global action against the heinous 
crime of people smuggling. 

  "There was ready agreement to cooperate with 
Australia in areas such as intelligence gathering, technical matters 
and action through multilateral agencies like the UN High Commission 
for Refugees. 

  "The return of the latest batch of illegal entrants 
should send a strong message to the world that Australia intends to 
fight people trafficking and that it will work with all countries of 
a like mind," he said. 

  Since 1 November 1999, 29 boats and 2 245 people 
have arrived illegally in Australia, mostly from the Middle East and 
the sub continent. 

  The 87 crew members arriving with the boats face 
up to 20 years in jail and up to $220,000 in fines for bringing people 
illegally into Australia. 

  "Australia welcomes legitimate migrants from 
all over the world. We do not welcome people who jump the queue or the 
criminals who organise the smuggling operations," Mr Ruddock said. 

  "I am confident that we can forge an international 
alliance against this crime. Our immigration process will not be dictated 
to by the people smugglers." 

  28 January 2000   
Media contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860  

  

  

  jy  2000-02-01  11:16

