---
title: "Immigration internet initative to help migrants and refugees."
date: "2000-11-22"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211219095
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QKX26%22
---

  

 News Room

 Immigration Internet Initiative to Help Migrants and Refugees MPS 119/2000

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today launched an initiative to further help Australia's migrants, refugees and humanitarian entrants settle into the community.

 The multilingual online Settlement Information Kits and the Settlement Services Guide will help professionals and organisations involved in settlement planning understand the roles played by Government and community organisations in the provision of settlement services.

 "These are important tools for anyone involved with migrants, refugees and humanitarian program entrants," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The Settlement Information Kits are electronic documents available in 18 different languages that can be read and printed from the Department's Settling in Australia website.

 "The kits provide State and Territory-specific information and service contact details on topics such as employment, the health system, language and learning English, and where to go for help," Mr Ruddock said.

 The Settlement Services Guide contains information on historical patterns of settlement service delivery, an outline of current national settlement policy and delivery mechanisms and descriptions of each of the settlement services funded by the Department. This includes services such as the Adult Migrant English Program, Translating and Interpreting Service and Migrant Community Service Programs.

 "It is important that this information reach our migrants, refugees and

 humanitarian program entrants. By packaging it in this way, the information will be more effectively disseminated. It is also important these services complement and avoid duplication of those mainstream services offered by other Government departments and the non-Government sector," the Minister concluded.

 The Settlement Services Guide has been sponsored by the Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council which advises the Minister on matters relating to the settlement of migrants, humanitarian entrants and refugees. The Guide is available from State and Territory offices of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

 The State and Territory Settlement Information Kits are available from the Department's Settling in Australia website at www.immi.gov.au/settle.

 22 November 2000 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

