---
title: "Burma: Human rights."
date: "2000-09-04"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211208276
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SGC26%22
---

 Burma: Human Rights Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Media Statement - 4 September 2000

 Printer friendly page

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today renewed Labor's calls for the Howard Government to cancel its human rights training program with Burma's military regime.

 "The Howard Government was conspicuously silent through last week's roadside stand-off between the Burmese military and democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi", Mr Brereton said.

 "Australia's Embassy in Burma refused to join the British and US Embassies in seeking access to Aung San Suu Kyi during the nine days she was blockaded by the Burmese military. Foreign Minister Downer made no public statement in defence of her freedom of movement."

 "The headquarters of the National League for Democracy have now been raided by the Burmese military and senior NLD leaders effectively placed under house arrest."

 "UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson, UK Foreign Secretary Robin Cook, US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and the European Union, have all been quick to publicly deplore this latest crackdown against the Burma's democracy movement. Foreign Minister Downer was silent until his belated performance on today's ABC television World at Noon program."

 "In July, Australia's Ambassador in Rangoon advised the Howard Government that:

 'There are clearly no grounds for optimism in the State Peace and Development Council's unchanging approach to opponents of the regime. Nor do observers in Rangoon detect any signs that the regime is willing to bend in the direction of political dialogue or any hints that meaningful movement towards transition to a freely elected government is contemplated. Rather, all the indicators point to the regime being determined to remain in power at all cost, allowing only marginal reforms in the economy and society.'

 ●￻￻￻

 Despite this assessment, the Howard Government continues to snuggle up to Burma's military rulers. Later this month, the Government will conduct the next of its human rights seminars for Burmese officials handpicked by the military regime. Australia is the only country to embark on such an ill-considered program."

 "The Howard Government's initiative has been warmly welcomed by the Burmese military regime. It sends precisely the wrong message and undermines international pressure on Rangoon."

 "Labor is committed to cancel this program. The funds involved could be better spent on programs to assist Burmese refugees and the many victims of political persecution in Burma.

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

