---
title: "ALP abandons multicultural Australia."
date: "2000-07-09"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211201180
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M2X16%22
---

  

 News Room

 ALP Abandons Multicultural Australia MPS 074/2000

 The Australian Labor Party has abandoned Australian multiculturalism. The ALP's policy platform released today for their National Conference, makes no mention of multiculturalism - the foundation of Australia's commitment to the successful settlement of migrants for over 30 years.

 "The extent of the abandonment of Australians from culturally diverse backgrounds is breathtaking," Philip Ruddock, Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs said today.

 "Multicultural policies provided the foundation upon which our culturally diverse society has been so successfully built over a long period of time.

 "The ALP has ripped out that foundation and left no indication as to how newly arrived migrants and refugees might rebuild their lives in their adopted home," Mr Ruddock said.

 The ALP's policy platform dedicates only five paragraphs to settlement issues under the heading 'Migrant Australians: Responding to Particular Needs'.

 The substance of the ALP's new policy is that 'Labor recognises that some migrants will have particular needs and may require settlement assistance'.

 The settlement assistance appears to extend only to the provision of a network of Migrant Resource Centres, the provision of 'adequate' English language programs and 'adequate' interpreter and translation services.

 "Newly arrived and established migrants will have every right to feel abandoned by the ALP," Mr Ruddock said.

 "After reaffirming the Labor Party's 'long standing commitment to

 multiculturalism' Mr Sciacca should hang his head in shame at having presided over the ALP's complete abrogation of their responsibilities to ethnic communities, and the destruction of the most successful nation-building policies in the world," Mr Ruddock said.

 7 July 2000 Media contact: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715

 Media Release Index

  

