---
title: "Human rights training in Burma."
date: "2000-06-28"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211200572
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IDV16%22
---

 Human Rights Training In Burma Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Media Statement - 28 June 2000

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, today called on the Howard Government to cancel its human rights training program with Burma's military regime.

 "Labor has expressed strong reservations about the Howard Government's plans to step up its engagement with Burma's military regime", Mr Brereton said.

 "The Howard Government's $100,000 program to conduct human rights workshops for Burmese Government officials marks the resumption of direct government-to-government aid to Burma. This program represents a significant shift in Australian Government policy."

 "The first of these workshops is planned to be held in Rangoon next month. The second workshop is scheduled to take place in September. Approximately 75 Burmese Government officials will receive training in the initial program. The Burmese military will have the final say on who participates."

 "This program comes in the absence of any real human rights commitments from Rangoon or benchmarks against which performance will be measured. Burma's human rights situation appears as bad as ever. The Howard Government's initiative appears naive and unlikely to bring any substantive benefit to the long suffering Burmese people."

 "At a Senate Estimates Hearing on 31 May, senior DFAT officers admitted that 'the likely [human rights] impact of this exercise is at the margin'."

 "The Howard Government's decision to proceed with the human rights training program has been strongly criticised by Burma's democracy movement including Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi. What is required in Burma is fundamental political change and real movement toward the restoration of democratic processes. The only consequence of this ill-considered initiative may be to give international legitimacy to Burma's military regime."

 Mr Brereton noted that the Government has emphasised that no training will be provided to the Burmese armed forces and that courses will be delivered to middle ranking civil servants from Ministries including Foreign Affairs, Attorney-General's, Home Affairs and the Burmese Police.

 "It is no surprise that the Government emphasises this distinction, but no one should have any illusions about the regime in Rangoon and the extent of military control over the bureaucracy, police and judiciary", Mr Brereton said. "Burmese Government agencies are deeply implicated in the repressive practices of the military regime and unlikely to be influenced or reformed by a limited Australian human rights training program."

 "Labor considered view is that this program should be cancelled. The funds involved could be more usefully spent to programs to assist Burmese refugees and the many victims of human rights abuse in Burma."

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

