---
title: "Gulf War veterans nominal roll on the Net."
date: "2000-04-14"
creators:
  - "Scott, Bruce"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211482033
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A9B16%22
---

 DVA 34 Friday, 14 April, 2000

 Gulf War Veterans Nominal Roll on the Net

 The Federal Government has completed a nominal roll of Australian Defence Force (ADF) personnel who served in the Persian Gulf, as the first stage in a comprehensive health study of Gulf War veterans.

 The Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Bruce Scott, said the roll was part of a joint strategy between the Departments of Defence and Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) to better treat the health of ADF personnel involved in overseas deployments.

 "The roll lists 1865 personnel who served between August 1990 and September 1991, during the Gulf War and during associated operations in and around the Gulf," Mr Scott said.

 "This includes those personnel on the second deployment of HMAS Darwin after the cease fire had been declared and 75 Australians who participated in Operation Habitat, assisting Kurdish refugees in mountain camps."

 The nominal roll will form the basis of a study to compare the health of Gulf War veterans with that of ADF personnel who did not participate in those operations.

 Mr Scott said he had asked leading epidemiologist Professor Terry Dwyer to chair the independent Scientific Advisory Committee that will oversee the health study.

 "Professor Dwyer is the head of the Menzies Centre for Population Health at the University of Tasmania and has a long-standing interest in the health effects of military service," he said.

 "The tender process to select a research team to conduct the study is currently being finalised. Data collection will take about six months and I expect to receive the health study report early in 2001."

 The study is being assisted by a consultative group of Gulf War veterans who are providing an insight into their experiences. This group is helping to ensure that the conduct, aims and outcomes of the study remain relevant to veterans and address all of the health problems arising from service in the Gulf.

 The Minister said the completion of the nominal roll had been assisted by many veterans and their families, who had contacted DVA to confirm their service details.

 The nominal roll can be found on DVA’s website at: www.dva.gov.au/

 If any veteran has not been listed, or has been listed incorrectly, they or their family should contact DVA on 1800 502 302 or by email at: nominal.rolls@dva.gov.au

 Media contact: Mark Croxford 02 6277 7820 or 0401 145 787

 [Return to DVA media release index]

