---
title: "West Timor: United Nations mission."
date: "2000-09-13"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211209614
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y4F26%22
---

 West Timor: United Nations Mission Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Media Statement - 13 September 2000

 Printer friendly page

 The Indonesian Government's decision against meeting the forthcoming UN Security Council mission to Indonesia will not help allay the deep concern about the situation in West Timor", the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton said today.

 "It is to be hoped that the Indonesian Government will reconsider this stance and cooperate fully with the United Nations."

 In its resolution adopted on 8 September 2000, the UN Security Council called upon the Indonesian Government to take immediate steps to disarm and disband the militia operating in West Timor, restore law and order in the affected areas of the province, ensure safety and security in the refugee camps and for humanitarian workers, prevent cross-border incursions into East Timor, and ensure the safe return of refugees who choose to return to East Timor. The Security Council further decided to send a mission to Indonesia and East Timor.

 "The Australian Government must be forthright in urging Indonesia to comply with the Security Council resolution and cooperate fully with the UN mission", Mr Brereton said.

 "Foreign Minister Downer should pursue this matter directly with Indonesian Foreign Minister Shihab."

 "More than 100,000 East Timorese refugees remain in the West Timor camps, still subject to militia intimidation and violence. They are now cut off from international humanitarian agencies."

 "Contrary to repeated promises, the Indonesian military have failed to disarm or disband the militias --groups which were created, trained and armed by TNI. The Indonesian military cannot evade responsibility for the violent actions of these forces."

 "Continuation of this appalling situation can only be very damaging to Indonesia's international standing.

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

