---
title: "One system, two countries: Australia and New Zealand in the international community."
date: "2000-07-05"
creators:
  - "Garnaut, Ross"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Anzac dollar"
  - "International defence relations"
  - "Regional security"
  - "Political stability"
  - "New Zealand"
  - "Regional trading blocs"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Pacific Islands"
  - "Asia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211200945
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2UT26%22
---

  46 

  One system, tzvo countries: 

  AustmzZia and New Zealand in   the international community   Ross Gwnaut   Professor oj’ Economics, The Australian Nhttional University, 

  Canben-a 

  1. A Chadlenging Geo-Strategic Environment   As Australians prepare to celebrate the centenary of Federation, which is also the   centenary of New Zealand standing aside from the political integration of the   former IBritish colonies in what a Frenchman called Australasia, the two 

  communities face a geo-strategic environment of unparalleled complexity. It is also   an environment that could generate challenges to the quality of the two 

  communities’ standards of living, security, and political cultures and institutions.   I take it as given that Australia and New Zealand are different in ways that will   sustain two separate sovereign governments for the foreseeable future. A century   ago, New Zealand was different from each of what became the Australian states, but   not uniquely different. On many measures, for example, New Zealand was no more 

  and perhaps less different from New South Wales than was Western Australia. Hut   however forhlitous the original boundaries, a century of evolution within separate   nation states - a longer period of continuous democratic political evolution than in   all but a few lcontemporary states - has emphasised and institutionalised difference 

  and dulled sirnilarity.   I mention the differences at the beginning because I am going to talk mainlv   about the interests that Australia and New Zealand share in the international   community, the similarity of the challenges that they face and the advantages,   indeed the necessity of meeting these challenges together. An Australian can easily   make a Imistake in relation to New Zealand that is familiar to him. or her from   American perceptions of Australia. The mistake is to see many shared values and   institutions and to assume an identity and not merely a similarity of interests. The 

  differences are many and important, starting with the great but different challenge   that each faces in relations between the descendants of early and late inhabitants of   the respective territories.   Over a century of separate political evolution, the differences have sometimes   included policies and implications of policies which are not obviously related to 

  differences in the interests of the two communities. A failure of analysis and   leadership in both countries saw Australia and New Zealand place huge barriers in   the way of productive economic interaction between them for most of the century.   The barriers made the business communities in each see each other mainly as 

  47 

  threats and rarely as partners. Under the Australia--New Zealand Closer Economic   Relations Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA) or Closer Economic Relations (CER for   short), that has all changed since the mid-1980s, to the considerable advantage of   the people of both countries. The story is almost the opposite in security affairs.   There was a presumption of near identity of interests for most of the century. This 

  led to the military forces of the two countries fighting in the same cause in South   Africa in the first years of the Australian Federation, in the Middle East and Europe   in two world wars, in Korea, Malaya and Vietnam (‘but not the Kokoda Track). But   within a couple of years of the biggest step in correction of the long failure in 

  economic cooperation, the two countries diverged in their security orientation,   with Sew Zealand withdrawing, de facto if not de jure, from the ANZUS alliance   that Australia continued to see as being the basis of its defence policies. So much for   the differences. 

  Australia and New Zealand must each come to grips with three profound   changes in its geo-strategic environment, affecting the choices and opportunities of   small, isolated communities on the Southeastern edge of Asia. However Australia   might look from across the Tasman, it is disadvantaged by its small economic size   and isolation. The three changes interact with each other in important ways in their   effects on the two countries, so that success or failure in one will influence the   outcome on others. 

  The @st of the special challenges is a set of developments in East and 

  particularly Southeast Asia in the aftermath of the East Asian financial crisis which,   together, have had the effect of moving Australia from the centre to the periphery   of East Asian discussion of international cooperation. It is not directly an economic   legacy of the financial crisis that is important for Australia and New Zealand.   Growth has returned to all economies that experienced recession in 1998. In most   cases, but 

  nolt in Indonesia, growth rates are as high and prospects as strong as prior   to the crisis. There has been no notable retreat into protectionism. The Malaysian   experiment with exchange controls has had relatively little effect, and there has been   liberalisation of direct foreign investment in several economies. The problem is   rather the crisis’s legacy of attitudes to various matters of international economic   cooperation. Regional as distinct from global approaches to international economic 

  cooperation in East Asia have recently been accorded enhanced legitimacy, with   active discussion of a number of sub-regional trade agreements, and with the   ASEAN Plus Three (China, Korea and Japan) East Asian group beginning to play a   substantial role in regional affairs. There are greater doubts about heavy reliance on 

  advice from and cooperation with the West in parts of East Asia, most particularly   Southeast Asia.   The coincidence of an historic political transition in Indonesia with financial   crisis and its traumatic economic legacy has left Indonesia struggling to find an   institutional basis for stable economic policy and social order. Indonesian   perceptions that Australia had suddenly changed course on the issue of Timor   independence have interacted with Indonesian feelings variously of disappointment   and hum.iliation at the developments in Timor, and with perceptions that Australia   managed1 its leading role in Timor with arrogance, to turn one of Australia’s closest 

  48 

  One system, two count7ies - 

  (if always complex and challenging) relationships in Asia for the time being into its   most difficult at the official level. In parts of the Indonesian official system that were   most unh.appy about some or other part of Australia’s role in Timor, principally parts   of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the military, there are anxieties that 

  Australian-based groups will extend their activism f& political separatism to other   Eastern provinces, including Papua. This causes Australia to be seen as a threat to   Indonesian se(curity in these quarters. The relationship retains most of the intimacy   and importance that has emerged over the past couple of decades at a private level. 

  But it is the official view that matters between states, and Indonesia is no longer a   voice arguing strongly for Australia to be seen as a full participant in regional   economic and security discussion.   These devlelopments between them create a risk that Australia and New Zealand 

  may not be a.ble to benefit fully from the 

  Opphinity that would otherwise be 

  available partially to redress geographic disadvantage through linkage to economic   growth in East Asia. At worst, it could lead to the exclusion of Australia and New   Zealand from forums which discuss and take decisions on matters of large   importance toi them. 

  The s~ond’ change in the geo-political environment is the recent developments   which underline the fragility of constitutional order, and with it prospects for social   and economic development, in the northern arc of islands, from Timor through   Papua New Guinea to Fiji and Vanuatu, which Australians have come to call the “arc 

  of instability’.   Timor came to independence in the most unpropitious of circumstances - which   were pro’bably the only circumstances in which independence would have been a   possibilinJ. It starts its independent life with an inadequate cadre of well-trained and 

  experienced administrators of affairs of state, no settled institutions of governance,   and no democratic tradition of government within which to build a new country.   There is no system of national revenue collection, no national system of budgets or   accounts. There were few well-trained people, and fewer still after the departure of 

  officials who were comfortable with Indonesian nationality, to maintain health,   education. and other community services. The chances of instability and disorder   are large, and of a smooth path to successful develop:ment small. In its institutional   and human resource base for independence, Timor is weaker than the Melanesian   Island States that became independent in the 197Os, and whose poor preparation for   independence is still felt keenly a quarter of a century on. 

  The Eastern provinces of Indonesia, including Papua, have their own acute   development problems, to the easing of which the new Indonesian Government is   deeply committed. The problem is not the commitment and goodwill of the   Government but the immense difficulty of the task, with weak institutions of state   and civil society, and inadequate human resources. The new political order in   Indonesia no longer sees the use of official violence as a normal means of managing   social tensions, and local communities will take time to learn the alternative paths   to social order. Here, as in the independent states in the arc of instability, successful 

  development is a task that will take generations - a period to build and to learn to   operate new institutions, and for a new generation to grow up in confident   familiarity with the institutions of a modern, democratic society. 

  Ross Garnaut 

  49 

  Fiji and the Solomons have been dominating ne’ws in this part of the world over   the past month, with constitutional democratic government having been   - 

  overthrown by terrorist action in both cases. This dramatises, without changing,   - - 

  the problem s of political order and development in the island states of Australia’s 

  and Ne-w 2aland’s own Pacific region. The weighted average political and   economic state of the region is probably no worse than a year ago, before the   Morauta. Government in Papua New Guinea won office and began to introduce a so   far successful programme of reconstruction and development, with an initial focus 

  on economic, stabilisation. Papua New Guinea is back into building institutions   rather than consuming them. But even in these more favourable circumstances, the   time that it will take to build a secure institutional basis for democratic social order   and development has to be measured in decades rather than years. 

  Australia :and New Zealand have an immense stake in the progress and eventual   success of the island states in the northern arc, and in the Eastern provinces of   Indonesia. Success can only come over a long period. Success would bring   productive relations with neighbours, and higher standing in larger communities in 

  East Asia and the North Atlantic that are important to Australia and New Zealand   in other ways. Failure would be more dramatic, and the possibilitv of failure of   developrnent in the near northern island region may provide more po&erful impetus   to policy response. Failure would mean problems at the sea borders, of crime related   to immigration, arms and drugs. It would mean human destitution on an immense   scale, and associated problems of refugees. It would mean periodic unscheduled   demands; for :military intervention at large budgetary and other cost. It would mean   continuing tension in relations with Indonesia and Indonesia’s Southeast Asian   partners. And it would mean a serious down-grading of Australia’s and New   Zealand’s standing in the wider international community as effective developed   societies,, 

  The i~hird change in the geo-strategic environment is of a very different nature.   It is the reduction in the cost of moving people, goods and especially capital,   information and services that is at the roots of the phenomenon that h.as come to be   popular111 known as globalisation. At first sight, the reduction in transaction and   other trade costs would seem to diminish the disadvantages of isolation and of small   scale. In sorne ways it does. But the larger part of the expansion of trade and   incomes growth in the new economy associated witlh globalisation comes from fine   specialisation in complex goods and services, and transactions with elements of 

  direct foreign investment. Despite the greatly increased role of electronic   transactions, :in which the quality of the business and physical infrastructure matters   a great deal and distance in itself not much, participation in the intense trade and   fine speciali(sation in the new areas of economic activity, and continued   competitiveness with new technology in old areas of the economy, require a high   degree of knowledge and trust between the parties, supported by cultural familiarity   and face to face contact and exchange amongst experts in a particular field and   suppliers of a wide range of services. 

  The finer specialisation and global reach of successful enterprises in the new   economy support the emergence of a small number of global and regional 

  50 

  One system, two comb-ies I 

  headquarters Jin each line of business. While some activities in the new economy can   be undertaken without penalty at great distance from the global centres of economic   activity, the highest value activities mostly cannot, unless producers in the   decentralised location can establish global competitive strength, and themselves 

  form a world centre for a particular activity. In the new economy of lower 

  transactions and trade costs, talent as much as information has become more mobile,   so that the best human resources move to the centre of initiative and excellence in   which their skills can be most productively applied. and have highest value, ofien   near the great economic centres of the North Atlantic and the North Pacific. The 

  industries based on specific resources that anchor labour and human capital to a   particular location, which attracted much of the immigration to the antipodes in   earlier periods of European settlement, are relatively less important in 

  contemporary economic activity.   It is now harder for small and isolated economies to hold their most 

  economically productive young people. Australia and to a lesser extent New   Zealand have become less isolated with the shift in the centre of gravity of the world   economy towards East Asia in recent decades. But this lessening of disadvantage   alone is only a partial offset to the tide generated by the new technologies and their 

  effect in pralctice on the location of economic activity. An attractive physical   environment can help as one element in a package to hold or attract high value   employment, but it is much more influential if the superior environmental amenity   is within commuting distance by a fast train from a great metropolis. Australia 

  struggles to maintain a strong position in the knowledge-intensive industries, and to   hold its most economically productive young people. New Zealand struggles   against worse: odds. 

  - 

  It is not that it is impossible for a small and isolated community to do well in the 

  contemporary global economy. It is not impossible for small and isolated economies   to develop areas of specialisation in which they are genuinely world class. The   greatly improved economic performances of the reformed Australian and New   Zealand economies over the past decade or so makes the point. But success requires   sustained effort and there is not much room for errlor in policy. 

  2. Open and1 Discriminatory Regionalism in Asia 

  Economies trade more intensively with regional neighbours than with others. This   is true in the Asia Pacific as it is elsewhere. There are good economic reasons for   regional concentration of trade and investment. Trade costs tend to be lower   amongst regional neighbours than in intercontinental trade. This is lobviously true   for merchandise trade, where transport costs tend to be high, and where distance is   related to transport costs. But transport costs are not the only or even the main 

  trade co,sts affecting the country pattern of international trade. Other transactions   costs are as large as transport costs in determining patterns of merchandise trade,   and much more influential in the trade in services, now more important in what has   become known as the new economy. These include the costs of maintaining trust   and good communications on matters of great complexity between people of 

  different cultural backgrounds. These subtle components of transactions costs are 

  Ross Gnmau t 

  Fl 

  more important for the fine specialisation and intra-industry trade that has   contributed exceptionally to global trade expansion in recent decades. They are   especially important for direct investment, and this, in turn, is an important   influence on trade.’ 

  For these reasons, the natural tendency towards regional concentration of   international trade is as important for the new as for the old areas of trade 

  expansion, for services trade as much as for merchandise trade, and for the so-called   new economy as much as for the old.   There are also economically damaging causes elf intense regional trade. It is   common for regional trading relationships to be reinforced by discrimination   against non-members, through tariffs and other trade barriers imposed by   governments being higher for outsiders than for members. Trade discrimination is   a central feature of the European Union (EU) and the North American Free Trade   Agreement (NAFTA), and is present in the Association of South East Asian Nations 

  (ASEAN) and in Cl oser Economic Relations between Australia and New Zealand   (CER). Importantly, it is not a feature of Asia F’acific Economic Cooperation   (APEC) or of regional concentration of trade within Northeast Asia.   The Eluropean Union and the North American Free Trade Agreement are the   dominant models of formal regional cooperation. One of the characteristics of the 

  traditional regional trading arrangement, such as the EU or the NAFTA, is the   establishment of free trade amongst members while maintaining official barriers to   trade with non-members. The free trade amongst members has generally expanded   trade inside the area, and sometimes through this process the incomes of members.   The discrimination against outsiders has diverted some established and potential 

  trade between members of the free trade area and the rest of the world, to trade   between members. This second aspect of the regional arrangements has lowered   economic welfare in non-members and in the world as a whole, and has diminished   the benefits of’ regional cooperation to members as well. 

  It is obvious that the traditional forms of economic cooperation intensify trade   amongst lmember economies. It is less obvious, but no less true, that traditional,   discriminatory regional trading arrangements also intensify trade amongst excluded   countries. The member economies become less competitive in markets that are   outside the regional arrangements. The tangle of rules of origin that is invariably   associated. with the old regionalism is an especially costly burden in the new   economy. 

  Ultimately, the effects on trade and economic welfare in members and the rest   of the world of the establishment of a traditional regional trading arrangement,   embodying discrimination against non-members, depends on what it does to the   political economy of trade policy in member economies and in the world as a whole.   Does it create momentum for more general and non-discriminatory trade   liberalisation? Does it divert political focus from unilateral trade liberalisation, and   the reduction of trade barriers through multilateral negotiations? These questions   have no answers that apply in all circumstances. Rather, the answers need to be   formed by analysis of particular circumstances. 

  W’e can say in all circumstances that regional trade liberalisation that is   implemented without discrimination against third countries expands trade and 

  52 

  One .tystem, two countries 

  increases’ economic welfare in members and in the world as a whole. This is the   modern model of regional cooperation, called “open regionalism”, upon which the   APEC commitment to free and open trade and investment in the Asia Pacific region   is based. CER is close to being a clean form of “open regionalism”, since Australia 

  and New Zealland have removed most of their trade barriers against the rest of the   world alongside their bilateral free trade. “Open regionalism” is especially suited to   the complex world of the new economy where production and trade is characterised   by fine specialisation, worldwide sourcing of inputs and sale of products, and the 

  need for fast transaction times.   Regional economic cooperation, whether or not it embodies discrimination   against outsiders, invariably extends beyond trade liberalisation. Some measures to   encourage economic integration through reduction of transaction costs have the   effect of expanding trade and investment among members without damaging trade   with or economic welfare within the rest of the world. 

  This is the background against which East Asian countries have come to consider   regional trad:ing arrangements in the aftermath of the financial crisis. The intense   established economic relations in East Asia, and more generally in the Western   Pacific, are mostly the result of the exceptional opportunities for expanding incomes   through trade and investment among members of the same region. They have been   boosted a bit by common exclusion from the discriminatory trading arrangements   within IMestlern Europe and North America. They have been supported in 

  significa:nt ways by the building of confidence in open economic strategies through   participa.tion in APEC.   The huge: expansion of East Asian, Western Pacific and Asia Pacific economic   relations1 over recent decades is a triumph of market processes over political   constraints. ‘The regional arrangements that evolve:d in East Asia from this history   were initially cautious in their ambitions, built on voluntary commitments more 

  than binding agreements, and were careful not to damage important relationships   outside East Asia and the Pacific.   ASEAN and APEC emerged from these process8es. By the late 199Os, each had   evolved into forms that were very different from the European and the vounger   North American models of regional economic cooperation. Each had important 

  achievements to its credit.   Principal amongst the APEC achievements were a number of practical steps in   trade and investment facilitation to reduce transaction costs; the strengthening of   confidence in each Asia Pacific economy that continued open policies in others   provided a secure basis for deeper integration into the international economy; the   support that the APEC goal of free and open trade in the Asia Pacific region gave   to unilateral trade liberalisation in Indonesia, the Philippines and China in   particular but also in Australia, New Zealand and elsewhere; the framework that it   establish.ed for resisting retreat into protectionism in the financial crisis; and the   opportunity it provided for high-level consultation amongst Asia Pacific 

  governments, including on the marshalling of financial support and technical   assistance on monetary matters for countries damaged seriously in the crisis. APEC   has provided consistent support for the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and its 

  Ross Gamazd t 

  53 

  predecessor the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and on a number   of occasions :an APEC consensus has been highly influential in developments that   have strengthened the global trading system.   From. the earliest days of discussions of Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, the   Southeast Asian countries worked within ASEAN and APEC to ensure that the   roles were complementary. The ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (AFTA) was   nominally discriminatory, but in practice, as with CER, movement towards the goal   of free tradie within ASEAN was principally through non-discriminatory   liberalisation and strongly supportive of the APEC gloal of free and open trade in the   Asia Pacific region. Most AFTA members are committed to multilateralisation of   ASEAN free trade within a time frame that supports the APEC goal of free and 

  open trade and investment by 2020.2   Developments in recent years have raised questions about whether the   established re:gional (ASEAN and especially APEC) and global (the ‘(NT0 and the   IMF) institutions are meeting East Asian requirements for a framework for   international economic cooperation. The difficulties in securing membership for   China and Chinese Taipei weakened the WTO. The back-loading of textile trade   liberalisation in Europe and the United States in the Uruguay Round settlement   encouraged cynicism. The apparent capitulation in Seattle to populist forces seen   as opposing export expansion from developing countries raised doubts about the   continueId relevance of the WTO. APEC’s legitimacy was weakened by the 

  perception that it had played an inadequate role in response to the financial crisis,   and by the disappointment with Early Voluntary Sectoral Liberalisation (EVSL) at   Kuala Lumpur in 1998. Recurrent political tensions between the United States and   some East Asian countries, especially China, provided encouragement for people   who favoiured new, exclusive East Asian cooperation. The IMF was seen in sorne   countries1 as having misjudged the policy response to the financial crisis, and as   having represented North Atlantic and especially United States interests in its 

  advice and conditions on funding .   There has been a plethora of proposals for sub-re:gional trade arrangements that   would see important APEC members shift trade policy priority to negotiation of   “free trade” arrangements of a potentially discriminatory nature. Th.e discussions   between Japan and Korea are desirable for the Asia Pacific region if they reduced   historic distru.st between two major regional countries, but have the potential to do 

  great damage to the open regional and global trading systems if they settle into the   mould of a traditional discriminatory free trade area. Potentially but not necessarily   discriminatory arrangements have been proposed, amongst others, for Japan-Korea-   Taiwan; AJ??A-CER; Japan-Mexico; Korea-Chile; AFTA-Chile; Singapore-   Japan; Singapore-New Zealand; United States-New Zealand; and United States- 

  CER.   This is a time for major efforts in leadership in support of an open trading   system. This leadership was not provided by the LJnited States in Seattle. Japan   could once have been relied upon to point out The potential danger in these   developments, but not at this time. A former WTO Director-General, at the 

  Singapore Ministerial Meeting four years ago, noted that the WTO could be 

  rendered largely irrelevant if there were an undisciplined proliferation of regional 

  trading arrangements3 He called for commitment to the APEC concept of Open   Regionalism as a means of harnessing the enhanced legitimacy of regionalism to the   strengthening of an open global trading system. Ea:rlier this month, at the time of   the APEC Trade Ministers’ meeting in Darwin, the current Director-General of   WTO endorsed APEC open regionalism as a means of ensuring that regional 

  arrangements were supportive of the WTO. However, unlike his predecessor, he   seemed to endorse discriminatory arrangements so long as they met the inadequate   tests of not creating new trade barriers or becoming hostile blocs.   The contemporary discussion of East Asian regional cooperation also includes   consideration of the “ASEAN Plus Three” grouping, covering ASEAN, China,   Japan and Korea, evolving from its current status as a focus for high-level 

  consultation (now at Heads of Government level) into a more formal institution. Its   first practical agreements relate to monetary cooperation, but there is some talk of   sub-regional free trade.   The new legitimacy of sub-regional arrangements has positive as well as negative   origins. The challenge is to channel its potential for change in ways that strengthen   wider regional and global mechanisms for international cooperation. The response 

  to the challenge must begin with clear-headed recognition of the dangers.   The WI’0 can be damaged in two ways by regional trading arrangements. One   is by diversion of the political will and effort and the administrative capacity of   member gove:rnments away from the strengthening of WTO mechanisms and from   a new round of multilateral trade negotiations. The second is through the 

  proliferation of discriminatory regional arrangements, which can render the 

  first 

  Article of the WTO, the most favoured nation principle, irrelevant, whether or not   they are legal under Article 24 of the WTO. The WTO alone can develop the   rules-based system that is necessary for the international community to take full   advantage of the potential gains from global free trade, enhanced as they have been   by the new information technology. 

  New .regional, sub-regional and bilateral trading arrangements may be able to   generate gains through cooperation to reduce transaction costs in trade and   investment amongst members. They may be able to take some areas of cooperation   further in sub-groups than in the now huge and diverse membership of APEC. But   if they went further than this, to the negotiation of binding agreements for 

  discriminatory free trade, they would be very likely to reduce further the coherence   and effectiveness of APEC, and to corrode the WT’O.   The APEC concept of open regionalism provides the means of reconciling the   building of new regional arrangements with the re(quirements of a strong VVTO. 

  Given that discussion of various sub-regional trading arrangements has considerable   momentum, how should that energy be directed? There are gains and few risks if   the primary focus is on technical assistance and on a wide range of cooperative   activities to reduce transactions costs among regional neighbours, without seeking   to negoti:ate special arrangements on market access. If the political dynamics of sub-   regional cooperation generate pressure for improved market access, as they may do,   for example, between Japan and Korea, a primary commitment to open regionalism 

  Ross Gnmau t 

  55 

  is the discipline that is necessary to ensure that the new arrangements are supportive   and not destructive of APEC and the W’T’O.   In the absence of leadership on these issues from the major developed   economies, it is particularly important that Australia and New Zealand take a clear-   headed view of their own and the region’s interests into their discussion of sub-   regional arrangements. They need to recognise, however, that this is a time when   their role in shaping the regional agenda has been diminished for a while by the 

  legacy of the financial crisis and Timor. The dangers of marginalisation in   important regional developments in East Asia make it important that Australia and   New Zealand seek positive outcomes from current discussion of a link between CER   and AFT4, and make it clear that they would welcome unconditionally an invitation 

  to participate in the ASEAN Plus Three discussions, which would become ASEAN   Plus Five.   Australia and New Zealand would increase the chances of positive outcomes   from the current discussion of sub-regional econo.mic cooperation by doing two   things. The first is to complete the transition to complete free trade in goods in   each of their own countries by the APEC deadline of 2010, making CER a clean   example of open regionalism, and making it possible to enter other free trade   arrangements in the Western Pacific without discriminating against other trading 

  partners. Thle second is to argue for any market access liberalisation that emerges   from discussion of the AFTA-CER links and ASEAN Plus Five be on the basis of   open regionalism. 

  3. Development in the Arc of Instability 

  The management of relations with Australia’s imlmediate neighbourhood is the   country’s most demanding foreign policy problem. It could hardly be different for   New Zealand, given the prominence of the South Pacific in the country’s external   orientation. 

  The special features of the challenge include the difficulties of analvsis in settling   upon an apprloach that is likely to be successful, the immense fiscal demands of the   necessary programmes for development, the long-term nature of the task, and the   intricate complexity of the diplomacy required to steer a steady course over long 

  periods. They include as well the reality that in this region, or at least in that part   of the region East of the Papua New Guinea. border with Indonesia, the 

  international community expects Australia and New Zealand to take the lead, and   mostly to carry the load alone.   We clo not yet understand well enough the requirements for sustaining a   constitutional democratic order and development in the island communities. Part   of what rnust be done therefore involves research. I?art of the requirement is long- 

  term assistance to human resource development and institution-building. Part will   involve the commitment of Australian and New Zealand human as well as financial   resources directly to the protection of constitutional order when, as they will   sometimes do, the local mechanisms break down. The effort must include a large,   sustained dipl.omatic effort within the region, most iimportantly through the Pacific 

  Forum, to provide a supportive framework for sustained interaction of great 

  56 

  One ytem, two countries 

  intensity; and beyond the region to build understanding and support for the region   to manage its affairs in this way.   The domestic and international political difficulties for Australia and New   Zealand are innmense. It is a challenge beyond the normal capacities of our political   systems, *with their short time horizons and demand for concrete and immedia.te   outcomes from policy initiatives. The effort will suffer from being politically, and   for the individuals who will be called upon to do the work, personally and 

  professionally, a thankless task. Progress will be slow, at times to the point of   imperceptibility. There will be setbacks, and periods when the effort will seem to   have been fruitless. Worst of all, it will be several decades at best before success will   be realised. 

  Why bother? Because there is no realistic alternative. No matter how bad   things are now, with the breakdown in constitutional order in Fiji and the Solomons,   they will get much worse without concerted action from the region, led by Australia   and New Zealand. 

  In Timor, it is better for everyone if Australia and New Zealand are strong   supporters of a development programme in which Indonesia and the European   Union also play leading roles. I fear, however, that the European interest will recede   to issues closer to home, and that international leadership of continuing support to   Timor w:ill fall to cooperation between Australia with support from New Zealand, 

  and Indonesia - placing another load on a relationship that is anyway under strain.   We have taken some important steps together over the past year. For all its   unfortunate implications for Indonesia-Australia relations, Australia-New Zealand   cooperation in developing the coalition of the willing on East Timor around the   Auckland APEC Summit led to successful humanitarian intervention. At the sarne   Auckland Summit, the New Zealand hosts were instrumental in organising a first 

  meeting of Friends of Papua New Guinea, with Australia in the chair, in support of   the new Morauta Government’s commitment to economic stabilisation and political   and economic reform. This has to be just the beginning. 

  4. One System, Two Countries 

  More effrxtivie integration of the perspectives, policies and economies of Australia   and New Zealand, around the concept of open regionalism, can reduce the risks of   marginalisation of the two countries from developments in East Asia. IMore   effective cooperation can also increase the chances of success for the two countries’   contributions to political stability and economic development in the small island   countries in their neighbourhood. In these ways, this could 

  indif-ectly support the 

  two countries’ efforts in meeting the special challenges to small isolated economies   in the world of falling trade and transactions costs and “globalisation”.   Many of the   dkect benefits in meeting the challenge of globalisation in small,   isolated economies through Closer Economic Relations have already been realised.   But unre:alised gains from completing the unfinished agenda of CER are n.ot   negligibly small, especially for New Zealand. 

  In   Australia and the No&east Asian Ascendancy, I drew attention to the high costs   of maintaining a world class analytic and diplomatic effort in relation to East Asia, 

  Ross Garnaut 

  57 

  and suggested that Australia’s disadvantage of small scale would be helped through   an integrated effort with New Zealand. Some of the potential gains to which I drew   attention eleven years ago are still available.   Trans-Tasman integration in several of the service sectors has lost momentum,   amongst: other things weakening Closer Economic Relations as a model for regional   economic cooperation. 

  The recent debate in New Zealand about monetary integration has extended the   agenda for consideration. It has merit. A recent book An A~ZK 

  Dollar? by 

  Grimes and Holmes4 has drawn attention to the volatility of the New Zealand dollar   since the float in 1985, and the tendency for it to respond more strongly to domestic   than external. shocks. The Australian dollar has fluctuated more sympathetically   than the New Zealand currency with New Zealand’s as well as with Australia’s   external terms of trade. The larger currency area would be a bit more stable in   response to fluctuations in sentiment in international markets than the Australian   dollar alone, and substantially more stable than the New Zealand dollar alone. 

  Grimes and Holmes correctly draw attention as well to the significant reductions in   New Zealand’s international transactions costs from a common currency, although   this source of gain would be small for Australia.   A former Australian Deputy Prime Minister, Tim Fischer, has supported a joint 

  currency and suggested that it be called the 

  zac. The Australian Treasurer has 

  commented that if New Zealand wishes to base its currency on the Australian dollar,   it is welcome to do so. New Zealand and Australia would each realise most of the   potential economic gains from integration if New Zealand took this step 

  unilaterally, perhaps through a currency board system.   The Australian Treasurer did not hold out much encouragement for going   further, and working towards a joint currency, although there are advantages in   doing so. To have any chance of being politically acceptable in Australia, the   respective roles of Australia and New Zealand in setting the rules, and maintaining   a joint currency, including through appointments to the board of the central bank,   would need to reflect the relative sizes of the two economies. While most of the 

  prosaic economic gains from integration could be achieved through a unilateral   decision by New Zealand to peg its own currency to the Australian dollar, I see three   advantages in taking the extra step to a joint currency.   First, while both Australia and New Zealand have successfully developed 

  perceptions and the reality of central bank independence in recent years, a central   bank established by international agreement, with, say, one member of a five-person   board nominated by the second government, would be more obviously and   indissolubly independent. The extension of the talent pool to New Zealand would   make it a bit easier to find the required complement of qualified independent board   members without conflicting interests. 

  Second, if it were politically acceptable in Australia, a joint currency would be   politically mo’re palatable in New Zealand than a currency board based on the   Australian dollar.   Third, a new joint currency would provide a sound base - probably more 

  attractive to the Island States than the Australian dlollar alone - for the currency 

  58 

  One sy-tem, two countries 

  board systems that would provide the necessary mojnetary stability for long-term   development i:n the South Pacific island economies. This would be an important   development , since badly managed independent currencies have been an important   problem for development. 

  I have been asked whether, given the gains so far, the potential gains from   completing the unfinished agenda, and the imperative of working together on wider   regional issues, it was inevitable that there would be continued progress on Closer   Economic Relations. Regrettably, it is not inevitable. 

  The incremental gains to Australia from completing the unfinished agenda are   not so large that they seem obviously worth the effort, if there are irritants in the   broader Austra.lia-New Zealand relationship that raise the political costs in Australia   of further steps in cooperation. In this context, the divergence in approaches t:o 

  defence - on defence expenditure and its orientation, and especially on the Unite:d   States alliance - is more than a small irritant. I note that last week’s Australia   Defence IDiscussion Paper does not mention New Zealand in its treatment of   alliances. A soon-to-be-released book by American and Australian foreign policy   and defence analysts on Asia Pacific security issues, edited by Blackwill and Dibb,’   barely mentions New Zealand. In a rare reference Dibb says that “Canberra will   increasingly” come to see New Zealand as more of a liability than a useful ally. 

  The recognition in both Australia and New Zealand, following recent 

  developments in Timor, Fiji and the Solomons, that relations with countries in the   arc of instability will require stronger defence capacities can provide a basis for a   new and more productive discussion on defence cooperation. I hope that it does.   Australia and New Zealand face immense strategic challenges in the period ahead. 

  Deeper integration of policies and economies would increase the chances of success,   even for Australia, larger but still small in a contemporary international context.   Australians and New Zealanders should need no other reason to make the effort.   But there are other reasons. Our commitment together to open regionalism can 

  make a significant contribution to peace and prosperity in East Asia and the Asia   Pacific. Our commitment together to a long-term programme of constitutional   stabilisation and institutional and economic development in the South Pacific island   economies, would seem to be a necessary condition for those countries’ eventual   success. 

  In China, a unique set of historical circumstances has made it important to   maintain sepa:rate economic systems in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, while   holding up some symbol of national unity. Ye Yuanjing and Deng Xiaoping used the   term L‘One Country Two Systems” to describe their version of arrangements to meet   these conditions. 

  In Australia and New Zealand, a century of separate political sovereignty, and a   different, unique set of historical circumstances, have made it important at this time   in history to maintain symbols of separate sovereignty. At the same time, the   similarity of interests in a wide range of economic and international affairs argues   for deep integration and closely complementary policies. If Australia and New   Zealand get it right in each of their own interests, ‘I’One System, Two Countries”   would be an appropriate description of their relationship to each other. 

  - - - 9 - y , . . _-  . 

  End Notes: 

  Ross IGarnaLut (with Peter Drysdale) “The Pacific: An Application of a General Theory of   Economic Integration” in C Fred Bergsten and M Nolan (eds.) Pac.@ Dynamism and the   International Economic Srsfem, pp.183-224, Washington DC, 1993. 

  Ross IGarna.ut, Open Regionalim and Trade Liberalisation; An Asia Pa& Contribution to the   Wol-Zd Trade System, Institute of Southeast Asia Studies, Singapore 1996. 

  Renato Ruggiero, cited in Garnaut, ibid. 

  Arthur Grimes and Sir Frank Holmes, An ANZAC Dollar? Currency Union and Business   Dmehpmen t, Institute of Policy Studies, Victoria University, of Wellington, 2000. 

  Robert D Etlackwell and Paul Dibb (eds.) America’s Asian Al’liances, Cambridge, Mass. and London,   2000. 

