---
title: "Refugees need help to build new lives."
date: "2000-04-26"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211482242
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/O0C16%22
---

  Senator Andrew Bartlett 

  Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson 

  Refugees need help to build new lives 

  The Australian Democrats have accused the Federal Immigration Minister, along with some state   government leaders, of planning to deprive refugees of essential services. 

  “Statements by Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock are, effectively, encouraging state governments   to let genuine refugees live on the streets,” said Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Democrats’ immigration   spokesperson. 

  “The Coalition’s approach to refugees has now sunk to the level of barbarism. Australia’s refugee   policy has descended into a cruel and irrational farce as governments chase the Pauline Hanson vote.” 

  Mr Ruddock has said that states are not expected to provide accommodation, health or language   services to genuine refugees on temporary visas when they are released into the community. 

  “The Government is now openly saying that, even though these people are refugees fleeing genuine   persecution, we are going to give them as little assistance as possible,” said Senator Bartlett. 

  “There are also reports from community and state government organisations that the Immigration   Department has written asking them not to provide assistance to refugees on temporary visas. 

  “The Coalition’s approach will lead to refugees being unable to access basic assistance to build a life in   the Australian community,” said Senator Bartlett. 

  “Refugees have the best record of all migrants in terms of the long-term contribution they make to   Australia, yet the Federal Government is trying to prevent them from making that contribution. 

  “It is in the community’s interests for these refugees to fit into Australian 

  society, not condemn them to a life of 

  poverty, with inadequate or no accommodation or education and extreme difficulty in accessing employment.” 

  While agreeing that the temporary refugees should be eligible for normal humanitarian settlement services   funded by the Commonwealth, Senator Bartlett expressed concern at the reported comments of Premier John   Olsen and Premier Peter Beattie. 

  “Instead of complaining about the potential cost of assisting new residents, the State Premiers should do the   right thing by the refugees and the broader community. The federal government may be willing to abdicate   their moral, social and economic responsibilities, but that   just increases the responsibility on the states. 

  “The Minister wants to look tough on people who have been recognised by his own Department as genuine   refugees, There’s nothing tough in kicking people when they are down. You don’t get much more vulnerable   than a genuine refugee who has fled persecution and is now expected to be dumped out in the community with   no assistance at all. 

  “We should accept the need to provide haven for genuine refugees. Australia has a moral responsibility   to ensure that we are not sending people back to persecution or death,” 

  “The best thing for Australia is to grant new refugees permanent residency and full access to   humanitarian support services,” concluded Senator Bartlett. 

  For interview contact, Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101 

  http://www.democrats.org.au 

  , 

