---
title: "Indonesian government must stop the next East Timor."
date: "2000-08-17"
creators:
  - "Bourne, Vicki"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BOURNE, SEN VICKI"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211206632
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WW826%22
---

  Senator Vicki Bourne 

  Australian Democrats   Spokesperson on Foreign Affairs 

  Indonesian Government must stop the next East Timor 

  Australian Democrats’ foreign affairs spokesperson, Senator Vicki Bourne, today warned   that events in Ambon are like East Timor in 1975. ( 

  “It is murder and it has to stop. Houses are being burnt, people are being killed, the   population is traumatised and it must stop,” Senator Bourne told a peace vigil at   Parliament House. 

  “We can not wait 25 years as we did for East Timor for the world to recognise that it is all   happening again. 

  “The islands of Bacan, Tidore, and Ternate have been completely emptied of Christians.   Churches, schools and hospitals have all been destroyed and people are living in   makeshift accommodation. Some sources place the number of displaced people at   200,000, although it has been suggested that even this figure may be conservative. 

  “I understand the army knew of villages that were emptied in a concerted and   methodical way. People were forced to leave their houses and the whole village was   burned to the ground. 

  “1 call on the Indonesian Government to work with religious leaders to quell the violence.   I call on the Indonesian Government to remove the Jihad from the Maluccu Islands. 

  “I also call on the Indonesian Government to exarnine the role of their army in the   hostilities”, said Senator Bourne. 

  Today’s peace vigil was organised by the Ambonese community to highlight the   slaughter and terror occurring in Ambon and the Maluccu Islands. 

  Reverend John Barr also spoke to today’s peace vigil, making a passionate plea for the   terror to stop. Reverend Barr and the Uniting Church have taken a leading role in   exposing the ongoing atrocities in Ambon. His speech is attached and he is available for   comment. 

  For further information: Vicki Bourne 0418 861 098   Gabrielle Russell (02) 9246 3377 or 0414 522 702 

  Five days ago I was in Kupang, West Timor. There I met with refugees who had 

  just fled Ambon and were taking refuge in a university dormitory. I spoke with   them, I listened to their cries and we prayed together. 

  Their story was like so many stories we have all heard. Ambon and the Maluku   Islands are a killing field. Thousands of people have died. Between 3 and 4   thousand people are said to have died over the past 18 months. I believe the   number is higher, much higher. 

  Then there are those who have fled for their lives - up to 500,000 people - men,   women and children, old people, young people, people whc are terrified and   vulnerable. Many of these people are still hiding in the mountains where they are   being hunted down, where they are trying to survive without adequate protection,   without enough food and without any medical care. 

  And then there is the Laskar Jihad and the military. These are thugs and 

  terrorists who come from other parts of Indonesia to systematically attack and   destroy communities. They slaughter the innocent and massacre those who just   want to live in peace. A reign of terror has now been imposed on a once beautiful   and peaceful land. 

  Friends, I come here today bewildered and confused. Today, 17 August, is   Indonesia’s Independence Day. It’s a day when many Indonesians rightly   celebrate their liberation from Western colonialism. It’s a day when many   Indonesians acknowledge the emergence of their nation, a nation that, among   other things, seeks to embrace humanitarian principles and religious tolerance. 

  Yet today there is a terrible form of tyranny going on in Indonesia that attacks the   very basis of the nation. It’s a tyranny that targets particular communities like the   Christian community in Ambon, Halmahera, Lornbok and Sumatera. It’s a tyranny   that targets these communities in a most violent and inhuman way. It’s a tyranny   that is militant, fundamentalist and abhorent in its destruction of religious 

  diversity. It’s a tyranny that is frightening in its effort to undermine and destroy the   democratic process that is developing in Indonesia. 

  Friends, I also come here today ashamed and angry. The rest of the world knows   what is going on in Ambon and the Maluku Islands. Yet%orld does virtually   nothing. I know the Australian Government is concerned. It is indeed very   concerned. Yet the Government of Australia seems impotent and unable to 

  respond effectively. European nations and North America are slowly coming on   board however their responses are hesitant and cautious. 

  The truth of the matter is that we cannot just stand by and let Ambon die. I 

  appeal respectfully to the Government of Indonesia to stop the violence and the   terror in Ambon and the Maluku Islands! Please do something! Whatever you   do - please stop the violence and the killing! 

  And if you can’t stop it 

  - then please ask for help. Seek assistance from the   international community. Go to the United Nations and get their help. invite the   international community to participate in peacemaking initiatives. Whatever you   do - please do not let our brothers and sisters simply die! 

  i also appeal to Government of Australia and the nations of the world to stop   seeing Ambon and the Maluku Islands as an isolated, internal issue within   Indonesia. 

  Stop seeing Ambon as a case that is different to East Timor and therefore none   of our business. Ambon is as serious and as critical as East Timor. For what’s   happening in Ambon and the Maluku Islands is an offence to all humanity. It’s   deeply offensive and it therefore requires international attention. It’s clearly an 

  international issue that requires an international response. 

  The international community, therefore, must be ready to offer generous   humanitarian aid. The international community must be prepared to receive   refugees and offer safe havens to those who are the victims of this terrible   conflict. And the international community must be able to offer peaceful solutions   and a process of reconciliation. For Ambon is an escalating conflict where there   are no winners. Everybody looses in this conflict. 

  I believe Australia has little choice. Indonesia has little time. We must work   together on this. Our friends in Ambon and the Maluku Islands are dying. Many of   our friends here today in front of this Parliament House are distraught and have   nowhere to turn. To ignore this tragedy or simply play it down 

  would be a most 

  callous, inhumane and irresponsible way to act. To walk away from this is 

  unthinkable. 

  Brothers and sisters, in God’s name we must act. We must travel together. We   must work creatively, passionately and energetically for a just and peaceful   outcome! 

  People of Ambon and the Malukus - we are with you! On this day and in this 

  place we hear your cries. We will do ail that we can! 

  Thank you. 

  Rev John Barr   Secretary for Indonesia   Uniting Church in Australia National Assembly   PO Box A2266 Sydney South 1235   Phone0282674251;0408826742   Fax 02 8267 4222 

