---
title: "Government risks race election."
date: "2001-08-29"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227816
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UJT46%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare

 M e d i

 a

 R e l e a

 s e

 29th August 2001

 Government Risks Race Election  

 

 The Government risks fanning racial tensions within our community by rushing new legislation into Parliament just weeks before calling an election, according to Member for Calare Peter Andren.  

 “There is no doubt there is room for reform in our asylum granting processes, but this should be debated fully in Parliament and not rushed through to obtain maximum political advantage in the last two weeks of this Parliament,” Mr Andren said.  

 “In the short term we have a humanitarian crisis on our doorstep, whatever the law of the high seas, and in the absence of any other option we must accept the people aboard the Norwegian ship the Tampa are our moral responsibility.

 “After all, in rescuing the passengers of the stricken boat, the freighter was responding to requests from Australian authorities.  

 “In the longer term we should seek the full co-operation of our Asian neighbours and the United Nations to rub out the multi-billion dollar people smuggling trade.

 “Hopefully the worldwide coverage of this event will redouble international action to address people smuggling rackets.

 “Indonesia has a special responsibility to ensure the elimination of any corruption that facilitates the embarkation of boatloads of asylum seekers from Indonesian ports is.  

 “I have no problem with legislation designed to weed out the frauds from the genuine refugees.

 “But it must be remembered there are 50,000 illegal immigrants already hiding in this country who have deliberately overstayed visas.  

 “The Parliament must be given the opportunity to properly scrutinise this legislation so we are not part of a pre-election knee-jerk reaction in response to polls and talk-back radio.  

 “We almost risked a race-based election in 1998 over Native Title, we are headed down the same path in the current climate.  

 “We cannot claim the high moral ground in sending our troops against Saddam, we cannot condemn the Taliban extremists, if we aren’t prepared to accept there are thousands of persecuted victims of those regimes who manage to escape.  

 “Why wouldn’t they seek asylum in the most free nation on earth?  

 For More Information: Peter Andren 6277 2341 or 041 961 2891.

