---
title: "Some Australians have forgotten their own ancestry says Senator Bartlett."
date: "2001-06-03"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211224708
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2M846%22
---

  Senator Andrew Bartlett 

  Australian Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson 

  Some Australians have forgotten their own 

  ancestry says Senator Bartlett 

  The Australian Democrats ask all Australians to support refugees by   attending the national day of action being held at noon today in their   capital city. 

  In recent weeks, there has been an upsurge in the media’s and Government’s condemnation   of detainees; sensationalistic reports have highlighted situations that have allegedly occurred   in the Port Hedland detention centre, such as hunger strikes, ‘rioting’, and violent and   threatening behaviour toward Commonwealth employees. 

  The Government’s actions have served only to distort the plight of Australia’s detainees. 

  Senator Andrew Bartlett said today, “The Government’s immigration policies have seen   Australia’s once much-lauded reputation as a multicultural nation supporting and advocating   human rights drastically eroded. People’s lives are being destroyed; this was made all too real   with the recent death of Mr Shahraz Kayani. 

  “There is growing despair, frustration and anger among detainees and refugees. 

  “The definition of ‘refugee’ is very clear and exact. Asylum seekers go through strict and   invasive assessments before they are accepted as refugees. It is not about how you got here;   it is about what you have escaped from and what would happen to you if you were returnelj.” 

  Senator Bartlett continued, “The misconception being espoused that people are ‘jumping   queues’ is ridiculous, particularly when you are escaping from a country that does not haw? an   Australian embassy. 

  “The Howard Government has enflamed racist sentiment and struck fear into the hearts of   many detainees by instigating practices that are unprecedented in Australia’s migration   history. These practices will leave a scar on our country and many of our refugees for years to   come. The Government’s immigration policies are destroying lives. 

  “Detainees are labelled ‘illegal immigrants’ and ‘queue jumpers’, regardless of their   circumstances by the Government, the media, and some misguided Australians-many of   who have forgotten their own ancestry, “ concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS 

  For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 

  http:/,lwww.democrats.org.au 

  ,_.I .-,_c -...,. ..---..--. “..I 

