---
title: "Visit to Nauru, Fiji, Vanuatu and New Zealand."
date: "2001-12-07"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232294
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8WK56%22
---

 Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER

 FA176  7 December 2001

 VISIT TO NAURU, FIJI, VANUATU AND NEW ZEALAND

 I will visit Nauru, Fiji, Vanuatu and New Zealand from 10 to 16 December.

 In Nauru on 10-11 December I will hold discussions with President Harris and members of the government on bilateral issues and people smuggling.  We will discuss issues regarding the Australian-funded processing centres, including our request for additional capacity.  I will visit the processing centres to gain a first-hand impression of their operations, and meet representatives from the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

 My visit to Fiji on 11-13 December will be the first by an Australian minister since democracy was restored at the August elections.  I will be meeting Prime Minister Qarase, Foreign Minister Tavola and other government ministers to discuss the way forward for the bilateral relationship following our lifting of bilateral sanctions on 5 October.  I will also meet the Leader of the Opposition and members of the Fiji Labour Party, the Secretary-General of the Pacific Islands Forum, Noel Levi, and members of the Fiji-Australia Business Council.

 I will visit Vanuatu on 13-14 December for bilateral discussions with Prime Minister Natapei, whose government is pursuing a reformist agenda under difficult circumstances.  I will also have talks with other government ministers and visit some Australian aid projects. Vanuatu and Fiji are both important neighbours for Australia in Melanesia, with whom we have close connections and important interests.

 In New Zealand I will attend the biannual Australia New Zealand Foreign Ministers’ Meeting on 15-16 December.  I particularly value the opportunity these meetings provide to exchange views with my New Zealand counterpart on a wide range of global, regional and bilateral issues of mutual interest.

 Media contacts: (Ministerial)  Nicole Guihot (02) 6277 7500            (Departmental) Lyndall Sachs (02) 6261 1555

