---
title: "People smuggler arrested in Malaysia, offshore places lost to onshore arrivals: transcript of press conference."
date: "2001-12-02"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232204
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U7L56%22
---

  

 Transcript

 People Smuggler Arrested in Malaysia, Offshore Places lost to Onshore Arrivals

 Press Conference - 2 December 2001

 Question: Minister - a major breakthrough for Federal Police in Malaysia… you must be very satisfied with the amount of pro-activity and success of these investigations.

 Mr Ruddock: I certainly am. What we've had is a very determined effort through the task force of Immigration and Federal Police working on information we gather from those people who come to Australia about the organisers of smuggling and the routes they take. And we've seen a number of very significant breakthroughs and this is one in relation to Malaysia. We've had others detained in Cambodia and at the moment waiting trial. They used to organise from Indonesia and tried to shift operations to Cambodia.

 And we've had of course, people who've tried to vacate the business because it's getting too tough in Indonesia.

 Question: What is precisely the significance of this latest arrest?

 Ruddock: Well you see, the way in which the trafficking is organised, is that people either make their own way to Malaysia to Thailand… or they are organised from places like Pakistan and Iran to Malaysia and Thailand. Accommodation needs to be arranged. They need to be linked up with the other smugglers in Indonesia. Their trafficking from Malaysia to Indonesia needs to be arranged and if you can take out the key organisers of those operations, it's very disruptive in relation to the travel that's been put in place.

 Question: In some respects this fellow - alleged at least anyway - is one of the hyenas if you like… he's a middle man but a senior connection…

 Ruddock: The allegations at the moment suggest that he is one of the major organisers as distinct from one of the underlings that goes out and meets people. Obviously there'll be evidence produced at a trial that the Malaysians will be conducting.

 Question: Just on that point, are you confident that the judicial system in Malaysia is going to be strong enough to provide the deterrent that you'd like to see.

 Ruddock: There are issues that we will want to press at the conference which is being organised by Indonesia to discuss people smuggling issues in this region and there will be a range of questions that will have to be looked at in terms the adequacy of law… in terms of the policing arrangements and the extent to which the system is able to deliver outcomes.

 But they're matters we will want to raise in the context of the discussions that we will have in the conference that is put in place early next year.

 Question: In the meantime though, you wouldn't want to see anything that is just a slap of the wrist for these people after they're arrested.

 Ruddock: No. The seriousness of these matters can be judged by the fact that we have required that where penalties can be imposed for smuggling five people or more - and they involve up to 20 years penal servitude - that we've now specified that for first offences that the minimum sentence must be five years' jail. And for a second offence it's seven years' jail.

 So the seriousness that we attach to it can be seen from the nature of the penalties that we put in place.

 Question: What about Malaysia? Would you like to see Malaysia follow our lead though?

 Ruddock: We would just say that we have led by example.

 Question: You'd like to see Malaysia follow our lead in imposing similar tough penalties to make the deterrent uniform?

 Ruddock: Well when we talk to the Malaysians, it'll be in the context of the conference and it's important I think to look at the lead that we have taken and the size of the penalties that we think are appropriate.

 Question: Just on another matter - the article in the Sun Herald this morning about the statistics relating to the success of people applying for humanitarian visas, showing that those arriving by boat are more likely - or have been at least, more likely to succeed. Are those figures in many respects now outdated given recent world events?

 Ruddock: Look they are outdated because the situation is going to change because of the law that we were able to amend before the Parliament rose… which tightened up on the definitions of what it be to be a refugee, to bring it in line with the international standards, as distinct from the rather relaxed standards that have developed here through judicial review.

 Of course, the law that has now limited the role of the courts should limit further unintended expansion of the definitions of refugee. But the important point is that the international protection system won't work if those people who are unsafe where they are and who cannot return home miss out on resettlement places because they've been stolen by those who are free enough to travel and who are able to get to places like Indonesia where they are safe and secure, and get into the hands of smugglers and then get to Australia and put up asylum claims. When they get an asylum claim up… when they were safe and secure in Indonesia. Don't forget the point. They were safe and secure. Nobody's being persecuted in Indonesia.

 And so the issue you have to look at is why do people who engage people smugglers get a better outcome than those who have no prospect of returning home and are unsafe.

 Index of Transcripts

  

