---
title: "Defence families considered in immigration centre decision."
date: "2001-08-23"
creators:
  - "Scott, Bruce"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER ASSISTING THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227643
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/84S46%22
---

 Media Release The Hon Bruce Scott MP Minister for Veterans’ Affairs · Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence · Federal Member for Maranoa

 23 Aug 2001 MIN 316/01

 Thursday 23 August MIN316/01

  

 DEFENCE FAMILIES CONSIDERED IN IMMIGRATION CENTRE DECISION In making its decision to allow the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (DIMA) to establish a temporary immigration reception centre within HMAS Coonawarra, Darwin, the Liberal-National Government had considered the impact on Defence personnel and their families who reside in the immediate vicinity, the Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence, Bruce Scott, said today.

 "I want to reassure serving personnel and their families who live within HMAS Coonawarra Naval Base that I have directed Defence to develop a range of measures to deal with concerns that might arise from the establishment of a temporary DIMA processing facility," Mr Scott said.

 "Unauthorised boat arrivals to Australia is a serious issue that needs to be dealt with in a responsible manner and I am confident the majority of the community will support the Liberal-National Government’s carefully considered decision.

 "Minister Ruddock has advised me that the Coonawarra DIMA facility will only be used on an as required basis for reception processing, when their normal processing capacity is exceeded, with unauthorised arrivals being relocated to other immigration facilities elsewhere, usually within a few days.

 "As Minister with responsibility for Defence personnel matters I recognise there may be concerns among some of our Defence personnel and their families arising from the establishment of this temporary facility. Their welfare is of paramount importance to me, and I have instructed Defence to develop a range of options to address accommodation and lifestyle concerns that may arise among Defence personnel and their families at HMAS Coonawarra.

 "Options include increased security arrangements for those who reside within the Naval Base and the married quarters, and a choice for individuals and families to relocate to Defence Housing properties within the Darwin area, should they so wish.

 "I have also directed that additional staffing be established at the Defence Community

 Organisation Darwin, and that a residents consultative forum be established."

 Mr Scott said in addition to the Coonawarra DIMA processing centre, temporary immigration detention centres would also be set up at Defence establishments at the Singleton Military Area, Singleton NSW, and El Alamein Camp at the Cultana Training Area, near Port Augusta SA.

 "While I expect there will be little direct impact on Defence personnel and their families in these locations those who may be impacted by the establishment of DIMA facilities at Singleton and El Alamein will be offered similar options to those in Darwin.

 "The Liberal-National Government’s decision to use Defence facilities to assist DIMA represents a responsible approach to the serious issue of unauthorised boat arrivals to Australia."

 Media Contact: Mark Croxford 02 6277 7820 or 0408 645 787

 Phone: 61 (02) 62777820 Fax: 62734140 Email: Bruce.Scott.MP@aph.gov.au Website: http://www.defence.gov.au

 [ Defence Home ] [ back to top ]

