---
title: "Melbourne, Victoria: transcript of doorstop interview: unemployment figures, GST, sale of AFR."
date: "2001-11-08"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231807
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7YF56%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Unemployment Figures, GST, Sale Of AFR

 http://www.alp.org.au//media/1101/kbmcvicb081101.html Monday, 19 November 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Unemployment Figures, GST, Sale Of AFR

 Transcript - Melbourne, Victoria - 8 November 2001

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: The unemployment rate has hit 7 per cent. Joblessness is up in this country because of the goods and services tax. That rate of 7 per cent is related to the impact of the goods and services tax on our economy. It has destroyed jobs in the Australian economy. It slowed growth and as growth slowed unemployment has risen.

 This is what the Labor Party has announced during the course of this election campaign related to jobs and the capacity of our economy to create jobs. This is what John Howard has announced during the course of this election campaign on the question of jobs and how his policies relate to the creation of jobs. The Labor Party fought this election campaign, has fought this election campaign and continues too on the basis of security abroad and security at home. But in security at home it is a question of jobs, health and education.

 We have always regarded an obligation on the Australian Government to have a strategy for jobs. We have a strategy for jobs - John Howard hasn't.

 I have seen his last statement of this campaign to the National Press Club today. There was no vision in it, no plan. There is now a clear contrast between the Australian Labor Party and our political opponents. John Howard has gone through this election campaign with a plan for retirement and an absolute determination that before he goes he will raise the rate of the GST or see it imposed on food and replace himself with Mr Costello after that.

 We have gone into this election campaign with a constructive program for the future of this nation. If you want any more evidence that the Liberal Party plans to ensure that the GST goes on food we have it from Barry Hasse their Member for Kalgoorlie today. The Member for Kalgoorlie came out and has said, in fact he said on November 7th quite clearly, that he believes that the goods and services tax should be on food, on all food. That is a common view amongst Liberal Party backbenchers but far more important than that that is the view of Howard and Costello, that is what they will do.

 But the figure today which ought to worry every Australian is that figure of 7.1% joblessness and complete complacency of this Government. That 7.1% is related to the goods and services tax, growth slowed, joblessness rises. That invariably happens when growth is slowed by decisions taken by government.

 JOURNALIST: Aren't there also some aberrations in there regarding the Ansett collapse?

 BEAZLEY: There are no aberrations in these figures. I see that Mr Costello was out there today saying that it was about terrorism, others have said Ansett. And certainly Ansett is a problem that needs to be fixed and if it is not fixed by Saturday, and I hope that it will be, then that will be my first task as Prime Minister of this country. But remember back to the Budget in May. What did the Budget in May say? There would be no collapse of Ansett there had been no terrorists acts in the United States but the Budget papers of May this year said that unemployment would rise to 7% and it has. Why did they say it would rise to 7% because the economy had slowed, the economy slowed as a result of the goods and services tax. 4% growth persistently through our last four years carried through to this Government until this Government got ownership of the economy with the Goods and Services Tax growth dropped to 1.4%.

 JOURNALIST: What impact would … roll back have on these figures…?

 BEAZLEY: The impact of the policies that we have announced during this election campaign which deal with things like the National Infrastructure Kick Start, the Regional Infrastructure Kick Start. What we have had to say about road and rail infrastructure. What we have had to say about defence infrastructure, capital works for schools. What we have had to say about real results from work for the dole, the creation of Knowledge Nation apprenticeships. All these here in our list. They all create jobs - that is what they do. When we went into this election campaign saying jobs, health and education we were fair dinkum and we have put forward policies that deal with jobs, health and education and, of course, often they all mix, often they all mix. If you doing the right thing in terms of, for example, building additional facilities for our aged care you will, of course, create jobs while you do that.

 But some of our programs are explicitly jobs related and that goes to the development of our national infrastructure.

 JOURNALIST: …contribute to this slowdown?

 BEAZLEY: It has played no part whatsoever in the slow down to this point. This is John Howard's alibi and certainly the impact of the global slowdown will be felt next year in levels of joblessness in this country, but it has not been felt yet. It has not been felt yet. This is all their own work. This is all the work of the goods and services tax to this point. We will have other problems next year there is no doubt about that, but we go into that impact, that international impact on us weakened because of the impact on our economy, the slowing of our economy with the Goods and Services Tax.

 Just look at it on fulltime jobs. Contemplate these figures, because fulltime jobs is often a far better measure than anything else of where the jobless rate is going. In the last three years the Labor Party was in office we saw the creation of something like 435,000 fulltime jobs. In the entire period of the Howard Government now nearly six years it is 356,000, that is what it is. Now that is the contrast. Nearly 100,000 more fulltime jobs in Labor's last three years in office than in the entire period of the Howard Costello Government. Nearly 100,000 more fulltime jobs.

 JOURNALIST: The fact that Barry Hasse says that there should be a GST on food doesn't really mean

 much, does it, given that Howard a few days ago emphatically ruled out increasing the GST?

 BEAZLEY: Never ever? This is the 'never ever' man. This is the 'never ever' man who said he would never do a GST. This is the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister designate in Peter Costello who spent months, firstly trying to put in place a GST on food and then lamenting its absence the last lament from Costello being a month before the election campaign. Now they ask you in an election campaign to believe that they don't mean it. To believe that we have had our game with that and we are not going to do it any more. How can you believe people who in the first instance said that they would 'never ever' do a GST? Without qualification, not in between elections or an election or two from now, or there would be an election between when we do it and when we promise to undertake it to the Australian people. Never said anything like that. They said 'never ever'. They said 'never ever' and they gave you a GST, they gave the Australian people a GST. They spent months trying to put in place a GST on food, months lamenting its absence and now they expect to tell you they won't expect you to believed they won't try and create the conditions where it is forced on us.

 JOURNALIST: Do the unemployment figures prove that John Howard was right to spend so much of the Budget surplus to give a fiscal stimulus because they could have been much worse if he hadn't done that?

 BEAZLEY: What he did in spending the fiscal stimulus was to try to create for himself a fix on problems which had emerged because of his maladministration. It had nothing to do with stimulus and everything to do with saving his skin. It had nothing to do with jobs, everything to do with saving his skin. But the problem that he confronted in the economy at the beginning of this year was entirely a product of his administration of the goods and services tax. There was nothing in the international community at the beginning of this year to produce these jobless figures. The international community was going along just fine. What was happening was the GST had slugged small business sideways, increased bankruptcies by something like 30 per cent that is among the people who employ 70 per cent of the people in this country. That is why we have had such poor figures in relation to fulltime jobs in this country and why we have such a poor figure overall now.

 It is the GST that has produced these circumstances they have to be held responsible for it and exposed in their intention to see it broadened.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, unemployment was static last month, we are during an election campaign and we have this first unemployment figures. How are voters meant to find you credible in saying that this is all the GST? If it is all the GST how many jobs has the GST, sort of, gone from the economy and what percentage to that unemployment figure is created by the GST?

 BEAZLEY: Until the GST was implemented, for eight years Australian growth stood at 4% or above 4%. That was when we came out of the worldwide recession at the beginning of the 90s, not an Australian recession a worldwide recession at the beginning of the 90s. We had eight years of growth after that at 4% largely a product of changes that we put in place during the period of time that we were in office and that continued. It takes a while for a government to get ownership of the economy. They got ownership of the economy at the time that they put in place the GST. And what happened? Growth dropped from over 4% to 1.4%. Unemployment is always a lagging indicator. That is why you can say with absolute confidence that this has got nothing to do with what is now a breaking international slow-down. The impact of that will be felt in Australia. But it will be felt next year.

 How much better will it be to have a Government with a plan. A plan in this difficult, tough environment

 in which jobs will be at a premium - a plan to create jobs, an investment in jobs in this community. How much better will it be to have a government that is prepared to do that than a complacent government which has produced this as its plan for jobs during the course of this election campaign. We need a government active, a government committed, a government with a plan if we're going to deal with joblessness in this country. You've got that if you've got the Labor Party in office. We've had a complacent Government skating through this election campaign with no plans for the future of this country other than its concealed plans to raise the GST and put it on food and its definite plan, it's overt plan for the retirement of the Prime Minister.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, have you managed to cast an eye over this ADF video of the asylum seeker incident on Christmas Island yet? And if so, what do you make of it?

 BEAZLEY: I haven't seen the video yet. But I understand from people who have it's inconclusive as to what is revealed in that video - and I see by the nod of your head that you probably think it's inconclusive, too, having had a look at it. I see that John Howard today was saying that his views on that were based on other things - were based on a defence briefing, not the video. Peter Reith should have been more careful in the language that he used in relation to the video if he was basing his proof on that video. I see that Mr Howard has referred to other things which he'll send on to me, I look forward to receiving those and having a chance to have a look at it. But Reith should certainly have been more careful in his language.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley…National Press Club, and picked up by the Prime Minister, that Labor hasn't released its immigration policy. And why is it?

 BEAZLEY: We have released immigration policies in relation to border protection. We have released immigration policies in relation to ensuring better handling of migrants at Australian airports. We've released immigration policy in relation to putting immigration officers overseas, particularly in areas where a potential problem may well emerge in terms of things which could place this nation at risk. I've had population policies sitting on my website right through this election campaign. Frankly, we have been talking about immigration quite a lot during the course of this election campaign, as you may have noticed. But I have said during this election campaign, there are other things to talk about as well. I am proud of the fact that I think I have succeeded in getting on to the agenda of this nation things which really matter to ordinary Australians in their homes. There's nothing that matters more to ordinary Australians than a job. I have a plan for jobs. John Howard has no plan for jobs. His goods and services tax has destroyed jobs in this country. The penalty that we pay for that goods and services tax is a 7% jobless rate today.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what do you think of the…John Howard….

 BEAZLEY: I have allowed John Howard to play his election campaign the way he has wanted to. I have gone down the road I have wanted to go to in this election campaign. I'm not offering commentary on his particular tactics. I'm offering commentary on his lack of vision - the fact that he has no plan for this country. Everything he has done has been for the short-term. And this nation is paying a penalty.

 JOURNALIST: After seeing Mr Howard's speech today, do you feel more confident about Saturday?

 BEAZLEY: I feel more confident about this thing: I know now, but I knew it before, I am the candidate for Prime Minister in this country with commitment to the long-term and with policies for the long-term. Yet again John Howard skated through that performance at the Press Club today without vision, without

 direction, without any plan other than his retirement - as I say, the plans that they have privately, to commence on the unfinished business of the goods and services tax.

 JOURNALIST: …do you think that the looming economic slow-down will require….beyond the policies that they've announced so far. Do you think that the reason today's unemployment figures mean that the recent economic projections are too conservative? And do you think rates are going to continue to fall?

 BEAZLEY: This is a good start. I tell you this: when you've got a repayment of the debt from the Snowy Mountains scheme, which is what we've got coming up through the course of this year. When you look at those jobless figures, how fortunate we are that we've got one political party in the process of saying these figures, that Snowy Mountain scheme created great jobs in its time. Now let's use that money to start spending in the regions, to start spending on national infrastructure, to start spending in rail, to start spending in the construction of our nursing homes. How good it is that the Australian Labor Party in removing resources from the Category 1 schools is going straight to what is a pretty good job creating activity inside schools - and that is repair and maintenance of our public school system. If you take a look at this [list of Labor's policies that will boost jobs] while I say that that is a plan that is essential for national investment in being a skilled and productive and creative people, it also just happens to double pretty well as an antidote to a situation in which unemployment is rising because the growth in the economy has been soaked by the goods and services tax, and because an international impact is in all probability in the wings for next year.

 JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that under your plan that the unemployment rate will come down?

 BEAZLEY: I can guarantee that these measures will have a favourable impact on jobs, yes. I can guarantee that. We have to see what the impact of the international economy will be on us and on joblessness in this country. But I tell you what, you go into next year without a plan for jobs, and that impact is heavy from the international community. You'll not be thanked by the Australian people. We need a government with energy. A leader with energy and direction. And we need a government with a plan. That's what you'll get from me.

 JOURNALIST: …..(inaudible)…..

 BEAZLEY: The target for unemployment announced in the Labor Party policy, you understand the Labor Party has a policy book in which we commit ourselves to various things. They are long-term objectives but they are objectives which are the underpinnings, if you like, of Labor policy and it's up to the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party to implement them over time at pace at which it determines. But in that book is a figure of 5 per cent. That is, of course…a weigh station to a better figure than that. So, that is the Labor Party's policy target in the Labor Party's policy book. We are a long way from that courtesy of where John Howard has left us. But my position is, I work to create jobs. That's what I work to. My target is to implement all of this. And the product of that will be a better unemployment number.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, Rupert Murdoch said today that the AFR is up for sale….

 BEAZLEY: That's news for the AFR, I suspect.

 JOURNALIST: … AFR up for sale. I'm just wondering….necessary in your view to protect diversity in the Australian media.

 BEAZLEY: I don't know what anyone had to say about the AFR's ownership. I'm afraid I'm not aware of

 those comments. You asked a more general question. We believe in diversity in the media. One of the reasons we strongly support the ABC is it helps diversity in the media. The cross media rules and the ownership rules we see as issues which are key in democracy in our community, ensure diversity. If you don't have diversity in your media, you really do have a difficulty with developing the sorts of critical approaches of a government that are necessary and governments whether they happen to be mine or anyone else's. We have seen no reason at all to move away from plans that we have to persist with those laws and regulations that ensure media diversity in this country.

 JOURNALIST: On Channel 7 this morning, you mentioned that it was time to acknowledge that the race card had been played several times in this election campaign and brought back a couple of times. Is one of the reasons why you haven't responded to that throughout the campaign because you don't want to…John Howard's approach to refugees and asylum seekers?

 BEAZLEY: I am in the business of putting forward a strategy for a creative nation. I'm not in the business of running on somebody else's platform. I deal with somebody else's platform as I have to during the course of an election campaign. But I think that in very difficult circumstances I am proud of my Labor Party colleagues and my Labor Party workers who have struggled to place before the Australian people a real agenda - a real election agenda with real people helped by real investments in the future of this nation. Today in the second last day of the campaign we see a percentage figure that indicates the Government needs to change, the Government has run out of puff. The Government cannot handle that most basic requirement of the ordinary Australian family around the kitchen table, is that sitting around that kitchen table in each Australian family there should be at least one, hopefully two, and if they've got older kids, more than that, in happy, productive, fruitful employment. And that's what I'm about.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

