---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: commitment of Australian forces to campaign against terrorism."
date: "2001-10-04"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229648
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B4356%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Commitment Of Australian Forces To Campaign Against Terrorism //media/1001/kbmcactb041001.html Friday, 05 October 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Commitment Of Australian Forces To Campaign Against Terrorism

 Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 4 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Earlier today the Prime Minister made, on behalf of the Australian people, a commitment of Australian forces to the campaign against terrorism.

 I wish to announce that as far as the Opposition is concerned, and myself personally, we support these commitments in the national interest. It is in the Australian national interest that we should be involved in the global campaign against terrorism. The commitment of Australian forces is modest and appropriate and well within our capabilities.

 Having said that, of course, the families of those service personnel engaged will feel the commitment of their spouses, their fathers, occasionally their mothers, to be a commitment which will impact upon themselves and their family life. They go with our prayers, they go with our good wishes, and their families have our complete understanding and support.

 This is a campaign like no other. It is a campaign for the long-term involving, from time to time, military action and a great deal of police and intelligence work. Because it is a campaign for the long haul, it requires political commitment for the long haul. George Bush and Tony Blair provide that long-term political commitment to this struggle. And so do I.

 JOURNALIST: What about that other campaign, Mr Beazley? How does this impact on your ability to cut through and convince people that you're the better leader, rather than the Prime Minister?

 BEAZLEY: I do believe that there are several reasons we'll cut through on this. Firstly, because the Australian people politically are capable of absorbing a debate around the issues of security for our nation abroad and security for our people at home. They are quite well aware that the job of government is to be able to handle the foreign affairs and defence relationships and interests of the Commonwealth and, at the same time, look after the needs of their families and themselves and to build the future for this country, particularly through our education system and ensuring our security with a decent health system. It was ever thus and it will be so in this election campaign. I am totally confident that we will be able to do that.

 There is a second reason I'm completely confident about this. That is that the issues we'll have to handle internationally are completely within my experience. The questions of the overseas deployment of armed

 forces are things with which I dealt when I was the Defence Minister of this country for some five years and when I served on the International Security Committee of Cabinet for some 11 years. There is in these deployments nothing new for me.

 The third reason is that I'm there for the long haul. I'm the only political leader who is.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what do you think about Prime Minister John Howard's decision to go to APEC in the middle of this election campaign? Is that a problem for you?

 BEAZLEY: I notice he made it in a conditional way. We shall see. I dealt with that question this morning. I suggest that you refer back to my answers then.

 JOURNALIST: …think he will go, are you suggesting that he's misleading the people?

 BEAZLEY: No, he just simply said that at this stage it was his current intention to go. We shall see what he ultimately does. I had something to say about that this morning.

 JOURNALIST: If he does go, Mr Beazley, as he says, he will be there with the US President, with the Russian leader, the Chinese leader, all number of leaders. Would that put you at a disadvantage in photo op sense?

 BEAZLEY: You're the analysts. I leave those determinations to you. For my part, I think what is required here is an explanation which we are engaged in. An election campaign uniquely provides that opportunity. Can I say, further on that, I think it is very important that those who lead the coalition internationally, it includes our leaders, includes, of course, Tony Blair, it includes George Bush. I think it is important that as much that can be said to people around the globe about the evidence that sustains the significance of these activities should be said, as much as possible. It cannot be complete because much of that information rests on secure sources and rests on technologies which if exposed would render them easy to evade. You cannot make it complete, but you can make it substantial. I welcome the fact that British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw was indicating a preparedness to see that happen. And the tone of Tony Blair's excellent address the other day was very much along the same lines. I think it is important that our people, because this is for the long haul, the struggle, the conflict, the campaign against international terrorism is a long-haul campaign, it won't be over by Christmas. It may not be over for some years. Therefore, at this early stage, the maximum possible information and argument around the rationales for the activity that can be made public should be made public.

 JOURNALIST: …situation, have you had access to the same material?

 BEAZLEY: I've had a number of briefings, but not the last one that he had. Those briefings, my own experience as a Defence Minister, and my understanding of the agencies that supply that information, lead me to be totally confident that the right steps are being taken.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, should you now be getting those same briefings, particularly as we go into caretaker period?

 BEAZLEY: Of course, I should be. Of course I should be and I believe I that I will be. It's a question of time, on this particular occasion. In any case, the briefings that have come to me satisfy me that the actions that have been taken are appropriate.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, leadership will be an important issue in this campaign. Given that Mr

 Howard will be standing shoulder to shoulder with Bush, with Putin, with Megawati in the middle of this campaign, surely that gives him a head start in that respect.

 BEAZLEY: I think leadership is an important issue in this campaign. Leadership for the long haul. This issue will not be revolved even were Mr bin Laden to be captured in the course of the next few months. The issue of international terrorism will not be resolved in the next few months. It will take some years to change the political and military characteristics of the globe whereby we can all feel secure that the types of actions that we have seen in recent times will not replicated. Rather than photo opportunities, a preparedness to commit yourself for the long haul is the key here. I happen to be fortunate enough to have had an immense amount of experience in this area. More experience, I might say, than any member of this Government. If you're talking about people who are going to stand shoulder to shoulder with those who are engaged in this struggle, an Australia led by myself would be a pretty good ally.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, do you think Australians will have time to worry about education and health over the next five to six weeks if there are troops deployed to Afghanistan or the Persian Gulf?

 BEAZLEY: Yes, I believe so. I believe the Australian people are capable of both comprehending what is required internationally and comprehending what is required locally. It has to be said, the commitment we made, though appropriate, and, for those engaged, they do require and deserve the thorough going support of every Australian. It is a modest commitment nevertheless. The timing of that commitment is still being worked through. But I set that to one side. The issues that underpin that commitment, and the issues which determine whether or not we're going to be a successful nation this century, are capable of being discussed side by side. What I'm impressed about is this: there is a common acceptance among those who comment on public affairs in this country and indeed, probably, among many of those who follow it more intensely than some others that if this campaign focuses on domestic issues in this country this Government is gone. That is, I think, a sound judgement on their desserts. They have not organised themselves domestically in a way that justified their return. So, your assessments about the significance of domestic issues emerging during the course of this election campaign and whether they can is, I think, an appropriate concern and consideration for all of you. But from my point of view, I am totally optimistic that we are going to be able to deal with both sets of issues. I'm totally optimistic that I'm capable of handling both. I'm totally optimistic that I will be the only candidate in the field for Prime Ministership that has a comprehensive response both to international and domestic security issues and a preparedness to serve for the period of time that gives this election meaning and the Australian contribution to the struggle against international terrorism meaning.

 JOURNALIST: …long-term a commitment that we've made, 150 SAS troops etc…sending. How long, when you say long-term, do you think this go on? And can Australia support, or be without 150 SAS troops for, as you say, a year or beyond.

 BEAZLEY: Issues of rotation will arise, no doubt, during the course of this. This particular phase has a focus on where people believe bin Laden to be, in this case in Afghanistan. But the truth of the matter is that the activities that are associated with the various sub-groups and clans and operations that make up those who seek to pursue objectives internationally by terrorist methods. These things won't disappear overnight, nor will the answers to them necessarily be found in this particular location. We may well move away from an intense focus on military activity to policing and to intelligence arrangements. All I can say is this: it's not going to be over in the next six to 12 months.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you've said a couple of times now that our contribution to the international

 force has been moderate.

 BEAZLEY: Modest and appropriate.

 JOURNALIST: …rotational issues were to arise. How appropriate in these circumstances is to have roughly a third of our defence forces charging around the Timor Sea looking for refugees?

 BEAZLEY: I think in the case of things that we must watch in rotational terms is our commitments in Timor and elsewhere the South Pacific. They are enormously demanding of our ground forces, there's no doubt about that. The Government has also found that it cannot sustain its naval activity in the Timor Sea and thereabouts. It has to reduce its activity in that area. The simple fact of the matter is that the purposes of the Australian Navy are the sorts of purposes that we now see in focus in the things that we're discussing today. The job of the border protection is a police job for a coastguard. It's as simple as that. As every day emerges, and as we come to a better and better understanding of the demands of effective border protection here, the idea of a coastguard is not something that the Labor Party invented last week, or as a response to things that happened on the Tampa. We have been arguing this persistently for the last two years, ever since this Government lost control of the refugee issue. Not only that, of course, concerns in relation to movement of illicit drugs. We have been arguing that for some consistent time and all I can say is an objective look at all the circumstances we now find ourselves in demonstrates that we are absolutely right and we will be campaigning on this.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

