---
title: "Immigration Detainees Bill further worsens our human rights record."
date: "2001-08-23"
creators:
  - "Theophanous, Andrew"
source: "Office of THEOPHANOUS, DR ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227654
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UAT46%22
---

 The Hon. DR ANDREW THEOPHANOUS, M.H.R.   FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CALWELL

 IMMIGRATION DETAINEES BILL FURTHER WORSENS OUR HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD

 The  Immigration  Detainees  Bill  No.2,  which  was  debated  in  the  House  today, represents  a  shameful  exercise  by  both  parties  to  agree  to  this  kind  of  legislation. Despite heated discussions  and  divisions  within  the Labor Party on  this  matter, it  is outrageous  that  legislation  designed  to  further  deepen  Australia’s  current  crisis  in human rights should receive bi-partisan support”, Dr Theophanous said this morning.

 The basis behind this Bill is to further restrict the human rights of asylum-seekers. Dr Theophanous has moved amendments to ensure that the legal rights that are not only expected  by,  but  are  legislated  for,  the  general  Australian  community,  should  also apply to those persecuted asylum-seekers that we lock in detention centres.

 This is one of many recent revelations which show that we have major problems with the current level of faith and trust being placed in ACM guards. Earlier this year, one such  ACM  guard,  who  under  this  legislation  would  have  the  right  to  order  strip-searches,  was  convicted  of  the  arbitrary bashing of  a  detainee boy.  Dr  Theophanous referred to many examples of bashings and mistreatment of refugee-claimants by the ACM. These are being investigated by the Human Rights Commission.

 “Notwithstanding  all  this,  this  legislation  ensures  that  these  same  private enterprise security guards are being given far more sweeping powers than State or Federal police, despite the Government-sanctioned official training and public responsibility that police must endure. These same ACM guards merely have to have ‘reasonable  grounds  for  suspicion’  to  order  the  strip  search  of  an  asylum-seeker - yet another act that will further deepen the psychological damage of the asylum-seeker.”

 “Instead  of  ensuring  that  such  abuses  do  not  occur,  we  turn  around  and  give  these same authorities even more powers. What an outrage under the current circumstances, with  so  many  inquiries  taking  place,  and  so  many  criticisms  of  the  government’s attitude, including today’s report from the Commonwealth Ombudsman.

 “I  am  moving  amendments  to  create  balance  in  our  approach  to  asylum-seekers,  to allow  for  their  complaints  to  be  heard,  to  allow  for  the  implementation  for  key

 recommendations of the joint Standing Committee, and to allow for a greater role for the Human Rights Commission and Commonwealth Ombudsman. It is shameful that these amendments will be opposed by both the Government and the Labor Party. The bi-partisan  support  for  this  Bill  serves  as  a  perfect  example  of  the  need  for Independents, or third voices in the Australian Parliament,” Dr Theophanous said.

 Media Inquiries: Josh Bihary 0412-927-166 23 August 2001

