---
title: "Customs detains suspected illegals in Torres Strait."
date: "2001-03-28"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211222232
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/43S36%22
---

  

  

 Media Release

 SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON

 Minister for Justice and Customs Senator for Western Australia

 28 March 2001

 Customs detains suspected illegals in Torres Strait Customs officers have detained 14 suspected illegal entrants and five Indonesian crew at Kerr Island in the western Torres Strait, the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison said today.

 Customs and Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service officers were transported to the island early this morning in the Customs Coastwatch Bell 412 helicopter after an Indonesian fishing vessel was located in the area by Coastwatch late yesterday.

 Senator Ellison said a Coastwatch Islander surveillance plane re-located the vessel near Kerr Island at first light today. There was a group of people, including women and children of Middle Eastern appearance on the beach near the vessel. (Kerr Island is approximately 90 nautical miles north-west of Thursday Island.)

 The Navy vessel Malu Baizam is on its way to the island with officers from relevant Federal agencies. Arrangements will be made later today to transport the people to Thursday Island where they will be handed over to immigration officers.

 "This detection again demonstrates that Customs Coastwatch is doing an excellent job in surveillance of Australia’s coastline," Senator Ellison said.

 "There has been heavy activity with illegal arrivals off the north-west coast in recent weeks, but despite this Customs has maintained a close watch in the north and east of Australia."

 "As we have seen only too vividly this week with the emergency rescue of 22 men, women and children whose boat was sinking off Christmas Island, travelling to Australia illegally by boat is dangerous and potentially deadly."

 Senator Ellison said the additional resources provided to Customs following the Prime Minister’s Task Force recommendations on coastal surveillance, were also paying big dividends.

 "The Bell 412 helicopter which detected this vessel and transported the Customs party to the remote island was provided by the Government in response to one of the task force recommendations.

 "It supplements the original helicopter and fixed wing Coastwatch aircraft that operate in the Torres Strait region on a daily basis," Senator Ellison said.

 The Bell 412 was provided as part of the Government’s $124m upgrade of coastal surveillance. It is a twin-engine all-weather night-capable surveillance and response helicopter, fitted with an arsenal of electronic surveillance equipment.

 Media inquiries: Nicole Johnston 02 6277 7260 or 0419 217 918

 Return to Index 

