---
title: "Coopers Plains, Queensland: transcript of doorstop interview: better teachers and school facilities, refugees, Ansett."
date: "2001-10-10"
creators:
  - "Beattie, Peter"
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229917
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FO456%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Better Teachers And School Facilities, Refugees, Ansett http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/kbmcqld101001.html Thursday, 11 October 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview with Peter Beattie, Queensland Premier Subjects: Better Teachers And School Facilities, Refugees, Ansett

 Transcript - Coopers Plains, Queensland - 10 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Firstly, can I thank Peter Beattie, the Premier for being here with me. Thank Mr Probert, the Principal and the teachers, the students who have really done us proud here today.

 What we're talking about today is the most important thing we can talk about in Australia for the long term - and that is what is happening in our education system, what's happening with our students. Mr Howard's position is that kids in public in schools are the responsibility of the State Governments, and not the responsibility of the Federal Government.

 I want to say this: as Prime Minister of this country, every Australian kid is my responsibility - their happiness, their education, their success - my responsibility.

 Today we are making a first cut of our education announcements. What it means is this: we are not going to have an education system focussed on the few, but one for the many. We are going to see a good standard of education for all Australians, not just the rich. What we are announcing today, and signing here, is an alliance between the State Governments and the Federal Government - a Federal Labor Government - to ensure that our State schools, our public education system, gets a real increase in investment at the State and Federal level over the decade.

 The first step in that process is a decision by us to remove the unjustified additional funds that have gone to Category One private schools under Dr Kemp and Mr Howard's proposals, not for investment in education, but investment in privilege. Those funds will be used for two purposes.

 The first is, to ensure that schools like this get the maintenance funds that they need from both Commonwealth and State Governments.

 Second is to enhance that asset of Australians, the most important profession in Australia, and that is the teaching profession, to make sure that we get the young people moving through the education system to sign up to be teachers.

 We have hear some propositions for teacher education scholarships - Teacher Excellence Scholarships

 which will allow the best kids to go through the training process to become teachers with an incentive -their HECS debts will be removed while they choose to pursue that teaching profession.

 The second component of it is Teacher Development grants. What those grants will do is to ensure that teachers have a chance, either to upgrade their professional standards, to get themselves back in touch with their professional disciplines, and for that they'll get support from the Commonwealth for course fees up to $4000, and a grant on completion of $2000. Or, and this the case right around Australia, unfortunately, if they find themselves teaching in a discipline outside their expertise, they get the chance to develop the expertise in a discipline. As the Chief Scientist and the Prime Minister said, if you don't teach a discipline that fascinates you, you cannot fascinate the people you are teaching, it's as simple as that. While I'm not exactly certain of the circumstances here in Queensland, we find that the Commonwealth's neglect in this area over the years has helped create a situation where in some areas of this country, up to 40 per cent of teachers do not teach in the discipline in which they were trained.

 This is a down payment on curing all these problems. I am so grateful to my State colleagues, like Peter Beattie, for being prepared to join with us in this fight for good education for our children.

 BEATTIE: I'm delighted to be here as a signatory on behalf of, not just my State, but, symbolically, on behalf of all Labor States to sign up to increase funding in real terms to public schools over the next decade.

 The second thing I'm delighted about is to sign up to match the $50 million that a Labor Government will put into it capital works, increased capital works. What it means in schools like this is that they'll get more funding.

 When I arrived here this morning I had a discussion with the principal and you can see that two of the blocks here need to be painted. I've indicated to him that we'll be providing an extra $30,000 to do that. The bottom line is we need extra Federal funds to assist us.

 If you look at our Budget, we spend more on education than any other area of activity in this State. We will continue to do that. My Government is committed to a Smart State philosophy. Smart State because we believe education is our future. If don't spend more money on education, we're going to be left behind. We could end up simply being a beach. We've got to do more than that. There's to be new industry, bio- tech, IT - all those things - and it starts here in our schools. That's why we want to keep public schools properly that's why I'm here with Kim today, because I'm passionate about what he's doing. His commitment to the Knowledge Nation dovetails strongly into what we're doing with Smart State. This is the future. If we don't do that, as I said, our kids will not be internationally competitive, and if that happens, they won't get the new jobs of tomorrow. I'm delighted to be here.

 JOURNALIST: ….(inaudible)…..?

 BEAZLEY: Obviously, we have to discuss that through to the States. The States all have a maintenance program, they assign priorities. The school here has been benefited by the visit of the Premier to the tune of some $30,000 and….

 BEATTIE: They want you back next week.

 BEAZLEY: That shows that the States know where the maintenance needs are. As I said, this is just a down payment on what we intend to do with public education overall. It's a starting point. There will be

 many more announcements during the course of the election campaign.

 JOURNALIST: ….(inaudible)…..?

 BEAZLEY: Firstly, that's got nothing to do with Category One schools, as you know the announcements we are making today are basically about Category One schools. But you'll also see in the education policy we release is that we will be giving resources to the schools that you named.

 Last October, Kemp had the opportunity to do that in the legislation he had there. He didn't do it then, why? Because he wanted to leave it over now for his base political purposes.

 The simple fact of the matter is this, we said to Kemp, you give resources to the State schools in an appropriate proportion, and we'll pass this now. But we are not going to be intimidated by you into passing this until you do the right thing by the State school system.

 What we have said is, the moment we are elected to office, and we'll be elected we hope on November 10th, we'll be going into that Parliament, we'll be passing legislation, we'll be letting those start-up grants through, why? Because, at the same time, we'll be doing the right thing by the State school system.

 We invented, at least my father did, invented the system of Commonwealth assistance to all school children - State school children and private school children. He also said, at that time, that he and Gough Whitlam accepted responsibility for every kid in this country, whether they be in a State school system or the private school system - every kid in this country on the basis of need, that's what he said - on the basis of need. We find ourselves in the circumstances now where the Commonwealth Government has turned that on its head. Instead of it being about education assistance for the many it's become about privilege assistance for the few. We're going to change that.

 JOURNALIST: …the net result of all this you have got every private school in the country…..saying don't vote for Kim Beazley…..

 BEAZLEY: Let me assure you that we haven't got that. Very fortunately that is not the case. The school systems understand completely what's happening here. They know that the SES formula is a mess. They know it. Basically it's honoured in the breech, not the observance. The Catholic system, for example, is right out of it. They took one look at the SES system and said, 'you can put that in your pipe and smoke it. We're not going to be in that. We are going to, thank you very much, place ourselves in a situation where you do not tell us what to do, and where we, who have an understanding of the actual distribution of need in our system, the actual distribution of need, we will do that distribution, thank you very much. We will do it on the basis of the percentage of average government school costs. Not the bodgie way you choose calculate to do that'.

 Now that took 70 percent of the private school kids out of the system. Then we went over to the other 30 per cent. What we find is this: that in particular, schools like the Jewish schools around the country, schools of middle income character, if the SES formula will actually apply to the them, they would lose substantial sums of money. What happened then was the Government said we would keep them grant maintained. You take out the grant maintained folk, what are you left with? What you are left with basically, apart from the schools which we support getting additional resources, like there are some community schools in that category, by and large, money is going to those Category One private schools. Forget it.

 I talk to people in the private school sector far more than anyone else around here, apart from my colleague Michael Lee, and probably the Premier, at least in terms of Queensland private schools, they know exactly what's on here, and they're not going to be in that sort of nonsense.

 JOURNALIST: Are you saying……

 BEAZLEY: They are rich in resources, or they are rich in fees they are rich in some way or another. They offer their kids a marvellous education - huge. But to look at a school like this and its needs. To look at some of the poor catholic schools, and other government schools in areas even less well off than this one, and here you have got the students who really need a good schooling to help them get a leg up in life, you look at them, and you contemplate that Kings' in Parramatta, under the Government's proposal will get $4 million to build a pond. There will be 13 ovals, their rifle range, their boat sheds and so on, which they advertise, and by the way, at the same time, a building program worth $16 million as I recollect, a construction program, donations to which were all fully tax deductible, so if the $16 million goes through on the basis of full tax deductibility - effectively another taxpayer subsidy - $7 million on top of this, Australian people know when privilege is being enforced. And they know when an education decision is being taken. My fellow Australians believe this profoundly, that the job of the Government, in provision for education is to be about a good education for the many, not just a privilege for the few, they know that.

 JOURNALIST: ….(inaudible)…..?

 BEAZLEY: In the case of Warwick its in Category One because of huge business donations to its foundation. It is not as high fee as most of the other Category One schools. There are basically only two schools, outside Victoria and South Australia, that have a category one classification. There are none in Tasmania. There is that one here and one in Western Australia which is a specialist Japanese language school, as I understand it, those two. Fundamentally, they have been placed in Category One and been there for years, because of enormous resources obtained by one means or another. Sometimes it's by fees, sometimes it's by donation, in the case of Warwick, by donation. My concerns are not with the people who are doing very well, and they were doing just fine before these grants were made by Kemp. It is with the schools which are not. They have got to get support, we have an emergency situation, and we are going to deal with those problems.

 JOURNALIST: ….security…

 BEAZLEY: That becomes part of their endowment, that becomes part of their resources per capita for their kids.

 JOURNALIST: But if we are taking all the money off Warwick, what happens to Warwick and every other Category One school……

 JOURNALIST: ….(inaudible)…..?

 BEAZLEY: It makes a start in shifting the balance because what has being a very long standing balance between a generous provision for private education and medium sized provision for public education, from the Commonwealth accounted the best part of 30 years, 25 years, the best part of that, has been massively distorted by the adoption of this particular formula. What we are doing is redressing that and we will redress further when we start announcing what we will be doing with the Education Priority Zones and the like.

 JOURNALIST: National Alliance, what happens……

 BEAZLEY: Firstly we're open to scrutiny. Secondly we've Labor State governments.

 JOURNALIST: That may change though.

 BEAZLEY: Let's face it, deal with the Labor Party you deal with public hospital, public education fanatics. That's the Labor Party. That's how we are. That's how we are brought up. That's what we do. That's our meaning in life. State Governments who are Labor want to go to every election campaign telling people how much they did for their kids. I trust them.

 JOURNALIST: What about the South Australian… resources

 BEAZLEY: We are going to have very lengthy discussions with the South Australian Government clearly, about all these matters, the same deal is on offer to him. There's no doubt about that. I am pleased to say that Mike Rann has taken it up. If Mike Rann is successful the election in South Australia sometime in the next few months, then it will be relatively easy. But I am not in the business - you see this in the end is not about Labor or Liberal State Government, it is about kids and the deal that is on offer to my colleagues who are Labor is a deal on offer to everybody. The thing about the Labor folk is when I ring them up and say lets sign up for this deal. 'Beauty', is the sort of response that you get from them, 'lets get into it', because it is what they are about anyway. The easiest thing in the world for a Labor Premier to sign up to is real increases in public education and public hospitals, because it is a part, well it's in their genes.

 JOURNALIST: …. In a lot of things. Cooperation for the party to date, there is no guarantee that the Labor….tradition of that package…

 BEAZLEY: No there isn't you know, I have had direct experience of dealing with the Queenslanders. I remember when I was deputed by Paul Keating to negotiate the National Training Authority, in which the States had to sign up to maintaining their spending on training. They had to sign up to that and the Commonwealth ratted on this agreement in the end when Kemp got the job, but the Commonwealth signed up to, for a decade, a real increase in expenditure on training and on the basis of that, the States agreed to put all their money into the ANTA pot and I negotiated that, I negotiated that with the then Queensland Labor Government, they weren't trying to score points off me at all. They were actually quite serious about being parties to that process. It is true, that historically, there have, from time to time, been fights between State Labor and State Federal Governments. I wouldn't deny the history, and always fights between State Liberal governments and Federal Liberal governments and often between State Liberal governments and Federal Labor governments. But the difference now is this, the difference is we want to change things. We have had a century of the development of the Australian nation being held back by Commonwealth/State bickering. We now have the opportunity to start this century with a different mode of relations. A different type of relationship, so that even though there will be from time to time disagreements around this and that, disagreements in principle. Now are you saying that State Governments may not be re-elected? That is always a possibility, but I do think that if we, at the State and Commonwealth level, are working together to deal with the education, health and the other problems I delineate, talk about Federal/State cooperation has longevity in it for all governments.

 JOURNALIST: On issue of the HECS debt, for teachers, people who become teachers have no HECS debt as long as they remain teachers,

 BEAZLEY: That's right.

 JOURNALIST: How long, is there a minimum term ….10 years or …….

 BEAZLEY: It's the period of time in the notional HECS debt. It depends, it's 7 to 10 years, generally speaking.

 JOURNALIST: ……said 10 years in total.

 BEAZLEY: Yes, that is basically what it amounts to. If you left half way through, you would give the obligation pro-rata.

 JOURNALIST: You said …sign up

 BEATTIE: That's the national one. Our share of that is obviously less than that. But yes, we have indicated as part of this we will have a contribution towards capital programs in school, yes, State schools.

 JOURNALIST: So if you….program now.

 BEATTIE: Off the top of my head… I couldn't tell you, but it's….

 JOURNALIST: …. Kind of increase is that? Is a middle….

 BEATTIE: Well it is our share of the $50 million. That's something we would negotiate. But that has always worked out on schools and on formulas and so on. And that depends on the number of schools we have. The important thing is that we have increased our funding to schools, this is an additional amount of money which we would match, that's basically what we are saying.

 JOURNALIST: But how much have you increased your funding….

 BEATTIE: I'm happy to release that to you, I don't have that at the top of my head, but we have increased in the last State Budget the Education Budget significantly as I have said before, it's the biggest component of the State Budget. Education, followed by health. It's about 23-24 per cent of the total budget in rough terms, now I am going off the top of my head, but I am happy to provide that to you.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, how much additional funding redirecting money.. $100m around…

 BEAZLEY: This is mainly, today, of our redistributing the money that would come from Category One schools, there is a small amount of additional funding just to smooth it out, you can see that at the back of your document in the funding section, that will show you it is only very small, what you might call the money beyond the money coming from the Category One schools, but we will be releasing much more on education policy over the next few weeks and an awful lot of that will be new money, effectively.

 JOURNALIST: How can you guarantee that every State is going to match you and your $110 million?

 BEAZLEY: I don't think there will be the slightest problem, I think they are all signed up to this. I would be very surprised….West Australia has signed up to that, yes, but I would be very surprised if a South Australian Liberal Government were to say, 'no we don't want any money'. But if they did, then it would be another good reason for voting for Mike Rann.

 JOURNALIST: ut in terms of ……

 BEAZLEY: First step, you know on the first things you need to do for the teachers is this: respect them. You need to comprehend they are at the peak of the professions. That the things that they do are fundamentally, vastly more significant than many in other professions, in terms of a contribution to the Nation. What we have to do at the national level, because basically the States do carry the burden as the employers of teachers. What we have to do at the national level is assist the States in being able to create in the minds of the teachers the impressions that I know that the State Labor Governments feel. That is, when they are dealing with their teachers, they are dealing with a valuable resource. It's very hard for them, because of the industrial relationship with them, to be able to convey that all the time. That means every time there is an enterprise agreement there is a knock down, drag out and that's inevitably part of the process. What we have to do federally, we who are not in that sort of relationship, is to come along side the State and say, 'look we understand that we want your teachers to have a chance to renew themselves so they are proud of the way in which they conduct the discipline. We know that you want an even better profession than the one you have got, well the Commonwealth has one responsibility in this area and that's the training of teachers and so we have here the assistance, new assistance, for ensuring that the young people who come into the training processes are the best young people that can be there to do the job. So we are going to be thinking of a myriad ways of enhancing the standing of the teaching profession in the Australian community because we are on the verge of a substantial crisis in the teaching profession, as the teaching profession ages. When I first became a Member of Parliament, the average age of a high school teacher was 32 and I was I think from recollection 31. I'm now 52 and the average age of a high school teacher is 48. It shows this is the only profession in the country which is ageing with me. I have always felt a sense of identity, I walk into class staff rooms often, I talk to teachers often, because they are to me a most important part of Australian national life. I have never felt uncomfortable in a staff room because they all look just like me. But perhaps statistically and actuarially somebody else ought be uncomfortable about that.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley …..

 BEAZLEY: I don't think that you should pursue the terms of recruitment in the teaching profession as what you might describe as gender biased policies. I don't think you should do that, but I think there is no doubt at all that it is important that young people have a balance in their role models and it would be a good thing if there were more men in the teaching profession from that point of view. Probably, particularly at the primary school level. Now there are a whole range of issues in that which I really don't want to go into, and there are questions of discussions between State Governments and the teaching profession. There are issues there beyond the issues that go to salary and entitlements. The one thing I would say to men is this, this is now one of the few professions in the country where you can actually seriously talk a job for life. This is now one of the most secure professions. What my job is at the Federal level, given the responsibilities I would have for the teacher training process, therefore, the…..teachers is to ensure that everybody understands that if they make that choice, they are going into a great profession and to give that reality. So that's a job for me. Now what effect that will have over time one cannot tell, if it has the effect of a better balance if you like, of gender role models for the kids in school, that would be a good thing, too.

 JOURNALIST: ….(inaudible)…..?

 BEAZLEY:Have we all exhausted on education?

 JOURNALIST: ….States…with the alliance, how do you expect them to be able to fund their

 commitments….?

 BEAZLEY: Like Federal Governments, states make choices. They make choices about assigning priorities among their various expenditures. The truth of the matter is that when you see, Labor State Governments, they tend to gravitate towards public education and public hospitals. I've just watched the way the State Labor Governments have tried to struggle with the resources available to them to make sure that those profound Labor commitments are met. I actually regard this as something that we'll be able to do - and other things that I'll be announcing during the election campaign, as something we can do standing on our heads. But standing on our heads to do this thing, is the most critical set of decisions we could take for the long-term future of the Australian people.

 BEATTIE: When Kim raised this issue with me, and obviously with my Government, we did the necessary forward estimate planning and our commitment will be in the next forward estimates. In other words, we've already budgeted for the commitment that I've given to Kim. We run a very frugal administration here, I would not sign anything unless we had budgeted for it. I want to make it very clear, what we have done is budget very clearly for the significant commitments that we're giving today. It will be carefully set out in the next Budget, but it's already considered in the forward estimates.

 JOURNALIST: How important is it, do you feel, for these students who might teach….campaign strategy. How much difference does that make when….

 BEAZLEY: It's not really about an appeal for votes to a particular profession. It's what I believe about that profession and what I believe about their importance for the future of Australia. In a sense, I'm not addressing teachers when I say these things, I'm addressing the public, and saying to the public what I think we all ought to do about teachers and what I think we ought to do to back up our rhetoric with actions. That's what I'm really saying. So, I'm not really addressing my remarks to teachers and nurses. Teachers and nurses, in a sense, do know how important are the things that they do, even if they don't feel that they get the respect that they need. They don't need to be told how important it is, they need to know that they're going to be supported. What the rest of the public need to know is that this is critical. Frankly, it's not a difficult sell. Australian people know how important teachers and nurses are to them. It's not a difficult sell. The difficulty is getting them to understand that there's at least a political party in town that takes it seriously. And in taking it seriously, that's an opportunity for the Australian people to take it seriously, too.

 I saw the Liberal Party's advertising last night and it said that the Government of John Howard was about taking tough positions. Well, let me challenge John Howard to take the two easy decisions - answer two easy questions. Will you or will you not remain as Prime Minister for the course of the next term of Parliament if you are elected and stand for election again? The second question is, easy question, will you or will you not debate me at a point of time in the campaign when all our cards our out there on the table? If you're tough, you can answer that you will stay, you will contest another election, and you will debate me again in the election campaign. If you can't say that, there's not much to you.

 JOURNALIST: …unions protest plans…royal commission and would you encourage…..

 BEAZLEY: As far as I'm concerned, workers in the trade union movement make up their own minds about what they do. People have a right to protest about anything in a democracy, provided what they do is within the law and peaceful. Whatever particular cause or concern that you have, provided you are prepared to operate within those boundaries, commonly accepted boundaries of public behaviour for

 conveying political opinions, it's a matter for you. I'm engaged, not in organising demonstrations. I'm engaged in the process of winning an election and putting forward the policies to win those elections. What other people are choosing to do during the course, either of the election campaign or anything else that's going on, that's a matter for them. What I would urge everybody, who's going about the business of conveying their views politically about any set of events which is occurring now, to do it within the framework of the accepted democratic principles and the law-abiding character of this country.

 JOURNALIST: …..number of refugee and asylum seekers on the weekend who jumped overboard. Have you had any briefings on exactly how many people did actually throw their children over? And, if you haven't, is it correct, or is it wrong for yourself and the Prime Minister to be condemning asylum seekers when there's no actual details…

 BEAZLEY: Anybody who threw anyone overboard - a kid or anyone else - that is an action to be deprecated and not supported in any way, shape or form. But I, like all the rest of you, rely on the accuracy of Government information. If the Government information is inaccurate in this regard, then it's yet another bungle and botch, if it is inaccurate. Frankly, what's happened in the course of the last few days in relation to that further incursion into Australian waters and asylum seekers is an absolute indication that this Government has not been able to deal with the problem. I said it before, and this is my overriding position, it's a position in which I have absolute confidence, that is, you can solve this problem, only if you are prepared to negotiate an agreement, and are capable of negotiating an agreement at the point of embarkation, and that is Indonesia. I'm totally confident we can. I know for certain, John Howard can't. What we now know is that he's had all the laws he's wanted, he's got the Navy out there on patrol, demonstrating on a daily basis about why it's necessary to have a coastguard. He's got all of that going on. If that isn't working - try another brand.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, there are reports that were shots being fired over the …understand that they might ….Also, do you support…..?

 BEAZLEY: I know nothing about shots…your question is the first I've heard of any notion that shots were being fired over their heads. I would be most surprised, as I happen to know the rules of engagement that apply to the operation of the Navy, were that to have been occurring. But we set that to one side. What I say is this: what this demonstrates, whether these folk end up in Papua New Guinea, Nauru, Christmas Island or whatever, Howard's policy is not working. There is one way, and one way only, to get a policy to work on this, and that is to have a Government capable of negotiating with the Indonesians. The sort of arrangement that the Labor Government had. Reflect on where all this has come from - 136 boats came to this country and John Howard lost control of the asylum issue in this country. He lost control of policy. He went into flat panic on the 137th and he's been in the business of putting all sorts of laws in place and the Navy out there to try, in the course of this election campaign, to preserve his position. We've given him everything that he's asked for and it is not working. The only solution now is to try our solution.

 JOURNALIST: What's your feel about how the Navy is regarded as now…….you've got contacts…..

 BEAZLEY: The Navy operates on this basis: they do what the Government tells them. The Navy is loyal to the Government of the day - and so it always should be. Point one. Point two, this is not what the Navy wants to be doing. The Navy are proud professionals and what they are preferring to do - all the time, is enhance their professional skills and be operating in an environment which respects those skills. This is not a role or task for them. It is particularly not a role or task for ships of the capability of the frigates that

 are engaged here. But there is nothing else. So, they know they have to do that job. But I doubt very much whether they'd be at all fazed by the idea that we have, that there should be a coastguard.

 JOURNALIST: ….do you think you can start to turn this around in the public's eye….are you more confident about….

 BEAZLEY: The problem that Mr Howard has is, whereas people had an open mind as to whether or not his solutions would work, and people were very obviously supportive of them, and our position was massively misrepresented by him, and more generally he's now had all he wants, he's now got all he wants and still they keep coming. I think there's a fair few people in this country now who will be putting a question mark over whether or not this bloke has got a solution for the long-term as opposed to a solution for an election campaign. If they've got a question mark over that, they're right to question them.

 JOURNALIST: Just on Ansett…have you got any evidence from, I gather reports this morning that John Anderson……demanded….?

 BEAZLEY: There's stacks of rumour around. I guess I'm like you, I receive those rumours. What I can say with absolute certainty is this: this Government has not done a darn thing to help Ansett keep flying, or to get Ansett up again - not a thing. You can talk all you like about jobs and job security in this country, and you can talk about the collapse of the tourism industry. Let me tell you this, you can't do any more for the tourism industry and you can't do any more for jobs in this country than get Ansett II up and flying again.

 I was interested to see the administrator today asking for the sort of assistance from the Commonwealth Government, or at least it was implied and attributed to him this view, of the sort of assistance I have been talking about now for the best part of a fortnight. If that had been applied earlier, we'd have had Ansett up earlier. We face job losses on a large scale in this country. Particularly in this State of Queensland in the tourism industry. We face it because John Howard and Anderson have not simply not had the foresight, the courage and the preparedness to act to ensure that Ansett gets up and running, but they seem at every twist and turn to have operated in a way that guarantees they don't. We are not dealing here with acts of omission. We appear to be dealing here with acts of commission as far as our political opponents are concerned. That's their view of job security.

 JOURNALIST: ….flying Ansett…?

 BEAZLEY: I thought it was terrific to be back on Ansett again. Those BAE146s operate heavily in the West Australian environment. They have been the principal means of communication for a long period of time now between Perth and the northern parts of Western Australia and I am a frequent user of the product. I've got to say, the cabin crew and the flight crew were just so darned pleased to be in the air again. You probably asked them enough questions about that yourselves to get the evidence of it for yourselves.

 JOURNALIST: …Bob Hawke's comments last night that you…Opposition Leader for five years…..is that a backhand compliment?

 BEAZLEY: I think that when you are an Opposition Leader you understand this about life, there's no focus on you. The focus is on the other side of politics until the election campaign comes around. When you're in Opposition you deal with the cards that are dealt you, and do the best you can. It's not easy being an Opposition Leader at any point of time. Being an Opposition Leader from Western Australia is

 that much harder. Serving in Parliament for 20 years during that, and 13 years as a Minister requires a bit of ticker.

 JOURNALIST: …campaign…Queensland…Mr Howard is following you up here….marginal seats up here. How important do you think the role of Queensland voters will play in this election? And how important is it to keep a close eye on the marginal seats around Queensland?

 BEAZLEY: To a very large extent, Queensland will determine the outcome of this election, there is no doubt about that. There are a lot of marginal seats in Queensland, both ways. We're in a fight here. We understand that. We've understood that for some considerable period of time. I have, I guess over my years in politics, spent an awful lot of time in Queensland and have come to know it pretty well. I think that we have the policies, the pitch of policies which are going to be important to the average citizen of Australia who resides in Queensland. I think I particular what we have to say about the fate of Ansett is important in that regard. To get to places like Townsville, and like Cairns, who are at the heart of the tourism industry here in Queensland requires Ansett to be flying. There is no other solution.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

