---
title: "Clayton Victoria: transcript of doorstop: Governor-General, asylum seekers, Woomera."
date: "2001-12-20"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232513
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KNN56%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - CLAYTON, VICTORIA, 20 DECEMBER 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Governor-General, asylum seekers, Woomera

 CREAN: I welcome the decision of the Governor-General to finally break his silence in relation to the tragic events at the Toowoomba School. Dr Hollingworth’s statement acknowledges that this was handled badly and he regrets it.  It is a great pity that the circumstances of insurance and legalities overrode issues of concern to the family and the victims.  What is disturbing since the statement has been issued is that there have been certain inconsistencies between what is in that statement and statements by the victims and their parents.  Accordingly either the Governor-General has to clear up these matters of inconsistency and failing that the Prime Minister needs to satisfy himself on these matters of inconsistency and advise the public accordingly.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Dr Hollingworth should stand down?

 CREAN: No I’m not calling for that but I think that there needs to be further clarity in the light of statements in his statement and I believe fundamentally that the Prime Minister has to get himself involved in this.  If he wants to avoid further damage to the Office of Governor-General he needs to get Dr Hollingworth to issue a further clarification or the Prime Minister needs to tell the public he is satisfied about his appointment.

 JOURNALIST: …further confirmation of those budget cuts ….  or further confirmation of the insidious behaviour by Catholic Brothers?

 CREAN: Well as I understand it this was an Anglican School so let’s not start throwing around allegations here.  I think the victims have already been hurt badly.  It has taken a long time for them to get justice and action, a point acknowledged by Dr Hollingworth.   I hope that this is another lesson to all of those seeking to cover up these sorts of incidents into the future but most importantly I think for the victims sake and their parents we need finality on what actually took place and what action the Church took and

 when.  If there are still inconsistencies the families are not going to be satisfied nor will the public be.  So either Dr Hollingworth needs to issue a further clarification or the Prime Minister needs to satisfy himself about it and advise the public accordingly.

 JOURNALIST: What damage do you think has this done to the office of Governor-General?

 CREAN: Well I think it has tarnished the office of Governor-General the fact that it took so long for this statement to come out.  Many people have been calling for it, me included.  I think if we are to avoid further damage to the office we need to clear it up completely and that is in the hands now of either the Governor-General or the Prime Minister, but the Prime Minister has been silent on this matter.  I don’t believe in the circumstances it is appropriate for the Leader of this country to stand silently by whilst there is potential for the office of Governor-General to be damaged.

 JOURNALIST: Carmen Lawrence was on the radio this morning saying that she thinks there is momentum building in the Party to change the Party’s stance on detention of asylum seekers.  What is your reaction?

 CREAN: I have called for all of the Party’s policies to be reviewed. Every one of them except the further sale of Telstra.  We welcome the input into changes that people within the Party believe that we should be making. We have set up a process to encourage that.  I want that process to be conducted in full and to completion.

 JOURNALIST: How do you believe the Government’s handling of the Woomera situation has gone?

 CREAN: Well I think the Government is handling it very badly. This is a continuing problem which the Government’s failure on the policy front in terms of the detention centres is only exacerbating.  We called for a Royal Commission last time.  It seems these issues won’t go away as much as the Government wants to push them under the carpet.  It needs to address this issue, address it urgently.  We need a lasting solution both as to the means by which asylum seekers are able to get to this country and then when they are here the process by which their claims are determined, determined quickly with no endless rights of appeal.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Dr Lawrence’s comments today were helpful?

 CREAN: I have encouraged debate in review of the Party’s policies.  I have set a task for myself of modernising the Labor Party.  I have demonstrated the first step of that is to modernise the front bench.  I believe that the Party needs to now modernise itself.  A modern Labor Party for a modern Australia.  That is what I am looking forward so I encourage the

 debate - there are rules and processes for that debate to take place and I would urge the participants to not just pursue the debate but to pursue the process appropriately.

 JOURNALIST: What’s your solution ….. on the housing of asylum seekers?

 CREAN: We need a lasting solution that involves identifying the problem at source, identifying the problem and reaching agreements with countries through which the asylum seekers come, of identifying a process by which we can sort out quickly who are genuine refugees and who are not, a coastguard, a cop on the beat and a mechanism by which once the process is determined there are not endless rights of appeal.  That’s the comprehensive solution.  I am prepared to lend bipartisan support to such a solution.  I urge the Government to develop one and I am more than happy to sit down with them and work towards a lasting solution.

 JOURNALIST: Would you tolerate the current behaviour by asylum seekers?

 CREAN: I think that the police and the authorities have the opportunity to address that behaviour.  But what I would far prefer to be doing is dealing with the cause of the problem, not having to deal with the crisis once it happens.  That is why we need a lasting solution.  That is what I am calling for - bipartisan support and I am prepared to lend it.  It’s a pity that the Government won’t respond positively to my challenge.

 JOURNALIST: Do you have a Christmas message for Australians?

 CREAN: I do.  I wish them a happy, prosperous and happy Christmas and New Year.  I want them to spend time with their families and I want them to reflect on what Christmas does - it features a compassion, it features a tolerance.  It seems in our society that it has been lacking in the last few months and I hope that reflection over the Christmas period gives time for people to reflect and approach things in a new way in the New Year.

 I will be looking forward to developing such an approach for them, with them, on their behalf.

 Ends

