---
title: "Diversity is Australia's strength, says Minister."
date: "2001-12-20"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232516
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3UN56%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

 Media Release

  

 Diversity is Australia’s Strength, Says Minister

 Multiculturalism remains an important means of addressing the challenges and opportunities that arise from Australia’s diversity, the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, said today.

 Launching the 2002 Diary of Multicultural Events at the National Museum of Australia in Canberra, Mr Hardgrave said diversity was Australia’s strength and stressed the importance of citizenship.

 “The Government is committed to enhancing efforts to promote citizenship as a unifying force in Australian society,” Mr Hardgrave said.

 Mr Hardgrave said all Australians faced many challenges, particularly as a result of the September 11 terrorist attacks against the United States.

 As a result, it was timely that the theme of the diary was `living harmoniously together’.

 The diary is designed as a guide to events and days celebrated throughout the year by Australian communities and gives all Australians the information they need to get together and discover our cultural diversity.

 It also celebrates important milestones in the development of Australia.

 “Many of the stories told in the diary remind us that living in harmony requires an ongoing effort to move beyond just tolerating our cultural diversity,” Mr Hardgrave said.

 “Beyond tolerance is a recognition of our inter-dependence as

 Australians.”

 During the past 50 years, almost six million people have come to Australia as new settlers, 600,000 of whom have come under humanitarian programs as displaced persons or refugees.

 Mr Hardgrave said the diary’s theme also reflected the 2002 United Nations International Year of Mountains.

 He said the Snowy Mountains Hydroelectric Scheme was not only one of the world’s greatest engineering feats but also a demonstration of the success of a multicultural workforce.

 The diary was produced by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs.

 20 December 2001

 Media contact: Paris Kostakos 0409 042 370

 Media Release Index

