---
title: "Government delay on Ansett costs billions, jobs, regional services."
date: "2001-09-11"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228656
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R1X46%22
---

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 11 September 2001                            MEDIA RELEASE                      01/533

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Government delay on Ansett costs billions, jobs, regional services The Australian Democrats have been informed that both the Prime Minister, Mr John Howard, and the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Transport, Mr John Anderson, were hand-delivered a letter on August 14 detailing the extent of Ansett’s financial crisis.

 On Monday, Mr Anderson’s media release concluded, “No one, including apparently Air New Zealand and its shareholders, understood the true state of the company's financial position until last week”.

 The Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Stott Despoja, said, “In fact, they were officially informed well before then. The Australian Government has been talking to the New Zealand Government for weeks, the problem is they have been talking about the contrived refugee ‘crisis’ while they were ignoring the real Ansett crisis.

 “Both the Labor Party and the Coalition are now telling the Australian public that regional jobs are the big issue. If that is the case, what will they be doing about the nearly 700,000 unemployed Australians?

 “The Australian Democrats call on the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister to come clean about what they knew and when they knew it.

 “What we need to know now is: When did Ansett first advise the Government of the extent of its difficulties? What advice the Department of Transport provided the Government with?

 “Why the Government continued to push for Qantas to acquire Air New Zealand even though such an objective was unlikely to eventuate and resulted in Ansett running out of time to find a buyer other than Qantas?

 “The formation of a domestic airline with more than 90% market share is not a good outcome for Australian workers, airline consumers or businesses who rely heavily on air travel.

 “While no one wants to see workers lose their jobs, the only thing the Government is ensuring is that no jobs are lost before the election. Why has everything been left to the last minute? Why are Australian consumers being forced to accept an anti-competitive outcome stitched up in days when they have been fully aware of the depth of the problems for over one month?”

 “If the Government is going to allow the formation of a mega-airline in Australia, then it should also toughen up the Trade Practices Act to ensure that when market abuse occurs the ACCC has the power to divest a monopoly of assets in the way that the US Government has tried to discipline Microsoft,” concluded Senator Stott Despoja.

 For more information please contact Alison Rogers on 0419 867 649

