---
title: "Perth, WA: Detention centres/refugees, Australian detainees in Indonesia, Australia's population intake, Prime Minister's visit to US, Federal Election timing, Timothy McVeigh and the death penalty, Greens preferences, the environment."
date: "2001-06-12"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211225055
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8R946%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Detention Centres-Refugees, Australian Detainees In Indonesia, Australia's Population Intake, Prime Minister's Visit To US, Federal Election Timing, Timothy McVeigh And The Death Penalty, Greens Preferences, The

 Environment

 http://www.alp.org.au//media/0601/kbmcwa120601.html Wednesday, 13 June 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Detention Centres/Refugees, Australian Detainees In Indonesia, Australia's Population Intake, Prime Minister's Visit To US, Federal Election Timing, Timothy McVeigh And The Death Penalty, Greens Preferences, The Environment

 Transcript - Perth, WA - 12 June 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what do you think of Con Sciacca's plan to set up a maximum security detention centre for troublemakers and those who are most likely to be deported?

 BEAZLEY: He's trying to find a way through and it's just a set of suggestions … between this conundrum: of people who have no chance of coming into the country, who are obviously hostile as a result of that, and are protesting their circumstances, and people who are genuinely going to be refugees and come into this country, often with wives and children with them as well, as refugees. How do you assure their safety, how do you get balance into the program? That's what he's trying to think his way through.

 JOURNALIST: Dr Gallop has said that the society of Port Hedland, which could be suitable …there's a lot of infrastructure there already. He's quite warm to the idea and has sort of said, well, OK, that's an idea, then use Port Hedland.

 BEAZLEY: Yes, well, obviously, if we were to pursue that - and there has to be some better way of doing things than we're doing them now, that's patently obvious - and we want an inquiry first before we do anything and we will have that inquiry first. But, undoubtedly, they will recommend doing something differently from the way we're doing it now, because the way we're doing it now is producing poor results …

 JOURNALIST: Do you endorse Con Sciacca's idea?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I think it's got merit. But, you know, it's something that you'd clearly think through and you would await, as I said, the advice of a proper inquiry into the whole system before pursuing it. But, nevertheless, separating out people who are likely to be successful from those who are unlikely,

 certainly would save those who are likely to be successful …

 JOURNALIST: Doing something like that wouldn't necessarily guarantee stopping that sort of …

 BEAZLEY: It might put a different regime in place in that facility. I would think, though, that before we move down that track, an inquiry is what's necessary.

 JOURNALIST: What do you say to…people who are saying that detaining people who are refugees is inhumane?

 BEAZLEY: Well, you have to establish that they're refugees, that's the first point. The second point is that you have to be aware that those who come into this country as refugees, via this method, displace those who come in, who wait in very, very long queues indeed, in refugee camps who don't have the financial resources to pay those who are associated with this - effectively trading people. And therefore there has to be both a mechanism whereby you establish the refugee status of the person concerned and at least give some signal to those who are organising and taking huge amounts of money off these people that they just cannot automatically get themselves into a position where they just shove people into the country. So, I think that there is going to have to be a detention policy no matter what. But how you do it is another matter. And how it's being done at the moment is damaging the reputation of this country.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, on another issue, the Jakarta detainees … the Australian … conference over there. Do you think …

 BEAZLEY: Well, I think we've always got to be concerned when Australian citizens lawfully conducting themselves elsewhere find themselves in a degree of trouble and … I'm making inquiries of friends and others as to what exactly happened here and I'll get a better picture of the adequacy and the action of the Australian Government after doing that. So, I'm not going to jump the gun on it. But it's a pity, a great shame, what happened. Indonesia is struggling towards democracy. It's a different Indonesia from Indonesia a few years ago. We have got to be supportive of and sympathetic to the people who are struggling in extremely difficult circumstances - economically and socially - to create a nation in which everybody is a stakeholder, everybody has a share. It is a development which those of us who love democracy ought to be watching with interest and sympathy.

 JOURNALIST: Does that mean we should, perhaps, be more tolerant …?

 BEAZLEY: Well, there is going to be, in the sort of circumstances that Indonesia now faces, actions from time to time which seem inconsistent because there are different forces, political forces, at work in a much more open society that are going to produce, from time to time, actions like this. However, it needs to be pointed out by the Australian Government to those in authority in Indonesia that the actions of these individuals are not malevolent that what they're concerned about is labour rights and labour rights are invariably part of a democracy.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, Martin Ferguson has said that under Labor, the single migrant intake would be increased but … regional areas. That sounds like a return to the '50s, doesn't it?

 BEAZLEY: Look, we need to ensure that when migrants come to this country that they come to the areas of need. Now, we have almost a magnet in Sydney now and people who are planning the development of Sydney find themselves, from time to time, over-run and are concerned. On the other hand, we have some of the most habitable parts of Australia being, effectively, depopulated, or the population is

 decreasing. It includes places like Tasmania. It includes places like many parts of regional Australia. And when it comes to economic development from those areas, the cry is for skilled labour, skilled workers. And when we talk about skills here, we're often talking about skills at the cutting edge now of new technologies. And there is an international market, if you like, in high-skilled workers and we are losing large numbers of our high-skilled workers elsewhere and high-skilled workers elsewhere are interested in coming here. And we have to acknowledge that and understand it if we're going to develop the skills base necessary to support new industries.

 JOURNALIST: How do you make them go to places where they don't want to go …

 BEAZLEY: There are all sorts of mechanisms that you can use in the points system and what Martin Ferguson is calling for is a bit of creative thinking. We've by no means has concluded plans on that. But we need a bit of creative thinking in this country now on so many fronts and this is one of them.

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister is off to the US on 10 September. He's confirmed that today. Does that kill off any prospect of an election before then?

 BEAZLEY: It's up to the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister can call and election at any time. And he has flirted with an election, really, since the beginning of this year. And he's not done the country a darn bit of good while he's done it. There is an election consciousness in this country now which is bad for the economy.

 JOURNALIST: Would it seem unlikely, though, if he's going to meet the American President in mid September, be unlikely he'd break that to call a Federal election?

 BEAZLEY: Well, you're the analyst. I'm simply the politician. I'm the bloke who has to fight the next election from our side. And, suffice to say that we are ready to fight it at any point of time, were that election to occur. And the coyness of the Prime Minister about politics since the beginning of this year has been one of those marginal detractions from the economic performance of this country over that period of time.

 JOURNALIST: When would you like to see the Federal election, then?

 BEAZLEY: I've always said that Parliaments should run their full course. Which, of course, would take it out to October this year. But at the same time, you also recognise that when people come out from holidays in January and fire the starter's gun, it creates a set of anticipations in the community, in the country and which people make investment decisions or hold off investment decisions, there's a question of confidence which ripples though when there's an apparent election in the atmosphere. I didn't fire the starter's gun, John Howard did. And he's then subjected this country to what effectively seems to be a 12-month election campaign instead of a six-week one. Well, there'll be a lot of people in small business who won't thank him for that.

 JOURNALIST: When the Prime Minister meets George W Bush, what sort of issues would you like him to raise?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I hope that he puts forward to Mr Bush the totality of Australia's interest in a stable Pacific. I hope that he talks to him seriously about the need to ensure that APEC, that trading forum, is healthy and successful. I hope that he will undoubtedly cover off the importance of security relationships between Australia and the United States. I hope that he says to President Bush that there is a question

 mark over the proposal that he has put forward for national missile defences and the possible knock-on effect of attempting to achieve that in political relations in this region. I think he'll talk to him about that. And I hope that he talks to him about the significance of following up on the important trading relationship that is established through APEC, with the need to have constantly at the forefront of your mind the issues of stability in the Pacific and relations between the United States and Japan, Korea and China are critical in that regard. Then I hope he deals with the issues of our most immediate region. We basically do have to act in a way to be supportive of developing the maximum possible stability in the countries to our north, particularly in Indonesia. And the United States has got a role to play in that along with everyone else.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, with the execution of Timothy McVeigh overnight, should Australia re-open debate about the death penalty?

 BEAZLEY: No.

 JOURNALIST: Not at all?

 BEAZLEY: No.

 JOURNALIST: Why not?

 BEAZLEY: I think it's a sad country that has to go through debate about whether or not there is State authorised killing. In the United States there is a certain culture around this, I'm not going to criticise the United States in regard to that. But I do think that the death penalty is not part of a society which values a State that is punitive when people commit heinous crimes and is prepared to imprison them, but nevertheless is prepared to say that we as a collective entity are not like you.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, in the Nedlands by-election the combined Greens parties had a primary vote of 26 per cent. Do you think that's the sort of trend you'll be expecting in the Federal election?

 BEAZLEY: The environment is critical. Concern about the environment is everybody's concern these days. There are major national environmental issues on the table now: Kyoto targets, that's one of them. The problems of salinity generally and particularly along the Murray/Darling River system - that's a critical issue. The question of our forests, they're critical too. These are matters which should be the absolute focus of national politics. And one of the initiatives that we would ensure took place, were we to be elected to office, to have that essentially valueless COAG process of last week transformed into an operative political instrument in this nation, with twice yearly meetings in which the environment was one of four items on the agenda, automatically - education, health, the environment and Australia's regions and then anything the protagonists wanted to add to those. But every six months, and perhaps even more regularly, there would be a deliberation whereby the different tiers of Government in this country sat down to work their way through these chronic problems. There is a reasonable sense of alarm about the environment in this community, so I'm not surprised a those votes.

 JOURNALIST: You say it's going to be a big issue at the Federal election. Do you believe that the Party which demonstrates that it's the greenest will win?

 BEAZLEY: I think it will be one of a number of factors. There are going to be a number of issues in this election but the environment is going to be one of them.

 JOURNALIST: The Green vote is going to be very high, though?

 BEAZLEY: The Green vote will be high. But even higher than the Green vote, will be the vote of those, one of whose primary concerns is the environment. And there'll be many Labor voters who will be voting for the Labor Party with a full-blown concern that the Labor Party do the right thing on the environment. And they will be convinced of our policies.

 JOURNALIST: So, will you be making a preference deal with the Greens and any green sort of Party?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I'm not the preference negotiator for the Labor Party. There are people who will be out there negotiating preference arrangements. But we've always enjoyed a reasonable relationship with the Greens.

 JOURNALIST: The Greens were saying today if you want their preferences you'll have to meet certain criteria.

 BEAZLEY: They always do.

 JOURNALIST: Are you confident, though, you can reach that…criteria?

 BEAZLEY: Well, we'll see. I'm pretty confident that John Howard won't. I'm pretty confident about that. I mean, I saw John Howard coming out the other day saying, 'I've done tax this term, made of mess of that. So, next term we'll do the environment'. As though the bloke who jumped with alacrity to knock over the Kyoto accords the moment the United States moved on that, the bloke who's pleased to see uranium mining go ahead in a national park, the fellow who has turned Wilson Tuckey loose on the forests, wants to tell me and all other Australians that his next target in political life is the environment. Well, if it is, with a record like that, heaven help us.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

 Home | Action | News | Policy | People | About

