---
title: "Funding applications for services to new arrivals close soon."
date: "2001-03-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211221479
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/59M36%22
---

  

 News Room

 Funding Applications for Services to New Arrivals Close Soon MPS 028/2001

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said today there had been a strong response to the new web-based electronic application form for immigration settlement service grants.

 Applications from non-profit community organisations seeking funding for services to assist migrants, refugees and humanitarian program entrants to settle successfully in Australia close on 16 March 2001

 "So far nearly sixty organisations have begun to use the new web-based form available from my Department's web site and I would encourage others intending to use the site not to wait until the last minute," Mr Ruddock said.

 Approximately $9.1 million is available under the Community Settlement Services Scheme (CSSS) for the provision of a range of settlement services in metropolitan, regional, rural and remote areas for periods of one to three years duration.

 "The Government recognises that often it is people and communities working at the local level who can find the most practical ways to assist individuals, families and groups settle successfully into the Australian community," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The CSSS is intended to respond to gaps in mainstream service provision by supporting providers of direct services such as information and referral services and community participation in planning and delivery of services."

 Funding priority will be given to projects facilitating client access to mainstream services, developing networks that engage mainstream service providers to deliver culturally

 appropriate services, and those aiming to be self-sustaining beyond the period of the grant.

 "Priority projects for CSSS funding are those which extend existing networks and address the settlement needs of migrants living in rural and remote areas, where support services are difficult to access," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Areas where there are small and emerging communities of recent arrivals and groups within the migrant communities facing specific settlement problems will be specifically targeted.

 "Priority will also be given to projects which cater for refugee and humanitarian entrants except those who are eligible for specialised services under other Government programs, or who are otherwise excluded," Mr Ruddock said.

 Editor's Note: The Internet address for the forms and other information on the grants is: (www.immi.gov.au/grants )

 5 March 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

