---
title: "World Refugee Day."
date: "2001-06-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211225328
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DUC46%22
---

  

 News Room

 World Refugee Day MPS 080/2001

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today acknowledged the importance of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees' (UNHCR) inaugural World Refugee Day, to be held today, 20 June.

 "With about 23-million refugees and people of concern around the world, it is important for developed nations to be able to share the burden with countries of first asylum, especially at a time when the UNHCR is facing a funding shortfall," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Australia has a proud tradition of helping those most in need and in the past 50 years has resettled almost 600,000 refugees and displaced people.

 "In the past financial year more than 7,500 refugees and humanitarian entrants were resettled from overseas. They have come from several regions such as the former Yugoslavia, the Middle East, including a sizeable intake from Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan, and from Africa.

 "As someone who has seen first hand the reality of refugee camps in Africa, the Balkans and the Middle East, it is important that Australia continue to play a role in offering places to these needy and profoundly desperate people.

 "Most cannot return home and many are not safe where they are, but with the continuing influx of people arriving on our shores illegally, it is becoming increasingly difficult to provide them resettlement places.

 "There are less than 10 countries around the world, offering a total of about 110,000 resettlement places each year and many of those places are under threat.

 "Every time someone who has the resources to pay people smugglers arrives unlawfully in

 Australia and is granted refugee status, a place is denied to someone else languishing in the most undesirable circumstances. "While developed nations are spending around $10-billion a year processing the claims of asylum seekers, the UNHCR has recently announced it is revising its projected income down 14% to $US825-million and that it will have to abolish almost 800 posts.

 "This simply reinforces my view that our priorities are obscenely wrong," Mr Ruddock said.

 The Minister said that Australia will continue its efforts to share the burden, with the humanitarian intake in the coming year consisting of 12,000 places, of which an estimated 4,000 will be set aside for the resettlement of offshore refugees. However these places remain under serious threat from people arriving illegally and then lodging claims onshore.

 The Minister acknowledged the work of UNHCR and the government and non-government organisations that work tirelessly to assist the 23 million refugees and people of concern around the world.

 20 June 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

