---
title: "Coastwatch and border protection."
date: "2001-08-22"
creators:
  - "Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit"
source: "JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227594
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J2I56%22
---

 

 Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit

   22 AUGUST 2001

  

  

 COASTWATCH AND BORDER PROTECTION Mr Bob Charles, MP, the Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit, today tabled the report of the Committee’s review into Coastwatch: Report 384—Review of Coastwatch.

 Mr Charles said:

 ‘The main point of the report is that Coastwatch is working well and there is no need for an Australian Coastguard.

 The Committee has inspected Coastwatch’s National Surveillance Centre and seen at first hand how offshore surveillance patrols are conducted, how suspect illegal vessels are detected, and how their interception is coordinated. The Committee saw a well integrated organisation, effectively using the resources at its disposal, and staffed by personnel dedicated to protecting Australia’s borders.

 Coastwatch’s role in regards to the recent upsurge of boat people is not to prevent their arrival, but to detect, and coordinate the interception of those boat people and, if they choose to enter Australia’s territorial waters (ie cross the 12 mile line), bring them safely to land. An Australian Coastguard would not do anything differently.

 The challenges faced by Coastwatch are wide ranging and demanding. Coastwatch is performing well in detecting and coordinating the interception of illegal entry vessels in northern and north-western waters. Simply providing additional resources to Coastwatch or creating an Australian Coastguard will not stem the tide.

 In northern and north-western waters Coastwatch’s performance in combating illegal fishing is limited by its ability to intercept the vessels it has detected. In contrast, in the Southern Ocean the limiting factor is one of actually detecting illegal fishers. The Committee has recommended ways in which these problems should be addressed.

 Unauthorised air movements in northern Australia currently pose a minimal threat. However, Customs should take primary responsibility for the issue, but with Defence being intimately involved with the contingency planning recommended by the Committee.

 It has been suggested that Coastwatch, as part of Customs, may favour Customs in conducting its operations. The evidence from Coastwatch’s other clients, did not support this view. The Committee concludes there is a sound relationship between Coastwatch and its clients. This has been helped by the practice of seconding a serving uniformed Australian Defence Force officer

 to be Director General, Coastwatch. This practice should continue.

 The current Coastwatch organisation is right for Australia. Because it is not wedded to the assets it calls upon, it can quickly change its surveillance equipment and response strategies to meet changing threats and take advantage of new technologies. An Australian Coastguard would lead to asset duplication with the RAN and Customs. Also inter-agency bickering would be likely between the Coastguard, Customs, Immigration, Quarantine and the Australian Federal Police when operations were being conducted.’

 For media comment, contact Mr Bob Charles, MP on telephone (02) 6277 4775.

 For information, contact the inquiry secretary, Dr John Carter on telephone (02) 6277 4574.

 Electronic copies of the report are at:  [http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committe/jpaa/index.htm]

 

 Comments to: The Secretary of the Committee on PH: (02) 6277 4615 or FAX: (02) 6277 2220 or e-mail: JCPA@aph.gov.au Last reviewed 22 August 2001 by the Committee Secretariat © Commonwealth of Australia Parliament of Australia Web Site Privacy Statement

