---
title: "Barton Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview, 6 April 2001: Dr Wooldridge, Democrats leadership, GST, Governor-General's replacement, asylum seekers."
date: "2001-04-06"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211222701
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FKT36%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Dr Wooldridge, Democrats Leadership, GST, Governor-General's Replacement, Asylum Seekers http://www.alp.org.au/media/0401/kbmcact060401.html

 Tuesday, 10 April 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Dr Wooldridge, Democrats Leadership, GST, Governor-General's Replacement, Asylum Seekers

 Transcript - Barton, Canberra - 6 April 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: John Howard must act today to stand aside Dr Wooldridge and request, in fact direct, the Australian Securities Commission to examine the circumstances in which two medical consortiums' shares rose dramatically on the stock exchange after a meeting, a dinner attended by Dr Wooldridge. This is the second time Dr Wooldridge has found himself in a situation like this and it appears to be a situation of loose lips contributing to an opportunity to raise share prices. It is evident from The Age today that Dr Wooldridge said something at a gathering of some 700 people that was sufficient for those in the know to believe that the value of two companies would increase substantially as a result of a decision taken by American Research Authorities and a $30 million grant going to Australian researchers. He must come clean on what he has said - he avoided answers in Parliament - he must come clean on what he said. But more to the point John Howard must now act. Dr Wooldridge must be stood aside. The Australian Securities Commission must be asked to investigate the circumstances of this thoroughly.

 JOURNALIST: So do you have some sort of proof now? Is that why you are stepping up your...?

 BEAZLEY: Well, what we have here is a story in one of our newspapers, The Age, that is a product of a report from two journalists who were at that meeting themselves who have had the opportunity to quiz Dr Wooldridge, who followed the answers that he has given in Parliament, who have seen reports and had reported back to them what was described by one observer as a 'rocket' that went around the investment community the next day, the day after Dr Wooldridge's appearance at this dinner. So we have here a serious situation with many questions for Dr Wooldridge to answer. But the right people to ask those questions now is ASIC and the right action by the Prime Minister is to stand Dr Wooldridge aside.

 JOURNALIST: He didn't actually name the company though, did he?

 Back

 BEAZLEY: What he apparently said, and we don't know exactly what he said, but what he apparently said was sufficient for those in the know to understand that something good had happened which would impact on the value of these companies. That is quite evident from the reporting that we've had so far. What exactly he said, we don't know and he must come clean on that. But what he said was enough to send - and again these are not my words but the words of an observer at that particular dinner - a 'rocket' around the community in the know the next day and the value of shares rose up to 50 per cent as a result of that 'rocket' doing the rounds.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, will you pass on the information yourself to the commission? Will you do that?

 BEAZLEY: There are many people with information, so it seems. But nobody is going to pass on any information in the absence of an inquiry. ASIC must now inquire but ASIC to inquire either does it of its own initiative or at the direction of a government. Now this is the test of John Howard and whether he has any ministerial standards left at all. And the test for him is to stand Dr Wooldridge aside and ensure that the appropriate authority which it there to protect the interests of all Australian investors properly investigates this. Now they would investigate any other set of circumstances of an equivalent character. Merely because a Commonwealth Minister is involved is no reason not to investigate them now. But it would be totally inappropriate for Dr Wooldridge to continue performing his duties while such an inquiry was taking place.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, tonight the Democrats will know who their new leader is. From your perspective would Natasha Stott Despoja be easier to work with for Labor than Meg Lees?

 BEAZLEY: I have great respect for the Democrats and I hope they can resolve their leadership issue to their satisfaction tonight and it would be presumptuous of me as the Leader of the Australian Labor Party to suggest how they should select or what particular leader they should select for themselves. But I do say this more generally about the issue of other political parties which are occasionally the recipients of protest votes. People who do determine to vote against a government of the day and register a protest do need to be careful about what subsequently happens to that vote. Many people did vote Democrat at the last election assuming that that would stop a GST and then went on to vote for the Liberal Party in the House of Representatives. That action on their part, of course, failed in its intent and that is something that people do have to bear at the back of their minds when they confront the possibility of voting for protest parties at the next election. If they want their protest to be carried thoroughly through the best thing to do is to vote for the Labor Party.

 JOURNALIST: John Howard has indicated this morning that a Natasha Stott Despoja led Democrats would be harder for him to work with would it therefore be easier for you to work with?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I would have thought John Howard had his own leadership problems at this stage of the game. John Howard finds himself in a situation now where his credibility is being questioned by the Australian people. He said that he would make them relaxed and

 comfortable - he has made them anything but. He said there would be no GST - there is one. He said he wouldn't Americanise the health system - he has. He said no worker would be worse of with his industrial relations changes - they are. John Howard has a major credibility problem, forget about Meg Lees or Natasha Stott Despoja.

 JOURNALIST: John Howard actually pointed out that IR would be hard with Natasha as leader...

 BEAZLEY: That is John Howard returning to the role of political commentator. What I want to see is John Howard Prime Minister and we are getting precious little of that in the last few months.

 JOURNALIST: Just on the GST, do you welcome the backdown from the farmers in their tax...?

 BEAZLEY: Don't say backdown say rollback. I welcome the continuing rollback by the Government under pressure but I give them no credit. They adopt this contradictory policy all the time. They criticise me for advocating rollback and they run helter skelter after the Labor Party to put rollback in place. They are now rolling back on the BAS as we urged them to. They rolled back on the deceit they practised on the Australian electorate about the impact of the GST on fuel. They have had to rollback on beer. They are rolling back persistently and they did a bit more rollback yesterday.

 JOURNALIST: Is the Prime Minister running out of time to select a new Governor-General?

 BEAZLEY: The Governor-General's replacement should have been known to the Australian people months ago. Generally speaking it is six months prior to taking up the position that we get to know who the new Governor-General is. The Prime Minister has been enormously coy about this, leaking out names from his office and then scuttling away from them once those name are floated. It is a most undignified way to conduct a search for a representative of the Head of State. The time has come for the Prime Minister to make up his mind and tell us all.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, Con Sciacca said that Labor will support a tightening or rules governing asylum seekers in Australia. Will Labor support legislation allowing strip searchers and cavity searchers including on children?

 BEAZLEY: We do have to make absolutely certain that everybody who is in those detention camps is safe. And in circumstances where there is the possibility of riot and therefore injury to not just the guards but also to others who are inmates of those camps must always be guarded against. So we are supportive of sensible procedures to do that. But we have major questions about the administration of those camps. There have been now repeated reports of abuse of those who are inmates and we have said there needs to be a judicial inquiry. So while we are prepared to look at measures that increase the safety of people in those camps and diminish the capacity for riot to break out and that safety to be compromised we think that there are problems broader than just that as far as the proper conduct of those camps are concerned. And we have now for some considerable period of

 time suggested a judicial inquiry is appropriate. And the more limited inquiry did not in any way, shape or form suggest that a broader inquiry was not appropriate.

 JOURNALIST: So does that mean that you won't support strip searchers?

 BEAZLEY: We will look at what the Government's legislation is and we will support decent measures to ensure that people not able to conduct themselves in a way that jeopardises the safety of guards or other people in the camps and the Government is going to roll out a few suggestions on that and we will take a look at them. We take a look at them with a disposition to be supportive as Mr Sciacca said yesterday. But there are more problems than just that associated with the camps at the moment.

 JOURNALIST: So do you think strip searchers are decent measures?

 BEAZLEY: As I said, we will look at all the measures that are put forward by the Commonwealth with a disposition to support whatever enhances the safety of the people in the camps and the guards. That is what Mr Sciacca said yesterday and that is what we are sticking to.

 Ends

 Back

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

 Home | Action | News | Policy | People | About

