---
title: "Democrats seeking to stop government pursuing court costs over Tampa case."
date: "2001-09-25"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229249
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OE056%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 25 September 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/562

 Democrats seeking to stop Government pursuing court costs over Tampa case

 The Australian Democrats will try to amend the Border Protection Bill to prevent the Government from seeking costs against those took court action to protect the rights of the asylum seekers on board the Tampa.

 “The Federal Government is not content with punishing refugees - it is also attacking anyone who dares to fight for their rights under the law,” according to the Australian Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett.

 “If the Government succeeds in obtaining costs against the applicants in the Tampa case, it will send a dangerous signal to anyone else who might want to act to protect people’s legal and human rights.

 “It will also discourage lawyers doing public interest and pro-bono work in the future, which would place even further strain on Australia’s underfunded and under-resourced Legal Aid system.”

 Senator Bartlett continued, “As Justice French said, in his finding in the case for the Full Federal Court, the lawyers in this case ‘acted according to the highest ideals of the law and have sought to give voice to those who are voiceless’. We should not be punishing such people for acting in the public interest.”

 Senator Bartlett will be moving an amendment in the Senate to the Border Protection Bill. The Bill retrospectively legalises all actions the government took in relation to the Tampa.

 “The fact that the Government is passing a special law to prevent court action in relation to their past and possible future actions makes it all the more outrageous that they might pursue costs against the applicants in Tampa case,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For further comment: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

