---
title: "Vaile says border protection has become a key issue locally in the election campaign."
date: "2001-10-24"
creators:
  - "Vaile, Mark"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRADE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230681
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WMB56%22
---

 Mark Vaile MP Deputy Leader of the Natonal Party - Minister for Trade - Federal Member for Lyne

 Vaile says Border Protection has become a KEY issue Locally in the Election Campaign 24 October 2001

 Locals tell Vaile to remain tough on Illegal People Smugglers

 Federal Deputy National Party Leader, Minister for Trade and Member for Lyne, Mark Vaile, says the divide between the Coalition and Labor on Border Protection has become a key issue in this year's Federal Election.

 "As I travel around the electorate, many people continue to highlight their concerns over the issue of illegal immigration. Overwhelmingly, they are telling me that our Government must continue to take a tough stand," Mr Vaile said

 "Kim Beazley's comments regarding the boat load of 356 people who lost their lives after their boat sank in Indonesian waters was an absolute disgrace! To suggest that it was in some way linked to a failure of Government Foreign Policy reveals just how low Mr Beazley will go in his attempts to score a cheap political point," Mr Vaile said.

 "Kim Beazley has crossed the road and gone from one side of the street to the other on this issue. Right now he appears to be crossing the street again, and if the feedback I've been getting is correct, the voters won't like him standing in the middle of the road come November 10!"

 Mr Vaile said be believed his electorate would overwhelmingly welcome the Government's policy announcement in relation to border protection.

 The new Coalition policy, Protecting Our Borders, outlines plans to protect Australia, including a $175.5 million investment in maritime surveillance and an enhancement of radar and communications capabilities to detect smuggled materials.

 Mr Vaile said the Coalition's new policy further protects Australia's coastline in a raft of measures, which will:

 • Significantly boost Australia's extensive radar network with $12.8 million in additional funding over four years; • Invest another $32.2 million to increase flight surveillance coverage; • Increase Coastwatch flights; and • Double Customs maritime surveillance.

 Mr Vaile said much of the anger at Labor's policy changes over border protection has come from people in regional and rural areas like New England who know only too well of the need to protect our shores and to safeguard our future.

 "They also see the Howard-Anderson Government's commitment to keeping illegal boat people out with tough new laws to curb people smuggling, including jail sentences up to 20 years and fines of up to $220,000," Mr Vaile said.

 "Some of these laws could have been implemented a lot earlier and prevented the flow of illegal immigrants had Labor in conjunction with independents and minor parties not blocked the legislation in parliament for the past two years."

 "Kim Beazley clearly needs to be sent a message on this issue on November 10. Weak leadership is certainly not what we need in these times of instability, especially on important issues like Border Protection," he added.

