---
title: "Australia needs a new approach on asylum seekers."
date: "2001-06-12"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211225048
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H4A46%22
---

  Senator Andrew Bartlett 

  Australian Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson 

  Australia needs a new approach on asylum seekers 

  With our detention centres fast becoming out of control, the Government’s   ‘solutions’ seem to be the continued demonising of asylum seekers and raising   the height of detention centre fences. 

  The Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the continuing   deterioration in the situation in detention centres highlighted the need for a new approach, rather than   going further and faster in the wrong direction. 

  “It is time for Australia to reconsider its approach and look at how other countries deal with this difficult   issue,” Senator Bartlett said. 

  “There is no simple easy solution, but clearly we can do better than we now are. 

  “The Howard Government’s indifference and arrogance toward asylum seekers, and its rigidity over   the processing, location and incarceration of asylum seekers simply further incites a highly sensitive   situation. 

  “The Government’s practices fly in the face of the standards developed by the United Nations High   Commission on Refugees (UNHCR),” said Senator Bartlett. 

  Senator Bartlett pointed out that Australia repeatedly fails in its understanding and adherence to ths   UNHCR’s refugee standards. 

  “According to the standards, detention lof asylum seekers is only to be used as a last resort. It mus: be   brief, absolutely necessary and only instituted after all other options have been implemented. 

  “Detention is only acceptable when verifying claims and identity, but strict time limits are imposed, and   freedom to access the UNHCR, legal representation and non-government agencies must be   maintained throughout the process. Australia fails in all of the above. 

  “Without a doubt, this Australian Goverclment has the distinguished honour of having instigated   practices which are unprecedented in cur migration history. Practices that will leave a scar on our   country and on the asylum seekers for many years to come - long after this Government has   disappeared from the political landscape. 

  “What is not being reported is the desperation of those herded compulsorily behind the barbed wire of   what are euphemistically called detention centres. There is no mention, by this Government, of the   brutalisation, intimidation or terror that some of the detainees are facing regularly in Australia’s   detention centres.” 

  “With each ill-considered decision Australia’s detention centres are more and more resembling   concentration camps. Australia’s Government sees it as expedient to dismiss every asylum seeker as   a ‘queue-jumper’ irrespective of their circumstances,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS 

  For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101 

  http:/Mww.democrats.org.au 

