---
title: "United Nations Day breakfast: address."
date: "2001-10-24"
creators:
  - "Hollingworth, Peter"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230672
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XSF56%22
---

 ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT REVEREND DR PETER HOLLINGWORTH, AC, OBE,

 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

 ON THE OCCASION OF

 THE UNITED NATIONS DAY BREAKFAST

 24 OCTOBER 2001

 Thank you Jeremy Lasek for your welcome to the National Library to address this United Nations Day Breakfast.

 I will only be speaking for a few minutes this morning and I have some things that I would like to say. I will not acknowledge distinguished guests individually. You are all distinguished guests and I would like to acknowledge you all.

 What do most Australians know about the United Nations?

 It is probably best known through its many agencies that promote health and education, equality and the rights of children around the world.

 At the present moment, Australians are especially aware of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in its endeavours to place the growing numbers of refugees around the world.

 Most would recognise from the television the beautific face of U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan. Here I wish to extend our particular congratulations to him and to the United Nations upon receiving the 100th Nobel Peace Prize.

 This helps us all to focus on what lies at the heart of the U.N. - the ideal of world peace. Above all other things, the U.N. organisation is dedicated to the achievement of peace across the globe.

 And at times like these, when the world is insecure and even frightened, I imagine many people are becoming cynical about the notion of peace between people who seem to view it so differently.

 One of the most dangerous weapons of terrorism is its capacity to undermine our faith in the instruments, and the possibility, of peace.

 One of its most sinister objectives is to see us surrender to cynicism, apathy and resignation.

 It has become somewhat of a cliché to speak of good things coming out of adversity, yet it is also a profound truth, a mystery lying at the heart of life itself.

 Today, as we gather in the capital city of a resolute and fortunate nation, we are, I believe, more conscious of our common values and humanity than we have been for many years.

 This year, as we mark Australia's 100th anniversary as a nation, we are becoming more aware of our democratic foundations, and our need to protect and preserve aspects of Australian life we have tended to take for granted.

 In a moment, the United Nations Day Address will be delivered by Her Excellency Penny Wensley, Australia's outgoing permanent representative to the U.N.. Given her vast international experience, her words are sure to be insightful and challenging to us.

 It is also fitting that we will be hearing, this morning, from a man who was recently awarded a rare and prestigious honour by the United Nations.

 And, from men like Jack Beetson, we learn how from little things, big things grow.

 Jack has been named one of the UN's Unsung Heroes for the UN Year of the Dialogue Among Civilisations for his work in bridging understanding between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.

 Jack says that his struggle is "not just a matter of Indigenous rights, but of human rights".

 His mission is to encourage people to find common ground, ways to communicate by stepping into each other's shoes and walking together with a new understanding and respect for each other as human beings.

 Jack Beetson's success is a triumph of good will, enduring hope and a sustained faith in humanity.

 I wish you all a pleasant and positive United Nations Day, and encourage you to maintain your commitment to the U.N. cause of peace and justice and to think about what each of us might do to promote these things in our daily lives.

