---
title: "Narangba, Queensland: transcript of doorstop interview: Labor's plan for our schools, asylum seekers, Cheryl Kernot, preferences, polls, agreement with Indonesia."
date: "2001-10-24"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Lee, Michael"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230646
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HU856%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley, Michael Lee - Doorstop - Labor's Plan For Our Schools, Asylum Seekers, Cheryl Kernot, Preferences, Polls, Agreement With Indonesia http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/kbmcqld241001.html

 Thursday, 25 October 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview with Michael Lee, Shadow Minister for Education Subjects: Labor's Plan For Our Schools, Asylum Seekers, Cheryl Kernot, Preferences, Polls, Agreement With Indonesia

 Transcript - Narangba, Queensland - 24 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Some days on the campaign trail give you pure joy. The last hour or so that we've been in school, for me, is one of those.

 Today I am announcing a billion dollar investment from a Labor Government in Australian schools. A billion dollars investment in the future of this nation. Our theme in this campaign has been jobs, health and education. This is absolutely central to that component of it that relates to education.

 Everywhere I go people tell me that this is the critical issue for them. It's critical whether they happen to be parents of children, they happen to be young people in universities, or whether they're just people with in interest in the future of this country. Every Australian believes that education is central to our future as a nation - and so it is.

 It marks out a clear difference between the Labor Party and the Coalition because John Howard considers his work in education at an end. He has done two things that he wishes to be seen as noteworthy. Firstly, he's invested heavily $150 million in Category 1 schools, which is an investment in privilege, not in education. Secondly, as he said in the Great Debate, the best thing he can do for education is a GST. That was a source of mystification to many Australians as they heard that. But what it was an indication was a man essentially in retirement mode, run out of ideas, run out of the notion of the future of this country, interested only in his personal retirement plan.

 This is a $1 billion investment which is affordable. As I've said on many other occasions, we have had Access Economics run their thumb over the totality of our package and each one of the elements. It's affordable within the framework of what has been announced by Treasury as the picture for Australia in fiscal terms over the course of the next four years.

 What's it going to pay for this $1 billion? Firstly, it's going to be an investment in schools where there are young people doing it hard. It will be a chance for those young people: be it in areas of literacy, be it in areas of mentoring to see them encouraged into particular opportunities in the workforce, or future training, be it in accessing new technology to ensure that they have the sorts of advantages that the kids in the Category 1 schools get access to.

 All these things are going to be feasible under one of the programs that we have here outlined as part of this $1 billion.

 Secondly, there's an element there for early learning. More and more research indicates that a dollar spent, just prior to a youngster going into school, saves you $10 down the track. A dollar spent on early learning creates, encourages and attitude to learning that lasts through high school and through to university or some other training or further education arrangement. That expenditure on early learning is critical, in terms of behaviours that then emerge in the community. This will help many young people to a future of creativity instead of a future of despair.

 Also in this is doubling the money to help students go from school into the workforce. Included in that $1 billion is near doubling of the money to help kids go from school into the workforce.

 Just before we left office 5½ years ago, we put in place the Jobs Pathway program. It's continued, but puttered along. What this does is substantially increase the resources going into that to encourage young people as they enter the latter years of their schooling, to position themselves in such a way that they can get themselves an opportunity in the workforce. This is critical at a time when youth unemployment is rising.

 Then included also in this, in the Learning Gateways program, is how we use new technologies, programs with new technologies, to ensure that our young people get, firstly, the best understanding of what is available to them throughout the education system in the curriculum, to render the schools transparent to parents, so that parents can follow what their children are being taught, and look at what other children are being taught and look at the matching of their own schools activities to what is available elsewhere in the education system.

 This is particularly important in regional Australia where it's not so easy for parents to maintain contact with what is going on in the school, where the distances are greater, but nevertheless, the capacity to effectively use learning portals such as we are proposing here, the capacity to use is there because there is a great deal of on-farm IT skill.

 This is going to be a good program for regional Australia as well.

 Overall, through these various programs, there is the provision, effectively, for an extra couple of thousand teachers into our education system. What we're doing here is building on policy that we have previously announced. The new policy today, builds on policy that we've previously announced, focussing on that most basic element of the learning process at all, that most critical element of the learning process, and those are our school teachers. As I've said before, the most important professionals in this country.

 We've got every element, I believe, gradually building a picture of covering every element of the education system as our education programs emerge.

 John Howard thinks that he's done enough. All of this comes in on top of what the Federal Government is now doing. The Federal Government is walking away from its responsibilities in education. It has said that it will walk away. It has done enough. Those are the words of Mr Howard himself.

 Well, they've not done enough. They have not done enough when you see the needs through the education system today, particularly the public education system.

 A Federal Government must accept responsibility for all Australian children. It must do that. It is not something to be duck shoved to the States. The Federal Government has to accept responsibility for all Australian students - and we do.

 JOURNALIST: How are schools going to be selected for funding under the education priority zone program?

 BEAZLEY: Well, obviously we will look, in the first instance, to the areas where students are doing it tough. We'll look to areas of significant disadvantage in educational terms, or more broadly. There may be areas where there are identified, in terms of what has been revealed in terms of looking performance inside the schools, where there are literacy problems, the areas where there's a lack of access to new technology for the students. These are the sorts of things that will be examined as we look at setting up the priority zones.

 JOURNALIST: Won't that stigmatise those schools … setting up a system where they'll be identified as poor achievers?

 BEAZLEY: I think this is a better program than the old Disadvantaged Schools Program that was put in place under the Whitlam Government, in terms of its flexibility in addressing particular local needs. But, no-one (inaudible) in any way shape or form stigmatise them when they're involved with that - no-one. I don't think anybody is going to consider themselves stigmatised. What there will be of course is great competition around the country for accessing an education priority zone because most will see, I believe, this as conferring a substantial opportunity on the young people who are associated.

 JOURNALIST: Who will make the final decision about where the funding will go? Will it be Michael Lee or an independent sort of … ?

 BEAZLEY: It will not be Michael Lee or Kim Beazley. This is going to be properly administered through the Department and in consultation with the States. We've have got to de-politicise these programs. What we've had in so many of the programs put in place by the Howard Government, Howard and Anderson Government, has been an opportunity to play politics in a particular area. An opportunity to porkbarrel - end to that. We're talking here about the future of Australia, not about the future of the political parties. This is about the future of Australia, and if you're going to be about the future of Australia you have to put it at arms-length from itself. You have to put the right programs in place, you've got to subject the program to the testing, there has to be political judgement about all of that, but because that's part of the democratic process. But the administration of the actual program - that's a matter for proper independent analysis.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: I'll bring in Michael Lee on that.

 LEE: Well, that is, of course, that the States and Territories will have a lot of information which it will

 need to determine which of the areas that have the greatest need. We've said that zones are targeted at the places where educational and social disadvantage overlap. We can get a lot of information from the Bureau of Statistics about where the poorer parts of our country are, but its only the State and Territory Departments of Education that can tell us which of the schools, which of the regions that have the greatest educational disadvantage. Where are the areas where the retention rates are lowest and we'll be working very closely with the States, in Government, though that information to pick the zones and the schools that are the most disadvantaged and need the extra money that's guaranteed through the program.

 JOURNALIST: … same socio-economic formula though, that you said doesn't work in private schools. How are you going to work out who is poorer or not?

 LEE: It's obviously very different from Dr Kemp's pure SES model. What we're looking at is coming up with ways, that not only consider the Australian Bureau of Statistics raw data, about which are the richest or the poorest parts of the country. But also factoring in what's the performance of individual regions and individual schools. There are lots of schools in Australia where, unfortunately the retention rates for Year 12 students are much lower than they should be, there are lots of parts of our country where the literacy and numeracy performance should be better and often that coincides with the poorest parts of the country. If you come from a poor background you are more likely to have a literacy problem, you're more likely to leave school before Year 12, you're more likely to have a behaviour problem at school, and you're more likely to have a problem getting a secure job when you leave school. This Program is about providing an average of a million dollars over four years to the schools that are in this Program. This is a massive injection of extra resources to the schools that are looking after the kids that need extra help. That's what it's about.

 JOURNALIST: You've set yourself a goal…… schools' retention rate ..of 90% … the highest retention rate this country has ever had is about 47%. Is that ….. ?

 BEAZLEY: Some States have got up to 90 - that has actually happened. Well, getting those sorts of statistics I can recollect when I was Employment, Education and Training Minister, in the latter phases of the period of Labor Government in some of the States, before they were all turned over by the Liberal Party during the course of the nineties, and then the rate collapsed. It collapsed completely. I think from recollection that South Australia went from 83% to about 59% and then it started to work its way back up. So, there's some historical precedence for this, but more important than the historical precedent, is basically most of the countries we literally like to compare ourselves to, do those sort of statistics standing on their head, and if we're going to be a competitive society over the course of this century, if we don't get to those sorts of figures in that time period, we're in a deal of trouble.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: That's what we're pitching to, yes, as far as high schools are concerned, that's what we're pitching to.

 JOURNALIST: Does all the money here apart from the clawback from Category 1. Does all the rest of the money come from the surplus and do you still guarantee the Budget will remain in the black?

 BEAZLEY: The Budget will remain in surplus. We've committed to that as I've said repeatedly. You will notice that Simon has started releasing savings measures, and I suggest you refer to them as well, and the savings measures, like the spending measures have all been cleared off by Access Economics.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Howard said this morning that you were continuing to slur with regards to the asylum seekers ……

 BEAZLEY: I'm not only happy to deal with that, but I insist on dealing with that. But that will be later on. I want to exhaust these things first.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you're in Longman today. Could you give any indication whether you think that the area would be in or out of the zones or don't you know, and secondly, in the zones, how do you exclude the wealthier schools, or don't you?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I think within the zones in those clusters you'll probably find, in truth, that there aren't terribly many wealthy schools and, if any, I think you would also find too if you're going to award things within the system, there'll be some sort of attention paid to the particular circumstances of each of the individual schools. Now, it does it apply here? Well, I can't pick where those locations are going to be and sustain what I just said about our commitment at keeping at arms-length. But, I am here because I have some confidence that people in this area won't be disappointed, so I'm not going to situate myself in a place where I know they will be, I will situate myself in a place where I think they will have a pretty good case and that it'd be alright on that front.

 JOURNALIST: … or put together some sort of plan?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I think that we're going to let the zones work these issues through themselves. One of things that we want to do with this, is to hand over authority to the local population that may manifest itself to what the schools themselves think, what the State Government thinks in that area, what local authorities think. It's not the same as the Disadvantaged Schools Program, which is a bit one-size fits all. See, you're going to find some of these zones where English is a second language is the key issue. But that won't be around here. I mean, there will be other issues here.

 LEE: In the outer urban growth parts of our capital cities, there will be often disadvantaged regions, where you might expect to have up to a dozen schools involved in a zone, but in some of the remote parts of the country where you might have a much more sparsely populated area, much smaller schools, we're allowing the flexibility to have less schools in a zone. So, just picking an example out there, you might have in the Kimberley area a number of disadvantaged Aboriginal communities, you might have less than 12 schools in that zone but still having the capacity to go up to 12 in the outer urban areas such as this.

 JOURNALIST: Do you have to apply to be considered … ?

 LEE: The Federal Department of Education will sit down with each of the State and Territory Departments of Education to work out which of the areas where both educational and social disadvantage overlap. The ABS figures, the States and Territories will have their Department of Education figures and they will make recommendations to myself as the Federal Minister and the relevant State and Territory Ministers.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: No, we only gave a place like the Kimberlies for an example. You'll find that a substantial proportion of the aboriginal population is taught in private schools, and in those circumstances to exclude them from it would be quite damaging. So, there is a willingness to incorporate both within it, but we

 expect the overwhelming proportion of the money, frankly, to go to public schools.

 JOURNALIST: You could have an area where a couple of the schools are predominatly disadvantaged and you get a relatively advantaged private school. Now, would you exclude that or what would you do?

 LEE: Well, Michelle, an example might be if you had an educational priority zone in inner Sydney, a Category 1 school, … it would have to be located in that educational priority zone. That doesn't automatically guarantee that Category One schools (inaudible) answer about targeting an area than picking up to a dozen schools …..

 JOURNALIST: … Category 1 schools, let's say you had a somewhat better off private schools in that area, would it not automatically qualify, but other Government schools would automatically qualify?

 LEE: It doesn't depend on whether it's a Government or a non-Government school, it's on that arms length, open and transparent assessment, about what the needs of that community is, and relative performance of the school.

 JOURNALIST: …. Some schools...

 BEAZLEY: Look, let's face it, one area where you could classically contemplate a zone. And don't think that I'm pitching because I think it would be necessarily, because I'm not isolating areas that would be. You'd have to say in Parramatta that there's a real chance they would be an education priority zone, when you look at the poverty stricken character of some of the Catholic and Government schools around that area. But Kings is situated in the middle of it. Let me absolutely say, there's not a cent that would go to Kings. Though, Kings might well find itself in the middle of an education priority zone. You might also find better off private schools in which the case the weight for the resources would go to the schools that aren't.

 JOURNALIST: Are they all (inaudible) …

 BEAZLEY: I'm very confident about the Budget numbers that we've been handed by Treasury and by Finance, and they're adjusted figures now, considerably adjusted figures. I think they're conservative figures. As far as we are concerned, we are not having core and non-core promises. We are going to implement the promises that we've made, which is why we've had them so carefully costed. Frankly, they're modest. They're modest but superbly targeted, if I do say so myself, to meeting the needs of this country and improving our chances of being a creative society. So, we have targeted these figures, we've costed them carefully and we're completely confident that we can deliver these in any set of economic circumstances, and we are operating with the only reliable measure that is available to us, and that's the numbers that have been put in place by Treasury.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, now that the cookie jar is now empty - are you expecting to bring out a few more of these other big-ticket items in the next few weeks?

 BEAZLEY: You'll notice reference in your papers there are further things we're going to say about schools, and we will say them later in the campaign. This does not conclude the Schools Program. We had a small element of it at the beginning of the campaign. We now have a more substantial element of it today and there'll be more to come down the track. We have more announcements to make as far as education and a creative nation is concerned.

 JOURNALIST: …will it be detailed …..

 BEAZLEY: A number of them have been detailed and we'll release more detail down the track - I suggest you refer to his papers on the actual detail. I don't actually have them.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Not privatising Telstra helps a great deal. There is no doubt about that. I see the Prime Minister was all over the shop on Telstra today - all over the shop - unable to give a straight answer when straight questions - came to him on Telstra when he was on talk-back in Western Australia. Let me give you a straight answer on Telstra. We will not privatise it and let me tell you the effect of that - very good for the Budget.

 JOURNALIST: … are you going to guarantee that schools that are worse off than under the SES …(inaudible) … there funding frozen … be any worse off. Is that a promise that you … (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: We have said about that SES formula - we passed it all - and we will work within that framework while we look at it, but as far as we are concerned, we believed that there were some private schools that need additional resources. What we didn't agree with was the formula that was put in place and you know something, about 80% of the private school system is with us in that regard.

 JOURNALIST: Can you give a guarantee that its only going to be Category 1 that are going to lose their money?

 BEAZLEY: Category 1 schools are going to lose their money. They're going to lose their additional increases. Nobody else is going to lose theirs.

 JOURNALIST: … on education?

 BEAZLEY: We have an agreement with the States - that - I've announced before, it's our Public Education Alliance, and what the States have undertaken with us in that Alliance, is to increase spending in real terms over the next decade in the public education system. I think you can absolutely guarantee that State Labor Governments are not going breach that. They're passionate about it - they're committed -they wouldn't have signed up with us a document that would place them at risk politically if they were to breach it. So I think you can absolutely guarantee that the States will play ball with this one. They are very keen about it. Right, are we now exhausted on education?

 JOURNALIST: Mr Howard this morning … you were continuing to spread the slur. What's your response to that?

 BEAZLEY: I resile from absolutely nothing. He deliberately misrepresented me. He did that yesterday, he twisted my words and he's continuing today and I'll tell you why he's doing it. The reason why he's doing it, is the last thing he wants to talk about is the things that we've been talking about today. The future of Australia - he has got no idea where he wants to take this country. When he was quizzed about that on ABC Radio this morning, just as he was all over the shop on Telstra, he was all over the shop on the future of Australia. No ideas about education - the future of it - no ideas about the future of our health system - so, all that's left to him is to twist and misinterpret the words that I said yesterday. So I resile from nothing from yesterday, but I also will not resile from pointing out the reasons why he twists my words, because he does not want an Election Campaign about jobs, health, education and the future.

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister said that you started it. Don't you think that ….. about it is undignified of both of you to be fighting over 300 people that are dead?

 BEAZLEY: Look, I will defend myself against false accusation by the Prime Minister no matter what the circumstances. This is a tough election campaign. It is an election campaign in which I have had experience with Mr Howard - he has twisted my words before, he's twisted them again yesterday and I have absolute confidence he will twist them in the future, because that's what he's on about in this election campaign. Not about the future of this country - but about a tactic that will see him through to retirement.

 JOURNALIST: ...(inaudible)...

 BEAZLEY: I stand by everything that I said yesterday. I stand by it and I stand by my view too that he has twisted what I've had to say yesterday, and he has twisted it for his own purposes. And part of his own purposes is to evade a debate on the issues that I am talking about today like education - to evade discussion about what's happening in our public hospitals.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Let me just say about Dickson. Dickson's a marginal seat, but it's a marginal seat we hold, and we will continue to hold after the next election. Longman is the sort of marginal seat we must win, so you're going to see me in the marginal seats we must win. That's the first point I'd make. The second point I'd make is take a look at what Russell QC, an official of the National Party had to say today. It gives the lie to the Liberal Party advertising campaign. What Russell QC said about it was that Cheryl was right, Cheryl's lawyer was right and Cheryl was right in the interpretation of the Act in relation to herself. You've got a leading National Party figure and a QC to boot, coming out there and saying that Cheryl was right and I would have thought that the Liberals would be taking that advertisement off. But, I had one other thing. That advertisement is a challenge to me - well, I'll put back a challenge to John Howard - I will not be lectured by John Howard on the subject of Ministerial standards while he has got sitting in his Ministry, Mr MacFarlane, the Small Business Minister, who sat in the middle of his electoral committee, his Federal electorate committee while it organised a rort on the GST, albeit, under instructions from the Queensland Liberal Party branch. Howard did nothing about that, nothing at all, even though it was the most offensive position for a Small Business Minister to find himself in, when a majority of small businesses are struggling with the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax. So, I'd say on Cheryl's advertising - one, have regard to Russell QC of the National Party, point one - point two, have regard to Mr Howard's inconsistency in any challenges to me on this subject whilst ever MacFarlane's a member of his Government.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: My view about those ads, is that those ads are wrong, and Russell QC says that they are wrong, but more to the point, about those ads is that they challenge me to say what I would do about frontbenchers, and I challenge Howard. My challenge to Howard is this, explain why MacFarlane is still in your Ministry when you've got small business on surveys out there saying they are still struggling with the GST. Why did you let MacFarlane stay in that Ministry when small business is struggling with the GST and his electoral committee on Statewide instructions to the Liberal Party were rorting the scheme.

 JOURNALIST: … hammered out a deal with the Democrats and what it means to your campaign?

 BEAZLEY: All discussion of preferences, as you know, in the Australian Labor Party are done by the National Secretary and negotiating Team and don't involve the Leader, and the National Campaign that we operate, where we're having to handle a complexity of issues everyday. It's not something that I as a

 Leader, sensibly sit down and do something about. So, if you've got a question - my view is I have complete confidence in Geoff Walsh, the Secretary of the Labor Party, to negotiate in a preferential system, the right arrangements. I have complete confidence in him and if you've got a question about it, he's very accessible.

 JOURNALIST: Your candidate said that you might win the seat on One Nation preferences, how do you feel about the prospect of winning Queensland seats off the back of One Nation? Does it trouble you at all?

 BEAZLEY: The Labor Party is the party which took the stand on the issue of One Nation because we believed that that Party made life, and we still do, made life uncomfortable for many ordinary Australians and was not what Australia is about these days, which is a vibrant multicultural society. That's why we took the stand, on principle, years ago now, and the other political parties have had to come around and work their way through that system themselves since then because of the stand that we took. What One Nation chooses to do with its preferences is entirely a matter for One Nation. So, they make up their own minds about what they do - we don't tout for anything when it comes to dealing with the One Nation Party - so its entirely a matter for them, what they choose to do.

 JOURNALIST: ... Morgan Poll …

 BEAZLEY: Now, I've said to you before that I am a fighter in this Election Campaign and not an analyst. I am going to breach my rule just once - and it's not going to be about the Morgan Poll - it's going to be about Newspoll. I see in Newspoll on the Goods and Services Tax that for the first time, the number of people claiming that they're better off under the Goods and Services Tax has fallen below the actual tax rate. The rate is 10%, the numbers who say they are better off are 8% and this is before John Howard has had an opportunity to extend it to food or raise the rate. So, this is quite an interesting figure. Gradually, over time, more and more Australians have come to understand that they're worse off and that is why more and more Australians are appreciating the efforts of the Australian Labor Party to relieve them of some of the burden on their families of the Goods and Services Tax. But that's the only poll I am commenting on. I now shut down with my usual answer in this Election Campaign - I am a fighter, not an analyst.

 JOURNALIST: …. In terms of your comments yesterday, what exactly did you mean when you …

 BEAZLEY: Now, that is John Howard's misrepresentation, and I will not resile from a thing that I have said yesterday. John Howard has misrepresented my position, he's twisted it as he's twisted my position in the past, precisely because he does not want to talk about the issues that we are dealing with today. And I don't resile from it for a minute. Everybody in this country knows this and we have supported the Government on every piece of their legislation. We've supported for temporary purposes the use of the Navy. We think a Coastguard should do it, but we know, and you know and every Australian now knows that the solution to this problem lies in a resolution with Indonesia. We all know that now, we all know that. If we want to get to a position where Australians feel secure, Australians feel that their borders are not being penetrated willy-nilly by illegal immigrants, we have got to get an arrangement with Indonesia. Now, John Howard chooses to twist that position, he chooses to misrepresent that position, and he chooses to do so basically, and it's a commonsense position, basically he does so because he wants to avoid debate on the sort of issues we've been discussing today.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: We have always said this. That we think part of the solution to the problem we're confronting is taking our fair share from a proper process in Indonesia within the cap that is agreed on a bipartisan basis. And the Australians may not know this, but it is a fact that we accept in the country, and have for a very long period of time now, 12,000 people every year as refugees. Its part of the contribution we make dealing with the problem internationally, part of agreements that were arrived at previously to ensure that we didn't ourselves, at different points of time, get flooded. Any resolution of this problem implies a willingness to take properly processed people. But, its properly processed people in Indonesia, not people who feel themselves under some form of obligation or encouraged by evil people who organise this trade, to come down to Australia via those illegal processes.

 JOURNALIST: There are 500 properly processed refugees in Indonesia right now. Will Labor take those refugees?

 BEAZLEY: Part of the process that we will go through with Megawati when we are elected to office, when I send my Ministers up there immediately to get a resolution of these issues will include these things. Apart from a regional agreement which we will be seeking, specifically with Indonesia - one, we're going to help the Indonesians with resources to properly process those who would be asylum seekers there, in Indonesia. We're going to help them with that. Point two, we are going to agree that within the bipartisan agreed cap to take our fair share. There are people who take refugees from Indonesia now, when they're processed in Indonesia, they go to Europe, they go to Canada, they go to many other parts of the globe. Well, we will take our fair share in that process. That's what we'll do and that's an undertaking that we'll give to the Indonesians and that's part of the solution.

 JOURNALIST: ….. in current circumstances?

 BEAZLEY: I think the 12,000 built up over the years amounts to a very substantial Australian contribution given our population size. This is not 12,000 period. This is 12,000 per year. and I think it's enough.

 JOURNALIST: Immigration spokesman …guarantee agreement with Indonesia …

 BEAZLEY: We will succeed in getting an agreement with Indonesia. We're going to succeed. I've got complete confidence in that and that confidence is based on our previous experience. Thanks very much.

 End

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

