---
title: "$169.4 million four year funding ensures future of vital youth assistance programmes."
date: "2001-05-22"
creators:
  - "Kemp, David"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, TRAINING AND YOUTH AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211224048
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DT346%22
---

 Media Release

 $169.4 MILLION FOUR YEAR FUNDING ENSURES FUTURE OF VITAL YOUTH ASSISTANCE PROGRAMMES B1 22 May 2001

 "An additional $63.5 million over the next four years will ensure the on-going success of two vital Federal Government youth assistance programmes," the Minister for Education, Training and Youth Affairs, Dr David Kemp, said today.

 "This guaranteed four year funding makes clear the Government’s support for young people in the pivotal period of their life when they are considering leaving school or are making the move from school into work or further education or training," said Dr Kemp.

 "This long term funding is part of the Government’s response to the Youth Pathways Action Plan Taskforce Report released tonight.

 "It is clear that Federal Government programmes such as the Jobs Pathway Programme (JPP) and the Job Placement, Employment and Training programme (JPET) often make a vital difference by providing the support needed by young people, especially those at risk of becoming disconnected from society or dependent on welfare."

 The highly successful Jobs Pathway Programme was last year funded at its existing level for one year. In its sixth Budget the Government has provided an additional $46.7 million to ensure that JPP continues to be funded at its new high level over the next four years. This brings total direct programme funding for JPP to $95 million over the next four years.

 "JPP began in 1995-96 with funding of under $1 million. Today, it is a major Government programme worth over $22 million per year to help young people make that important step from school into independence."

 The Jobs Pathway Programme helps smooth the move from school for young people aged 15-19 by providing personal assistance that focuses on the skills and knowledge

 required to reduce their risk of becoming unemployed. The on-going funding means that services will continue to assist up to 70,000 young people annually from over 1,600 secondary schools around Australia.

 Young people at risk of homelessness and other disadvantage will also benefit from an additional $16.8 million over four years through the JPET programme. This funding ensures JPET will continue to assist young people until 2005, with a direct programme commitment of $74.4 million over this period.

 JPET assists young people aged 15-21 who are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless, who are ex-offenders or who are or have been wards of the state, as well as refugees. There are 137 JPET services around the country supporting more than 14,000 young people each year.

 Initial results from a recent evaluation of JPET shows participants benefited from significant improvements in access to safe accommodation and education, training and employment opportunities.

 Commenting on the report of the Prime Minister’s Youth Pathways Action Plan Taskforce, Dr Kemp said the Government was fully committed to supporting young people at this vital stage of their lives.

 "While a comprehensive response to the report is being developed, through its continued support of programmes like JPP and JPET, the Government has clearly shown it is committed to assisting our young people to reach their full potential.

 "These programmes are a vital key to help young people move through school and from school to further education, training and community participation."

 Further information on JPP can be obtained from the JPP website at http://jpp.detya.gov.au or by calling the JPP hotline on 1800 635 035. Further information on the JPET Programme can be obtained from http://jpet.detya.gov.au  or by phoning the toll-free hotline on 1800 657 569.

 Media contact: Catherine Job: 02 6277 7460 or 0408 648 400

 Return to the Top of the Page

 contact details  |  search  |  publications  |  site map  | subscribe

 the source  |  career information | education network australia (EdNA)   australian education international | prime minister's web site 

 Any comments or queries should be sent to: wwweditor@detya.gov.au

 This page was last updated on Tuesday, 22 May 2001 Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs Copyright © Commonwealth of Australia DETYA Web Site Privacy Statement Disclaimer

  

