---
title: "Western Australian Vice Chancellor's Harmony Day Oration, Perth, 21 March 2001"
date: "2001-03-21"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Aboriginal reconciliation"
  - "Refugees"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211222037
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TSO36%22
---

    

  [Speech by Malcolm Fraser]

  

  WESTERN AUSTRALIAN VICE CHANCELLOR’S HARMONY DAY ORATION

  PERTH - 21 March 
2001

  

  I am honoured to have been asked to give this inaugural Harmony Day 
Lecture.  The letter of invitation asks me to spe ak about 
the importance of multiculturalism for a healthy democracy and of the 
need to build on our cultural diversity to fight racism at all levels.

  

 I value this opportunity.  
No subjects are more important to Australia.  Without racial harmony, 
without peace and tolerance in our homes, in our cities and our countryside 
we have no real future.  What a country is or becomes is derived 
from its own history and from the attitudes and actions of those who 
are members of society at any one time.

  

 I applaud the initiatives 
taken by the Vice Chancellors of Western Australia, designed to advance 
social cohesion, to encourage participation in the civil society and 
to oppose discrimination and racism wherever it may be found.  
In your recommendations you also commit to advance reconciliation with 
indigenous peoples - perhaps the most important single social issue 
confronting Australia at the present time.

  

 We began as a white settlement 
in a land inhabited by indigenous people.  As white settlers pressed 
outwards, the clash at the frontier between the old and the new was 
terrible, hateful and all too enduring in its consequences.  The 
settlers and their colonial government were not prepared to contemplate 
a just accommodation with Aboriginals, even though such a course was 
urged upon them by British authorities.  We had also witnessed 
a bitter course of relations between Europeans, the Chinese and South 
Sea Islanders.

  

 Most significantly, we 
experienced the importation into Australia, a new nation, of old conflicts 
between the English and the Irish, Protestant and Catholic.  With 
the preponderance of migrants from Britain or from Ireland, it was perhaps 
inevitable that these problems found their way into Australian life.  
This occurred because people in those years found it difficult to leave 
aside old prejudices and hatreds.  It was also significantly promoted 
by the actions of government.  Prime Minister Billy Hughes deliberately 
turned the conscription debates during the First World War into an attack 
on the Catholic Church and the Irish.  

  

 We could so easily have 
foundered on those differences in the early twenties, before the settlement 
of 1922 between Britain and Ireland.  The scars were not removed 
from our society until nearly half a century had passed.

  

 In the years before the 
Second World War, we were a dominant Anglo Celtic society.  To 
be a good Australian, one would have to belong to that narrow mould.  
Religious discrimination was rife.  Catholicism was actively discouraged 
in many professions.  The religious divide carried through into 
political life.  

  

 The more we look at past 
attitudes and policy in Australia, the more we understand about the 
reality of indigenous policy, and the attempts to “breed out” Aboriginals, 
the more we realise how far we have come over the last fifty years.

  

 During the World War, 
Australia was so nearly invaded and, if invaded, almost certainly occupied.

  

 At the end of the War, 
political leaders from all parties had shared many common experiences, 
the World Depression, trade embargoes and sanctions, which deepened 
that recession, the Holocaust, the war itself.  In so many places, 
including Australia, people knew that they had to do better.  A 
return to the old ways would at some point be a return to another war, 
so how to build a better, a more enduring society?

  

 For Australia’s part, 
there was a shared belief amongst the political leadership that we had 
to “populate or perish”.  

  

  In some respects it is fortunate that Australia had a Labor government 
in the immediate post-war years .  Only a government with 
close links with the Union movement would have been able to persuade 
that movement to accept a large-scale migration programme.

  

 The Minister for Immigration, 
Arthur Calwell, advised Parliament in 1946 “the Government’s immigration 
policy is based on the principle that migrants from the United Kingdom 
shall be given every encouragement and assistance.  It is my hope 
that for every foreign migrant, there will be ten people from the United 
Kingdom …Aliens are, and will continue to be admitted, only in such 
numbers or classes that they can be readily assimilated.”

  

  Such a statement was essential in achieving acceptance of the new 
immigration programme.  Consensus in that programme was also made 
clear when the next Minister for Immigration, Harold Holt, from the 
other side of the House in 1950 said:  “This is a Brit ish 
community and we want to keep it a British community …”.

  

 A great effort was made 
to try and achieve the twin goals of maintaining a homogenous population 
and of assimilating those who were different.  Both attempts failed.  
It is a great credit to Australians and to ethnic community leaders 
that they failed peacefully.

  

 The hope that settlers 
from the United Kingdom would greatly outnumber others was confounded 
by the composition of successive migrant intakes.  This was inevitable.  
War had ravaged all of Europe.  Many people had been persecuted.  
It was certain that tens upon tens of thousands from Nazi-occupied Europe 
would want to leave and seek a better home in a more peaceful land.  

  

 Migrant actions also refuted 
the suggestion that they would assimilate.  It was again inevitable 
that new migrants from one country would tend to gather in one place.  
It was a natural phenomenon to hear the old language spoken, to be around 
people who came from the old land.  It was obviously comforting 
to many people who had come so far to a country so different.  
Later generations moved more widely through the community.

  

 But while Australia did 
not assimilate people who became new Australians, the record shows that 
those who believed assimilation was the only course were wrong.  
Between 1947 and 1980, three and a half million people from more than 
a hundred countries came to Australia.  During this period Australia 
embraced an ever increasing degree of ethnic and cultural diversity.  
The record shows that the Australian people, from wherever they have 
come, have enriched and strengthened this country with their cultures, 
their energies, their commitments and their children.  We could 
not have built Australia without them.  Together we have built 
a nation which, by any international standard, must be judged a success.

  

 This achievement was obviously 
greatly assisted by the economic prosperity of the fifties and sixties.  
There was a shortage of labour, people could get jobs.  Patently 
the migration programme was adding to productivity, to demand.  
It was a significant factor in creating more jobs.

  

 But there has been far 
more to our acceptance of diversity than favourable economic circumstances.  
Social and political processes made vital contributions to the outcome.

  

 The way Australia’s 
ethnic communities developed, the initiatives they have taken and the 
responses they have provoked, have played a central part in Australia’s 
progress.  Migrants established churches, community groups, welfare 
associations, schools and sporting clubs, through which they could preserve 
and develop those aspects of their inheritance which they valued.  
Australia’s general tolerance and freedom were important in enabling 
this to happen.

  

 There are some people 
who through this period spoke of ethnic ghettoes. Ethnic communities 
were established but they did not cut themselves off from the community 
at large.  They asserted their right to be accorded a place of 
respect within the Australian community, a place that acknowledged their 
linguistic and cultural needs.  Ethnic communities sought out and 
changed the attitudes of the press, educators, welfare agencies, churches, 
politicians, public servants and the general public.  They secured 
acceptance of issues which concerned them as legitimate and significant 
on the nation’s social and political agendas. 

  

 In terms of the life of 
the nation, these changes took place with relative speed.  What 
occurred is profound and subtle.  It was not just the recognition 
of the needs of ethnic communities.  We have not merely grafted 
an ethnic dimension to an otherwise unchanged view of ourselves.  
There is a fundamental change in the established way of seeing Australia.

  

 In multiculturalism we 
have forged a radically innovative basis upon which we can respond as 
a nation to Australia’s diversity, to its challenges and opportunities.  
It is a basis which offers at once both an understanding of the present 
and a vision of the future.  Multiculturalism is built on realism 
and idealism.  There had to be an idea of a nation, a vision of 
what we could become.  

  

  It also involved a practical recognition of what Australia was fast 
becoming - a population derived from a wide variety of ethnic and 
cultural backgrounds.  Perhaps we have learned from some of those 
earlier years and the bitternesses and hatreds that flo wed from 
the English relationship with Ireland.  In the first part of our 
history as a nation those religious and ethnic differences had left 
Australia deeply scarred.

  

 There can be two reactions 
to diversity.  We had probably learnt even then that any efforts 
to enforce conformity carries with it high costs to the individual and 
to society.  It denies identity and self-esteem. It can drive a 
wedge between children and parents.  It poses a threat of alienation 
and division.  It is not possible to demand that people renounce 
the heritage they value and also expect them to feel welcome as full 
members of our society.  Realism dictates that cultural differences 
must be responded to in a positive way.

  

  Multiculturalism involves far more than the passive acceptan ce 
of diversity.  It sees diversity as a quality to be actively embraced, 
as a source of social wealth and dynamism.  It encourages groups 
to be open and to interact so that all Australians may learn and benefit 
from each other’s heritage.  Multiculturalism is about diversity 
and not division.  It is about interaction, not isolation.  
It is about cultural and ethnic differences within a framework of shared 
fundamental values, which enables them to co-exist in a complimentary, 
rather than a competitive basis.  It involves respect for our law 
and for our democratic institutions and processes.  Insisting on 
a core area of common values is no threat to multiculturalism but its 
guarantee, for it provides minimal conditions in which the well-being 
of everyone is secured.  It is about a quality of opportunity for 
the members of all groups to participate in and benefit from Australia’s 
social, economic and political life.  This attitude is dictated 
by morality and hard-nosed realism.

  

 I am talking about basic 
human rights, not benevolence, which the giver bestows or withdraws 
at will.  No society can long retain the commitment and involvement 
of groups that are denied these rights.  If particular groups feel 
that they or their children are condemned, whether through legal or 
other arrangements, to occupy the worst jobs, the worst housing and 
to suffer the poorest health and education, then the society in which 
they live will pay a high price for that division.

  

 Thus multiculturalism 
speaks to us forcefully and directly about a range of fundamental issues 
relevant to all Australians.  It is not an abstract or alien notion, 
it is not a blueprint holding out Utopian promises, but a set of guidelines 
which grows directly out of our society’s aspirations and experiences.  
That is why, in a little over a quarter of a century, multiculturalism 
has so quickly entered our political and social vocabulary and become 
a simple reference point.  It is too strong, too deeply ingrained, 
too much part of Australia, ever to be set aside.

  

 It needs to be understood 
that multiculturalism, from the outset, involves the firm acceptance 
of Australian core values, a commitment to the freedom and well-being 
of this society.  An acceptance of our laws and our rules, of our 
political and judicial processes.  

  

 That commitment has been 
absolute and without equivocation.  It was never a question of 
placing loyalty or affection for another country above and beyond affection 
for Australia but the days are well and truly gone where one had to 
be Anglo-Saxon and Protestant, or pretend to be, to be accepted as a 
good Australian.  As a nation we have come a long way.

  

 We might all have our 
own perception about when multiculturalism became more than an aspiration. 
I have two benchmarks in my own mind.  The Commonwealth’s total 
acceptance in 1978 of the Report and Review of Post-Arrival Programmes 
and Services to Migrants - the Galbally Report.  That Report 
identified Multiculturalism as a key concept in formulating government 
policies and recognised that Australia was at a critical stage in its 
development.  It re-examined existing assumptions and methods and 
urged the need for policies and programmes to take new directions.  

  

  Central to the report was a commitment to the principles of equal 
opportunity and equality of access to general services.  The provision 
of special services where these are needed, respect for cultural diversity, 
consultation, self help and self reliance.   The Galbally 
Report chartered a new course.  The Government moved rapidly across 
a broad front to implement the report in full.

  

 In the next few years, 
the Commonwealth developed a major orientation programme for new arrivals 
and introduced innovative English language instruction;  promoted 
multicultural education in government and non-government schools;  
boosted the child migrant education programme;  extended the provision 
of special welfare services to migrants by substantially increasing 
the number of grant-in-aid social workers;  established a network 
of migrant resource centres;  established the Australian Institute 
of Multicultural Affairs.  We extended ethnic radio services and 
carried out a range of projects in particular areas of need.

  

 While time and circumstance 
have impacted on these programmes, the underlying philosophy remains.

  

 Another of the report’s 
recommendations related to the establishment of a Special Broadcasting 
Service called multicultural television. I t was deliberately not called 
“ethnic television”.  

  

 There were some who argued 
at the beginning that the ABC should be responsible for this work, that 
we did not need a second government service.  The ABC had not been 
good at going beyond the narrow confines of the old Australia. It had 
shown no sense of obligation, of providing services that may be specially 
attractive to three and a half million new Australians.  When the 
ABC Board found that the government was determined to proceed, they 
ultimately came forward and said that they would do the job after all.  
By that time I had no confidence the ABC would really do the job required, 
that it would be sincere, that it would have conviction.  

  

 We went ahead and established 
the Special Broadcasting Service. Its programmes are not designed to 
be ethnic programme for ethnic communities.  The programmes are 
designed to enable all Australians to learn more of the history, of 
the culture, of the background of the tradition of the people who make 
up modern Australia.  In a very real sense it was a programme for 
all Australians.  This was also one of the recommendations of the 
Galbally Report.

  

 Governments clearly can 
do a great many things.  They can lead, they can define directions, 
they can set the tone.  But in the end, it depends upon people.  
The essence of multiculturalism can be realised only in the attitudes 
and behaviour of people in areas which are beyond the proper reach of 
democratic government.  

  

 A law on the statute book 
punishing those who use racial or ethnic insults will not compel neighbours 
to respect and appreciate each other’s cultural heritage.  A 
code of conduct for the media which warns against denigrating ethnic 
groups will not prevent advertisers and scriptwriters using exclusively 
Anglo-Saxon models for their heroes and heroines.  Educational 
institutions can introduce multicultural courses to raise awareness 
of social diversity but these cannot guarantee cultural sensitivity 
where it is most needed, by doctors towards their patients, by teachers 
towards their pupils, by lawyers and social workers towards their clients.  
Ultimately, responsibility for multiculturalism rests on the community 
at large.

  

  We can record with a sense of satisfaction but not with complacency 
that, during the first bout of Hansonism, support  for multiculturalism 
ranged between 70%-78% of the entire Australian population.  Her 
attacks on multiculturalism had not dented general support.  

  

 In addition, formal enquiries 
by the National Multicultural Advisory Council were launched to see 
if the term “multiculturalism” should or should not continue to 
be used.  The Council concluded that multicultural policies have 
served Australia very well, contributing to a fair and more just society.  
Inclusiveness was the key to the principles of Australian multiculturalism 
recommended by the Council.  These principles articulate the essential 
balance of rights and obligations that are necessary to a just and united 
society.

  

  Support for and understanding of multiculturalism is affecting Australia 
in profound ways.  It will make it easier to accept a natural relationship 
with countries of east and south-east Asia and to play a role in east 
and south-east Asian institutions, as  a country whose future 
will be determined by the sense of security and economic well-being 
throughout the whole region.  

  

 The changes brought by 
multiculturalism encouraged us as a nation to make a distinctive international 
contribution to the struggle against racism and to the defence of human 
rights and to the needs and aspirations of people in the developing 
world.  Thus we have had recognition and support from nations with 
whom we once had little in common.

  

 There have been attacks 
on multiculturalism, there have been continued misunderstandings that 
suggest that multiculturalism puts loyalty to another country above 
loyalty to Australia, that it diminishes Australian values, that it 
weakens Australian culture.  It does none of those things.  
We only have to ask ourselves what kind of country are we now, what 
kind of country were we before the changes began?

  

 Since I have been involved 
with CARE Australia, I have seen more of countries where racism, ethnic 
division and hatred, are rampant.  In the last fifty years we have 
avoided racist and religious problems seen so sharply in Somalia, Rwanda, 
Yugoslavia, Serbia and Kosovo and in Northern Ireland.  It is significant 
that leaders of ethnic groups within Australia have played a greatly 
different role from that which was played during the worst English-Irish 
divisions in the earlier parts of the last century.  What governments 
and individuals then did exacerbated the differences and the hatreds 
and Australia was scarred.  

  

 In the second half of 
the last century, we had all learnt much from earlier divisions and 
failures.  So it was not only political leaders from the old Australia 
but ethnic community leaders from new Australians who were saying that 
we have come to a new country to make a new land, we want to work together.  
We are not going to import old divisions and old hatreds.  Nowhere 
has this been more fully recognised than in recent years with the problems 
in the Balkans.

  

 In this country we have 
people from all groups in the Balkans, from Serbia, from Croatia, from 
Kosovo.  It would have been so easy, amidst the intense hatred 
that torture that unhappy land to have these problems imported to Australia.  
The fact that this has not happened is greatly to the credit of ethnic 
leaders and of the inclusiveness of our free and open society.  
Above all, it shows that ethnic leaders understand what Australia is 
about.  It shows that their commitment to this country, to its 
peaceful well-being and progress is absolute.  We have had Australians 
in the Balkans fighting on many sides of the Balkans issues, but they 
have done it in the Balkans, not here. 

  

 This is an essential message.  
We are a new land and we must not import old differences.

  

 Australia has been remarkably 
successful in general programmes of migration.  New settlers from 
many lands have been accommodated.  The old idea of assimilation 
is dead and new Australians find their own way in a country which tolerates 
and respects their heritage, their culture and diversity.

  

 Simply because we have 
done well should not blind us to two failures.

  

 We still have not adequately 
come to grips with the question of reconciliation.  We have not 
been prepared to look at the past honestly and take actions that will 
enable that past to be put aside, allowing us all to move on to build 
a better and a more credible country.  

  

 We should remember that 
authorities in the United Kingdom, through the 19  th  century, 
sought to persuade the colonial governments that Aboriginals should 
be treated with respect and decency.  We know that, for a large 
part, those injunctions were put aside.  In this state, control 
of indigenous policy was left in the hands of the colonial office because 
of distrust in Britain of the local administration.

  

 Even today we have legislation 
that is discriminatory and which adversely affects indigenous Australians.  
Mandatory sentencing is contrary to international obligations.  
The idea of allowing the police to have discretion but giving none to 
a magistrate, so that he cannot take into account all the circumstances 
of a case, is indeed a basic denial of justice.  

  

  Undoing mandatory sentencing would offend some sections of Australian 
society, especially in Western Australia and the Northern Territory.  
This is a classic case where governments should lead and persuade their 
masters in the electorate that what they ar e doing is correct.  
It would also create a greater urgency on behalf of governments and 
communities in tackling the basic problems which mandatory sentencing 
was designed to combat.  It treats the symptoms, however, and not 
the cause.  It seems to me that all major political parties are 
equally guilty of neglect on this issue.  How long will we have 
to wait before one or other of the major parties is prepared to stand 
on principle and act accordingly?

  

 With Sir Gustav Nossal, 
I believe that the next Prime Minister will make an apology and I believe 
he should.  It is not, as we have been told, a question of transposing 
what people did in the nineteenth century and in the earlier part of 
the last century, onto the shoulders and consciences of today’s Australians.  
It was then a different and a harsher world.  An adequate expression 
of sorrow does not make today’s Australians guilty of past events.  
An appropriate apology would, however, place on record our official 
attitude to that past and assist significantly in healing still-open 
wounds.

  

 The present course of 
pushing people through the courts has already cost around $12 million.  
The cost will rise because appeals are under way and more cases are 
to be heard.

  

 Perhaps most importantly, 
an apology would do much to enable us all to get on with building the 
future together.  An apology would unlock the past and make it 
possible to put it behind us.  In addition it is clear that a number 
of the approaches to Aboriginal problems have not been particularly 
successful.  It will enable indigenous and non-indigenous Australians 
together to work more effectively in seeking appropriate and effective 
solutions.

  

 There is a second area 
where, in more recent times we have failed in our obligation and responsibility 
to treat all people with respect and self-esteem.  Both political 
parties are responsible for the policy of putting migrant detention 
centres in remote and inhospitable parts of Australia.  We have 
placed those detention centres within the hands of a private administration 
which, on all accounts, seems to be harsh and extreme.  As people 
enter those centres, they are given numbers by which they are known 
- a prison characteristic and one which seems to dehumanise life.

  

 Reports which have been 
recently published indicated significant shortcomings with the operation 
of detention centres.  All too often these refugees have been treated 
as people outside the law.  We have been told that they are illegal, 
that they are queue jumpers, that there are terrorists amongst them.  

  

 It is interesting to see 
what happens to most of them at the end of their period in the detention 
centre.  Overwhelmingly, unauthorised refugees are ultimately given 
permission to stay in Australia.  The Parliamentary Library Research 
Service has advised me that in the year ended 30 June 1999, 97% of Iraqi 
and 92% of Afghani boat people were given refugee status.  In the 
next six months, 96.2% of Iraqis and 90.4% of Afghanis were given refugee 
status.  These were people who have been overwhelmingly denigrated 
in public statements.  The rhetoric totally fails to match the 
ultimate outcome.

  

 We know the Minister has 
learnt that many countries treat these categories of refugees more humanely 
than we have in Australia.  It is a blot on our reputation.  
When we look at the overall numbers of illegal arrivals, in 1998, 8,000 
came to Australia, about 52,000 to Britain, 98,000 to Germany and 427,000 
to Canada and the US.

  

 Recently, when 1,000 Kurdish 
refugees were beached on the southern French coast, we saw a French 
Minister moving to the place to see that the refugees were properly 
treated.  It is plain she thought they had been through a considerable 
ordeal.  A number had already been taken to hospital for treatment.  
The first task was to make sure that anyone who needed medical care, 
received that care and then they could talk about longer-term solutions.  
It was a humane and sympathetic approach.  The refugees were treated 
with dignity and esteem. 

  

  On Australia’s record of recent times, our reaction would have been 
very different.  What we do damages Australia’s name as a compassionate 
and humane country.

  

  It would seem clear that our approach to the problem is indeed in 
breach of the Universal Decl aration of Human Rights Conventions.  
It would seem to be in breach of the International Covenant of Civil 
and Political Rights.  This view is supported by the Human Rights 
and Equal Opportunity Commission.  It is also in breach of the 
Convention of Rights of the child.  Current practice runs counter 
to UNHCR guidelines on detention.  Australia is seriously out of 
step in these matters.

  

 It is hard to avoid the 
conclusion that Australia’s welcome to refugees who have come here 
without authority, has been made as tough as possible to deter others 
from coming.  When we consider the conditions that they have left, 
it becomes clear that no democratic government could make conditions 
tough enough to succeed in that objective.  There is a growing 
international consensus that harsh treat is not a deterrent to asylum 
seekers.

  

 A country like Australia, 
which, despite the exceptions, has a good reputation in relation to 
human rights, needs to protect its reputation assiduously.  It 
is that reputation that allows us to use our voice in the forums of 
the world to advance the cause of human rights around the world.  
When we put ourselves in the wrong, we damage our capacity for advocacy 
and soil the reputation we have gained over fifty years.

  

 Perhaps the major lesson 
of our own experience in recent times, the lack of effective progress 
concerning reconciliation and the harshness of our treatment of asylum 
seekers is simply that, even in an open and vigorous democracy like 
Australia, we cannot afford to be complacent about basic human rights.  
It is so easy to slip into habits of mind and actions which are discriminatory, 
which deny basic human dignity.  We have not been immune from that 
slide in Australia. 

  

 There are two sides to 
this coin.  The importance of actions that citizens can take cannot 
be over-emphasized.  At the end of the day, it is our own personal 
determination to treat people with respect and self-esteem that wins 
the day.  This is the grass roots of a decent society.  The 
other side of the coin, however, involves government.  The attitude 
and actions of government are critical in shaping our society for the 
future.  They are critical in providing a lead where citizens may 
be hesitant.  It is for the government to define the path for the 
future, to re-emphasize the need to maintain a just and humane society  .   It 
is a combination therefore of action by citizens and leadership by government 
that is essential to the creation of a just society.

  

  I greatly welcome the concern that the Vice Chancellors and those 
wh o support them, have shown in the nature of our society.  
I applaud the recommendations that have been made concerning the way 
forward and the need for citizens to build a shared future.  But 
when we talk of a shared future, we need to recognise that the future 
is not shared by far too many.  There is still a great need to 
work against prejudice and bigotry and to establish a truly equal and 
fair Australia.

  

 4721 words

