---
title: "Speech at the ALP Centenary Dinner in Melbourne, 8 May 2001"
date: "2001-05-08"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Bob"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Party leadership"
  - "ALP"
  - "White Australia policy"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "BEAZLEY, Kim"
  - "Former Prime Ministers"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211223528
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4N966%22
---

  

    

    

  

  Division of Education, Arts and Social Sciences

  

  

   

  

   Speech by 
the Hon RJL Hawke, AC, at the ALP Centenary Dinner   
in Melbourne, 8 May 2001

  

   

  

   

  

  Each one 
of us as we contemplate this first one hundred years of the Caucus of 
our great Party will conjure up different images of personalities and 
issues that have featured in this history.

  

  Preoccupied 
as we so often are by the drama of conflict, rivalries, schisms and 
defections, many minds will turn to the arguments on conscription, the 
ratting of Billy Hughes, the protracted and debilitating fight between 
the Langites and the forces led by Curtin, Evatt and the devastating 
Split of the fifties - some even to the more recent tussles for the 
leadership.

  

  Significant 
as all those things are in the vivid tapestry of our past, I would rather 
tonight reflect upon the strong underlying threads of that tapestry 
- threads which have given us inspiration and purpose for the time 
ahead

  

  To understand 
that enduring strength, one must appreciate a seeming paradox - the 
simultaneous commitment to constancy and to change.   From 
the very beginning, to this day, Labor has never wavered from its fundamental 
commitment to protecting and advancing the interests of the working 
men and women of this country.   At the same time it has shown 
a continuing capacity to adapt and change its policies to pursue that 
goal in the most effective and purposeful manner.

  

  Perhaps 
this truth is best illustrated by Labor’s approach to the White Australia 
policy.  In the first year of Federation the Labor Caucus supported 
the legislation embodying this policy and this support was continued 
on the assumption that it served the interests of Australian workers.   
That assumption became increasingly threadbare over the years and in 
the post Second World War period economic and moral considerations coalesced 
to lead Labor, properly, to the abandonment of the policy.

  

  That abandonment 
was the culmination of the single most constructive transformation ever 
effected in Australia - and it is right that we, who are both the 
inheritors and the guardians of the great Labor tradition, should cherish 
this fact and put it in its appropriate historical context.

  

  Remember 
that after the Second World War broke out the conservatives were found 
wanting in the task of providing government for this country and in 
its time of peril Menzies resigned because he did not have the support 
of his own people and in the same year, 1941, Fadden was defeated when 
a no-confidence motion was carried with the support of the two Victorian 
Independents, Coles and Wilson.

  

  Labor’s 
John Curtin galvanised the Australian people, harnessed the forces of 
industry, stood up to Churchill by putting Australia’s interests at 
the top of the national agenda, and, after being overwhelmingly endorsed 
at the 1943 election, guided Australia to victory, dying just a few 
weeks before the defeat of Japan.

  

  As magnificent 
as these achievements were, equally significant was the vision that 
Curtin and his Caucus had for the post-War Australia.  During the 
darkest days of the War some of the best minds in the country under 
the leadership of Nugget Coombs were assembled to plan the structure 
of that future.   And central to that planning was the commitment 
to a massive immigration program that was to change the face and the 
capacity of Australia for ever and for the better.

  

  Consider 
the dimensions of this change.  Under this policy some 6 million 
people have come as immigrants and another three-quarters of million 
under refugee and other humanitarian programs   i.e  .    a number virtually equal to Australia’s population   
of 7 million at the end of the war.  We have retained the best 
of our inherited traditions - parliamentary democracy and the rule 
of law - but have been able to strengthen our economy and enrich our 
culture by the contributions of these new citizens who have come from 
more than 140 different countries to make Australia their home.   
No country in history in such a relatively short period and so peaceably 
has been so able to transform itself for the better.

  

  This is the great Labor achievement and the support of Caucus was 
central to that achievement.  No other political group in our history 
has put such an indelible stamp upon the character and strength of today’s 
Australia.

  

  And I would, in this respect, make two other points.  First, 
the role of the trade union movement should never be forgotten.    
Australia had never known anything like full employment before the war 
and there was a natural disinclination among many trade unionists to 
welcome the influx of hundreds of thousands of new entrants to the work 
force.    But my predecessor as President of the ACTU, Albert 
Monk, and other far-sighted colleagues collaborated with the Labor Government 
- and its successors - to plan and implement the program.  
Those successors - Menzies and Holt - publicly acknowledged the 
debt Australia owed to the trade unions for this co-operation.  
It is one of the tragic ironies of politics that their successors, Howard 
and Costello -  that happy pair of Liberal lovebirds - and 
their fast disintegrating government should seek to depict as un-Australian 
the trade union movement, so instrumental in helping to create this 
modern Australia. 

  

  Second, I said that our renunciation of White Australia was the culmination 
of our radical changes in immigration policy.  Since that time 
we are the one major party - with the Caucus at the forefront - 
which has been absolutely consistent and unequivocal in refusing to 
embrace or tolerate any kind of racial discrimination.   When 
Graeme Campbell - who has now found his right spiritual home with 
Hanson’s One Nation - went down this track Caucus and then the Party 
repudiated him.

  

  Against that constancy we have the history of Liberal lapses and Howard 
hedging.   So unacceptable were Howard’s comments about Asian 
immigration in 1988 that when I introduced into the House of Representatives 
on the 25  th  August a motion rejecting his position, three 
of his Liberal Party colleagues, including the present Minister for 
Immigration, Philip Ruddock, crossed the floor and voted with the government.  
Eight years later Howard failed Australia again on this fundamental 
issue in giving oxygen to Hanson by his refusal to condemn absolutely 
the dangerous racist nonsense she was peddling. 

  

  Since Labor abandoned White Australia as part of its policy, it, and 
the Federal Parliamentary Caucus have never wavered from the principle 
that no individual shall be discriminated against on the ground of race, 
colour, creed or gender.   Caucus will maintain that position 
and it will be a fundamental element of the incoming Beazley Labor government.

  

  That government will inherit massive challenges arising from the incompetence 
and distorted priorities of Howard and his colleagues.   But 
Kim let me say this:  just as you inherit the challenges and the 
problems, so will you be the inheritor of a philosophy, a spirit, and 
a sense of commitment to the nation’s best interests embodied in the 
Caucus that will enable you to meet those challenges successfully.

  

  Time is short so let me just briefly go to some of the more important 
of those challenges.  We will never as a country fulfil our potential 
if we are not a nation at peace with itself.  The process of reconciliation 
with indigenous Australians which I commenced a decade ago has been 
distorted by the Prime Minister’s small mindedness.  He has a 
convenient, bifurcated perspective of history.  He, rightly, identifies 
with the glories of the Anzac tradition and says that it has helped 
to shape the character of Australia today.  But the gross injustice 
inflicted upon Aborignes were the responsibilities of earlier generations.  
We weren’t there - it has nothing to do with us he says.  We 
weren’t at Gallipoli either but we   do   identify with it and we   are   shaped by it.   This “five-bob each way” 
approach demeans us, denigrates Aboriginal Australians and divides the 
nation.  We should recognise both the glories and the infamies 
of our past and our Prime Minister on behalf of the nation should say 
sorry.   Kim Beazley as Prime Minister will do that.

  

  The conservative parties have, consistently, been criminally derelict 
in the areas of education, research and innovation.   When 
we came to office two appalling facts confronted us.   First, 
with only one in three children completing secondary education we were 
near the bottom of the educational league of developed countries - 
and it wasn’t the kids of the well-to-do who missed out on the opportunity 
to develop their talents.  Second, in the preceding decade there 
had been a 40% reduction, in real terms, in funds directed to research 
and development.   In the tradition of the Party that had 
turned Australia around after the war, Labor in the next thirteen years 
reversed those inexcusable legacies of the conservatives and moved this 
country steadily up the international tables.

  

  But as soon as they got back in 1996 the conservatives were at it 
again.  Education is in crisis and, particularly, public schools 
are being disadvantaged as against the private sector.  And in 
a world where it is increasingly essential to channel resources into 
Research and Development the dramatic upward trend under Labor was savagely 
reversed by the Howard government.

  

  Kim Beazley will bring to an end this betrayal of Australia’s future.  
And, as the leader of the Party which removed the spectre of physical 
and financial trauma from millions of Australians by the introduction 
of universal health insurance, Kim Beazley, in co-operation with the 
States, will bring back efficiency and equity into the Australian health 
system which has been allowed to run down under this government.

  

  In equipping Australia to take its place in an increasingly competitive 
globalised economy the Beazley Labor government will not delude Australians 
that tough decisions can always be avoided.   But it will 
follow one pre-eminent principle.  If such decisions are necessary 
in the national interest and some people at the immediate face of change 
are impacted adversely then the nation as a whole will provide for them. 
  And in doing this it will work constructively with the trade 
union movement as, indeed , it will with business.

  

  Finally, Kim Beazley will recognise the fundamental importance for 
Australia of good relations with the countries of our region.  
In pursuit of that objective, Australia under Labor will not be the 
surrogate - certainly not the Deputy-Sheriff - of the United States.  
Our relationship with that country is, of course, significant but that 
does not require an automatic endorsement of its policies.  My 
government had a good relationship with America but we were independent 
in our judgement.  Ronald Reagan pleaded with me for Australia 
to support Star Wars.  I refused and the relationship survived.  
Similarly a Beazley Labor Government would, I believe, refuse Australian 
involvement in Bush’s unnecessary and potentially dangerous National 
Missile Defence system.

  

  And so, my friends, there it is.  A great Party, a great history, 
great challenges and a great leader.  We will best honour that 
unique political tradition by committing ourselves resolutely, completely, 
to doing all in our power to ensure that Kim Beazley by the end of this 
first year of the second century of federation will be in a position 
to meet those challenges as head of a federal Labor government.

  

    

  

   

   Hawke Centre   |    University Home   |    Division Home    |    Top of Page  

  

    

    

   Disclaimer   |    Copyright   © 2001 | Last Revised: 16 May 2001    
   UniSA webmaster   | Page author:    Louise Barnes  , Assistant, The Hawke Centre  

  

  For further information contact    Jenni Jeremy  , Development Library, The Bob Hawke Prime Ministerial 
  Library

  

  http://www.unisa.edu.au/hawke/speeches/alpcentenary.htm 

  

