---
title: "Refugee Convention 50th anniversary: a celebration of compassion."
date: "2001-07-28"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211226622
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/N0L46%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 28 July 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/435

 Refugee Convention 50th Anniversary - a celebration of compassion Today (28 July 2001) is the 50th Anniversary of the signing of the United Nations Refugee Convention, and the Australian Democrats are urging Minister Ruddock to reconsider his push for the United Nations 1951 Refugee Convention to be weakened.

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats spokesperson on Immigration said, “Minister Ruddock’s push to weaken the requirements of the convention is wrong and inhumane.

 “Our Government should not be wasting its time trying to weaken or water down the convention, but rather it should be re-affirming its commitment to its protection and implementation and looking for ways to upgrade its effectiveness in a changing world.”

 “Australia’s political parties need to recognize their international responsibility to displaced, persecuted and abused peoples who seek a future for themselves and their families.

 “Displaced people are a global problem - there needs to be a coordinated international response.

 “Australia has the opportunity to lead efforts for a constructive humane approach, including increasing overseas aid and assistance to other countries to help them deal with refugee numbers. Instead Australia maintains a punitive and harsh line,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Indeed, the government’s practices fly in the face of the existing standards developed by the United Nations High Commission on Refugees (UNHCR). Australia fails repeatedly in its adherence to the UNHCR’s refugee standards.”

 “We should be ensuring our approach is brought up to the standard of the current Refugee Convention, not trying to bring the Convention’s standards down.”

 “We’re deluding ourselves, if we think building prisons for asylum seekers and fortifying Australia’s shores will keep the ‘unwanted’ out. We are part of the same world and, therefore, subject to the same political, social, economic and environmental influences and effects as the rest of the world.

 “Our days of imaginary isolation are long gone,” concluded Senator Bartlett.  ENDS

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101

