---
title: "Sydney: transcript of doorstop interview: RBA interest rates announcement, Ministerial Indonesian visit."
date: "2001-09-05"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228054
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FIV46%22
---

 1

 MEDIA RELEASE The Hon Simon Crean MP Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Treasurer

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW SYDNEY 5TH SEPTEMBER 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subject:  RBA Interest Rates Announcement, Ministerial Indonesian Visit

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, a quarter percentage interest rate cut.  What’s your answer?

 CREAN: Good news for homebuyers, but it must be worrying news for job seekers.  There have been interest rate cuts now totalling one and a quarter per cent since the beginning of this year, but we’ve seen the unemployment rate rise from six per cent to six point nine per cent.  The Reserve Bank is signalling a concern about an economic downturn.  This is the double whammy for the Australian economy - hit first by the impact of the GST mugging the economy, halving the growth rate, and now staring down the barrel of declining international demand.  Despite the fact that the Reserve Bank has expressed concern about the inflation rate, which is a factor they have to take into account when setting interest rates, an inflation rate lasting longer than expected at the higher rate, the Reserve Bank nevertheless feels obliged to cut the interest rates.  This is an indication that government policy in stimulating investment has failed.  It’s the fact that the government’s got the balance of economic growth wrong, and the Reserve Bank has got to step in and try and stimulate the economy.

 JOURNALIST: You don’t accept this is about an international downturn, not a slowing in Australian growth?

 CREAN: This slowing is internationally driven, but it comes after the slowing that was domestically driven.  The slowing that we experienced last year because of the GST has caused the Reserve in the past to drop interest rates.  It’s now been forced to do it because of concerns about weakening international demand.  This is the double whammy.  The second is always difficult to avoid because we are subject to what happens in the rest of the world, but the first could have been avoided, and we’ve now had one and a quarter per cent drop in interest rates since the beginning of the year but unemployment has gone up.  So it’s good news for homebuyers, but it’s not good news for jobseekers.

 JOURNALIST: Won’t it not drive house prices up though?

 2

 CREAN: Well again, that can happen, particularly with increased demand off the lower cost of financing homes, but we’ve got to understand that the other concern that the Reserve Bank has expressed is the increasing indebtedness into which Australian households are finding themselves.  This is the fact that Australia is purchasing on the credit card, and despite interest rates falling, Australian households are experiencing higher impacts in terms of their debt repayments.  So whilst the rate of interest has come down the debt burden has gone up.

 JOURNALIST: Your opinion Mr Crean on the Government sending three senior ministers to Jakarta this morning?

 CREAN: It’s about time.  Australia should have been concentrating on its relationship with Indonesia a long time ago.  It didn’t.  The Prime Minister wanted us to believe that because he had met the President the relationship was back on track.  But she wouldn’t even pick up the call in terms of the Prime Minister’s request to her.  It’s good to see ministers going up there, but I suspect it’s been too late.  It’s certainly been too late in terms of addressing the recent refugee problem and I think it’s just a sign that the Government isn’t serious about improving our relations with our neighbours, which is a key component of addressing the refugee problem.  We’ve got to be able to close the gate and we’ve got to have a Coast Guard that’s a cop on the beat.  Unless we address those issues we will continue to be confronted by these problems.

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t it more than just Indonesia in terms of addressing refugees, like for example Malaysia?

 CREAN: Of course it is and that’s why the relationships need to look beyond Indonesia.  But Indonesia is a major source of this problem at the moment and that’s where we should be focussing attention.  But it has to be with other countries in the region and it has to be part of an international framework.

 ENDS

