---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: collapse of Ansett, ANZUS Treaty, illegal immigrants."
date: "2001-09-14"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228758
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9XY46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Collapse Of Ansett, ANZUS Treaty, Illegal Immigrants //media/0901/kbmcactb140901.html Wednesday, 19 September 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Collapse Of Ansett, ANZUS Treaty, Illegal Immigrants

 Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 14 September 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: This government is ducking its responsibilities yet again.

 [Tape break]

 …making policy on the run. He has come out and said he will devise a ticket tax to support the workers' entitlements in Ansett.

 The workers in Ansett are entitled to receive their entitlements if they are unemployed and the effort to save the airline fails - there is no question about that. The money for those entitlements should come from, apart from Air New Zealand which must be pursued for it, if it is to come from domestic sources it should be from John Howard's advertising program and it should be from the sale of Sydney Airport -that is where it should come from.

 John Howard accuses me of putting in place a new tax by increasing to a minor degree the superannuation charge that employers pay and then at the same time having said that's a new tax he says he will introduce a ticket tax. Once again he will not put responsibility for employees entitlements where responsibility lies. Not with the taxpayers but with employers.

 This is an opportunity for John Howard to show some leadership. He is responding on the run to pressure from the Labor Party and from the community but he has got to start to come up with some good solutions. He has not managed to do so yet.

 Every effort should be made to keep this airline as a going entity for somebody else to come in and take over all or part of its operations. John Howard, John Anderson are on auto pilot, asleep at the wheel. They have failed in their duties and they must act now.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, isn't it unfair to blame the government and direct so much blame to the government when really Air New Zealand is the one at fault here and it would seem owners of Ansett before that?

 BEAZLEY: Plenty of fault to go around. There is no doubt at all that Air New Zealand has operated appallingly in this environment. They have operated within the context of a law that John Howard has let

 them operate within. You know, it beggars belief that John Howard and John Anderson are out there complaining about restructuring of Air New Zealand so that workers' entitlements were not covered by the assets of the organisation. Who put that legislation in place? Who prevented the reforms to that legislation taking place when we in the Labor Party moved them in the Senate? John Howard. Now he has had the opportunity to change it and he has not done so - so there is plenty of blame to go around here.

 But in the life of the nation when you have an enormous national icon operating like Ansett in an environment in which government has a role, as we do in aviation particularly for any organisation that has an international component to it, you also have to acknowledge the buck stops on your desk. The buck stops at John Howard's and John Anderson's desk and they have got the feather dusters out desperately trying to sweep that buck off.

 JOURNALIST: How much do you say it would cost a day to prop up, for the government to prop up Ansett? You said it is not…

 BEAZLEY: Well, John Howard said it was $170 million for two days. When I last looked they were apparently making a loss of about $1 million a day and when I looked at some other set of propositions they were talking about a few million a day. Irrespective, they don't have to take over Ansett's debt and they don't have to operate non-ticketed operations. What they need to do is to put this operation in range of a fix. Now Virgin Blue is prepared to play a role. It may well be that Singapore Airlines is prepared to come back and play a role. You have got people talking about management buyouts. You can see all sorts of arrangements involving wet-leasing of the equipment and the people who are associated with employment in the industry. There are all of these solutions and they are all now off the desk because effectively the liquidator simply now has to liquidate.

 JOURNALIST: If there was no workers' entitlements without ticket tax would you then support the idea?

 BEAZLEY: Look we will do what is necessary to back the workers in on their entitlements. Don't get me wrong on that but we are also entitled to our view about what should be done. It should be done in the first instance by Air New Zealand. It should be rendered as far as possible unnecessary by every effort being made to keep this operation going. I hate the way people just assume that is has got to go out the window and nothing more can be done. And, if it has to be done domestically before the New Zealand obligation kicks in then it ought to be done by the Commonwealth using resources from the sale of Sydney Airport and using resources from their current advertising program to pay for it.

 Now, John Howard has the hide to in the same press conference to accuse me in obliging employers to include a component within the superannuation guarantee charge that protects all workers' entitlements, not just a shabby percentage of workers' entitlements, but all of it has the hide to accuse me of putting in place a new tax while in the same breath he is actually putting a tax on travellers.

 JOURNALIST: Is there any danger that this ticket tax proposal might work to take the pressure of Air New Zealand to come up with the entitlements?

 BEAZLEY: I am worried about the workers frankly. At the end of the day it's my concern for their situation which would override everything else. You have got to keep the weights on Air New Zealand but you have also got do the right thing by the workers and do the right thing in the right way. Now there are options available to the government - they don't have to put on this tax. They can do it by stopping the 'work for the dole' advertising, the 'broken umbrella' advertising, the 'unchain my heart' and in

 addition to that they can use funds from the sale of Sydney Airport. These are options available to them and they should take those options.

 JOURNALIST: What is the government's responsibility to the workers apart from Ansett, of all the contractors - there are 40 odd thousand people who are going to be affected by this just from contract agencies?

 BEAZLEY: The more you sit down and look at this and look at the knock on effects the more you see how essential it is for the government to struggle to keep an operation going. There are so many other people in part or in whole dependant on this operation beyond just the direct employees and there are communities now according to the National Farmers Federation, some 60 of them, who are just not going to be serviced. Now, we should not be accepting that this is the end of the matter and that it is all gone.

 This notion of John Howard's is the new, you know, on the run, back of the envelope estimate of John Howard that it cost $48 billion a year to operate an airline and apparently nobody pays for their tickets on this airline which was his estimate today. You know that is not good enough from a Prime Minister of this nation - we expect a bit more exactitude and bit more knowledge from him than that.

 It was a couple of weeks would have given the opportunity to see what could be teased out from those who were interested in it and in addition to that it might have allowed something a bit less unseemly than the collapse which occurred today and the shocking treatment of employees.

 I was talking to employees at today's rally who are living in other capital cities but with no means of getting home. I mean, absolutely nothing was done to run down this operation properly. You know, they are miles from home without a cent to their names.

 JOURNALIST: Is this an appropriate time to invoke the ANZUS Treaty?

 BEAZLEY: The Prime Minister today said that, well I wasn't very clear on what the Prime Minister said, I think he said that simultaneously they wrote to each other about the ANZUS Treaty - I think that is what he said. It is to the party that is offended to invoke the ANZUS Treaty. The ANZUS Treaty may be invoked when there is an attack upon a metropolitan location of one of the parties to that treaty - that has occurred therefore it is appropriate for the United States to invoke it. The United States apparently has invoked it formerly but we have operated on the assumption that it is effectively in operation and in any case the relationship that we have with the United States has been in operation for the last couple of days. So the Australian Labor Party has said from the outset in my correspondence first with George Bush and more recently with a fellow that I happen to know better that happens to be his Vice President, Mr Chaney that as far as we were concerned we would respond accordingly, effectively as though the ANZUS Treaty was invoked anyway - so we support that.

 JOURNALIST: Isn't it the case that the United States doesn't even need Australia's military support?

 BEAZLEY: I think when you are going through an exercise of trying to brace the world to the threat of international terrorism then it is not surprising that you would go through the process of invoking your various treaties - they did it with NATO so I am not surprised that they would formerly go through the process of doing it with ANZUS that is nothing, I don't think that in the circumstances a particularly unusual thing to have occurred.

 Now what that actually means in practical terms, of course, is a matter for the consideration of the

 Australian Government and, of course, a matter for a request from the United States. Generally speaking in recent times in my experience as Defence Minister of this country and then subsequently as a member of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet during the Gulf War I have had experience directly, of course, of what might be called 'all flag exercises'. The United States would probably request of us something in that particular context - a gesture to show that we were with them if there is a commitment of some description under the ANZUS rubric in response to this act of terrorism. That is what I would expect but it may be something different. Nevertheless, whatever it is we do stand ready to respond positively.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Howard also indicated today that Nauru might take, or they would ask Nauru to take the extra 230 boat people currently on Ashmore Reef. Do you support that…?

 BEAZLEY: Mr Howard told another porky today about what happened in the Federal Court. He again came out with this blue duck that says that if the Labor Party had passed his Border Protection legislation he wouldn't have had a problem in the courts. That is completely untrue. The Border Protection legislation had absolutely nothing to do, shocking though it was, worthless law though it was, ineffective though it was, it had nothing to do with the circumstances that transpired once persons were taken off the Tampa. All it did was to offer additional protection to that which is already there of driving a ship that has come into your waters for illegal purposes out of your waters. It had nothing to do with when you decide to arrange transit to another place. We offered them coverage on that and they turned us down. So that is the first point I would make on that.

 The second point I would make on that is: where is all this going? What is the point of all of this? Apparently it is deterrence to people who are sending boats to this country. I ask you this: Is it deterrence to place people in an Australian funded to the tune, I think, of about $100 a day in support of each individual refugee funded operation, be it on Christmas Island or Nauru, during the conduct of which you are entitled to make application to Australia anyway and come in and Mr Howard has admitted many will come on that basis - is that a deterrent? Isn't it better for us to do a negotiation with the Indonesians and have people sent back in return for a proper process whereby under our refugee ceiling we accept people formally classified as genuine refugees under a speeded up process in Indonesia? That is the solution. I mean all that is going on here is just the government making it up as they go along. As deterrents it is absolutely worthless.

 JOURNALIST: So the people at Ashmore Reef should be…?

 BEAZLEY: They have the capacity to send them to send them to Nauru if they want to.

 JOURNALIST: Do you support that?

 BEAZLEY: But what I point out is this: if they do that it is still going to be a burden on the Australian taxpayer. They are still going to go through a process whereby many of them who end up here in Australia - they will go through that process on Nauru as they would in Australia and they will do it at considerable expense to the Australian taxpayer. What we need is a different approach and even John Howard knows this. He sent the Three Amigos up to Jakarta to try and get it and he failed - we will succeed.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

