---
title: "Sydney, NSW: transcript of doorstop interview: families, leadership, debates, refugees, economy, polls, industrial relations, Singapore Airlines/Ansett."
date: "2001-10-07"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229780
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1B356%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Families, Leadership, Debates, Refugees, Economy, Polls, Industrial Relations, Singapore Airlines/Ansett //media/1001/kbmcnsw071001.html

 Monday, 08 October 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Families, Leadership, Debates, Refugees, Economy, Polls, Industrial Relations, Singapore Airlines/Ansett

 Transcript - Sydney, NSW - 7 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: We saw Mr Costello on the box this morning sneering at the Labor Party's proposals to relieve burdens on Australian families. This fellow is so out of touch, he doesn't understand the impact his goods and services tax has had. He sneers at our proposal to take the goods and services tax off funerals, which is essential for elderly Australians. He sneers at our proposal to take the goods and services tax off women's sanitary products, which is a help to families. He sneers at our proposal to take the goods and services tax off site fees in caravan parks, which helps some of the most battling Australians. He sneers at our proposal to take the goods and services tax off emergency aid for charities. How out of touch is this Government with the needs of ordinary Australian families? They simply don't care.

 What we have here is a set of proposals along with what will be the proposals that we put forward on taking the GST off items that are hard on families. What we have here is a set of proposals to give Australian families a fair go. Australian families need a fair go. They are doing the most important thing that any Australian is doing, and that is, creating the next generation of Australians. The Australian parent is in the business of nation building. It doesn't matter whether they're doctors, lawyers, computer programmers, teachers, factory workers, welders or whatever. The most important thing that they're doing in life is rearing our next generation of Australians. They need a bit of a hand. That is what our proposals here today are all about.

 We are launching here our Headstart for Australian Families, in which we're effectively doubling the resources of government available for providing assistance to families at the most vulnerable time. There are a whole lot of programs out there being run by States. There are some pilots out there being run by the Federal Government. This will assure that they're all linked up in 35 different regions.

 The sort of assistance that we're looking at here is with parenting education. We do provide some assistance to parents in education before kids are born, but almost nothing after that point of time. It's about family visits, so that there is a professional prepared to come along to a family after a child has been born, see how they're going, see what their needs are, provide information.

 We've got a ParentLine - the suggestion here of resources for a parent line so that there's ongoing

 constant information available for parents about issues related to their children.

 Then there's provision for early childhood activities: playgroups, toy libraries and the like.

 These exist all over the country, but in different proportions and different dimensions. For example, here in NSW, there is a good visitation program. There's flexibility in the regions and the assistance that we provide to those 35 regions, there's flexibility that where there is a good state government provision, or a local government provision or something there in the private sector, but it's missing in some other area, that the resources can be put into the other area. Whereas if, in the particular instance, as would be the case outside NSW, there'd be an absence of family visits, then we'd be able to put those resources into family visits.

 This is all about making life easier for Australian families: recognise the vital function they're performing in nation building, take some of the burdens off them. That's what this Headstart for Australian families program is all about.

 There is now an infinite amount of research around that the years 0 to 3 are the critical years. That's when families need most assistance, and they get it least. We will be making announcements during the course of the election campaign about further initiatives in that area. Quite clearly, these initiatives today announced focus most clearly on them.

 There's also a work and family issue here. There is no doubt at all that under the industrial relations changes made by this Government, the workplace has become less family friendly. The workplace is harder and harder to access. Casualisation of the workforce has not necessarily been accompanied by a preparedness on the part of employers to make life easier, or to respond to family concerns. In fact, made them less so. The reduction of awards to 20 allowable matters has taken out of Industrial Relations Commission the capacity to make arrangements, to make awards, that in particular industries suit the family pressures that are there for the workforce.

 We will change the industrial relations system to ensure that that can take place.

 There is also the vexed issue of maternity leave. About a third of Australian women get access to decent maternity leave provisions. The Australian Budget, wrecked by Howard and Costello, cannot sustain what ought to be done, could conceivably be done by the Australian Government to relieve pressures there, and in Australian business at the moment, to put additional pressure on Australian business would pose difficulties as well.

 What we're prepared to do is to see the IRC look at this set of arrangements, and while they're doing that, to then sit down ourselves with employers, state governments and with representatives of employees, to work out how we can start to expand what is now available to the women in the workforce to a broader number of women.

 These are critical issues for relieving pressures on Australian families. Only the Australian Labor Party is on their side. Only the Australian Labor Party has seen family policy as absolutely central to a secure future for all Australians.

 The issues in the election campaign are going to be many and varied. Yesterday I was talking about national security policy and putting down a comprehensive representation of where the Labor Party intends to take the issues of our physical protection from international terrorism and the concerns that

 many people are feeling in regard to their security from an international environment that is more threatening than it has been for some considerable period of time.

 Today I am shifting focus on to that other element of security, a sense of security that you have around the hearth, around the kitchen table, security for Australian families. As I said, this program involves, effectively, a doubling of resources of the Commonwealth that are now available for ensuring that parents get the assistance that they need when they need it.

 A Headstart for families is part of a secure future for all Australians.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, this morning you mentioned that you'd stay on as the Member for Brand if you didn't win government. But would you stay on as Opposition Leader?

 BEAZLEY: There are only two certainties about the post election environment. If I win or lose, there'll be no by-election in Brand. But if John Howard wins or loses, there will be a by-election in Bennelong. Those are the only certainties about political life after this election.

 You've got John Howard trying to make leadership and clarity an issue. He tries to make leadership an issue when he's running away from it at some point of time in the life of the next parliament, should he emerge from this election as Prime Minister. He's trying to make clarity the issue when he's sending different messages into the people of Melbourne and the people of Sydney on whether or not what he's been engaged in over the course of the last 12 months is a rollback of the GST. He says to one journalist, 'well, it is rollback, what I've been engaged in in following the Labor Party down the road on petrol prices, Business Activity Statement, and the like'. On the other side of the coin, he says to the journalist from Melbourne, 'well, it's fine tuning'. That's clarity John Howard style, like that's leadership John Howard style. That isn't my view of how to lead this country.

 JOURNALIST: …Opposition Leader, would you like to stay?

 BEAZLEY: I'm in the business of being Prime Minister of this country. The guarantees I give, of course, are the for the people who vote for me in Brand. I'm giving them guarantees on that front. But as far as the Australian people are concerned, I'm not speculating on being Leader of the Opposition - I'm speculating on being Prime Minister when this election campaign is over.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, is this new money? Or would you redirect it from other areas?

 BEAZLEY: As I said, it's doubling of existing resources. It is taking some resources which are there now, about $130 million, which are there in mostly their pilot programs in bits and pieces around the country. It's linking them together and then putting another $130 million on top of it over the four-year period. So, $130 million of it is new money, $130 million of it is out there in bits and pieces which we're going to link together with the programs that we're putting in place now.

 JOURNALIST: When are you spending the bulk of the money…?

 BEAZLEY: It's pretty well even over the period. What we're releasing, until we get that Charter of Budget Honesty, is a affordable policy. For example, yesterday, when we released the policy on national security, domestically, it was in fact a program of over $1 billion - but it involved $100 million of new money. The other money was in getting the money that's been paid for Coastwatch to work more effectively for a Coastguard - redirecting funds within the Department of Defence to ensure that the SAS got a proper share, and were able to develop a long-range capability. That's reordering within the

 Department of Defence. The total program is over $1 billion, but new money is $100 million. In this particular instance, the new money is about $130 million but it comes in on top of a whole lot of bits and pieces around the place that have been cobbled together by this Government as it's come under pressure, from time to time, to do something about families, make that all work.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, are you happy for the debate to go ahead?

 BEAZLEY: I'm not happy if that's the only debate. I'll debate John Howard any time, anywhere. But what's leadership when the only debate on offer is before the Charter of Budget Honesty report, before all of us have put our policies out there? John Howard says that next weekend is not vacant, because he's headed off to Shanghai. He says the weekend after that is not vacant because he's doing the Liberal Party launch. That's fine. Let's make it the last weekend before the election. If there has to be only one debate, let's make it the last weekend. If this bloke has got real leadership, if this bloke is confident in his ability, then he will debate me in the last weekend of the campaign, when all our cards are on the table and the Australian people get a chance to test the mettle of the pair of us with all our cards on the table. It's not leadership to run away from a debate like that.

 JOURNALIST: How will you decide which 35 regions will get this money, and doesn't it mean that some people won't have access to that…

 BEAZLEY: It's always a good start. It's like Education Priority Zones. You take a look at areas where there are particular needs and where there may well be a number of youngsters at risk. That's where you start and then move on from that point. You've got to make good start somewhere, and 35 regions gives you an awful lot of coverage of Australia.

 JOURNALIST: …expect to be helped by…?

 BEAZLEY: There's be very large numbers of families affected by this, and very large numbers of children. You've got to remember that something like 800,000 kids are being brought up in Australian families where nobody works, no parent works, and 60 per cent of Australian kids are being brought up in families where the total family income is less than $60,000 a year. That gives the rough dimensions of the potential area of problems for the next generation of Australians, when you've got statistics like that. Those are the sorts of groups that we're aiming at. That's our future. You tend to find a substantial proportion of these in areas like the Western suburbs of Sydney.

 JOURNALIST: Are you going to tell people, though, what regions? Why should people vote for this policy if it might not be in their area?

 BEAZLEY: Because a lot of people have got a good heart and commonsense. A lot of people know that even if they're not in a region, maybe they come from the wealthier suburbs of Sydney, but they know this: that they want to exist in an environment with secure children and secure people. That helps them on all sorts of fronts. It's a particularly effective way of attacking the causes of crime and anybody can be a victim of that. Every now and then you know in politics people have an unselfish and good heart. Every now and then in politics people understand that they are benefited by somebody else being benefited.

 JOURNALIST: …boat people who have just arrived, I gather near Christmas Island. What's your response to that?

 BEAZLEY: Firstly, it shows that the much vaunted deterrents of John Howard are not working. That's

 the first thing it shows. The second thing is that it emphasises, because that is not working, it emphases what we have been saying, you're not going to cure this until you've got a cop on the beat for 52 weeks of the year, and you won't get that without Labor's Coastguard, point one. Point two, you're not going to cure this without an agreement in Indonesia. John Howard knows that, even though he's fouled the capacity for a Government led by him to develop that relationship. He acknowledged that when he sent the Three Amigos up there to negotiate with the Indonesians on what they might be doing and they came back empty handed. I can tell you this, when Laurie Brereton goes there after the election campaign and starts a negotiation with the Indonesians, he won't be coming back empty handed, and we'll have a cure to the problem.

 JOURNALIST: …Budget situation. What's the appropriate…to allow the Budget to go into deficit in the event that the economy is unfortunately pushed into recession by….?

 BEAZLEY: Not if the Australian economy is in growth. The Government tells us, in any set of circumstances, it's in growth. That's why we need the figures from the Government on what the situation is. I happen to believe, I served in a Labor Government for 13 years and I'm proud of the strength of the economy that we left. It was a growth economy - a good growth economy. I believe it was an economy that could withstand the buffets of the Howard Government and the international community.

 To suggest the Budget has gone into deficit, or going into deficit, when you've got Treasury figures out there saying that it's not, is mischievous. But there's no doubt that John Howard has put enormous pressure on the Budget with his back flips. Just in the same way that running away is no style of leadership when you're trying to run on leadership, so it has to be said that it's no style of economic management to have left the Budget, which was in good surplus, in a weak position with your constant back flips to save your political hide when we confront unknown and uncharted waters in the international community, both in security terms and in economic terms. John Howard can't be proud of that. But, nevertheless, the Treasury tells us, with some growth estimates they put out, that that is not the case. So, we can only operate on the estimates that are given to us from Treasury.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley….poll today says Labor….marginal seats in Victoria. Is that….?

 BEAZLEY: I've got to tell you, I used to comment on polls but I'm now a fighter, not an analyst. But I look around this faces here, I can see all the analysts. As you look at me you see one of the fighters in this election campaign. You tell me what those polls mean. As far as I'm concerned, what I'm about is putting forward to the Australian people a positive agenda and seeking their agreement with me that the issues of the day are security at home and security abroad. What effect that has on opinion polls, I won't know. But I'm hopeful it will be good at the end.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, in Queensland today, having ALP campaign material carrying Peter Beattie's face for some of the marginal seats. What's your response to that?

 BEAZLEY: I hope that our campaign material will carry Peter Beattie's face, will carry Bob Carr's face, will carry Steve Bracks' face, Jim Bacon's face, Mike Rann's, in the case of the Opposition Leader in SA, Geoff Gallop's, Clare Martin's. I tell you why, because central to my argument is this: we are only going to make things like our Headstart for families work if the State Governments are cooperating with us. We are only going to make our policies for public hospitals work if the State Governments are cooperating with us. We are only going to make our policies for public schools work if the State Governments are cooperating with us. We'll only be able to make our attack on salinity, to ensure a decent environment for

 all Australians work, if the State Governments are cooperating with us. I regard my ability to get on with Peter Beattie and all these other State leaders as a massive advantage to me personally in this political campaign. If I am worried about circumstances where they don't appear, that's a circumstance that would worry me, not circumstances where they do.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, on the issue of changing the industrial relations……could you explain how you might change those awards and on the issue of maternity leave, for the moment, of when you get access, what proportion would you like to increase it to…

 BEAZLEY: I tell you how I'd want to change those awards. I'd want to give a power in the Industrial Relation Act to allow them to make awards on anything that they chose to do, industry by industry. That's the first thing on that. The second is, that I'd empower the Industrial Relations Commission to oblige bargaining in good faith. Good faith by workers and good faith by employers. I'd do that as well.

 On the question of maternity leave, my comments are as I've already indicated. It is obviously desirable that women get access to paid maternity leave. About one third of Australian women do. The budgetary position that we now confront won't permit us to pay for that in Government and that many employers face a struggle and difficulty with that. What I'm about is how you negotiate with employers, be they State Governments, or be they private employers and then employees, how you negotiate the gradual steady build up of increasing access to maternity leave. It is central to decent family policy, but it is unaffordable in the current circumstances, but it won't always be unaffordable if employers and employees are devoting themselves to achieving those objectives.

 JOURNALIST: Reports of a deal between Singapore Airlines and Ansett….

 BEAZLEY: It would be magnificent if that is the case, because, I can tell you, the easiest jobs package you can get together for Australians is to get a government activated to be prepared to provide a loan or equity injection to back up the sorts of things that airlines like Singapore Airlines are prepared to contemplate and individual businessmen are now prepared to contemplate. If that is achieved without government, well, so be it. But it's got to be said that Howard and Anderson have done nothing but throw tacks in the in the path of those who have been trying to get an Ansett resolution. Having unfairly discriminated against them in the first instance, they've been making life hard in the second - except in so far as we in Opposition have been able to take them by the scruff of the neck and shake them around. But you do more for jobs in this country, and the tourism industry now by the single act of getting Ansett up and flying again than just about anything else I can care to think of.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, is Mr Howard wrong to go to APEC?

 BEAZLEY: The job of myself and John Howard is to be here to convince the Australian people that the direction in which we're going is the direction the nation needs to be going. The Prime Minister will be, from the middle of tomorrow, a caretaker Prime Minister. He does not carry the full authority that a Prime Minister of this nation carries. That's the first point. The second point is, on APEC he's always been a bit player. This has been a matter of deliberate choice by John Howard, he mocked it for the first two or three years that he was in office - mocked it. He now seeks to convince, in his caretaker period, that he's had some conversion on that front. Well, frankly, I don't believe him. What we need in this country is a government that is prepared to treat this region seriously. Frankly, under current arrangements, you're not going to get that unless I'm Prime Minister.

 Ends

