---
title: "New principal member for Migration Tribunals."
date: "2001-06-13"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211225087
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A1A46%22
---

  

 News Room

 New Principal Member for Migration Tribunals MPS 075/2001

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Phillip Ruddock, today announced the appointment of Mr Steve Karas OAM as Principal Member of both the Migration Review Tribunal and the Refugee Review Tribunal. Mr Karas' appointment is for a period of 3 years from 1 July 2001.

 Mr Karas is currently Acting Principal Member of the Migration Review Tribunal and has 12 years experience as a Senior Member of the MRT and its predecessor, the Immigration Review Tribunal.

 "Mr Karas has had a distinguished professional career in the immigration and legal related fields," Mr Ruddock said.

 "He has the extensive leadership and management skills necessary to guide both Tribunals in continuing to provide high quality merits review while the Government continues with the planned amalgamation of the Tribunals into the Administrative Review Tribunal."

 "His appointment will greatly enhance the processes underway to identify and implement changes necessary to achieve greater administrative efficiencies in both Tribunals," the Minister said.

 The MRT provides independent merits review of general migration decisions and the RRT is responsible for providing independent merits review of decisions to refuse or cancel protection visas made by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

 Mr Ruddock also announced the reappointment of members to the Migration Review Tribunal and the Refugee Review Tribunal. See separate media release.

 13 June 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

