---
title: "Australia-Indonesia cooperation vital to combat people smuggling."
date: "2001-10-23"
creators:
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230592
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JH856%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Laurie Brereton - Australia-Indonesia Cooperation Vital To Combat People Smuggling http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/lbmsindo231001.html Wednesday, 24 October 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Australia-Indonesia Cooperation Vital To Combat People Smuggling Laurie Brereton - Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Media Statement - 23 October 2001

 The drowning of more than 370 asylum seekers off the coast of Java is a horrific disaster," the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurie Brereton, said today.

 "This tragedy starkly demonstrates the callous disregard for human life of the people smugglers who are all too ready to put desperate people to sea in unseaworthy vessels."

 "There will not be an effective crack down on the people smugglers until Australia and Indonesia work together. The flood of boats towards Australia can only be stopped by fixing our relationship with Indonesia."

 "Labor is committed to pursue the issue of people smuggling with the highest levels of the Indonesian Government."

 "We will pursue a comprehensive agreement with Indonesia to extend cooperation against people smuggling. We will press for Indonesian agreement to accept the return of vessels and people who are trying to use Indonesian territory as a jumping off point to illegally enter Australia. At the same time we must do much more to help Indonesia deal with this national security, law enforcement and humanitarian challenge."

 "Labor is committed to fund increased technical support for Indonesian law enforcement and defence authorities to disrupt people-smuggling and other transnational criminal activity including drug and arms smuggling."

 "Additional assistance to Indonesian law enforcement will involve the Australian Federal Police and INTERPOL. Additional assistance in the area of maritime surveillance will come under the umbrella of our bilateral Defence Cooperation Program. The 2001-2002 bilateral defence cooperation budget is a modest $4.5 million. Support for Indonesian maritime surveillance is limited to maintenance assistance for the Indonesian Navy's ageing Nomad aircraft."

 "Labor's planned $10 million boost for funding of Indonesian law enforcement cooperation and maritime surveillance will directly enhance the security of both Indonesia and Australia. Joint action by Australia and Indonesia to crack down on illegal people smuggling and other transnational criminal activities is in our common interest. It will help reduce the risk of more tragedies such as that off the coast of Java this Friday."

 "Only a Beazley Labor Government is committed to put in place a regional strategy to crack down on people smugglers and strengthen our maritime border protection through the establishment of an Australian Coast Guard. Labor will provide real solutions which last and work - and which will stop the boats carrying illegal immigrants from coming.

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

