---
title: "Democrats: UNHCR criticism shows Australia is making the refugee problem worse."
date: "2001-10-31"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231112
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/80B56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 31 October 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/682

 Democrats: UNHCR criticism shows Australia is making the refugee problem worse The United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees (UNHCR) condemnation of Australia’s stance on refugees proves that the Government and the ALP are making the plight of asylum seekers worse, according to the Australian Democrats.

 Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett said, “Australia can’t encourage or demand that other nations take greater numbers of refugees when we are seen to be aggressively keeping people out and turning them away.

 “Minister Ruddock claimed this morning that the refugee problem is easing and that the Government’s stance had succeeded in a ‘drop-off’ in the number of asylum seekers. Nothing could be further from the truth,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “There is blatant evidence that Australia’s stance on refugees is failing - it is there for everyone to see, nationally and internationally. It is not only failing to stop the boatloads of refugees, it is impeding global efforts to deal with the problem.

 “The boats keep coming; the people on board risking anything and everything. This is in spite of the millions of Australian taxpayer dollars being spent bribing poorer foreign governments, so that they will take on our refugee responsibility.

 “If we are going to provide funds to poorer nations in our region, the monies should be properly targeted as part of Australia’s foreign aid policy.

 “Until Australia stops promoting the myth that there is a functioning queue for refugees, we will continue to impede the development of a global solution. Unless Australia recognises and acknowledges its global role and responsibilities in this process, the refugee issue will not improve.

 “The assessment and condemnation by the UNHCR of Australia’s stance is appropriate; it is the peak international refugee body and is in the best position to comment on the state of the refugee problem.

 “Australia needs to understand that it is now part of the problem, rather than helping with the solution,” concluded Senator Bartlett.

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

