---
title: "Decision not to renew ACM's Immigration detention contract welcome but judicial inquiry still needed."
date: "2001-05-25"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
  - "Sciacca, Con"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211224370
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/37546%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Con Sciacca, Duncan Kerr - Decision Not To Renew ACM's Immigration Detention Contract Welcome But Judicial Inquiry Still Needed http://www.alp.org.au//media/0501/csdkmsacm250501.html

 Monday, 28 May 2001

 Decision Not To Renew ACM's Immigration Detention Contract Welcome But Judicial Inquiry Still Needed Con Sciacca, Shadow Minister for Immigration, and Duncan Kerr, Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs

 Joint Media Statement - 25 May 2001

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Con Sciacca and Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs Duncan Kerr today welcomed the Government's decision not to renew Australasian Correctional Management's (ACM)contract as the operator of Australia's immigration detention centres.

 "The decision totally vindicates Labor's repeated calls for a Judicial Inquiry into the operation of Australia's immigration detention centres," they said.

 "The Howard Government has stated that the reason ACM's contract was not extended beyond the initial three years is because the Immigration Department 'could no longer be satisfied that the offer represented best value for money'.

 "That, however, is purely a commercial decision. It means that the Department has expressed no view on the larger issues raised by the Flood Inquiry and by the Commonwealth Ombudsman, which raised serious questions regarding ACM's suitability as manager of the detention centres and highlighted instances of unacceptable treatment of asylum seekers by ACM," Mr Sciacca said.

 Mr Sciacca said that the decision to retender is only the first step towards reforming a detention system that is fast becoming a national embarrassment.

 "One of the questions that a Judicial Inquiry should look at is whether privatisation of these facilities is acceptable. The numerous allegations that have been raised against ACM highlight the problems of accountability associated with privatised detention centres - especially in relation to detained asylum seekers, who are not criminals, yet in many instances are treated worse than jail inmates," Mr Kerr said.

 "With an election looming, the Government should not complete any tender process prior to receiving advice from a Judicial Inquiry. Only this would get to the bottom of all allegations, and clear the air to

 enable Australia to start afresh,' Mr Kerr said.

 Australasian Correctional Management currently operates all of Australia's immigration detention and processing centres located in Port Hedland, Woomera, Villawood, Maribyrnong, Perth Airport and Curtin. Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

 Home | Action | News | Policy | People | About

