---
title: "Chemical restraint invokes spectre of totalitarian state."
date: "2001-02-01"
creators:
  - "Kerr, Duncan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211220519
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MLC36%22
---

 Chemical Restraint Invokes Spectre Of Totalitarian State Duncan Kerr - Shadow Minister for Justice

 Media Statement - 1 February 2001

 Printer friendly page

 'The Government's proposal to change the law to give security staff in Australian detention facilities powers to chemically restrain asylum seekers is a cause for grave concern,' Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Population, Duncan Kerr, said today.

 'Minister Ruddock hasn't yet disclosed the detail of these changes, which will form part of his promised crackdown on detained asylum seekers. But it is clear that he is willing to give officers in privatised detention centres wide - and unaccountable - discretion to administer chemical restraint.

 'It is also clear that these officers will be able to take steps that the current law allows only in the most extreme situations.

 'It is also clear that Minister Ruddock is happy to give these new powers to Australasian Correctional Management Pty Ltd (ACM), whose contract for the running of these Commonwealth facilities he recently extended until December 2001,' Mr Kerr said.

 'This plan is disturbing because it will deny detainees the protection of important safeguards in the Australian justice system that ensure accountability, and protection of human rights.

 'It is also disturbing in the light of the track record of ACM and of its American parent company, Wackenhut Corrections Corporation. Legal proceedings brought against Wackenhut, in relation to its inappropriate and excessive use of chemical restraint on detained juveniles, led in September 2000 to the closure of a Wackenhut facility in Louisiana.

 'Minister Ruddock's plan to give the green light to chemical restraint conjures up the spectre of the worst excesses of totalitarian states.

 'His plan has no place in a democratic society like Australia.'

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

