---
title: "Border control means more than keeping out one boatload of refugees Mr Howard."
date: "2001-09-06"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Gavan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228485
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KXV46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Gavan O'Connor - Border Control Means More Than Keeping Out One Boatload Of Refugees Mr Howard //media/0901/gomsbc060901.html Friday, 07 September 2001

 Border Control Means More Than Keeping Out One Boatload Of Refugees Mr Howard Gavan O'Connor - Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry

 Media Statement - 6 September 2001

 The fact that Australian borders have not been breached by an exotic disease of plants or animals over the term of the Howard Government has had more to do with good luck than good management, according to Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Gavan O'Connor.

 Speaking at the opening of the AVCARE Summit in Sydney this morning Mr O'Connor detailed a litany of policy failure by the Howard Government in maintaining an effective quarantine barrier at our borders.

 "The Australian National Audit Office rang the bell on this Government's management of quarantine back in June when it disclosed that only 11% of seizable material passing through our international mail centres is actually detected, and that only 32% of seizable material is picked up at Sydney airport," Mr O'Connor said.

 "But the Government has known of major problems with the way it has run quarantine for much longer than that.

 "All party Senate Committee reports into the Government's handling of applications to import cooked chicken meat, salmon and New Zealand apples have exposed major deficiencies in the way the Howard Government has assessed the disease risks associated with imports.

 "When the Government announced in this year's budget that it was going to attempt to redress its five years of neglect of our quarantine barrier by allocating additional resources Labor was supportive.

 "Now we find that only a week after announcing 60 extra recruits a month for the Australian Quarantine Inspection Service (AQIS) in New South Wales, the Government is planning to lay off 30 trained AQIS inspectors and replace them with recruits from a labour hire company.

 "As with many of this Government's border control policies it is all smoke and mirrors.

 "And they still have done nothing to assure agricultural stakeholder groups, such as chicken producers and processors, that they have done anything at all to address the glaring deficiencies exposed by the Audit Office and three Senate Committee reports in the ad hoc and non-consultative way they have handled import risk assessments.

 "Mr. Howard has grabbed the headlines for his tough stance on one boatload of refugees while his Government has flip flopped all over the place for more than five years without putting in place a rigorous and consistent process for assessing import risks, and only in an election year have they started to plug gaping holes in our quarantine barrier." Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

