---
title: "Commonwealth Youth Forum: address."
date: "2001-10-02"
creators:
  - "Hollingworth, Peter"
source: "GOVERNOR-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229542
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RAG56%22
---

 ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT REVEREND DR PETER HOLLINGWORTH, AC, OBE,

 GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

 ON THE OCCASION OF

 THE COMMONWEALTH YOUTH FORUM

 2 OCTOBER 2001

 Colin Walters and the organisers of the Commonwealth Youth Forum, I should like to thank you, first of all, for inviting me to come to provide an introduction to this Plenary Session today.

 Our theme for this morning is "Youth Participation in Democracy and Bridge-Building Opportunities" -fascinating words, when you think about them - youth participation, democracy, bridge-building.

 Notwithstanding the postponement of CHOGM itself - I underline the word postponement. This Forum and its potential outcomes in all 54 Commonwealth nations, are enormously valuable, particularly when we think about the future.

 And I encourage all participants to make the most of this significant opportunity for yourselves as individuals, as well.

 Until a few years ago, you know, Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings were just that ... gatherings of the Commonwealth's Presidents and Prime Ministers, presided over by Her Majesty The Queen, as Head of the Commonwealth.

 It is still a unique gathering, where world leaders will, (we hope early next year in Brisbane meet) and actually sit around a table together and engage in private, unscripted debate, tackling the big issues that affect them all.

 In recent years, the people of the Commonwealth have become more directly involved in those gatherings.

 'People's Centres' have been set up to provide an opportunity for non-government organisations to put their points of view, and to demonstrate their contributions in the Commonwealth family.

 In Edinburgh, in 1997, this extension of the purpose and value of CHOGM took another step forward with the introduction of the Commonwealth Youth Forum.

 The very nature of this gathering provides the platform for this morning's theme of youth participation and bridge-building.

 You have come together as representatives of countries that comprise one of the world's most diverse, yet effective and harmonious, international associations.

 And through your participation, here in Australia, at this time, as a group you are the proud representatives of the organisation founded, as it were, on a certain family likeness, built upon such things as a shared history, a rule of law, the tradition of democratic governance. To name a few characteristics.

 This Forum, and the issues you will discuss this morning and throughout the week, are testimony to the strength and resilience of the Commonwealth of Nations.

 It is probably well known to those of you visiting this country that the term 'Commonwealth' was the descriptive term used by the Federation founders 100 years ago when they wanted to describe this new nation called 'Australia' - we called it the Commonwealth of Australia. It served us well, it is a great word, it carries all sorts of nuances - the common wealth, the common good, common names, common objectives, for common people.

 You are also here to show that young people are not simply the achievers of the future.

 As already pointed out, I have done quite a bit of work in these last three months, working with young people around Australia. And the one thing you do not like to be told is that you are the future because, of course, you are the present.

 Contributors in the here and now. Old people like me know that young people like you have got a great deal to contribute now. If we fail to listen and we fail to heed, we do not leave the world in a good place.

 You have beliefs, you have ideas, you have opinions. No doubt they are still moulding and forming, but they are there.

 And you want to express those ideas now, and to have them heard and taken seriously in the formulation of national and international policy.

 Just a fortnight ago, my wife and I took part in a National Conference of Young People, organised as part of the program for Australia's 100th anniversary of nationhood - the centenary of our Federation. It took place in Perth, in Western Australia, on the other side of the continent.

 There were two hundred and fifty young people, from all over the Commonwealth, that is, the Commonwealth of Australia, falling into much the same age bracket as you do. And for a long weekend, a pretty intensive weekend, they worked together hard to develop common ideas, about issues like education, health, the environment, housing, the process of reconciliation between our Indigenous peoples and the wider community, the plight of the world's refugees and our role and responsibility in helping them.

 The conference spent three pretty gruelling days - mind you, some of it was self-inflicted because they stayed up too late at night, but that didn't effect their performance during the day - deliberating on these weighty matters, and came to the decision that their response should come in two, separate but related

 forms.

 Over the weeks to come, the conference participants will finalise a set of detailed recommendations to Australia's three levels of government, that is the Commonwealth, the States and local governments.

 But one, central outcome of the conference was finalised in Perth. This was the Declaration from the Young People of Australia on the Centenary of Federation.

 In the context of this morning's theme, and anticipating the important issues that you will be covering, I want to read the Declaration out to you.

 I feel I have an obligation to do so because they presented me with a beautiful illuminated text, that truly they must have sat up all night to do.

 I want to read it, and I will take it slowly, and I hope that you might be able to reflect upon some of the key thoughts that come through to us.

 While the Declaration refers to Australia, I think the words will hold meaning for young people throughout the Commonwealth of Nations. I think these values and thoughts we all hold in common.

 The theme of the conference was: Imagine Your Australia

 Imagine Australia. Our people, our community, our land; we belong.

 We have the right to dream, to live and succeed in a country we can call home.

 Ours is a nation of compassion, with the honesty to recognise wrongs and the courage to set them right. We seek to learn and not to blame.

 We respect, heal and love our fragile land.

 We believe education is for everyone; a nation that learns, grows.

 Ours is a country where there is always a helping hand within reach.

 We are a people whose similarities and differences are celebrated with pride.

 We are a nation committed to upholding human rights in Australia and throughout the world without compromise.

 We embrace community spirit. We are aware, we are active, we are involved.

 Imagine our Australia Ö live and share.

 What struck me most about this document was the number of times it used words like, "we", "ours", "our", "us".

 In the era where western, industrialised nations like Australia are said to be spawning a selfish disinterested "Me Generation", those words were enormously reassuring. That is what Commonwealth, of the common good, is about - us.

 In these days of uncertainty, the bridges we build within and between nations, and our readiness to participate in democratic processes, become much more than worthy ideals.

 They are symbols of our endurance.

 This is particularly true when young people like you come forward to form a global chain of humanity, forged on trust, forged on common values, on goodwill, on a sense of mutual obligation to one another, of a sense of service to humanity. Those would seem to me to be the key values that you would all hold in common.

 It is an honour and a privilege for Australia to host the People's Festival and the Commonwealth Youth Forum as our nation commemorates its 100th anniversary.

 As one of the world's most enduring democracies, we are pleased this week to be sharing our national celebration with young people from across the Commonwealth.

 I want to thank and to congratulate all of you for taking part in this significant gathering at a time of great significance to the whole world.

 I think there were the best of reasons why many of the Commonwealth's leaders and Heads of Government felt that they had to stay at home with their people. That is all the more reason why the young should be here, and I am glad you are. And I trust that, as you build these bonds of fellowship, you will take the Commonwealth, as its new leaders, through the 21st century.

 I have every confidence that these bonds of affection will grow in the generations that are to come.

 And I would like to wish you well in your deliberations.

 Thank you.

