---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: border protection legislation, Afghanistan, Ansett."
date: "2001-09-18"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228830
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2RY46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Border Protection Legislation, Afghanistan, Ansett //media/0901/kbmcact180901.html Tuesday, 18 September 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Border Protection Legislation, Afghanistan, Ansett

 Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 18 September 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: The stand I took in the national interest on the border protection legislation two weeks ago has been completely vindicated. I took a bit of political heat on that when I took a stand for decent workable laws. The Government mocked me for it. The Government has now come to recognise that the complaints and concerns that we raised to produce decent workable legislation were right. The only resemblance that this border protection legislation bears with its original is the title. A completely different approach has been adopted by the Government. I'm proud of the decision I took to take a stand in the national interest here. The objections that we made to that Bill in relation to the imposition it made on all Australian civil laws by rendering them invalid in the face of that law has gone. The question in relation to appeals to the High Court, the prohibition of them - gone. The question of being able to send people out to sea in leaky boats - gone. The ability, as there was in that original legislation for an officer to be exempt or immune from any civil and criminal law without constraint - gone. All of that gone. By the way, too, the unintended consequence of their being able to direct law against Australian citizens and Australian vessels.

 It was a panicky piece of legislation that they put in place then. A panicky piece of legislation that required due consideration. We took a stand in the national interest. Our Caucus is yet to consider this legislation and will do so in an hour or two's time. But I say with pride that we took a stand and the stand was vindicated.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock is intimating that perhaps he has the support of Labor. Are you saying it's too early to say that?

 BEAZLEY: We have to go through our proper process as far as that is concerned. But I am relieved and gratified that, though I've taken a deal of heat over the course of the last couple of weeks, we have been completely vindicated.

 JOURNALIST: What about your position on the exclusion of Cocos Islands and other….

 BEAZLEY: That is effectively producing a safe haven. My view to the Caucus would be that we ought to support that as well.

 JOURNALIST: With all of those elements gone from the Border Protection Bill, what does it achieve?

 BEAZLEY: There are interesting features of this Bill, by the way. It includes a Tampa based solution, in part of it. Guess who was asking for that a couple of weeks ago? I suppose what it does is place a structure of constraint around what the Federal Court found yesterday to be the Commonwealth's power. The Commonwealth has always to our mind unquestionably had the power to turn boats away from Australia. The Federal Court vindicated that power yesterday under Section 61, I think it is, of the Constitution. What this Bill now does, ironically, is to place constraints around the operation of that and determine the circumstances in which it can be conducted and the powers and immunities of the officers and the constraints on those powers and immunities that ought to operate in those circumstances.

 JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you whether or not you think that a war in Afghanistan might increase the number seeking asylum in countries like Australia?

 BEAZLEY: It appears the Pakistanis have closed the border, which makes it unlikely that people in Afghanistan will leave that country over the course of the next few weeks. So, I couldn't be sure of what the outcome would be in terms of the creation of numbers of refugees from Afghanistan exiting the country.

 JOURNALIST: It's usually a pretty regular consequence of war, though, isn't it, migration of large numbers of people?

 BEAZLEY: It is usually the consequence, that is true. But I guess they need somewhere to go. If the borders are closed, they would have to seek their safety within the country. I think that the response that is intended by the United States is a response that is proportional, and directed towards those who are responsible, for the perpetration of those criminal acts in the United States. I would find it most unlikely that the Americans and their allies intended war against the Afghanistan civilian population.

 JOURNALIST: MPs like Peter Slipper are still maintaining that there are some undeniable links between terrorism and the asylum seekers that are arriving in Australia. You've had security briefings. Have you had any more recent information?

 BEAZLEY: No, I've had no more recent information on that. When we asked Mr Reith whether some how or other we got the wrong briefing, his office said to our people, 'no, it was just a supposition, there is no evidence whatsoever for that proposition'.

 JOURNALIST: A number of European nations are now a little bit more standing back from their original support of US retaliation for these attacks last week. Do you think Australia acted too early in supporting the Bush administration?

 BEAZLEY: No, and I don't think they're standing back. What they're going through is the normal process, as they are entitled to under the NATO and, indeed, in the ANZUS arrangements and, indeed, as the resolution expressed in Parliament yesterday. Everybody determines their contribution within their own capabilities. I think you'll find that all parties to both treaties will do that. But I think you'll also find that whatever the actual content of their response, it will all be solid support in the fight against international terrorism.

 JOURNALIST: How hard is Labor going to be going after John Anderson today over his handling of the Ansett situation?

 BEAZLEY: We believe this Government has neglected its duty shamefully in relation to Ansett. We

 believe that they have complacently presided over what is a substantial damage to the Australian economy, tourism industry and the livelihood of a lot of good, hard working Australians. And we are going to hold them absolutely accountable.

 JOURNALIST: Cathay Pacific has expressed an interest. Would be that be an acceptable solution?

 BEAZLEY: I want, in this country, airlines that are prepared to service all of Australia. You'll get any number of people prepared to fly between Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne. It's what happens elsewhere that counts for our tourism industry, that counts for decent equal access to opportunities, economic and otherwise for all Australians. The only airlines that provide that are airlines like Qantas and Ansett. Frankly, we've got to get Ansett up and running.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

