---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: Northern Territory election result, illegal immigrants, GST on caravan parks, industrial relations, One Nation, mandatory sentencing."
date: "2001-08-19"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227491
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JLQ46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Northern Territory Election Result, Illegal Immigrants, GST On Caravan Parks, Industrial Relations, One Nation, Mandatory Sentencing http://www.alp.org.au//media/0801/kbmcact190801.html

 Monday, 20 August 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Northern Territory Election Result, Illegal Immigrants, GST On Caravan Parks, Industrial Relations, One Nation, Mandatory Sentencing

 Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 19 August 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Congratulations to Clare Martin on a fantastic win. Congratulations to her on putting forward positive policies and standing up for decent civilised values. The impression around Australia of what Northern Territory politics are like has been changed forever for the better. The Northern Territory now represents tolerance. It represents decent community relations and it's all down to a magnificent, civilised, sensible campaign by one of the best new political leaders in this country.

 JOURNALIST: What do you take away from it federally?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I will say it again: this is an election won around the issues of the Northern Territory by a candidate and a party, candidate for Chief Ministership and a party that focused well on Territory issues. So I don't claim any sense of credit out of this federally but this is the fact - right now in regional Australia this year we have seen election after election in which the Liberal and National parties have been rejected and collectively it adds up to a seismic shift in Australian politics. They do not believe that ordinary Australians, any longer, are served by Liberal and National Parties and the take out of that for the federal election is good for us.

 JOURNALIST: With so many Labor state governments are you concerned that people want to take out a Liberal insurance federally?

 BEAZLEY: No they won't. John Howard is clinging to that desperately. Just as in Question Time he abuses me, constantly, he also if he is not abusing me and the Labor Party federally he is abusing the state Labor governments. What the Australian people would know would be this: this is a chance for something positive, a chance for something new - state and federal governments working together instead of against each other. We need state and federal governments working together to solve aged care problems, hospital problems, education problems, the Knowledge Nation. We have now a moment of historic opportunity to do exactly that and I believe that there will be many people around Australia

 knowing, of course, that if we don't perform that we can be defeated too. But prepared to take the view that this is a chance that shouldn't be missed.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think also that the electorate is becoming more volatile with the shift to Independents?

 BEAZLEY: The electorate is becoming volatile in it's prepared to make hardnosed judgements about political leaders. Political leaders have to stay in touch and perform and political leaders have got to be multidimensional. They have got to be able to handle tax issues at the same time as they handle the issues of social policy in this country - be it aged care, hospitals, education or whatever. And the public prefers leaders who are broad and leaders who stand for the whole community and stand on their side - not for the few against the many.

 JOURNALIST: Are there any lessons that you can actually draw from Clare Martin's campaign in the Northern Territory, her campaigning style…?

 BEAZLEY: Yes, stay positive. There are arguments against electing the Howard Government and those arguments will be out there. We have got a vision about the Knowledge Nation, about education, about health, about the needs of our community. The sort of country that we want to be this century. Get that vision out there and keep it out there.

 JOURNALIST: Are there any lessons for the conservative parties in dealing with One Nation, do you think?

 BEAZLEY: Well, once again we see the cost in conservative politics of John Howard's weakness. He has been weak with the West Australian Liberals. Weak with the Northern Territory Liberals and the public is saying this is not the way we want to go. We want a bit of strength in leadership when you have to stand up for community consensus and every Australian feeling part of our society. Every one of us a stakeholder and playing footsy with One Nation does not help you at all electorally. That ought to be the take for John Howard.

 JOURNALIST: Given that there is no response from the Prime Minister's office so far, does it give you the sense that he is in some sort of denial?

 BEAZLEY: The Prime Minister has tried desperately to face the fact that for five years he neglected ordinary Australians, stood for the few against the many, would not be on their side when it came to dealing with the banks, with Telstra, whatever, he gave no value to the Australian people but persecuted them with a huge new tax. Now this year he has been desperately trying to cobble together a campaign based on a huge shelling out of the budget surplus combined with the most unprecedented advertising campaign of $20m million a month. It has got to be said - he is not getting much value from it.

 JOURNALIST: He stomps around the country saying 'we are in the game, we are in the game' and he keeps getting thumped electorally.

 BEAZLEY: He says he is in the game and he is all about politics. What John Howard has got to learn and what I always have to understand completely is the Australian people are about solutions, long term solutions. Real solutions to all of their problems and not a politician who says - everything in aged care is fixed, everything in health is fixed, everything in schools is fixed - there is nothing more for me to do and that is John Howard's message to the Australian people. And every mum that has to access a child's

 hospital, every child who has to put their parents into nursing homes, every kid who has to sit in an inadequate classroom in a government school knows that that's a lie, knows that you are out of touch when you say that sort of thing and that is where John Howard's head is at - but that is not where we are.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, are you now confident that you can win Solomon and Lingiari?

 BEAZLEY: Let me first say: Clare Martin's victory, Clare Martin's issues, local state issues and those are what prevail but if they voted at the federal level like they voted at the state level we would win them both.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, can I ask you about immigration? The government wants to tighten laws governing the processes by which we decide whether or not illegal immigrations are refugees, saying that we are more humane than the United Nations on this issue. Can I ask you your response to that?

 BEAZLEY: We have supported all the government legislation, there has been bill after bill - we have supported it all. The exception has been, and I see John Howard himself said, that there has to be an appropriate appeal process and you can't get away in a nation where laws rule from appeal processes there is always going to be appeal processes whether you legislate them or not the Constitution demands it, that is what you have. But on every aspect of changes to immigration laws they have had our support including the issue of strip searches recently. When are they going to get real and put in a coast guard? You want deterrents in this country, not just for illegal immigration, but you want it on illicit drugs, or whatever, quarantine, the works - get serious, be like a real maritime nation - have a coast guard. Now John Howard will do anything… What it does is show the people who are people smugglers that you are serious. That their chances of getting through are negligible, that we are going to be serious.

 JOURNALIST:…(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: You never got rid of the problem, you never get rid of the problem but you can deter the problem and that is what you would do with a coast guard. The knowledge that you are invariably going to get caught, when you get caught you get processed, and if you are incorrectly registered as a refugee you go home.

 JOURNALIST: They get caught when they sail into Christmas Island.

 BEAZLEY: They don't all get caught. There are a lot of people entering this country illegally who don't get caught. What we need now is a much better border protection effort - that is not to say that you won't still experience troubles. The United States does, they have got a coast guard, they still experience troubles but it is a grade up in deterrents from where we are now, so let's give it a go.

 JOURNALIST: GST on caravan parks, the governments says that this is simply finetuning.

 BEAZLEY: I hear the distant drum roll of roll back. I hear the distant drum roll of another John Howard back flip. At the same time as they abuse us for roll back they are into it themselves like a pack of hungry dogs. The trouble is they didn't eat the bone hard enough in this particular case. In this case they went a little bit down the roll back track, the fairer and simpler track, but they didn't go far enough. Get it off the site fees and then you won't need any finetuning, roll back finetuning, related to the way in which that tax is collected - get it off it and that is what we say.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, how concerned are you by reports that say that up to 1,700 workers from the Orange Mobile Phone company are facing possible job losses and losses of their entitlements?

 BEAZLEY: John Howard - get real. I mean, John Howard is out there complaining about industrial relations problems now and attacking me and the Labor Party and saying, you know, if we are elected Sharan Burrow comes in the next day to determine policies, that is a nonsense of course. John Howard should hang his head in shame. John Howard said to the Australian people a couple of years ago when he bailed out his brother's company to the tune of 100 per cent he was going to do it for all Australians and it turned out that that was another non-core promise. We have got industrial struggles all over this country now of workers doing what John Howard told them to do. It is not good enough. Every Australian worker is entitled to protection. The Labor Party has a total positive solution, a total, affordable, positive solution. There would be none of this industrial unrest on these issues at the moment and there would be none of the threats facing those workers who are now at risk in their entitlements if John Howard had acted two years ago to keep his promise and implement the Labor Party's policy. Well, in three months time the workers of this country will have an opportunity to protect themselves because John Howard will protect only the workers in his brother's company to save himself the political embarrassment.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, just back to the NT briefly. Mr Howard has just put out a line saying 'it was all down to local issues and there were few if any federal implications at all'.

 BEAZLEY: …the people in regional Australia must despair of him and when I say regional Australia, you don't go too far out of the CBDs of Sydney and Melbourne before you hit regional Australia. When is this bloke going to wake up and get real about what is happening? Now I would agree that here we have a magnificent leader in Clare Martin and superb positive policies and a local campaign. But there always is the overt theme and the underlying theme. The underlying theme in regional Australia is cost of living, security of services. These are the underlying themes in regional Australia and what is happening to Telstra, what is happening to the banks, what is happening with the GST that is part of the watercolour wash background of every political campaign in regional Australia around the country now and John Howard can't see that because John Howard did the wash.

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think that there has been such a difference…in western Australia and the Northern Territory?

 BEAZLEY: You don't want to over state what happened with One Nation in Western Australia. They polled a little bit less than they did in the previous federal election. That is the truth.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: Yes, but it is the PR system in the Upper House. But in the terms of the last two votes for One Nation in Western Australia they were actually a bit down in the last election campaign, state election campaign, from what they were federally. And if you look at where Geoff Gallop owes his victory to minor parties it was really the preferences of the Greens, and even though they were decimated, the Democrats they still got a vote. The combination of Green and Democrat votes was well ahead of One Nation in WA particularly in the seats that Labor won.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think you might get the same result repeated in Queensland, though, at the federal election in terms of One Nation…?

 BEAZLEY: We take on One Nation we have always had the guts to stand up for the view that every Australian is a stakeholder in our society no matter what their racial or ethnic background. That is the truth of the matter. We have stood up to them and because of that they have a very small effect only on

 the Labor vote. The lesson that you have got to learn from the Northern Territory, if you happen to be Liberals, is that playing footsy with One Nation doesn't do you any good. Right your question?

 JOURNALIST: Why did you choose not to campaign in the Northern Territory?

 BEAZLEY: Two weeks, it is a bit hard to get up there but plus you knew here you had in Clare Martin a truly superb Labor leader and a good policy team and she was all right on her own.

 JOURNALIST: Is this the end of mandatory sentencing?

 BEAZLEY: I hope so. Clare has taken an enormously principled stand on that and there was the hope amongst Burke and his acolytes that they were going to be able to run the normal Northern Territory raciest campaign and it didn't work. And I thank the Northern Territory people for showing to the rest of the Australian community their true colours which are that they are a tolerant, decent people and they will have no truck with wretches like that.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

 Home | Action | News | Policy | MPs and Candidates | About the ALP

