---
title: "Tweed Heads, NSW: transcript of doorstop interview: caravan parks, Centrelink overpayments, GST, Medicare Alliance, asylum seekers & detention centres, Cheryl Kernot leaflet, superannuation, heroin trials."
date: "2001-11-05"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231362
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PFC56%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Caravan Parks, Centrelink Overpayments, GST, Medicare Alliance, Asylum Seekers & Detention Centres, Cheryl Kernot Leaflet, Superannuation, Heroin Trials

 http://www.alp.org.au//media/1101/kbmcnsw051101.html Tuesday, 06 November 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Caravan Parks, Centrelink Overpayments, GST, Medicare Alliance, Asylum Seekers & Detention Centres, Cheryl Kernot Leaflet, Superannuation, Heroin Trials

 Transcript - Tweed Heads, NSW - 5 November 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Well, this is a magnificent place for a conference and I do very much thank the owners and residents of this mobile home park for their courtesy - you come in here as well mate because you've been a great campaigner on these issues and campaigned very well with the rest of them in bringing our policy to, I think, a very successful conclusion.

 We're supposed to be out the front of this caravan park at the moment and it has a picture of Larry Anthony on it. You should not look at it as a campaign poster, you should look at it as a "wanted poster" because that is the guilty man. That is the guilty man on the main scandal of this campaign - the cover-up, the cover-up of the family debt, the family payment compensation clawback for the Goods and Service Tax.

 We heard on the John Laws program today from an Ansett worker who went to his Centrelink Office, where he wanted to place himself on Unemployment Benefits, and when he went to the Centrelink Office, the officer with whom he dealt said this to him, "oh, by the way you have a $1,700 debt but I wasn't supposed to tell you before the election, we have instructions not to tell you before the election. You'll get $1,000 of that covered but you'll have to pay us the other $700, you're going to have to pay us the other $700".

 There has been a massive cover-up and every now and then, honest Centrelink workers, in their desperation dealing with the ordinary middle Australians they deal with day-to-day, are prepared to indicate to those who've had their requirement concealed from them during the course of the election campaign what their debt is. This gentleman lives in Woodland, in Victoria and he went to his nearest Centrelink Office and received that information. Now, why is that relevant to today? Well, remember this, it's relevant at any time, but it's particularly relevant to what we're discussing here today, because that was part of the GST compensation for one group and they have been treated with deceit.

 Another group have been treated with deceit - those who are owners of manufactured homes living in manufactured home parks because they, like everyone else in this country, were told that the Good and Services Tax would not apply to rents, but they found it applying to their site fees, and one of the first undertakings I gave in terms of making the GST fairer for those who carried the burden was in response to the people from parks like this, who were outraged at the impact of that Goods and Services Tax uniquely to themselves. So, we have effectively zero-rated this, we have taken the GST - we have washed the GST in our proposals right out of, right out of the application of it to site fees to make absolutely certain. We've actually taken the point further than is taken in the case of rents to make absolutely certain that this group of Australians does not get uniquely disfavoured in the way in which the Government wished to do for them and they've tried every mechanism since they've put in place this unfair tax, to try and get themselves around their deceit on this but they've not managed to achieve an outcome.

 Also important to people in parks like this is the undertaking we have given to take the GST off gas and electricity. Those are big bill, big bills in manufactured home parks and they're big bills, of course, for all households, but it's a big part of the income of people who live in these arrangements, the bills that they pay for gas and electricity and I might say, as I went around and addressed groups in meeting places like this, and they put to me the impact of the Goods and Services Tax on them. The two things they mentioned of course were, were they uniquely disfavoured in relation to site fees, but they also talked about gas and electricity.

 Well, what we have living around us here are ordinary middle Australians and they have other needs and concerns as well and as I've walked around and talked to residents, they are other things in our policy which resonates, and those are how we deal properly with the dental needs of elderly Australians and our promise to restore that dental scheme that the Howard Government cut.

 Elective surgery is important too, and what we've proposed in the Medicare Alliance that we have with the States, the various elements of it which go to assisting public hospitals all mean that, at the end of the day, we're going to see public hospitals more capable of carrying elective surgery than they are at the moment. One gentleman told me here of a resident that was supposed to go in for a knee operation, I think today, but has now been postposed to January, basically because of the pressure that is there now on the public hospital system.

 Our election campaign has been a positive campaign for the future and its been focussed on what is happening to ordinary Australians, in many different situations, its about giving them hope, giving them sense that they have a committed Government that is on their side. Committed for the long term, prepared with affordable promises, to put themselves in a situation where ultimately we can be tested. If I break any of my promises I can be eliminated at the next election. That cannot happen with John Howard, he will not be there.

 So, as this campaign proceeds, the issues narrow and increasingly the issues of fairness come to the fore. The issues of affordable family life come to the fore and what we're dealing with today in the Goods and Services Tax is very much about affordable family life. I conclude by just drawing attention to the people on either side of me. Anthony, who is our Parliamentary Secretary, deals with housing matters has fought a noble fight on this caravan park issue, and I thank him for it. And Jenny has been a superb candidate for Richmond and she has done an excellent job in drawing these issues to the attention of her would be constituents so I thank her for the effort that she has put in as well.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, does your position on asylum seekers have full support of your front bench?

 BEAZLEY: Yes, it does. Let me make it clear because there's a long bow being drawn by a desperate Liberal Party now. The border protection legislation that went through this Parliament, went through with the wholehearted support of the Labor party because we assisted the Government to redesign it, to make it workable and effective. The Government could have had that border protection legislation two weeks earlier if it had been prepared to sit down and talk with me. In their arrogance, they dismissed that - in the end they came to see that we were right. You wanted effective legislation, legislation that would work, and we have put that in place, but we need more. We supported the government on all their legislation and still the boats keep coming - more has to be done - we have to have an effective Coast Guard - not just for dealing with the issues but people who are illegally attempting to enter this country for the purposes of migration. We also need it for drugs, we need it to protect our Borders effectively from those who'd want to bring anything illicit into this country. Its why we need a Coast Guard and we also need a diplomatic solution. Now, I think as people sit down and think this issue through, they know there's only one Party that can deliver that. Whatever the reasons there is only one Party that can deliver a diplomatic solution and that's somebody who can talk in the region - we can - our opponents can't.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, if you have the full support of the front bench, why then has Cheryl Kernot issued this leaflet within her own Electorate that Labor will completely overhaul our Border Protection laws?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I don't know about a leaflet that's alleged to be out there at the moment from Cheryl Kernot but what I do know is this. A very long bow is being drawn by Linton Crosby and John Howard on these issues in desperation, because they are desperate that this election is getting away from where they know there is agreement with them on the part of the Labor Party, but they try to convey it as something different and they also know that as the election gets away from this situation where we are in complete agreement to the points where we are in disagreement they've got problems. They've got problems with the Goods and Services Tax.

 JOURNALIST: This was Cheryl Kernot not Lynton Crosby.

 BEAZLEY: As far as I am concerned, I know of no leaflet that has been circulated and I suspect the long bow there.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, will you be releasing an Immigration Policy during this Campaign and like all political parties, isn't there a broad range of … That includes many people … quiet ... about the current of asylum seekers?

 BEAZLEY: In the Labor Party, we have debate, and then we have a conclusion and the conclusion is the policy that we adopt and take forward and the policy that we take forward on border protection is the policy that I have just outlined and that is that we support the legislation that is in place and the processes but we know that that is not enough, that it is not enough to deal with the problem. What we have to do, to deal with the problem, is to get a better permanent border protection force and the second thing we need to do with the problem is to get a solution in the region around us. Now, I have stuck with that line for months now. In the course of this election campaign, and as far as the Coast Guard is concerned, I'd been advocating it for years, advocating it for years, that's not something cobbled together for the purposes of an election campaign. That is something that is put in place. There is a serious contribution to national debate on security and a sensible response both in the legal immigration issues and drugs

 issues.

 JOURNALIST: … Labor Party .., concerns about the treatment of asylum seekers in Australia and overseas?

 BEAZLEY: Oh, look, well let's separate out those issues. On the question of what ought to happen domestically, we need an inquiry into what is happening in Australian detention centres. We've got a situation where the privatised detention centres are clearly not providing security - people can walk in and out of some of those detention centres. In the others, there's a question mark over the capacity of the private operator to do the job properly in those detention centres. That's a separate issue. There does need to be an inquiry into that.

 As far as the question of the protection of our borders against illegal immigration, as I said, more has to be done than this Government is doing and we have a suggestion as to how that more can be achieved. The Government doesn't like to talk about that, of course, because they know that anybody who sits down and does a comparison on credibility as to who is most likely to negotiate a solution with the Indonesians, me or John Howard; nobody who knows anything about the foreign policy stance of this country and the capacities of the person concerned would assume for one minute that Mr Howard would have a better chance of doing that than me, so they don't want to talk about that, but above all what they don't want to talk about is what we're talking about. They do not want to talk about the GST.

 John Howard made a 70-minute speech and, as far as I'm aware, not once in that 70 minute speech to launch his campaign did he mention the words GST. It was like, don't mention the war, don't mention the single most important initiative of the Government in this last three years of office, don't talk about it, because if talk about it you remind people of how its hurt them.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, no doubt you'll be tracking down this leaflet if Ms Kernot has contravened Labor Party policy, will you be counselling her?

 BEAZLEY: I'm making absolutely clear what Labor Party policy is, and I've made those points persistently through this campaign. Let me read what I announced in Strengthening Our Border Protection Policy. This was on 16 October in Perth. Labor supported strong border protection legislation. "If elected, Labor will retain the Border Protection Bill in the form that was passed by the Parliament this year". That is Labor Party policy, that is Labor Party policy which will be adhered to by every member of the Labor Party. Well, I warn you of this, as the Liberals trawl desperately to keep the focus off the Goods and Services Tax, off hospitals, off schools, they are drawing a very, very long bow with alleged comments and alleged events, and alleged pamphlets from the Australian Labor Party.

 JOURNALIST: Are you worried this … outer-metropolitan seats, particularly in NSW, and if it is, is the NSW ALP…

 BEAZLEY: The NSWALP has been performing magnificently, performing magnificently. What I know is, I am an old campaigner, I've been in politics for a very long time, I've been a Minister and a Party Leader for a very long time and I know my opponents and I know this about my opponents, the longer the bow they draw, the more they're frightened of something else, and in drawing a long bow on this, they're doing it for this reason. They know that the public is starting to look at the Goods and Services Tax again, they know the public is starting to look at what's happening in public hospitals again, they know the public is starting to look at what is happening in schools again, they know their neglect. You've

 got it here today. It's a sorry John Howard performance on superannuation. The day that I'm talking about taking the pressure off people in manufactured home parks, the day I'm talking about that, by relieving them of the GST on site fees and relieving them of the GST on their electricity and gas, what is he doing. He is talking about improving the taxation position of the top 5% of Australian income earners. John Howard is out there taking the tax off high income Australians, while I'm out there talking about what happens to ordinary Australian families.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, … matched contributions to voluntary contributions up to a total of $1,000 …what do you say to that?

 BEAZLEY: The people earning less than $20,000, that's a hoax. The reality of his policy is to provide a tax break for high income Australians while hoaxing low income Australians. No Australians I know on $20,000 a year have got a lazy thousand - the truth of the matter is that if you're on $20,000 a year, what you're doing is doing it tough, you're not going to be there to take advantage of any co-payment - but those high income earners will - they'll be able to take advantage of that but that's John Howard, he's about the few not the many. You've had a baby bonus that applies to 5% of families, you've now got a tax break that applies to 5% of taxpayers, and what we are talking about with the changes that we want to make to the Goods and Services Tax applies to 100%, 100% of our taxpayers.

 JOURNALIST: … age of the population. What is Labor's plan to increase superannuation savings? You don't seem to have one.

 BEAZLEY: Thanks, Sam. Look, what we have is this: we know you cannot deal with this issue any longer piecemeal. You know, you can't deal with this with a cobbled together policy to favour high income earners whom you've offended in the latter phase of the campaign, when what we've got in the superannuation situation is an absolute requirement for Government, industry and beneficiaries to sit down and work their way through what the problems are in superannuation. No more piecemeal solutions, piecemeal solutions simply create more confusion and what we've got to do is to get away from that, sit down and look at it from the ground up at what needs to be a good retirement policy. We've got good credentials on this, we are the ones who actually made superannuation available to the ordinary Australians.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, on detention centres, he's also said you're going to sit down and talk on that as well, just a moment ago.

 BEAZLEY: No, detention centre's are a judicial inquiry. That's a different thing.

 JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify, are you in support of detention centres and the principle?

 BEAZLEY: Well, the Labor Party invented them. This is what people tend to forget. We had to deal with the same problem the Government has to deal with and the way we dealt with it was to do two things -mandatory detention if you came into this country illegally, not all countries have that, but we put that in place at that point, but it was a manageable problem. Why was it a manageable problem? Because we negotiated with the region around us to arrive at agreements and those agreements kept the number of people who are coming here illegally at containable levels. That's what we did. And, therefore, we didn't have an issue in the way that we have an issue now because we could operate it. This Government has not been able to operate it and we now see the consequences of that. What we need is a government who can actually fix these problems …

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you say that you need to sit down with … but haven't you got the resources to have done that already?

 BEAZLEY: There are some things that you can do sensibly in opposition and there are some things that you can't. When you're dealing with problems as complex as the superannuation system, even though we've made a promise - and we will stick with that promise - not to increase the tax burden on superannuation, in fact, you don't want to do that, it's bearing enough tax burden, you've got to sit down with the Tax Office to work your way through your solutions. You've got to be able to sit down with the Treasury and the relevant departments to work your way through solutions that deal with the problems of aging and retirement, you've got to be able to bring in the funds now - who have got enormous sums of money and an awful lot of it's being invested off shore. We're dealing with all sorts of issues here. We're dealing with adequacy issues, we're dealing with investment issues, you know there's an awful lot of the resources that need to be made available for developing new Australian inventions here, like in those superannuation funds. But where are they investing? In San Diego, not here. These are all sorts of issues that we've got to think through. Now, from Opposition, you can do a certain amount but when you look at the totality of the issues that go to retirement policy, because the retirement issues are only facet, you absolutely have to sit them down and go through with it across the board. Because we're not just taking about retirement, we're also going to be talking about investment in Australia and nation-building and the role that superannuation funds can play in that. Superannuation funds are, oddly enough, investing in risk capital, investing in new technologies but not here. They're investing in them elsewhere. So we need to talk to that about it.

 JOURNALIST: What about the proposal, … about … superannuation … working and non-working spouse …

 BEAZLEY: That's fiddling at the edges. That's why we need … this is the sort of policy you cobble together in the last five days when you become desperate on a domestic agenda. The real heart of that policy, forget the rest, the real heart of that policy is a tax break for the wealthy whom the Government feels they may have offended. That's what that's about. Well, we're about a tax break for all Australians in what it is we intend to do with the Goods and Services Tax.

 JOURNALIST: Will you guarantee that you won't change any of the seven bills that you pass dealing with illegal immigrants?

 BEAZLEY: Yes.

 JOURNALIST: So, it's a steadfast guarantee, you will not change …

 BEAZLEY: I've announced that repeatedly.

 JOURNALIST: And if it is real leaflet, which it doesn't appear you know whether it is or not, do you admit that … how can you say that's a long bow, drawing a long bow? … it says you're going to change …

 BEAZLEY: I would just tell you that one long bow after another is being drawn by our political opponents, and I reckon this is another one. They are desperate. I mean, you had Lynton Crosby out there saying, 'oh well, you know, the Democrats and the Greens are preferencing them so they must have had some sort of secret deal on this'. Well, we haven't. That's a load of nonsense. But that's the sort of thing that they're up to. Now, I don't blame you for not knowing the Liberals as well as I do, but I know them

 very, very well and I have been campaigning against these Liberals for the last 21 years of my life and then as a Party worker probably for another 10-15 years before that. And I know this about Liberals in the last week of a campaign - when they see the opponents agenda starting to get up, people starting to be worried about the future of their country and the future of their families and themselves, they go for desperation, desperation tactics. I almost say this: I promise for the rest of this campaign that I will suspend my willingness to tell the truth about John Howard if he stops telling lies about me. I mean, it almost got the point there where we could do a deal on that front.

 JOURNALIST: … leaflet, it doesn't both you?

 BEAZLEY: Because our policy is clear and I've got our policy out there on all these bills and what our intentions are. As for the Border Protection Bill itself, well, I have some pride of authorship. It was the complaints that we raised about the unworkability of their legislation that the Government finally addressed in the Border Protection Bill that they brought forward.

 JOURNALIST: … topic that you talked about yesterday - heroin trials. Now, down in Victoria you've got Premier Bracks', who's supporting heroin trials and … in Victoria, and secondly, do you think that the reshaping of the NCA had anything to do - this is what the Howard Government claims … reshape the NCA is not … has anything to do with the NCA supporting heroin trials?

 BEAZLEY: Well, the final part of your question, I don't know. I haven't given it a minute's thought, to tell you the honest truth, so I don't know the answer to that particular one. On the first point, my answer is the same as yesterday. We believe that you need a comprehensive approach to dealing with the problems of drugs in this country. The starting point is to punish severely the people who are responsible for profiting. That includes, under a civilian standard of proof, stripping of their assets and using their assets for good constructive purposes in policing and rehabilitation. Secondly, to stop it coming in with a Coast Guard. This is not a new commitment by Kim Beazley. I've been arguing that now for years, that we should have a Coast Guard to do that. The third thing is that we ought to have proper rehabilitation process, both in terms of assistance that can come from blocking drugs or counterveilling drugs, education programs, programs that are aimed at helping people who've got a habit, get over what is essentially a health problem. It's a legal problem for other people, it's a health problem for them and I believe in keeping them alive. If States come to me with a proposal on those issues, I regard that as an extension of what has been there for a long time, and that is the needle exchange program. Those other trials are an extension of that and why are they there? It is there to keep people alive. You cannot cure an addict who is dead but you've got a very good chance of curing an addict who is alive and I happen to regard these as human beings and fellow Australians and they need a chance to recover. Our policy is there - smash the criminals, drive them away from our borders, make our community safe with community safety zones, put the Federal Police into State Police stations in areas of risk so the State Police are reinforced, appoint community safety officers to get the people who are selling the drugs to our kids and everybody else, but when they've got them, they have got our kids, cure out kids. Thanks very much.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

