---
title: "Bungendore, NSW: transcript of doorstop interview: education priority zones, asylum seekers, GST, workers entitlements, policy costings, immigration."
date: "2001-11-06"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231410
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZOC56%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Education Priority Zones, Asylum Seekers, GST, Workers Entitlements, Policy Costings, Immigration http://www.alp.org.au//media/1101/kbmcnsw061101.html

 Wednesday, 07 November 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Education Priority Zones, Asylum Seekers, GST, Workers Entitlements, Policy Costings, Immigration

 Transcript - Bungendore, NSW - 6 November 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Before we get into the political issues of the day, I might explain why we're here and start by thanking Principal Ray Gentles for making this marvellous school available to us.

 We've been in a few before-schools, this is an after-school. This is a school which is superbly supported by the community and by the State Government. And, as a result of that, its community relationship, it has magnificent facilities which actually also are community facilities. We've been in the sporting facilities, you're now in the library, you can go right through this school and you see marvellous classrooms, a good computer room. You've got a whole range of things here that mean that the 300 or 400 kids who come here are beautifully looked after.

 This is what an Education Priority Zone is all about in dealing with the before-schools, as opposed to the after-schools. It's how you put resources into the community, poor communities, which cannot make the provision for their schools that those in better off communities can do. And the reason we have flexibility for them to be able to spend it, it could be on teachers of maths and science, it could be on computers, it could be on teaching English as a second language, it could be on literacy teachers, it could be on resources for the school where they're under-resourced in key areas. It gives them a choice, it gives them the opportunity to make their decisions about what ought to happen.

 This area's been able to do that, of course, without assistance from the Commonwealth. There would be many who are not able to. But we just wanted you to look at what it would look like, see what it would look like if you had an Education Priority Zone operating in a way that gave you a chance to put community resources into our great public school system, but a great public school system that needs a bit of help.

 I have just signed a regional challenge to John Howard. What that challenge does is it says these things: "I challenge him to say that he will not be fully privatise Telstra. I challenge him to say that he will not

 proceed with his legislation to deregulate old Aussie Post. I challenge him to say that he'll preserve the independence of the ABC, instead of wrecking it, and that he'll put proper resources into it. I challenge him to redirect that $150 million going to Category 1 schools into projects like the Education Priority Zone. I challenge him to end the crisis in aged care, take a leaf out of Doug Moran's book and abandon his own policies and instead pursue what we now need to do for the aged in our society. To take the enormous reduction that has been there, or the enormously increased demand that there is there not being met by the Government for beds for those who need to access a nursing home. And to force the banks to restore services to areas from which services have been ripped.

 So, this is a pledge about regional Australia. As this election comes to a conclusion, it is amply clear the people in regional Australia are doing it tough and they're worried about it and they're thinking through the issues as they are affected, as they are being affected by Commonwealth policies and they are responding accordingly.

 Yet again, on Brisbane radio today, John Howard said that he'd done all that he needed to do for education with the States by putting in place a Goods and Services Tax. That is a plan for a tax, it's not a plan for education. We all know what he means when he puts the weights on the Goods and Services Tax. He and Costello mean it to cover food. They mean it over the years to force the rate of the Goods and Services Tax to rise.

 I point out again, all it would take for the Coalition Government to raise the rate of the GST is a bill like this, a bill like this, a one-page bill and the rate of the GST is raised. They need to talk to the States, you need to do anything accept pass a bill, a one-page bill through the national Parliament. That is what, at the end of the day, Howard and Costello aim to do. They intend to put it up and they intend to put it on food.

 Only a month ago, we had Peter Costello out there saying, or a month before the election campaign began, saying the GST ought to be on everything. And we know one thing about this election: if John Howard wins it, Peter Costello will be Prime Minister. That is amply clear. John Howard's found hundreds of different way of trying to say anything but the one thing that the Australian people wanted him to say - I will serve, I will commit myself and at the end of the term, I will subject myself to a test of the Australian people again.

 So, in the last days of this election campaign, it's coming down to this: a party with a plan for the future, be it in health, be it in education, be it in aged care, be it in taking the pressure off families by reducing the GST on critical items, a party with a plan for the future and a party with a plan for retirement, a hand-over and policy cobbled together just sufficient to get them through.

 Critical in this election campaign will be the contest here at Eden Monaro and, of course, we are offering an excellent candidate in Steve Whan for that contest and I'm delighted to be here with him, or in Eden Monaro yet again, with our excellent candidate here, getting out there, talking about the issues in the way in which he's been doing for some years now. And questions?

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the Treasurer has steadfastly ruled out increasing the GST, or increasing its reach, while he and John Howard run the economy. It sounds like you're trying to scare consumers into thinking it will go up?

 BEAZLEY: They put a bill for a GST and they put it on food. They had that in the House and they lamented a deal that removed it and both of them, and both of them, at different points of time, said since

 that deal it would be better if the GST was on food. We've had them, in recent times, saying it is better if the GST covers everything. We've had them say that in recent times themselves.

 And they've said, too, that if you look to increase spending on hospitals, if you look to increase spending on education, look only to the GST. And what we know from other analyses - because you know it's years before the GST replaces, for the States, those taxes and federal contributions that ostensibly are removed by it, years before that happens. You know that if crises occur, that's going to put pressure to raise the rates of the Goods and Services Tax.

 I put their undertakings - and I think I'm entitled to - I put their undertakings on the rate of the GST and its coverage in the same bucket as I put John Howard's 'never, ever' promise that the GST would come in place. They said they'd never ever do it and they did it. They say now, having tried to, that they won't raise the rate, that they won't put it on food - you know they will.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, why are those … likely to trust Labor any more on this issue, though, when your own infrastructure policy says that the withdrawal of special purpose payments will "force the States to put up the rate of the GST". In that case, isn't this just a similar scare campaign as the Liberals are running against you on asylum seekers?

 BEAZLEY: The interesting thing about special purpose payments is this: people have forgotten about it but the Commonwealth funds the States, I think from recollection, to the tune of some $17 billion a year in special purpose payments. They're for things like transport, they're for schools, they're for hospitals and the like. They're special purpose payments that go to the States. While the Commonwealth guaranteed the States, in the arrangements that they put in place for the GST, the financial assistance grants which were non-tied grants to the States, they left open the question of what they'd do about special purpose payments. They left that open. And that is how you put pressure on the States. You reduce, in real terms, or in practical terms over time, the special purpose payments or fail to keep up with the spending that may be necessary when they're growing at faster than the rate of inflation, or the need or demand is growing faster than the rate of inflation. You put the pressure on to force the rate of the GST up. That's what you do. That is what the intentions of the Commonwealth are in that regard. So, this is where we are entitled to say that if they're going to shovel everything onto the GST, there is one purpose clearly in mind, that is to raise the rate of the GST and/or expand its coverage to other items. That's what their intention is. You know, as night follows day, if they're re-elected that is what they'll do. Now, how can you trust us, you say? I'll tell you why you can trust us. I don't think there has been anyone in this country who has not recognised that the Labor Party has fought this tax tooth and nail, has been absolutely straight-forward with everybody about what its intentions and situation will be. We did say in the last election campaign, if this thing comes in, it will be impossible to get rid of it after you've put the whole business community through the wringer once. We said that in the last election campaign as we argued against the Goods and Services Tax. We kept the fight going and we nearly won. What we're doing now is making it simpler and fairer. We can be trusted on that and we can be trusted not to raise the rate. Our opponents can't.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, constitutional experts say that the only way to really ensure that the GST rate does not increase beyond the 10 per cent, that given your pledge not to raise it, that given the fact that you're going to keep the GST, would you consider something like a referendum to put an end to the … the rate of the GST or indeed the fact that you'd have to seek the consent of the States before …

 BEAZLEY: Well, you wouldn't have to put that in a referendum to stop it. There is one absolutely

 rock-ribbed way of stopping it and that's to vote for a Labor Government.

 JOURNALIST: Tom Uren's coming out today to give his support to the Greens and the reason is … ALP's policy on boat people. What's your reaction?

 BEAZLEY: What I say is this: we have to protect our borders. The Labor Party stood strongly for that when we were in office. We were thoroughly aware of the possibilities emerging that subsequently emerged. We put in place regional agreements and we put in place mandatory detention to discourage and deter. And it worked when we were in office. It worked. It was a hard thing to do to get those regional agreements in place, but we got them in place. Now what we're confronting is this situation. Despite all the legislation that we've supported, despite the fact that you've got the Navy out there on patrol, it is quite evident that more needs to be done, that deterrence has not been achieved. So, what we now need is something more. And the something more is an agreement, a diplomatic solution, an agreement in our region. And one thing is amply clear, and I might as well state absolutely bluntly, at this stage of the election campaign: there is only one candidate for Prime Minister who can negotiate that and that's me. The other candidate cannot.

 JOURNALIST: … the deterrence policy that you support, he … stopped the boat people, in fact, they seem to be coming faster than ever, how long will your policy of sending them off to various islands …

 BEAZLEY: As I said, we need something more than that. Quite clearly, when you look at those numbers, we need it very quickly. Which is why I've said that if I'm elected to office, our Foreign Minister and the other Ministers associated with this, like the Immigration Minister, will go as soon as practicable to Indonesia and to the region. They'll have an envoy in place as well to keep their activities going persistently to negotiate the sort of agreement to ensure that the boat people are not sent on. There's many things that you have to do associated with that. I think you have to give resources into the region to ensure that people can be sustained in camps in the region and ensure that the UNHCR can get in to operate on their status. And we have to accept that from the cap on refugees that we have in this country, a reasonable share in relation to Australia. But we can put that in place. We can get it in place. The reason I'm confident about that? Because we did it. We did it when we were in office. And we had trust in this region. We had trust in negotiation with countries in this region and we had the information. We actually had Prime Ministers who were prepared to get out there and a job of work, not keep away from it. You'd have another Prime Minister in place, if we are elected, who'd be exactly the same.

 JOURNALIST: … Liberal Party dirty tricks campaign on asylum seekers … Has the Labor Party been … information about Stan Howard … dirty tricks campaign on that front?

 BEAZLEY: Nothing has been done in relation to Stan Howard, or statements about Stan Howard, that aren't the simple truth. The simple truth is this: firstly, workers need confidence in their entitlements. That's the first thing. They were promised by the Howard Government protection for 100 per cent of their entitlements. The company of which Stan Howard was a director which went belly up, National Textiles, the workers got 100 per cent of their entitlements. There have been seven schemes since, and not one of them has come up with an outcome like that again. Not one of them. The Labor Party has, and has had now for several years, a policy which protects workers' entitlements. Security at home, like security abroad, are central in this election campaign. Only one set of workers has got security at home as far as their entitlements are concerned - and they remain unique.

 JOURNALIST: ... try to ensure …

 BEAZLEY: We've been doing two things, not just in this election campaign, we've been doing it prior to this election campaign. We've been pointing out the hypocrisy of at one level ensuring that one company only got 100 per cent workers' entitlements, while no-one else has got it, despite the fact that a claim was made at that point of time that a scheme would be put in place to guarantee 100 per cent of workers' entitlements. We have on the contrast the scheme that would secure 100 per cent of workers' entitlements. The situation of Stan Howard's company, of National Textiles, is the only example that we have to point to now of the right outcome for workers - the only example. So, we will.

 JOURNALIST: ….boat people. Are you disappointed with the position of Tom Uren and are you being squeezed by people who are drifting away from you because they're disaffected with the boat people policy and those who are going away from you because they think John Howard is harder at it?

 BEAZLEY: You will notice the way in which public opinion is developing, we are actually running this campaign on a plan for this country. We are talking about relieving people of the burden of the GST on them by taking out some significant items. We're talking about doing things for education that mean our nation has a future as an educated and skilled people. We're talking about fixing health care and aged care problems. You know something? The public is starting to take some notice of all of this. Why? Because this is what the public is worried about.

 What you've got to be able to do in these election campaigns is cover all the issues. We've covered the border protection issues and we continue to take, as we did when we were in Government, a strong stand in that regard. If you're going to run a generous policy on refugees and the cap of both the Government and the Opposition have agreed to on a bipartisan basis, and continue to agree to, is a generous policy. You also have to have order in the program. You simply have to do that as well. So, we've been doing that. But as this election campaign has proceeded, more and more people are starting to think again about what has happened to them. And what might happen to them.

 And they now understand, because John Howard refused to commit to the most unusual position for a Prime Minister going into an election campaign that I've ever seen, he refuses to commit to a term that is going to get Peter Costello as Prime Minister. And they do not like that idea one bit. They also know that they've got a Government which has been tricked when it's come to the issues of the goods and services tax and they fear that they will raise the rate, they'll put pressure out there in the system to raise the rate, or expand its coverage. They are concerned about that. But they are concerned, too, about what's happening to their schools, what's happening to the future of their kids, what's happening to hospitals.

 Frankly, I've been fighting this election campaign across the board. It's been John Howard who's been desperately trying to scrabble together an argument out of a variety of policy issues for a temporary re-election as far as he is concerned. And so we are now poles apart. We are poles apart on the critical issues of family life in this country.

 JOURNALIST: … polls …

 BEAZLEY: I've said before, I'm not an analyst - I'm a fighter in this election campaign. It's up to you to interpret the opinion polls, not me. But I take one thing out of the opinion polls, that is it is quite evident that those critical issues of jobs, health, education, taking the pressure off families, they are beginning to resonate with people, they are starting to see that. They are starting to see that the Government has got no idea what to do with any of that and they are being troubled by, firstly, a Government who doesn't seem to care about what's happened to them as families and what's happening to the future of this country and

 doesn't seem to care about the fact that they're going to have Peter Costello in there leading them next time around.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, the Government is standing its adding up of your policies this morning. Are you confident the ad will be withdrawn?

 BEAZLEY: It's quite untrue - absolutely untrue. There's double counting and they're misleading with absolute deliberation. Our finances, our proposals leave the Budget in surplus and have been fully costed by Access Economics - an independent costing operation. Let me go back to the character of that Access Economics study and ticking off of our proposals which keep our Budget in surplus and make sure that our policies are affordable. You all know in the media, and we all know in politics, that Access is a reliable organisation - a reliable organisation used by both sides in politics to verify their promises, campaign funding, and other things that they do from time to time. You also know that all newspapers in this country, and often the electronic media, use Access Economics as well for commentary and for other activities associated with their own exercises in costing and politics. So, we have there reliable estimates. Those reliable estimates show that the Budget is in surplus under Labor all the time. These statements by Crosby are just a 'think of a number' exercise to deliberately mislead. There's double counting in his figures and there is just plain misleading in his figures. He will try and put his ad forward, if that ad goes forward as a complete untruth.

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with business leaders that there's a strong economic argument for a big increase in immigration in the short-term? And if you don't, when …

 BEAZLEY: I think that it is necessary for us to be able to prosper, to compete effectively for skilled migrants in the areas of new and high technology. That is an important area. Right around the globe now, there is competition for the skilled people that can make your proposals for innovation work. The problem for Australia at the moment is we're losing them. Those who are coming in are not of the same level of skill that we are losing ourselves. So, we need an immigration policy that does these two things. Firstly, keeps our skilled people here as much as we can. That's why we've got policies against the brain drain. And brings into this country the high skilled people who can create work for other Australians. The countries that can do those two things win. That's what we have to do. I think that you attract them in by funding your universities properly, by ensuring that your businesses get the right amount of tax concessions when they're investing in innovative product. This is how you attract people who are going to provide jobs for other Australians in this country. That's what we're doing.

 JOURNALIST: What about an overall increase in the immigration intake … accompanying increase in the refugee intake.

 BEAZLEY: The refugee intake is not related to bringing in skilled workers to this country. Those are two separate issue. The refugee intake is a humanitarian concern. We agree with the cap the Government has on that which we put in place when we were in office and which has been sustained on a bipartisan basis. It is the second most generous cap in the world of those involved in the UNHCR program. That is sufficient as far as that is concerned. The issue of skilled workers is a different matter. What we have to do with skilled workers is like every other country on earth, compete to ensure that our skilled workers stay here - our high skilled workers stay here - and that we attract others into this country so that we can develop quickly new innovative ideas here which will employ Australians across the board.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Our promises, with both expenditure and savings do not constitute anything like that and we keep out Budget in surplus.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Our figures over the four year period are about $4 billion. That's savings and expenditure combined. That within the framework of our surpluses, is easily sustainable. As I understand the Liberal figures, they're $3 billion. So, let's not kid ourselves about where we're headed on that.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, Paul Keating once said his preferred position heading into the final week of an election campaign was being one out and one back. Is that where you see yourself with four days to go?

 BEAZLEY: Well, with four days to go, we're still the underdogs. We are aiming to, of course, do our very best to win this election. And we're very proud of the fact that we've been putting forward the positive policies to get us there. And the affordable positive policies to get ourselves there. And sustained in that affordability by independent assessment.

 JOURNALIST: … twice said in … press conference … prospect of an increase of the GST rate under Costello/Howard. Yet all you have said is that you can just ensure that you won't do it. Why won't you enshrine a 10 per cent GST rate in the Constitution or make it much, much harder to increase….

 BEAZLEY: Let me go to your allegation that we're trying to scare people. Fair dinkum. Take a look at the record. You had John Howard out there saying he would 'never ever' do a GST - 'never ever' do a GST. He didn't say, 'there'll be another election before I do a GST'. He said, 'gone. It has disappeared from the Liberal Party platform forever - forever'. Then you have John Howard putting in place a GST in direct breach of that promise. In the GST that he puts in place, there is a proposition that it should cover food. They lost that in the argument with the Democrats in the Senate, but they got their GST through. Subsequent to losing that argument, both he and Costello have been out there saying their preferred position would be the GST would be on food. Then you have Costello getting up before the Sydney Institute a month or so before the election began and said, 'the GST ought to be on everything'. I think that we're entitled to take a look at the record of this Government and say that on past performance they will raise the rate of the GST or expand it to food. They'll put pressure on the States in that regard to let themselves do it. That's what they'll do. That's why we say that they are going to raise the rate of the GST. What I say is this: we will not. In fact, we'll go in the opposite direction. They intend to go in the direction of raising the rate and putting it on food. We will go in the opposite direction of making it simpler, making it fairer. And in the process of making it fairer, by taking it off items like gas, like electricity, like funerals, like nappies, like, as we were yesterday, in a caravan park, like off the fees, the site fees, of those who are in those caravan parks. They have one plan and that is to raise the rate. We have another plan, and that is to relieve the burden on families.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

