---
title: "UN: real reform needed: Harradine."
date: "2001-06-25"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211225483
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/60H46%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  I-HE SENATE 

  UN - REAL REFORM NEEDED: HARRADINE 

  To achieve real reform of the United Nations, a far more rigorous analysis of its   performance than is reflected in the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs,   Defence and Trade report Australia ‘s Role in United Nations Reform, is required,   Senator Harradine said today. 

  A member of the committee, Senator Harradine wrote a dissenting report to the main   report which was tabled today at 12.45pm in the HLouse of Representatives. 

  Senator Harradine said the report failed to properly address the failure of some UN   operations. He said the few relatively minor criticisms of the UN made in the report   did not get to the heart of the reforms needed. 

  For example, the report failed to mention violence: against women and children by UN   peace-keeping personnel. The Special Rapporteur on violence against women has   expressed concern about the growing number of reports of rape and other sexual   abuse committed by UN peacekeeping forces and staff and UN refugee camp and   border guards. Another report exposed a rapid rise in child prostitution associated 

  with the arrival of peacekeeping troops. “These and other acts of violence committed   by peacekeeping personnel against women and children are rarely reported or   investigation, this report said. (see Dissent ~288-289). 

  The report also fails to mentior. recent corruption scandals involving UNHRC officers   against vulnerable refugees. 

  Failures in the area of aid and development have   For example, a UN report on A.fiica admitted that it would appear: “the coordination   of UN work had produced non-development in Africa.” This directness about agency   failure is not reflected in the relevant sections of the Committee report (Dissent 298-   290). 

  Senator Harradine also detailed the need for reform of CEDAW, to ensure it works   within its mandate. He said the report was remiss in failing to acknowledge the   Government’s reasons for refusing to support the ratification of the CEDAW Optional   Protocol. Senator Harradine also critici,sed the CEDAW Committee for re-interpreting   the Convention without the consent of member states who signed it in good faith 

  (Dissent ~292). 

  The report was also lacking in its failure to mention the complicity of the United 

  Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in coercive population control programs,   particularly that of the PRC. The report merely reoorded, without evaluation or   analysis, what the committee was told by UN officials in New York (Dissent p 297). 

  “Because of these inadequacies 1 was unable to concur with the report as a whole,   despite supporting a number of its recommendations,” Senator Harradine said. 

  Senator Brian Harradine   Canberra   June 25,200l   Ph: 02 42773735 

  Report available from R1.120 or at www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/jfadt 

