---
title: "Another tragedy in Australia's detention centres."
date: "2001-07-27"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211226613
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/O0L46%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson

 27 July 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/434

 Another tragedy in Australia’s Detention Centres The unfortunate suicide of a young Nigerian man in Villawood detention centre shows the level of despair and depression, which can be experienced by people when they are locked up in a detention centre.

 The Australian Democrats spokesperson on Immigration, Senator Andrew Bartlett supported calls for more effective counselling and assistance to help people deal with the trauma of being placed in detention centres.

 “This incident is yet another black mark against our detention centre regime. This legacy of suicide, riots, escapes and thousands of traumatised asylum seekers is one which must be halted.”

 “Australia needs to immediately reconsider its approach on detention centres and look at how other countries deal with this issue.  We need to do better than we are.”

 Senator Bartlett continued, “The Howard Government’s attitude toward suspected and legitimate asylum seekers, and its rigidity over the processing, location and incarceration of asylum seekers incites fear and despair in many. “

 “Reports of deported asylum seekers being arrested on returning to their home country only adds to the apprehension and desperation of many in the detention centres.”

 “Little wonder the level of despair and frustration is increasing - those herded compulsorily behind the barbed wire of what are euphemistically called detention centres can see no future, no hope.

 “While Australia’s Government sees it as expedient to dismiss every asylum seeker as a ‘queue-jumper’ irrespective of their circumstances, and treat visitors from some shores as suspected asylum seekers, there will be no reprieve,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101

