---
title: "Border Protection Bill would not have stopped court action."
date: "2001-09-04"
creators:
  - "Mcclelland, Robert"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228002
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/I6V46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Robert McClelland - Border Protection Bill Would Not Have Stopped Court Action //media/0901/rmmsbpb040901.html Wednesday, 05 September 2001

 Border Protection Bill Would Not Have Stopped Court Action Robert McClelland - Shadow Attorney-General

 Media Statement - 4 September 2001

 Statements by some media commentators that a court action could have been avoided if the Border Protection Bill had been passed are completely misconceived, according to the Shadow Attorney-General, Robert McClelland.

 "As the Prime Minister's second reading speech indicates the whole purpose and intent of the Bill was "to provide for the removal of ships from the territorial sea of Australia". It simply did not address a situation where passengers on board a ship, the subject of a removal direction, are taken off that ship and placed on another.

 This has clearly been the case in respect to the transfer of persons from the MS Tampa onto the Australian naval vessel HMAS Manoora. There can be no suggestion that the legality of that operation would have been in any way shape or form enhanced by the passage of the Border Protection Bill.

 The Bill would also not have been effective to prevent those on board the Tampa from making applications for protection visas.

 In so far as it would have prevented a person on board the bill from making an application for a protection visa under the Migration Act, such a prohibition would have only applied "at the time when a direction" was given under the Act [clause 9].

 While clause 2 of the Bill gave it retrospective application to 9am on Wednesday 29 August, any direction that a ship be removed from Australian territorial sea pursuant to clause 4 would only have applied as and from the date of the direction.

 The entry of the MV Tampa into Australia's territorial waters is reported to have occurred prior to that time - and it is understood that that it is the entry into Australian territorial waters that is being relied on by the applicants in the Federal Court proceedings to support their claim for injunctive relief.

 Any direction for removal of a ship would have post dated the commencement of the Bill and would not have had a bearing on the matters being considered by the Federal Court of Australia.

 Moreover, the Attorney General's office has acknowledged that the Bill cannot oust the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court of Australia pursuant to section 75 of the Australian Constitution to review administrative action. It is therefore, entirely wrong to suggest that the Border Protection Bill, if passed, would have ousted the jurisdiction of Australian courts to consider the legal status of those persons on board the MS Tampa.

 In all likelihood, passage of the Bill would have resulted in even more complex legislation challenging its validity.

 The Federal Opposition indicated during the Parliamentary debate and has consistently indicated since that time that it would consider appropriate legislation to address the situation that existed on board the MS Tampa should it be necessary.

 There is recent precedent for this. Labor co-operated with the government on legislation to bring Kosovo refugees to Australia. Safe Haven legislation was passed with Labor's support to provide, among other things, that those people were not permitted to make applications for protection visas while in Australia.

 We could not as a responsible opposition pass the Border Protection Bill as presented because it gave "absolute discretion" for Commonwealth officers to use coercive force with complete impunity.

 As one commentator has pointed out, coercive force could have been applied as much to Australians on board an Australian pleasure vessel as much as it would have applied to illegal immigrants on a foreign vessel.

 The Federal Opposition has offered bipartisan support to address the serious problem of people smuggling but the Border Protection Bill 2001 cannot be represented as a sensible or appropriate response to the complex issues involved. Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

