---
title: "Towards a fairer detention system."
date: "2001-06-19"
creators:
  - "Price, Roger"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of PRICE, ROGER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211225237
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1MC46%22
---

  M 

  E   v 

  I 

  a 

  ROGER PRICE MP Federal Member for Chifley A Report on Visits to Immigration Detention Centres TOWARDS A FAIRER DETENTION SYSYEM Federal Member’ for Chiiley, Roger Price MP believes that the Human Rights Sub Committee report on it’s visits to 6 detention centres will prove to be a turning point in the public debate on Detention Centres. The Human Rights Sub Committee is the only Parliamentary Committea to speak to detainees without the presence of DIMA or ACM. It held some 13 such meetings and the average attendance was 25. The Sub Committee spent some 7 hours after the visits, behind closed doors questioning both DIMA and ACM about aspects of detention policy. f‘AustralSa’s Detention Policy is a harsh policy ruthlessly implemented. It brings no credit to Australia”. ‘Because of the: remote looatlon of most of the centres it is costing Australia’s taxpisyers a bomb. I don’t believe it is possible to develop a more costly dletention centre system. Each detainee costs $104 per day, money that could be so muoh better spent on other more urgent priorities”. “Australia does not have a major problem of illegal arrival of asylum seekers that many other countries do and this is detailed in an Appendix 0 “There is a consistent pattern of complaints made by detainees and these ara outlined in Chapter 4. ‘Most Committee members were shocked by wlhat they saw.“(4.237) “Frankly I found that both DIMA and ACM were consistently not as forthcoming about aspects of the detention centres as they should have been. This was by way of not volunteering relevant information and on occasions dissembling 

  “The most significant recommendation is recommendation 8 because for other than 

  those detainees identified as a security risk, the period of detention is a matter of   choice for the government of the day not necessity. The Director General of   ASIO has confirmed to the committee that such a profile can be developed, 

  The Committee recommends that the Australian Security Intelligence   Organisation develop an appropriate risk ptMle to assist the eatiy release   into the Australian community of asylum seekers. 

  Recommendation 10 proposes time limits for the detention of asylum seekers.   Currently there is only a review mechanism for those detainees in prison. This   recommendation put the onus on DIMA to live up to its own targets and minimise the   time in detention. 

  The Committee recommends that for asylum seekers who have   received security ch3amnces: 

  there should be a time limit on the period that they are required to 

  spend in administrative detention; 

  jt is desirable that this time limit should be no longer than the period   that the Department of Immigration and Multicuitural Affairs is funded   by the Australian Government fawn time to t/me to process jndividual   applications for asylum in AusMiia, current& 14 weeks; and   similarly appropriate time limits should be established for 

  consideration of ap,plications by the Refugee Review Tribunal. 

  Recommendation 12 proposes a new sponorship scheme which would allow   detainees who have not been processed in the appropriate time frame to be   sponsored into the community by appropriate community groups 

  The Commitlee reclommands that the Department of lmmigraffon and   Multicultural AtEfIr1: negotiate with appropriate community groups to   examine the feasib,ility of developing a sponsorship scheme for   detainees who have not been processti within the time limit against   which the Department is funded, currently 14 

  weeks, and who have 

  received a security clearance. 

  ‘The Committee did not make any significant recommendation about families othe   than in the Report indicating that “the improvement in the treatment of Families is   a priority for the Committee”. (5.84) 

  2 

  “However I believe that the sponsorshSp scheme proposed for the detainees 

  who are held longer that the targetted time could be readily adapted for   farnilles and I would encourage the Government to do so. 

  “Perhaps the biggest problem of the centres is their remoteness and a deliberate   policy of avoiding public scrutiny, I favoured the introduction of a positior~ Inspector   General of Detention Centres similar to the NSW &WA Prisions systems who could   undertake independent inquiries as well as deal with any claims of unfair treatment.   This was not accepted. However a posltion similar to an official visitor was: 

  to nominating an appropriate, independent person for each detention centre   to whom complaints c8n be brought by detainees who claim harsh ur unfair   treatment by oficers of Australian Correctional Management Pty Ltd. 

  18/06/2001 

  Ends   Contact Roger Price MP 62774872 Mobile 0419554460 

  3 

