---
title: "Villawood video: the horror of detention."
date: "2001-08-02"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211226891
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VQM46%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 2 August 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/446

 Villawood video - the horror of detention The Australian Democrats are calling for Minister Ruddock to immediately rescind the contractual agreement between the Australian Government and Australasian Correctional Management. Escapes, riots, and abuse see Australia’s detention centres reaching breaking point - Minister Ruddock must be brought to account for ACM’s obvious mismanagement of Australia’s detention centres.

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration says, that the recently released video footage of guards mistreating detainees vindicates the Democrats calls for the agreement between the Australian Government and ACM to be rescinded.

 “It is increasingly obvious that not only is ACM prepared to blatantly ignore immigration detention standards, but that the Department is also prepared to hinder investigation of breaches.”

 Senator Bartlett said, “The allegations raised by eight Chinese detainees were significant - the Minister had a duty to ensure due process, including ensuring a full police investigation of the allegations can occur.

 “But these allegations - including the claim that the ACM staff involved in the violence were transferred from New South Wales to prevent police investigations - has already seen a number of detainees forcibly deported, denying them natural justice. Even getting the identity of some of the alleged assailants has proven difficult for police and the detainees’ lawyers.

 “The Villawood video captures the truth of detention in Australia.

 “It is very clear that the Government’s practices are in contravention of the United Nations High Commission on Refugee standards. These standards clearly stipulate that asylum seekers are to be detained only as a last resort, and that it must be brief, absolutely necessary, and only instituted once all other options have been implemented. This is not the case in Australia.

 “Recent escapes from Villawood have seen Minister Ruddock calling for increased security at detention centres, but it’s not fortification and increased security measures that are needed. Australia needs a constructive solution; something Minister Ruddock seems incapable of formulating.

 “He must take full and total responsibility for the inevitable; an increase in riots, abuse and escapes, particularly as asylum seekers grow more frustrated and angry at their inhumane and harsh treatment. Mismanagement sees Australia’s detention centres close to being out-of-control,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “While the Government maintains this stance, and sees it as expedient and populist to dismiss every asylum seeker as a ‘queue-jumper’, irrespective of their circumstance, Australia will continue to reap the condemnation of all civilised countries, and deservingly so,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101

