---
title: "Melbourne: transcript of doorstop interview: leadership, election, policies."
date: "2001-11-11"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231997
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5JF56%22
---

 1

 MEDIA RELEASE The Hon Simon Crean MP Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Treasurer

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, MELBOURNE, 11th NOVEMBER 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subject: Leadership, Election, Policies.

 CREAN: I have had a discussion with Kim Beazley last night.  He won’t be standing as Labor leader.  In those circumstances I will be.  When the Caucus is convened, I will be putting my name forward, and hope to become the next Labor leader. I think it’s a great pity that Kim Beazley didn’t get the opportunity to serve this country as Prime Minister.  I think he would have made a great Prime Minister.  It was a pleasure to work with him as his deputy in his team and unfortunately he didn’t make it.  But he will go down in history as one of the great Labor leaders for holding the show together that was decimated in 1996, and brought it back to within striking distance of victory on two significant occasions.

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think you would be a good leader of the ALP?

 CREAN: I think I bring a wealth of experience in terms of portfolio, as well as community involvement.  I know how to talk with people, as well as to listen with people, to work constructively towards solutions.  I have had leadership responsibilities in a previous role and I think I have demonstrated those qualities there.  I think I have got what it takes to be a leader of the country and I look forward to the opportunity to serve in that regard.  But I know I have got to earn it, and I will be putting every bit of my effort in the course of the next three years

 JOURNALIST: Do you think you’re the only man for the job?  Will there be other nominations?

 CREAN: Well, men or women.  No.  There may well be others and it is their prerogative to stand.

 JOURNALIST: Are you aware of any others?

 CREAN: I’m not aware of any others, but that’s for them to comment.  But, it’s the entitlement for anyone to stand within the caucus.  It’s a ballot of the caucus.

 2

 Whenever it is called we will have a result but prior to that I think you will have a clear indication as to whether there are any other candidates as well.

 JOURNALIST: Do you have a preferred deputy?

 CREAN: I think that there is a range of options for the deputy, but quite frankly it is too early to consider or, not so much consider, but to comment too publicly about it.  There is a lot of discussion got to go on.  I think we all realise how close we came, but we also know that we didn’t win it.  We’ve got to reassess the reasons for that, we’ve got to analyse where we failed, we’ve got to see what the implications of that are, so far as our presentation next time around.  Most importantly though, I think there is a real maturity within the caucus colleagues in the discussions that I have had this morning. They know that we came from the precipice of an absolute debacle to almost snatching victory and there’s some element of pride in the way in which we ran the campaign in a united way forward.  There are lessons in that - people know that that’s a strength we’ve got and they want to hang on to.  So, I think that what you will see is the presentation, not just of a united team, but of a regenerated team.

 JOURNALIST: It’s been suggested that Labor needs generational change.  Is that a concern for you?

 CREAN: I think it does need generational change, but I hope to lead that generational change.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the party took the wrong line on the boat people issue?  Do you think it needs reviewing?

 CREAN: I think that a lot of the policies do need to be reconsidered with one exception - we won’t be changing our mind on Telstra.  We stand opposed to any further sale of Telstra.  But I think that after any defeat it’s sensible to relook the policies. However, I think that there were many attractive policies that we took to this election.  I think the fact that we took them is the reason that we were so competitive right up until the end.  Our policies on aged care, on hospitals, on education, our policies for jobs -these were things that attracted people.  They weren’t sufficient to get us over the line, but they were sufficient to get us very much competitive and back in the race.  On the specific issue of boat people, I don’t believe the government has got a comprehensive strategy for boat people.  It got tough on a boat, but it’s never had a strategy to deal with the problem in a lasting way.  It hasn’t got dialogue with Indonesia, and it needs to establish it.  It hasn’t got the commitment in terms of the Coast Guard and it should commit to that.  It should accept, now that the election is over, that this actually is a good idea and it should e prepared to try and implement it, swallow its pride a bit, and at least admit that Labor had good policies in these areas, and embrace it.  And there’s got to be a sensible, as well as humane way for dealing with genuine refugees.  We offered, at the time of the Tampa exercise, when we said we couldn’t support their original Border Protection Bill, we offered bipartisan support.  We stand ready to continue to give that bipartisan support, but it has to be a comprehensive and lasting solution.  And it’s not just

 3

 us that needs to reassess it, but the Government has to reassess theirs, because theirs isn’t working.

 JOURNALIST: Why do you believe Labor lost?

 CREAN: I believe Labor lost because we were not able to win the battle in getting the domestic agenda long enough, and consistently enough, ahead of the international agenda.  I believe that had we succeeded in getting to the top of the list right up until the final day, the domestic agenda, we would have won.  On all the issues that matter to people with health and education and aged care and jobs, people preferred our policies to theirs.  They know that the Government didn’t stand for much in any of these areas because the Government wanted to stand on some concept of leadership, embodied in a stance on boats and a stance against international terrorism but not a stance of leadership for our home agendas.  So I am confident, and I think the party is confident, that we developed a suite of policies, a mix of policies that really sought to look after families, sought to meet their aspirations for their kids, for their retirement, for their health and we will continue to develop off those constructive policies for the future.  We will be putting forward alternatives.  We will be competitive.  We will be challenging the Government at every opportunity with constructive proposals.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean do you think that trade unions have too much influence in the Labor Party, as Chris Schacht said this morning?

 CREAN: No, I don’t think they have too much influence but I understand how that perception can be made.  I think it’s an issue that we need to address but I’ve never been preoccupied with it because I think it has more perception than it has substance in the claim.  I’m proud of the fact that the Labor Party and the labour movement has its relationship with the trade union people.  There’s no finer group of people you can represent than working people, ordinary working people, people who, through their sweat and struggle, really have made this country.  People who have made a great contribution.  I don’t like it when they, or their representatives are denigrated.  And that’s what the Tories do.  They don’t like unions so they have to demonise them.  I’m a great believer, and have always been in my life, that you can do more by working together than by trying to demonise.  There is more in cohesion than in division.  You’ve got to have a message for hope, not of fear.  And it’s those qualities, those differences I seek to espouse, and I believe whether it is the trade union movement that we need to work with, or the business community, or the community groups, or the parents of this nation, they’re the people that we want to get out and engage.  We want to develop a constructive agenda with them, we want to deliver on their behalf.

 JOURNALIST: When will the leadership question be resolved?

 CREAN: Well it’s a matter for Kim to call the caucus meeting, but that is more a function of when the final count of the outstanding seats are determined.  A caucus is comprised of people who are successful on behalf of the Labor Party in winning a seat in Parliament and so the final counts have to be allowed for that process.  So, when

 4

 we know when the seats are finalised Kim will be calling the meeting, and the Caucus will decide its leadership and its shadow ministry.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, if you do become leader, do you think it will help support for the party in Victoria?  It was suggested this morning that there is greater support for the party in the state that the leader is from.

 CREAN: I want to be a leader for the nation and not just the capital cities.  I want to be a leader for the regions, because it is the regions that have been left behind. And I want to be a leader that can get the balance right between our economy, our environment and our society.  I think this government has been preoccupied with one-dimensional approaches to policies where you need multi-faceted ones.  And, I will be looking to lead and develop policy for the nation, not sectional interests.

 JOURNALIST: You nominated your strengths and why you deserve to be leader. Are there any weaknesses you care to highlight?

 CREAN: (laughs) Go and speak to my opponents, they can find many.

 JOURNALIST: You’re a man of self-reflection.

 CREAN: Yes I am a man of self-reflection and I keep looking at what they say and I often find myself in disagreement with them on it, including their perception of my weaknesses.  If they think I have got weaknesses let them continue to try and expose them.  I think the bloke who didn’t have a very good campaign this time around was Peter Costello.

 JOURNALIST: He got a swing to him.

 CREAN: Well, he got a lesser swing to him, as I understand it, than the rest of the Liberal candidates in Victoria.  And I might say, on that score, I got a lesser swing against me than was the general rule against Labor candidates.  I’m a believer in standing for a constituency, not just for the Labor Party, but for that community.  You’ve got to do more than hold the Labor banner - you’ve got to be a champion for your community.  I believe that firmly, wholeheartedly, in terms of my constituency, and I know it will work in regional Australia.  I’ve got an absolute commitment to advancing the interests of regional Australia, because they deserve additional attention and I think if we get it right, we will win in those seats in the future.  Ballarat is a great example of the success of that strategy.

 JOURNALIST: Simon, with the review of policies, what’s the sort of time-frame on that and will people have to wait until the next election to really understand Labor’s policies.

 CREAN: Well, they are certainly not going to get them today.  We went with a very comprehensive set of policies and I think, as I’ve already indicated, that they

 5

 were welcomed by the Australian people. When the choices were made on those issues alone, they would have come our way.  I obviously have to have these discussions with my colleagues and my team when it is elected.  We will be doing the review over the course of the term, but if the question is, will we be holding back on policies until the last minute?  No, and we didn’t on this occasion.

 This notion that Labor waited until the election campaign to put out its policies is a nonsense.  At the conference of the party in July of last year, we put forward the framework for all of these policies.  What they didn’t have was the dollar detail, because we couldn’t put the dollar detail.  We didn’t know what the true state of the books were and the true state of the books just kept diminishing in that 18 months under this government’s so-called economic management.  But we put the direction down, we put the detailed notion down and we started the negotiation with our state colleagues to deliver the partnership, a partnership for delivery.  Government these days isn’t just what you do by way of policy, it’s how you do it, and how you sit down with the other levels of government, address the areas of overlap, and come forward with constructive proposals.  We did that more than 18 months ago.  It worked for us then in the development of our policy and I think that people saw substance to it when we were able to attach the dollar details.  So, I suspect that this term, not only will we be going down that path, I think it is the right way to go and you will be seeing our announcements during the course of that term.

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept it was Labor’s strategy to make itself a small target in this election and was that strategy a mistake?

 CREAN: No, and therefore the second question is irrelevant.

 JOURNALIST: Does the Labor Party branch structure need rebuilding?

 CREAN: I think we’ve got to appeal to wider groups.  The branch structure serves its purpose but we’re a broad-based party.  We seek to appeal to a wide cross-section in the community.  I think it’s important that we make it easy for people to associate with us.  I’d like to think that we could look at the organisational structure of the party.

 JOURNALIST: And the factions?  Are they a necessary evil?  Is that the organisational structure you would like to look at?  Do they have too much power do you think?

 CREAN: I don’t think they have too much power but they could have too much power.  I think that it’s a question of recognising them and seeking to use them to the best advantage, not to disadvantage.  I think that too much is made of the factional interest.  I’ve always been an embracer of the cross-factional view, of trying to bring everyone in that matters.  I’ve never been a factional warrior, but I’m realist enough to know that there are factional warriors.  My task is to work with them, but to give the

 6

 leadership and the direction that presents appealing policies and directions to the Australian public.

 JOURNALIST: Have you got an agreement with the factional leaders that you will be the right’s candidate?

 CREAN: No, and I’ve not sought it, and I won’t seek it.  I want to be the party’s candidate.  I want to be the person, that with a team, a team drawn from the best talent available, and there is a lot that we can bring in from the backbench, a team with the best talent available that presents itself to the Australian people.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, you’ve got an image of Labor’s hard man of politics, the head kicker if you like.  Do you think you will need to soften your image if you become Prime Minister?

 CREAN: Look, I’m a softie at heart.  You just have to ask the family, they’ve got it all over me.  So if anyone wants lessons as to how to soften, come down and spend a few days here, when I’m not here.  But, no, look, I know this image and I admit that I can be tough when I need to be.  But I had a role to play in the last parliament, indeed in the one before as Manager of Opposition Business and subsequently as Shadow Treasurer.  I had a role to play as part of a team and I played that role.  But I think I’ve demonstrated a capacity to adapt to different roles and different circumstances in the past, and I assure you I will do it again.

 JOURNALIST: We don’t know much about your personally.  What’s the last book you read?

 CREAN: The last book I read, well I’m in the process of it, The Constant Gardener, a Le Carre novel.  I like to know what those spies are up to.

 JOURNALIST: What are you planning for the rest of the day?

 CREAN: Well, I’ve got the family around, and I’ve no doubt got a few phone calls.  I’m basing myself at home, which is a unique experience because I haven’t been here much over the course of the last five weeks, so it’s always good to be home.  I can’t remember the last time I was home of a Sunday night.  I always love being home Sunday nights but Parliamentary life doesn’t give you many of them, so I’ll enjoy the nights.

 JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to your father at all?

 CREAN: Yes I did.  I spoke with both mum and dad last night.  I haven’t had the chance to speak with them this morning but I speak to him a lot.  We’re good mates, and we’ll continue to be that way.  But mum and dad have been terrific support for me in the past, as have Carole and the kids.  It’s a tough life, but it can be a rewarding one and we’re here to serve.  It’s a noble cause, public service.  It’s a hard one, but I do it

 7

 because I believe I have got something to offer.  I believe I’ve got a contribution to offer, and I look forward to the capacity to exercise it.

 JOURNALIST: How long have you wanted to be Prime Minister?

 CREAN: No I haven’t.  This is not the job I want to announce today.  I would have loved to have been here today announcing, well not announcing because I would have been calling you in hopefully with some photo shots of sitting down with the Treasury officials getting my first briefing as Treasurer.  I’m standing today for leader of the party but it’s not the job I wanted to announce today.  I wanted to be Treasurer of the country under Kim Beazley’s Prime Ministership.  I’ve never claimed, others have, that what I wanted to be is Prime Minister.  But obviously now that I’ve declared myself for the position of Labor Party leader, I now want to be Prime Minister, and I’m looking to be that, after the next election.

 JOURNALIST: If you get through to the next election, who do you expect your opponent to be?

 CREAN: Well I hope it is Peter Costello.  I can’t wait.

 ENDS

