---
title: "Howard's refugee farce gets worse every day."
date: "2001-10-03"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229594
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E4256%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 3 October 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/585

 Howard’s refugee farce gets worse every day   

 The Australian Democrats say the Howard Government’s handling of the refugee issue has degenerated even further into the realms of hopeless farce.  

 “The latest stand-off on Nauru highlights yet again the knee-jerk nature of the Government's approach,” the Australian Democrats' Immigration spokesperson Senator Andrew Bartlett said.  

 “It is clearer than ever that Mr Howard is making it up as he goes along and he has no idea what he will do next.”  

 Senator Bartlett continued, “There is still no clear idea as to where the next boatload will be taken to, who will process them, what system they will use, how much it will cost, or who will pay?

 “What is clear, however, is that many of the refugees will end up in Australia, and when they do they’ll be rated as second-class citizens, with reduced access to assistance and a cloud of criminality unjustly placed over them by the Howard Government.

 “The cost for this Government’s lunacy is skyrocketing into the hundreds of millions, the United Nation’s body that deals with refugees is scathing in its criticism, and our Navy is being made to look like Keystone cops - kidnapping people who don’t want to be let go.   

 “Not content with wasting scandalous amounts taxpayers’ money ferrying asylum seekers around the Pacific, Mr Howard now expects us to subsidise the health costs of Nauru, one of the most corrupt money laundering nations on Earth, just so they will continue to cooperate in this flight of folly.  

 “The most astonishing thing about this debacle is that there is no end in sight.   

 “And now that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has rightly refused to do Australia’s work for it, the Democrats are concerned that the asylum seekers will not get a fair, impartial assessment of their refugee claims,” said Senator Bartlett.  

 “Given the current political climate and the new laws, which prevent any legal oversight of the decisions of government officers, there is a serious doubt about ensuring proper assessments will be made.

 “Government officers will be under significant pressure to ensure larger numbers of asylum claims are knocked back to justify the massive expense involved,” concluded Senator Bartlett.  ENDS  

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (07) 3252 7101

