---
title: "Interception off Ashmore confirmed."
date: "2001-08-21"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227567
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NVR46%22
---

  

  

 Media Release

 SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON

 Minister for Justice and Customs Senator for Western Australia

 21 August 2001

 Interception off Ashmore Confirmed Customs Coastwatch has detected and intercepted a vessel carrying around 230* unauthorised entrants of Middle-eastern origin north of Ashmore Islands off the North West Australian coast.

 Senator Ellison said the latest arrivals were not unusual for the time of year.

 "Good weather obviously plays a big part in determining when refugees attempt the crossing by boat to Australia," Senator Ellison said.

 The vessel, an Indonesian inter-island ferry, was detected by aerial surveillance late yesterday.

 ACV Botany Bay, on patrol in the area at the time, was quickly at hand to intercept the arrival and escort the vessel to Ashmore for processing.

 The HMAS Launceston, also in the area, provided assistance to maintain vigilance overnight.

 Senator Ellison said Customs officers would board the vessel today to clear the people to assess the vessel’s seaworthiness and arrange destruction at sea to reduce the risk of unwanted disease being brought into Australia.

 The transporter vessel Samson Explorer is expected to arrive at Ashmore later today to taken the first load back to the mainland where they will be handed over to Department of Immigration officials.

 Senator Ellison said that in the 2000-2001 Coastwatch had intercepted 96% of all illegal vessels before they reached the Australian coast.

 "This is an outstanding detection and interception rate by Customs Coastwatch, working in close cooperation with our Defence forces," Senator Ellison said.

 "It demonstrates the value of Coastwatch maritime surveillance operations currently in place and that illegal activity along Australia’s coastline and off the Western Australian coast in particular, will be intercepted and acted upon."

 A total of six vessels carrying around 860* unauthorised entrants have been detected so far this financial year. All have been intercepted by Customs Coastwatch before reaching the mainland. This compares with a total of 53 vessels, carrying 4,295 people in the previous financial year.

 *Exact figures to be confirmed

 Return to Index 

