---
title: "Coonan comments September 2001"
date: "2001-09-01"
creators:
  - "Coonan, Helen"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of COONAN, SEN HELEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227923
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J0K56%22
---

 Coonan Comments

 Date: 1 September 2001

 TOUGH STANCE ON ILLEGALS ONLY THE BEGINNING

 There are two fundamental questions underpinning the issue of the would be refugees on the ‘Tampa’. The first is do we want the government to protect our territorial sovereignty and have the authority of the Australian people to protect our borders? The second is do we want to have an orderly migration program where the Government sets targets and controls who may come into Australia and on what conditions? The answer to both of these questions is a resounding ‘yes’! It helps to explain why public opinion is overwhelmingly positive towards the Prime Minister’s tough and resolute stand. The Labor Party’s failure to support the Government at a critical stage of the Tampa crisis is shameful. As with other critical policy areas Labor has no viable alternative for stemming the flow of illegal immigrants. The solutions to people smuggling are complex and require international co-operation to catch and prosecute the real villains—smugglers who traffic in human misery—and to process asylum seekers offshore. It also requires the co-operation of Labor and the Democrats to pass legislation in the Senate designed to limit the interpretation of ‘refugee’ to the definition in the UN Convention on Refugees and not the expanded definition developed by Australian judges in refugee determination cases. It also requires Labor to get its act together and this time to pass the Border Protection Bill that will permit the government to escort intruders out of Australian territorial waters and to oust the jurisdiction of the courts in such cases, so that the farce that took place in the Federal Court in Melbourne will be avoided! When Parliament resumes we will once again try to pass the Immigration (Judicial Decisions) Bill designed to limit judicial review of migration decisions. This is warranted because the lengthy appeal process simply prolongs the stay in Australia of non citizens who are not refugees and who otherwise have no right to remain. In most cases judicial review does not alter the ultimate outcome with Departmental decisions being upheld in about 90% of cases and those that are set aside rarely end up with a different result. The cost of all litigation for the Department exceeded $15 million in the 2000-2001 financial year. Constitutional difficulties aside, this is one more essential plank in reform of the refugee system. The Labor Party should support these reforms unequivocally!!

 Memorial Service for the Late Sir John Atwill

 Together with many other Liberals and friends, I attended the celebration of the life of Sir John Atwill, held at St Marks, Darling Point. The Prime Minister’s moving eulogy was a fitting tribute to a man who devoted many years to the Liberal Party as State and Federal Party President. Our deepest sympathy goes to Lady Susan Atwill, Fiona, Carolyn and family.

 HEALTH CARE: THE FACTS

 The Labor Party’s smear campaigns have included attacks on the Federal Government’s handling of health care- First through claiming that Hannah Beazley was “turned away” from hospitals in Perth and experienced long waiting periods while suffering appendicitis, and later by displaying a graph in Question Time supposedly showing a recent decrease in public hospital funding— found to be three years old! So here’s the truth about health care in Australia—Labor voters beware!

 THE COALITION: Has increased funding to States and Territories for their public hospitals to a record $31.7 billion (a 28% increase in real terms for the Australian Health Care Agreement), introduced the 30% Private Health Insurance Rebate and the $562 million Regional Health Strategy. We have also implemented a range of measures to restore the balance of our health system and provide real choice in health care. If elected for a third term we will continue funding these programs, promote preventative health initiatives, introduce new technology and support research funding.

 LABOR: After 13 years of Labor : The number of Australians with private health insurance fell from 65% to under 34%, full immunisation rate was only 53%, a decline in rural health services and an exodus of GPs from the bush occurred. And if they are elected to Government this year, they’ll remove the 30% Private Health Insurance Rebate, shift the Medicare Levy to public hospitals—(more pressure on the public health system), and they’ll ‘roll back’ the GST on health (increasing the cost of hospital services and pharmaceuticals). On top of this they still have no concrete plan for health services in the bush.

 Focus on….. Robertson

 Jim Lloyd and his team should be congratulated for their hard work in the lead up to the Election—which recently included a fundraising lunch celebrating the Electorate’s 100 Year Anniversary . Guests included the Hon Bronwyn Bishop MP (who presented a message from the Prime Minister), Chris Hartcher MP, Mike Gallagher MLC, Greg Pearce MLC, Senate team member Scot Macdonald, Rhondda Vanzella, Fran Quinn, Greg Hanson and Helen Wayland. I was delighted to play the role of Master of Ceremonies at the luncheon and also present Robertson FEC President Joy Burrows with Liberal Party certificates of achievement recognising the milestone. Jim’s campaign is looking good and he has been well received during recent door knocking and ‘coffee and cake’ meetings. I will certainly continue to support Jim, who fought hard to win the seat in 1996 after 27 years of Labor and again in 1998—Good luck, Jim!

