---
title: "Melbourne: transcript of doorstop interview: boat people, Ian Macfarlane."
date: "2001-09-03"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227930
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0RU46%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE The Hon Simon Crean MP Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Treasurer

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE 3RD SEPTEMBER 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subject: Boat people; Ian Macfarlane

 JOURNALIST: How  does  the  opposition  feel  about  the  court’s  decision  this morning?

 CREAN: Well  we  welcome  the  decision  because  it’s  another  important step in getting much needed relief for the refugees.  But this has been a terribly messy affair.   It’s  been  bungled  by  the  government.   We  still  haven’t  been  given  a  full briefing on the circumstances and we have offered bipartisan support to try and find a solution to the Tampa refugees.  Today’s decision is welcome but we need a lasting solution  and  the  government  still  hasn’t  provided  one.   We  stand  ready as  part  of  a bipartisan approach to try and address this issue and we’ve already put forward some constructive initiatives.

 JOURNALIST: What are you saying is the right course then?

 CREAN: What  we  really  need  is  to  get  an  understanding  in  the  region. That means engaging our neighbours.  We also need a Coastguard.  You need a cop on  the  beat.   What’s  been  demonstrated  is  the  surveillance  under  existing arrangements have not been adequate otherwise why do you need all the naval vessels in the area?   So Labor has said we’re prepared to part of a bipartisan solution on it. Why isn’t the government responding to those initiatives?

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean I’m sure the Prime Minister would see the result, the outcome as a success.

 CREAN: Well it’s not a success because there still isn’t a final resolution for  the  Tampa  situation  and  there’s  still  not  strategy  in  place  to  avoid  this  sort  of problem  in  the  future.   You  can’t  call  that  a  success.   What  we  have  is  a  bungled operation.  We have policy on the run and a very costly exercise.  We still don’t know how much.  This is the price of a Prime Minister’s stubbornness.

 Now can I go onto another issue and that is the further revelation in The Australian today  about  minister  Ian  Macfarlane.   This  is  an  issue  that  can’t  go  away  for  this government, no matter how much they might want to sweep it under the carpet around

 the refugee issue.  What the paper shows today through another leaked document is that Ian Macfarlane knew about an illegal scam and ignored it - a scam to defraud the Commonwealth  of  money.   He’s  the  Minister  for  Small  Business.   No  other  small business can get away with this.  Ian Macfarlane shouldn’t be able to get away with it either.  This is an example of one rule for everybody else, another rule for the Liberal Party and we won’t stand for it.  We also want to know why the Treasurer failed to act when  his  attention  was  drawn  to  it  as  well.   This  is  an  issue  that  won’t  go  away. We’ll continue to pursue it.

 (Tape break)

 ENDS

