---
title: "Concord, NSW: transcript of doorstop interview: Labor's plan for older Australians and Australian veterans, Neville Wran's comments, illegal immigrants, Budget figures, Telstra."
date: "2001-10-26"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230776
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TU956%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Labor's Plan For Older Australians And Australian Veterans, Neville Wran's Comments, Illegal Immigrants, Budget Figures, Telstra http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/kbmcnsw261001.html

 Monday, 29 October 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Labor's Plan For Older Australians And Australian Veterans, Neville Wran's Comments, Illegal Immigrants, Budget Figures, Telstra

 Transcript - Concord, NSW - 26 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Thanks for coming here today to be with us as we talk about yet another set of initiatives in the aged care area from the Australian Labor Party in this campaign - the only one with the plans for the long-term future of this country, putting those issues at the centre of our election campaigning.

 John Howard says there is no crisis in aged care. He said that yesterday. When he came into office he had a surplus of 800 nursing home beds. There is now a shortfall of 12,000. If things continued at the rate thus far under John Howard and were he to be re-elected, there would well be a situation where up to 20,000 would be the shortfall in another three years of Liberal Government should the rate of decline of provision of nursing home beds continue as they have done over the course of the last five years. That is a crisis in anybody's terms. Forget about what we might say in the Australian Labor Party, look at the La Trobe research, at what the President of the AMA has been saying. Look what the industry groups have been saying. Everybody in the industry who has anything to do with aged care says it is in crisis.

 The one person who won't is the person who sticks solidly beside Bronwyn Bishop, his Minister and it used to be said that all you need to do in aged care is to remove her and then you could fix things. But you've got to do more. What we have is a long-term plan for aged care - affordable within the framework of the Budget that we have been given.

 Again today, given what John Howard said yesterday, I want to stress there is a crisis in aged care, the crisis is getting worse. If it continues at the rate it has so far under John Howard, there could be even up to a 20,000 shortfall in beds by the time that another term of Liberal Government has concluded. You won't start to reverse this trend unless you put in place a party with a long-term plan - a long-term view of the future - and that is the Australian Labor Party.

 You have seen from us now plans for nursing homes that go to providing places, that go to assisting with ensuring they have good quality staff and are able to deliver on the quality standards that have been set

 for them.

 Propositions for our public hospital system, for us to assist the States where they're effectively running de facto nursing homes in public hospitals. Efforts being made in the public hospitals to deal with the interface of aged care problems and healthcare problems for the general community.

 You've seen what we propose to do on the goods and services tax rollback: heavily focussed on our elderly Australians - the people who are doing it tough. You've also seen what we propose to do with the national dental scheme. The fact that some 400,000 pensioners will be able to benefit from the things that we have said there. You can test the nation and you test a society by how it treats its elderly and its children. Our policies go straight to the heart of the problems that are there for our elderly in nursing home care and health care and dental care and to, of course, the youngest when we talk about pre-school opportunities for kids, talk about those crucial years of very early childhood, talk about, of course, all the things we're going to do in the education system.

 This is about national investment in constrained circumstances.

 We're announcing some other additional propositions today. Really, they are the reversal of bits and pieces of meanness placed by the Howard Government over the course of their first few years in office. A new initiative is some $23 million to increase the level and stability of advances on the aged pension when pensioners get themselves into a situation where they've got a big bill that they've got to deal with. It's effectively, the doubling of the amount that they can utilise for that purpose now from $500 to $1000.

 We're also putting $15 million into the Home Equity Conversion program to allow social security and Veterans' Affairs pensioners over 60, in the case of Vets Affairs, able to borrow up to $8,500 against their home. This is, again a scheme that was cut out by our political opponents and they've got flexible re-payment on that - very important to encourage people to stay in their own homes that they be able to repair and maintain them.

 Often people have paid off their homes by the time they've retired, in fact, almost invariably people have paid off their homes by the time they retire. If they're living as pensioners, a full pensioner, in particular, they find very quickly those maintenance bills that they used to take for granted accumulate and the home becomes less and less liveable. But there is nothing that they can do about that. We give them a capacity to borrow against the value of that home.

 We also have here a proposition to allow a work credit for pensioners so they can bank some of their entitlement of additional earnings before they lose access to the pension. You often find that pensioners get seasonal work and therefore, at a part of the year they will find themselves well above the earnings rate that they're allowed before their pension starts to decrease. Whereas, at other times of the year they're not earning anything at all. What we permit is for those periods of time an accumulation of $1000 worth of credit so that when they hit the seasonal employment period it's a while before they get themselves readjusted to deal…they've got a while to deal with their circumstances so that they don't find themselves effectively out of pocket with a huge effective marginal tax rate if they find themselves above their maximum permissible earnings.

 We've got some propositions here for the Veterans' community as well - an extension of the Gold Card to all those over the age of 70 who have given war service that entitles them to it.

 There are a couple of reviews too, here. We want to sit down and work through with the TPIs in a review

 what has happened to their entitlements. There's a legitimate area of complaint out there from them. They need a decent review. The view to us ultimately addressing what that review shows in regard to their entitlements.

 We also need a health study, an examination of the consequences of hazardous service for sections of our personnel who, in their training times, experience the type of difficulties, the type of psychological traumas, the type of physical threats that often are experienced in wartime. Training is dangerous most times for people in the Australian defence forces and their commanders do their level best to minimise the possibility of accidents. But there are some that are trained to a level of competence that makes that a little bit harder to calculate and, indeed, brings them in almost to war service levels of risk. There's nobody who experiences that more in the defence portfolio than those in the SAS. There is a real concern out there among ex members of the SAS for the particularly hazardous character of their training is not appropriately recognised. This will give them a chance to make their case and before an official body and we will take those recommendations that's ultimately made by them seriously when that study is completed.

 We're building up a solid picture here of national investment in the ageing of our population - national investment in it, in their health care, in their dental care, in the right treatment, right access to nursing home opportunities, or availability of nursing home beds. We have a plan for the future. Our opponent has a vision of past and plan for retirement. This is not good enough any more.

 So far their forays into domestic policy have been these: Vanstone says they don't want to take the GST off funerals because, 'you only die once'. John Howard says there is no crisis in nursing homes when he's got a 12,000-bed shortfall and rising. Michael Wooldridge says yesterday, you don't want to invest in public hospitals because there are sick people in them and it's expensive. We say, if this is your foray into the domestic agenda, perhaps you'd better stay out. As far as we're concerned, their foray to try and address these domestic issues have merely revealed how utterly and completely out of touch they are.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley…home equity loans. You've got $5 million to give them up to a maximum of $8,500. Is that first come, first served? Will you be reclaiming that money from their estate?

 BEAZLEY: Yes. That's the point about the borrowing. They can borrow against their estate. They'll probably want to repay, as time goes by, from their resources. These are very carefully calculated and, of course, they used to exist before. So, we have a pretty fair idea of what the cost of these schemes are. But they can borrow against their estate. There's nothing unusual about that. A) we used to have it before. B) they do it with rates anyway at the local government level.

 JOURNALIST: Weren't they abolished….

 BEAZLEY: A few people did use them and why not make it available? It was just meanness to take it out. There's plenty of experience at the local government level of operating this in relation to rates. Why not operate it in relation to people's need to maintain their homes.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)….

 BEAZLEY: Enough for that calculation to be a valid one. So, that's quite a few.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, just in relation to aged care…Government to a standard of 90 beds per…..Given that you've held them to that target, why can't you provide a target of how

 many….beds….under your plan…

 BEAZLEY: Because we're entering a new field here. We are offering no interest loans to the providers who make beds available. There are a whole series of decisions being taken by those providers that are marginal decisions. We see this as an opportunity to expand the resources available to providers who are probably just about there anyway. So, a lot of them are going to, if you like, cocktail the loan arrangements that they have. They'll rely to some extent on the banks that are providing for them anyway and that they've got some confidence of recovery from the general provision that's made for the recurrent position of people in nursing homes and they can top it up with these loans. Some may depend on the loans entirely. We're in a field where we know this is going to be successful in making large-scale….on beds. But quite clearly, the extent to which it does that, so if you want to put exact numbers on it, depends on the extent to which providers use the loan in its entirely for whatever it is that they want to do, or use this loan and part of another loan to do the same. Obviously, the more we can use it to leverage other money into the system, the better. And the more that we use it to leverage other money into the system, the more likely it is to provide a greater number of beds. But, as I said, no Government has done this before, they've made loans before for other purposes, but they've not done it for this and so, while we can see a substantial number of beds being produced, it's going to be a great deal more than just simply a rough translation of the loans directly into beds.

 JOURNALIST: What is it that you're….

 BEAZLEY: We have limited resources and we are doing a great deal for the elderly. The veterans, of course, access the Gold Card, but they access a lot more. They access a better GST performance. They access a capacity to get a better opportunity for nursing home beds. The people who will be taking up these loans big time will be the RSLs and the nursing home provisions that they make. We're attacking the problem from a whole number of angles. And, of course, they're big users of public health beds. Of course, they're well supported to use those public hospital beds - and private hospital beds, well supported there, too. But the point is, the more of them available, the better off they are. So, we're trying to see them as part of a total package in dealing with the problems of the elderly.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, why does funding for the $1000 advance loan….end in 2003?

 BEAZLEY: I'll come back to you on that one, because I don't think it does, actually.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley…..

 BEAZLEY: You've got to take a look at two things. Firstly, what's available to you in resources and keeping the Budget within balance? That's what you've got to do, keeping the Budget in surplus. You've got to look at that on the one hand, you've also got to look at the social problem on the other. We have, to my mind, in the last five years, not focussed on the national investment issues, or the ageing issues, or the health issues in this country. We have got to re-establish the database of social provision. We've got to re-focus our national attention on what you do to invest in a happy and healthy community. We've got to re-focus attention. We're putting our money down, or taxpayers' money down, in an affordable way on a whole variety of programs. But we don't kid ourselves that the social agenda ends with that. We don't kid ourselves. What we need now is an educated electorate and an educated Government on what is the picture of social provision in this nation. So, you've got a series of enquires proposed here, not a huge number, but a series that go to establish that sort of data.

 JOURNALIST: Neville Wran….race card….?

 BEAZLEY: If you want to talk to Neville Wran about his views I suggest that you approach him directly and I am not here to provide commentaries on the views of ex-colleagues on it as he is and otherwise. But one of the things I will say about is this: I am fighting this campaign on the basis of every Australian feels included in our society. That we turn to each other not against each other. That every Australian no matter what their income, racial, ethnic, religious background feels that they're stakeholders in this nation. That is what I am on about. And I am on about every Australian feeling part of the united society not divided.

 And so I am fighting this campaign positively. Positively on the things which will make all Australians feel that they have got a part of our nation. And that is why I am stressing the national investment issues and I believe in that environment we will create that sense of national unity which to some extent we have lost and we will get it back.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: As I said I am not commenting on things that Neville might have to say. What I am commenting on is what I am about and what I am about is a unified nation.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…people are coming from Afghanistan …white Anglo Saxon …?

 BEAZLEY: We talk about dealing with all illegal migration and we talk about border protection. Now we supported the Government on all legislative changes they made but we think they have to do more. Firstly, they have to put in place a coast guard but, secondly, they have to deal with a neighbourhood with a regional solution. Now when I began this campaign and said at the heart of getting these criminal activities which so harm people that are associated with them out of business and I said that what you needed to do was to negotiate it through the Indonesians all of you were sceptical with me as to whether that we possible - you were sceptical. We now know we can so the question arises - who can do it?

 If you have got a policy of accepting asylum seekers and refugees within a certain cap, which we do, on a bipartisan basis you also have to do it on an orderly basis. And you have to discourage people who would exploit it for criminal purposes. It is as simple as that. And that is what we do. But we have a solution beyond the Governments. Firstly, affordable patrolling with a coast guard. And, secondly, an agreement with the Indonesians which means that we take our fair share. That is the basis of the agreement, we take our fair share. That they come properly approved within the numbers and safely, that's what happens.

 JOURNALIST: What about the …people….?

 BEAZLEY: Anyone who is an illegal entrant to this country for whatever particular purpose is obliged, we are obliged to seek them out and ensure that they regularise their arrangements. And what that means is that they have to go back home and apply properly. And we do.

 JOURNALIST: Do you concede that there is a section of the Labor Party though ….?

 BEAZLEY: I don't concede a thing on that. I think the simple fact of the matter is that we in the Australian Labor Party believe that our borders have to be protected. We believe that within that framework there is room here for a sensible agreement with our neighbours. You see the Labor Party is experienced in this we have done it before. And I was always confident that we could get an agreement with the Indonesians and now I can say that with absolute certainty.

 JOURNALIST: …the Government clawed back …Budget…?

 BEAZLEY: We are the Opposition. We can only go on the figures that are given us. Really you need to direct those sorts of questions to Costello. The Treasury comes out and says these are the figures. We can operate on nothing else. And so we do and what do we do with the figures, we say this: everything we do has got to be affordable. We have got Access Economics out there running a thumb over everything we do and that is to ensure both on the savings side and on the expenditure side that we stay within that target of keeping the Budget in surplus.

 Now the argument that you have with whether or not the Treasury figures are correct is really an argument you have with Costello. Simon is the Shadow Treasurer not the Treasurer and we have to rely on what it is that the Treasury gives us.

 JOURNALIST: …finance….is that normal practice …claw back …?

 BEAZLEY: I have said that I am not going to be a political commentator on polling in the course of this campaign let me add to the list the things I will not be to during the course of this campaign. I will not be a former Finance Minister. As far as I am concerned I just live with the figures that we happen to get given by the Department of Treasury and Finance. They say that those figures are valid I operate on the assumption that they are. What else can I do? What else can we do?

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…tax cuts…?

 BEAZLEY: Look I take this view. Firstly, families are relieved about what we have said about the goods and services tax. That is the sort of tax cut, tax change that lasts forever. You get that out and it lasts forever. It goes on way beyond the three years that we are talking about here. Take it off electricity - that happens. So that is the first thing I would note about that so our changes to the taxation system benefit you for good.

 The second thing is: look, what is the point of small modest tax cuts which are likely to be taken away by this particular government. If you have got chronic under investment in things which are so critical for families what is the point of doing that if you can't take care of your aged population? What is the point of doing that if there is a chronic crisis in your public hospital system and other parts of your health care system? What is the point of it if you are under investing in the things that are going to make you a creative nation that is going to create jobs in the future?

 That is not a new view of mine you have heard me say that on the campaign trail before, we always expected that the Government would come forward with something like that and we have a different vision. Ours is a long-term vision. Their activity all this year has been about cobbling together whatever it is to ease John Howard into a position where he can retire on his own terms and not the electorate's.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: Whatever it is they did, and I don't know what they did, all I know is what the Treasury is prepared to sign off on. And, you know, what I am fascinated about is not the bureaucratic wrangling inside this government what I am fascinated in is national investment. Those are the figures that we have been given. We have kept our position modestly targeted but very well targeted on the key issues that confront our society now and I will leave the bureaucratic wrangling to explain to Costello and Fahey. They are the people who have any knowledge, insofar as any knowledge of this resides in the political community it resides with them. What I will get on with is the campaign.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: Well, as far as I am concerned Treasury and Finance have signed off on these numbers. They are supposed to be signing off on them independently until I find out otherwise that is the assumption on which I will operate.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: We have gone through this up hill and down dale with Access Economics line by line over a lengthy period of time and Access who in other circumstances has been described as the government's preferred modeller have come forward with signing off on those figures. Whatever Econtech has to say what you know about Telstra is this: Access has signed off on our numbers we won't privatise it -Costello and Howard will privatise it. That is the difference, the fundamental difference between us. We can say that in clear-cut terms. They tried to slip slide around it but it is there in their Budget numbers.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: We are totally confident in those figures because they also relate to past performance of what happens when you sell that particular asset. Telstra is a big earner for government. And the initial stage of the sale of an outfit like Telstra is diabolically expensive for government. They had to pay enormous sums to brokers and underwriters that handle these things, enormous sums and that is in the first couple of years and that you don't have to do when you're not privatising it. It is not as though there is no experience about this sort of thing for Access to make their judgements on there is plenty of experience around and their figures are good.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 BEAZLEY: The effective effect of T1 if you take what was realised by T1 and what has been the effect on public debt interest and what would have been, what you would have got from the dividend associated with Telstra apart from one year the Commonwealth Budget has been in continual loss. This is one thing a lot of people don't realise is that Telstra is a big earner and most times with a dividend beyond the official interest rates. That is something which expands, extends through time. So it is not surprising that Access Economics would come to the sorts of figures that it did.

 JOURNALIST: …Noel Pearson….

 BEAZLEY: I didn't see Noel's comments and nor have I seen it circulating anywhere. I think that it's just time that we did that and moved on. There's only one Chamber that hasn't done that yet - and that's the House of Representatives. I think the time has come to do it and move on and the issues that directly relate to the stolen generation and more generally to the Indigenous community. But I haven't seen Noel's comments so I couldn't comment on them.

 JOURNALIST: … affect on the Australian community and the Australian multicultural … might have been …

 BEAZLEY: I think that there is a requirement on all of us to value and respect the multicultural character of our society. One of the underpinnings of it is confidence in the immigration policy, confidence in that component of it that relates to asylum seekers and refugees and confidence in the general provisions of immigration. Immigration's important to this country. It's nation-building. I'm a believer in the immigration program, a strong believer in the immigration program. We've got to attract, to this country

 in particular, more people with expertise, particularly in new technologies, if we're going to win the race to be a creative nation. We've got to do those things. I am strongly in favour of migration program and therefore I'm hostile to its undermining. One of the things which undermines it is illegal movement and that is why we're committed to ensuring that illegal movement doesn't take place. People need to take a look at the consequences of undermining the migration policy for the long-term future of the country. I'm a strong believer in our multicultural society. And, again, I don't want to see that belief undermined by people's sense of insecurity about anything which might relate to aspects of the immigration program. That's why we take the stands that we do on strong border protection.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Again, I want to make something clear because I keep getting accosted on the streets from folk who are concerned about this. Whatever happens in terms of commitment that we have, a Labor Government will never introduce conscription. I want to make that absolutely clear. That's the first thing I want to say. The second thing is, whenever an ally talks to us about anything we're always prepared to have a conversation, or our allies in this case, are always prepared to have a conversation. But, frankly, that commitment was a product of the Americans saying, 'what is it you can provide?', and we're saying, 'this is what we can provide'. Now, I don't foresee circumstances in which we'd be called upon to do any more. What we have got is sustainable - and while I'd be prepared to have that conversation, I don't expect it to be one I'd have to have - what we've got is a sustainable commitment, sustainable and affordable for the long-term that gives our allies comfort that they don't stand alone in the field and that they've got other people who are out there prepared to support them. That's what they want from us, fundamentally. That's what they want from us, basically. They know who does the heavy work in this regard - themselves. We can give them some assistance in that and we are giving them some assistance. But I'm not anticipating, given the way in which this commitment has been got together, a request for anything more.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: You're asking me to speculate on all of that. I just say, look, over the years I've always been happy to sit down with the Americans and the British and have a conversation with them about things which concern them, but I think it's not appropriate to speculate on further commitment. Those commitments that we have made are not there yet and won't be there yet for a while. There is no indication in anything that I have seen that more is going to be required.

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister seems to be … speculate …

 BEAZLEY: No, not at all. As I understand it, …

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Well, as I understand it, all the Prime Minister said is that if anyone makes a request then he's prepared to consider it. That's my understanding of what the Prime Minister's had to say. But I also want to point out - and that's what I've said - but I also want to point out the great unlikelihood of that emerging and that we have got a carefully calibrated sustainable commitment here that does the trick, does the job, as far as our allies are concerned. I don't anticipate any other calls.

 JOURNALIST: … refugees, isn't that agreement related to …

 BEAZLEY: We have others as well as that particular agreement. That was one of the agreements. But we also have had agreements on what you might call multilateral people movements in the past from Vietnam and elsewhere. And we also had a conversation with the Indonesians, not an agreement, but a conversation, which meant that they checked anyone's preparedness, or the activities of the smugglers, in bringing people in to this country. And when they did, of course, it lessened the value of Indonesia as a transit point for those who would exploit the opportunity. So, we had less coming. We can get ourselves back into that position. The only question mark that was placed over anything I've had to say since I've been talking about that since September 6th - I mentioned it as far back as that - the only question mark is, well, will the Indonesians talk to you, Mr Beazley? Answer - yes, they will, and therefore we can solve it.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: I'm satisfied that the issues of this election are beginning to move onto the domestic agenda. As they move onto the domestic agenda, you find out how out of touch the Government is. You can see Vanstone's comments, Howard's comments, the comments by Wooldridge. They're not thinking long-term. If you take the three sets of comments that I cited earlier, it's pretty fair evidence that they've lost a grip on where this country is going in some very key areas. I expect to see much the same from David Kemp in the Education area. This is a Government out of puff and thus far, they've been able to evade exposing that in the course of this election campaign. They ran out of cover this week.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: I'm the underdog, there's no question about that. But that's as far as a commentator I'm going to get in this. I'm a fighter and I'm going to fight this one right down to the wire.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: I don't know anything about that. I'm happy with the security I've got. I was thinking about it the other day, as I got into the car from my street at my home, and there was such a line-up of gentlemen from the State and Federal constabulary, I think the street, I was told, has never felt safer.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

