---
title: "Government strengthens border integrity."
date: "2001-09-17"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228795
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7OY46%22
---

  

 Joint Statement with the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison

 Government Strengthens Border Integrity MPS 161/2001

 The Government will introduce a package of Bills into Parliament tomorrow to strengthen Australia's territorial integrity the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock and the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison announced today.

 These three Bills will strengthen deterrence measures in relation to unauthorised arrivals, including the introduction of a new visa regime and minimum sentencing for people smugglers.

 There will also be measures that validate the actions of the Commonwealth in relation to the MV Tampa and the Aceng, and provide additional statutory authority for future action.

 These measures will be in addition to ongoing prevention and interdiction efforts. This work includes efforts to disrupt departures, return boats and failed asylum seekers as well as positive leadership in international fora.

 The Migration Amendment (Excision From Migration Zone) Bill 2001  will excise certain Australian territories from the migration zone for purposes related to unauthorised arrivals. Any unauthorised arrival who arrives in an excised area after 2.00pm on 8 September will not be able to make an application for an Australian visa unless the Minister exercises his discretionary power.

 This will allow the Commonwealth to undertake assessments for refugee status outside the migration zone without being compelled to issue a visa. People who are determined to be refugees can then apply to the Minister to use his public interest powers to lift the bar, or they can apply for a third country for resettlement.

 The Migration Amendment (Excision from Migration Zone) (Consequential Provisions) Bill

 2001 will introduce a new visa regime for people who are processed under the provisions of the Excision Bill, which precludes access to permanent residence in Australia. It also allows for the detention and removal of unauthorised arrivals in the excision zone.

 The new visa regime will provide for a hierarchy of rights depending upon where people made their application.

 The Bill will also prevent the institution of legal proceedings against the Commonwealth in relation to the entry, status, detention and transfer of an offshore entry person.

 The third piece of legislation is the Border Protection (Validation and Enforcement Powers) Bill 2001.

 This Bill will put beyond doubt the legality of actions of the Commonwealth and its officers taken in relation the MV Tampa and the Aceng from 27 August 2001 until this Bill commences.

 No legal challenges against the Commonwealth in relation to these actions can be commenced or continued.

 It will also provide additional statutory authority for future action in relation to vessels carrying unauthorised arrivals and the unauthorised arrivals themselves.

 This will put beyond doubt that decisions about who can and who cannot enter Australia is the sovereign power of the Australian Parliament.

 The Bill will also introduce minimum penalties of 5 years for a first conviction and 8 years for a second conviction on charges of people smuggling.

 These package of measures will ensure that Australia is meeting its obligations in relation to asylum seekers whilst also sending a clear and unambiguous message to people traffickers and those seeking a migration outcome, that we will no longer tolerate deliberate flouting of our laws and abuse of our compassion.

 17 September 2001

 Media Inquiries: Steve Ingram, Mr Ruddock's office (02) 6277 7860 Nicole Johnston, Senator Ellison's office (02) 6277 7260

 Media Release Index

  

