---
title: "Townsville, Queensland: transcript of doorstop interview: Labor's plan for tourism, PM's comments on Labor spending, Ansett, Townsville Chamber of Commerce, BRW cover, deaths of 350 asylum seekers, health, education, jobs, Seat of Herbert, deployment of Australian forces."
date: "2001-10-25"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230697
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4K956%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Labor's Plan For Tourism, PM's Comments On Labor Spending, Ansett, Townsville Chamber Of Commerce, BRW Cover, Deaths Of 350 Asylum Seekers, Health, Education, Jobs, Seat Of Herbert, Deployment Of

 Australian Forces

 http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/kbmcqld251001.html Friday, 26 October 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Labor's Plan For Tourism, PM's Comments On Labor Spending, Ansett, Townsville Chamber Of Commerce, BRW Cover, Deaths Of 350 Asylum Seekers, Health, Education, Jobs, Seat Of Herbert, Deployment Of Australian Forces

 Transcript - Townsville, Queensland - 25 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: Before I launch our tourism platform today, what I'd like to do is to say something about what the Prime Minister has been saying around the country today talking about the affordability of the Labor Party's proposals for the future. This comes from a man who's managed to spend $20 billion in the course of the last 12 months trying to save himself from his past. The Prime Minister is out there saying that the Labor Party would put the Budget into deficit. Let me say this: we will not. The proposals that we have, have been costed by Access Economics; they will leave the Budget in surplus.

 We believe that we can invest in the future of Australia, invest in the nation's future in health, education, in aged care, in getting jobs for our people and taking the pressure off families experiencing financial difficulty through the GST. We can do those things in a sensible, modest fashion within the framework of the budget surpluses and the savings measures that we've announced within that framework, in accordance with the numbers put out by the Federal Treasury.

 John Howard is simply arguing this untruth as an excuse not to address the future. It's been his campaign for the last two and a half weeks to be about the past and his future, which is retirement in 18 months to two years.

 What the Labor Party has been about is the future of this nation. One of the industries central to the future of this nation is the tourism industry - and it is doing it tough. It has been hit twice in the course of the last 18 months - first by the goods and services tax, which has been an enormous imposition on small businesses in the tourism industry in particular, and the tourism industry that's quintessentially a small business industry. Secondly, it's been hit by the failure of Ansett.

 It continues to be hit by the failure of the Government to do something about making more simple its goods and services tax, and the failure of the Government to get Ansett II up and running again. And the

 failure to commit in relation to getting Ansett II up and running again, to ensuring that places like Townsville, like Adelaide, like the North of Western Australia continue to be served.

 The collapse of Ansett took 5,000 seats a week out of Townsville. This has been a massive hit on the tourism industry here - a very substantial hit. There are a large number of small businesses in Townsville that are experiencing bleak times as a result of it. Also, of course, the terrible circumstances of 11 September have placed a major dent in the international tourism movements - to Townsville and elsewhere around Australia.

 The package that we've put forward, that modest set of proposals, is aimed directly at the problems the tourism industry is confronting.

 What I announce here today has to be considered, too, against the background of what we said about the goods and services tax, and against the background of what we've said about regional and national Kickstart programs on infrastructure. The proposals we put there would be enormously useful to the tourism industry in places like Townsville. This by no means, what I'm announcing today, represents a complete picture of all that the Labor Party is prepared to do about tourism.

 What we are prepared in this package to do are these things.

 Firstly, an increased grant to the Australian Tourism Commission. They have been held back by the Government since the Government have been in office. As a result of that, they've had to pull out of advertising programs in a number of key markets and in some emerging markets. What we propose, the extra $10 million for them, would be to give them a start on reinstating those advertising programs, encouraging international tourists to Australia.

 We are also doubling the money going to local areas for work on tourism related heritage projects. There is $16 million in the kitty for that now. We would double that to $32 million. Those are the sorts of little projects on tourist railways, on local museums, the range of things that local authorities do around regional Australia to get in place a tourist attraction - doubling that money. That's a help, too, to sections of the tourism industry smacked by the GST, and smacked by the closure of Ansett.

 The centrepiece of it is $50 million in loans - low interest loans to be made available to small businesses who can demonstrate that they have a problem associated with the demise of Ansett I.

 These are all affordable and targeted within the framework of responsible budgetary policy. We, unlike John Howard, who spent $20 billion of the taxpayers' money trying to save himself over the course of the last 9 months, we are investing in the nation's future affordably.

 Part of that future lies in the tourism industry, which is a massive Australian employer and a massive turner of business for small businesses in this country.

 Townsville is the right place for us to launch this policy - partly because, of course, it is a big tourism centre itself. Partly, of course, because it has experienced, along with other parts of Australia, some of the worst consequences of the failure of Ansett I, and partly because we've got an excellent local candidate, and we like to launch things with excellent Labor candidates, like Jenny Hill.

 From those of the media who are here from Townsville, we are launching, too today, our Townsville package. We're identifying in this package some of the things that we are extracting from some of those programs that I have been mentioning. This Government abolished the Office of Northern Development

 when it came into office - we reinstate it and there would be a branch here in Townsville.

 We're also announcing, because this is the heart of the development of tropical tourism, but also of tropical health and a great deal of marine research, we're announcing a $5 million tropical regions project, drawing on Townsville's expertise and involving Townsville local government, local education and the State and Commonwealth Governments.

 We are also going to support regional universities like James Cook. James Cook is now the heart of employment and education opportunities here in Townsville. Like other regional universities, it's suffered cutbacks in its research as a result of being deprived of research places for graduate students. We're reinstating research places for graduate students.

 We are also equalising the position of regional universities with their city-based sisters in being able to access affordably broadband communications. Townsville would be one of the beneficiaries of the promise that we made earlier in the campaign - James Cook would be one of the beneficiaries of the promises that we made earlier in the campaign to ensure that the price at which universities in regional Australia access to broadband was the same as access by city-based universities.

 We are, of course, committed to the improved, enhanced defence facilities here in Townsville. They were started when I was Defence Minister.

 We are committed, too, to the Douglas Arterial road. The funding of the Townville a variety of concerns about accessing resources to be able to do what needs to be done with the port and its interface with road transport and in other infrastructure projects associated with Townsville, the Regional Kick Start loans, the national infrastructure loans. They are the sorts of things that are here available for accessing by local authorities and businesses here in Townsville.

 It's a double launch here today. Our tourism plans for the whole of the country, and our particular plans for Townsville.

 JOURNALIST: … What's the sort of evidence … proves their eligible …

 BEAZLEY: It will be independently done by the Department of Small Business and they will have the opportunity to inspect, of course, what is being claimed by those who believe that they have been badly affected. The Commonwealth has got some experience now through the R & D program with loans in the past and, of course, they have always featured in responses to natural disaster programs so they have been in the past help schemes available for small businesses who have been effected by flood and the like. So there is considerable experience in the Commonwealth in being able to work these things through.

 JOURNALIST: … but what about larger travel agents going under, and Ansett?

 BEAZLEY: The thing that is most important to do is to get Ansett up and flying again. That is obviously most important. And we have a preparedness to sit down with the Administrator and work those issues through and encourage the other airlines to come in and join with those in local business in this country who are prepared to see Ansett Mark 2 up and running. The reason why we want to sit actively at the table and not be drawn into it, you know, like extracting blood from stones which is how it has been trying to get Anderson engaged in this, the reason why we want to be situated in the middle of this is that we have things that we want Ansett Mark 2 to do. We don't just want Ansett Mark 2 to emerge as a

 server of the capital cities in the south east corner of Australia. We want Ansett Mark 2 to be providing competition to Qantas in the areas where that competition is really needed - such as this.

 So we will sit down there with the Administrator, the Government finally came, almost came close to our position, on what they ought to do with some $150 million. Haven't heard from the Administrator since then, but what we do know is that the airlines will want to sit down and talk through with government ways in which governments can sensibly help in getting themselves up and running again and we will certainly be in the cart for that. We are absolutely determined to get Ansett Mark 2 up and flying.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, when you announced this policy several weeks ago … on special loans?

 BEAZLEY: You always assume a certain level of risk in these programs that you put forward and that goes into the way in which you look at the business plan that they have for dealing with these particular problems. The experience in the past has been good with loans that have gone to people who have been affected by natural disasters. I would expect there to be a similar experience here. I see no reason why it would different. Carefully worked through any reason why this or any of the other loan schemes that we have announced would be any different. So I think the levels of risk are acceptable.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, these loans … about $750 million … promises financed by … perceived … these loans will be affected by market conditions. That's going to get you into trouble …

 BEAZLEY: Not at all. We will of course do it with the pace of that but there is total confidence that this will go through, those arrangements will go through in reasonable order. And, of course, we extract our propositions from the Budget papers themselves so we are confident that those loans will go through at a reasonable pace. And now that they are being so well used, I expect that any further resistance to those things concluding, given that there are going to be opportunities for national development arising from this and an interest, therefore, in the states governments and seeing these things go, through I am very confident that we are going to have no problems.

 JOURNALIST: Wasn't Labor … spending …

 BEAZLEY: There will be no need for that.

 JOURNALIST: …why are you not meeting the Chamber of Commerce?

 BEAZLEY: Well, actually some of the tourism people here have really done it hard in Townsville aren't represented in the Chamber of Commerce. They're actually smaller operators and we are particularly concerned with them, the loans scheme, point one. Point two, this is a bit of a furphy, I reckon. My office has never picked up an invitation from them and anyway I am going to have a chat to them. I think that you will find that over the years I have spent, myself, I have seen myself in constant dialogue with members of the Chambers of Commerce on development issues here in Townsville.

 I think we are rattling the cage of the Liberal Party up here a bit. We actually have a comprehensive plan for Townsville and they have had a record of considerable failure up here, over the course of the last five years. So I think a few of the Liberal Party are getting a bit antsy but I understand that. We will be happy to sit down with members of the Chamber of Commerce and hear what they have had to say and I will be happy to give them a bit of good news.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Yes, absolutely.

 JOURNALIST: … you gave a guarantee that a Labor Government would get Ansett flying as a normal airline? What are the limits on that …

 BEAZLEY: We are obviously going to be reasonable in terms of any fiscal impact on the Commonwealth. But the one thing that the Administrator was arguing for and for weeks the Government held out on and would not assist them with was that $150 million. Well, the Government finally came to the party on that and the Administrator, as far as I am aware, has not asked for anything further on that. But they may well be asking for things like favourable government intention and the use of the flying patterns of Commonwealth employees, all these sorts of things. We are obviously prepared to put all of that on the table in dealing with them. We have said at the outset we are obviously not going to take over the debt position of Ansett and we are not going to break the bank on providing them with assistance but that is a furphy, nobody has asked for that.

 What the Administrator has asked for is a sympathetic ear from the Commonwealth and that is what we would provide. Get actually into the business of helping them get up and flying again and not sniping from the edges which is what Anderson has been doing until very, very recently.

 I was totally confident a few ago that Ansett Mark 2 would be up and flying again, not as an Administrator version but in a business version, before this next election. I am not as quite as confident as I was and so I do think it will be a problem that will land on my plate.

 JOURNALIST: … are you confident you can do whatever is needed to get this airline up again?

 BEAZLEY: I am confident, given all the things that I have heard as a negotiating point with government, that we are going to be able to come to an accommodation which will help them get up and running again, up and flying again. I don't think that it is a problem that a well motivated Commonwealth will have a great deal of trouble with.

 JOURNALIST: … that seems to be a qualification …

 BEAZLEY: It is not a qualification at all, Michelle. It is a reasonably based judgement on the facts that are known to me and the facts that are emerging more and more in the media. There are business people out there now prepared to carry the weight. It's a matter, too, of getting some international airlines in to assist with carrying the weight. It is now within sight and no huge demands are emerging on the Commonwealth but a requirement for a sympathetic ear is absolutely there. And it's just not been there from the Government. You could almost think, if you took a look at the record of the Government, particularly prior to the collapse of Ansett and the first few weeks after it, it's as though they were willing the darn thing to happen.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, … front cover of BRW magazine …

 BEAZLEY: Well, I'm not surprised that the top end of town is soft on John Howard, because John Howard has been soft on them. He's been all rhetoric and no action when it comes to dealing with the top end of town and he's been really hard, really very hard, on ordinary Australians. As I understand it, the complaint of BRW is with the idea that we would introduce balance again into industrial relations, a fair go for employers and a fair go for Australian workers. We're about a fair go for all Australians and that means balance in the industrial relations system. It's been tweaked against ordinary Australians since this

 Government has been in office and we would swing the pendulum back to the centre to make certain that everybody had a decent crack at getting their living standards protected through the industrial relations system. Now, some object to that. John Howard objects to that because he's never been for ordinary Australians in the workplace. So I'm not surprised that in some circles that would get a tick.

 JOURNALIST: The tourism industry working group estimated the impact on GDP … fourth quarter on … terrorist attack of half a point off GDP. Does that figure … to you?

 BEAZLEY: I've seen two estimates - one a quarter per cent, the other half a per cent - and whilst ever Ansett is not up and flying in something like the mode of services that it used to provide, that quarter keeps recurring down the next couple of quarters. It's a very big hit indeed. That's why, instead of complaining about the fact that we've got properly costed policies in place that are not going to take the budget into deficit, the Prime Minister ought to be looking at what we're doing about investing in the nation's future and trying to emulate. And we are, with the proposals we've put forward for kick-start in regions, the proposals that we're now putting forward for the tourism industry and our commitment to get Ansett up and flying again, these are things which will do the job. It's about a government looking at the future. And that will stop what you say repeating in subsequent quarters, even though it can't stop it now.

 JOURNALIST: That said, given the quarter of four and a half point GDP, isn't their $26 million a pretty paltry, insignificant amount?

 BEAZLEY: Take it in conjunction with Regional Kick Start, with National Kick Start, take it in conjunction with what we want to do to make life easier for small business in relation to the Goods and Services Tax, and take it with our commitment to get Ansett up and flying again and it's a pretty good package.

 JOURNALIST: … given that 350 people have died …

 BEAZLEY: The Labor Party has been committed to discussions on a regional basis for a long time and we've put in place a good program to achieve that, including the underpinnings of a bilateral relationship with Indonesia which should ensure a successful outcome. The Labor Party can deliver on that. Until this point of time, people have been casting doubt on our ability to do that. Now, in response to the sad and tragic events on the part of the Indonesians, it is amply clear that the Labor Party will be able to.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Look, the three Ministers' visit to Jakarta disappeared virtually as soon as it had happened. The relationship was cool and the evidence of that was at APEC. The suggestion that we've made - as early as September 6th - about how these matters should be handled is now resonating elsewhere in the region. That is a good thing. That means that we'll be able to deliver.

 JOURNALIST: … study shows that …$2 billion … private health insurance rebate … why won't you means test that …

 BEAZLEY: We are concerned where you've got a situation where incorporated in the price of health insurance, there are a certain set of assumptions. We're concerned to ensure that the way in which we act doesn't place pressure on premiums in relation to the rest of them. As I've said, we've ruled a line under that and our health policies come in on top of that new investment in the public hospital system. That it is a genuine increase in what is going into the public hospital system, and a guarantee for the public

 hospital system that that clause that exists in the Medicare Agreement between the Commonwealth and States which would allow the Commonwealth to rip money off the States, given the current level of private health insurance, will be ruled out of the Medicare Agreement and disappear. So, the levels of private health insurance under that Agreement place the public hospital system at risk. But we will cure that problem. We will deal with that problem. Our political opponents won't.

 JOURNALIST: … another $1 billion on the public hospitals …

 BEAZLEY: We can spend substantial additional resources on the public hospital system and we'll sustain that through the years as a result of the Medicare Alliance that we've established with the States. We can do both that and also keep pressure off premiums in the private sector by persisting with the policy.

 JOURNALIST: … marginal seat. What are the …

 BEAZLEY: Our concerns for Herbert are that Herbert should have investment in its future. The city of Townsville and the related areas should have an investment in its future that ensures we have a decent performance on northern development and the activities that take place here. What happens with the education system? What happens with telecommunications - not privatising Telstra, as John Howard, yet again, indicated yesterday he would do. These things are critical to the future of the development of this part of Australia. In terms of the significance of the seat of Herbert in this election, it's absolutely significant. Herbert goes with the Government. That's tended to be the performance in the past. I'm confident that we're going to win Herbert and I'm confident that we're going to be able to deliver this comprehensive program that we launched here today to provide the sort of Commonwealth local partnership which is necessary to encourage the growth of jobs in this region.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: Go back to the speech that I made on September 6th and what you'll see there is this: central to the agreements … we've never taken a backward step from this. I know it's come as something of a surprise recently in terms of the announcements that have been made by the Government, but we have always taken this view within the cap of 12,000 refugees, there is a solution in terms of numbers for an agreement between Indonesia and Australia. We've always said that within that cap we would take people who have been properly processed in Jakarta, take care of the people who have been properly processed in Jakarta. Now, the numbers of that, beyond saying that that would obviously be within the 12,000 cap and there would want to be a reasonable proportion of that 12,000 available for refugees from other areas. But given the numbers that we're talking about here, that is an easy thing to achieve within that cap we are prepared to negotiate numbers with Jakarta to relieve pressure on Jakarta. You've got to do that if you want to stop people coming illegally into this country by this by this evil, evil trade and we have always been prepared to do that, and we made that announcement on September 6th but had been preceded by comment on that well before that date.

 JOURNALIST: … part of a poster advertising a federation display and its impact … on the Australian character. As Australians prepare to farewell troops some time soon, what do you believe the impact of such an open-ended conflict is likely to have on …

 BEAZLEY: Well, I think our armed forces will continue to do overseas the job that they've done in the past and reflect credit on this nation. I also believe that they'll come home safely. I also believe that we have an affordable commitment in the commitment that has been put forward by the Government and

 supported by us. You cannot put a time line on that because, of course, you don't know when there'll be a successful outcome in catching bin Laden and his crew. But nevertheless, we know how that ought to be done and what it will take to do it, and therefore you can say with some confidence that that commitment will be an affordable and sustainable one.

 JOURNALIST: You spoke of sending a special envoy … Do you have a person, a particular person in mind or a particular position … come from DFAT? If you have a person in mind, who is it?

 BEAZLEY: No, but it would be an experienced diplomat, a person whose had a background in these sorts of issues before and their job would be full time to coordinate regional responses and to provide our contribution to setting up a regional conference to develop expertise to ensure that that happens. We'd also be looking at additional Federal Police and Immigration officials in the sensitive areas. These things are all there announced in that package.

 JOURNALIST: … ambassador for refugees …

 BEAZLEY: Well, a roving envoy to get a regional agreement in place that will give us the chance of controlling this evil trade and getting a bit of order back into the way in which people are processed.

 JOURNALIST: … Australian Defence Association down in Melbourne.

 BEAZLEY: I've got no problems talking to the Defence Association. They've had very kindly things to say about my Coast Guard proposals and in those circumstances, and many others, I would enjoy a conversation with them. Currently, we don't actually have a plan to do that, but our Defence policies are quite clear that we support the White Paper, the Government came back to our position on military strategy, on a national strategy, and the sort of equipment focus that we would require that we would implement in office, plus the money, of course, we support that too. There are some differences - and we've already talked about those differences in the campaign in relation to the Coast Guard - and the fact that you're going to have to tilt some of that money in favour of special operations forces. But, apart from that, apart from those changes which are not gigantic in terms of what is a very substantial budget, then we are already out there with the Australian Labor Party's Defence policy.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what is your response to reports that it was Indonesian … that forced some of those boat people onto that …vessel.

 BEAZLEY: That is very disturbing, very disturbing that suggestion. But let's make no mistake about where this trade comes from. It comes from criminals, potentially corrupting criminals, who are evil and need to be dealt with. But you're only going to deal with that with a regional agreement and we've said that for some time.

 JOURNALIST: Given those reports, have you … Indonesia is not a signatory to the convention on it … Shouldn't we really be working further up the line to stop the refugee problem?

 BEAZLEY: We need to start with out neighbour and our neighbour is willing to talk, as I always believed our neighbour was - but we need experienced people to talk to our neighbour.

 JOURNALIST: Just on the … arrangements if you win. … Max Moore-Wilton … from his … position … to which he's put in as head of the Prime Minister's Department. Would that be Mr Costello?

 BEAZLEY: I never believe in the midst of an election campaign anticipating movements after it. What

 we announce is policy and the direction in which we're taking policy and we have said just generally on the public service - no nights of the long knives. Now, beyond that expression, I don't think it's a suitable thing for a Prime Minister to be talking about administrative arrangements in the immediate aftermath of an election. It creates an impression of excessive confidence in that regard. I am strongly of the view that we can win this election and we'll deal with those problems after it, should that happy event occur.

 JOURNALIST: … ANZ record profit of … announced today …

 BEAZLEY: This absolutely indicates that we must have Labor's social contract in place. The banks are making huge profits. They're making huge profits off credit cards, huge profits off mortgages, huge profits off fees. It's time for the banks to address their social responsibilities, put in place that social contract that will enable pensioners to access services free of fees, families to access low fee services and rural and regional and outer-metropolitan Australia to continue access to services that have been ripped away from them, or are threatened to be ripped away from them. John Howard will never act with the banks. He is always soft on the top end of town. Well, we will, and we will ensure that this profitability, a small proportion of this profitability, gets turned back to reasonable services for ordinary Australians.

 JOURNALIST: … Townsville … Given that, under the Howard Government, Townsville's received something like $500 million, with most of that money already spent, what are the details of the commitment?

 BEAZLEY: Well, there is obviously going to be a continuing set of commitments arranged to equipping Townsville. There are new aircraft being acquired which are going to be based here. There will need to be maintenance facilities established with them. There is a constant upgrade going on of the forces that are deployed here as they get themselves re-equipped as well. All of these things started with the Australian Labor Party when I was Defence Minister and shifted the orientation of Defence from the south-east corner to the north and west and it would continue. That reorientation continues to see benefits flow to the north and west, under my successors as Ministers for Defence of both political hues, and it would continue with me as Prime Minister.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: You've already seen what we have proposed for that. What Dr Wooldridge has to explain is why there is now a huge proportion of people no longer bulk billing, particularly in regional Australia, and the consequences of that for people in regional Australia. He has no plans for Aged Care in regional Australia. In fact, John Howard will not admit that there is a substantial Aged Care crisis in this country. Yesterday John Howard said that he'd finished on Aged Care, that there was no crisis. John Howard is clearly not listening. Yesterday, too, La Trobe put out a figure of $265 million shortfall. We actually think it's greater than that. We have a program for $467 million to address that shortfall. When you see the 12,000 beds that have not been constructed, or the resources being made available for the 12,000 shortfall - a good half to two thirds of it lies in regional Australia. And it is absolutely critical that we get that issue dealt with.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: We have our own commitments on improving regional health and they are substantially greater than the commitments being put in place, or being promised, by this Government.

 JOURNALIST: Why is Joel Fitzgibbon not here today?

 BEAZLEY: Joel's campaigning elsewhere around the country. We believe that what we have to do is to start in this latter two and a half weeks of the campaign to get all our shadow ministers out there campaigning like blazes. So, he'll be talking about tourism elsewhere.

 JOURNALIST: Gerard Henderson suggested today that the next Australian government should make a commitment to take a large proportion of the Afghan refugees that are now in Indonesia and will be arriving in Indonesia … and that would be a way of helping the Muslim countries in the region understand that Australia's committed to all the … associated by military commitments in Afghanistan. What do you think of that idea?

 BEAZLEY: Well, I haven't seen Gerard's article so, look, I couldn't comment on Gerard's article. All I can do is to draw your attention to what I've been saying now for months. That is, that in the cap that is available for refugees, we arrive at a sensible agreement with Indonesia and part of what we do in return for ensuring that this evil trade, which is currently being conducted, gets suppressed. To ensure that happens, we are prepared, within that cap, to take our share of people properly processed through the camps in Indonesia. Now, I haven't seen what Gerard's had to say on it so I wouldn't comment on it. But my answer would be the same.

 JOURNALIST: … boat people … would you like to see charges laid on the people who are responsible for …

 BEAZLEY: I would like to see the whole trade suppressed and everybody who is engaged within it be dealt with by the full force of the law. Now, if that is going to happen, there clearly has to be a relationship established between ourselves and Indonesia which gives the Indonesians confidence that the problem is being dealt with by other countries in the region, so the whole burden doesn't fall on them.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

 BEAZLEY: There is an absolute need for an Office of Northern Development across the board. This Government lost touch with regional Australia as soon as it was elected. And one of the reasons it lost touch was the abolition of that office. Now, it was a great one at channelling straight into Canberra information, when a decision was taken, that damaged the region, and also information about what could enhance the region, and good at translating Commonwealth programs, many of which certainly are the programs I've been talking about, to provide new opportunities. But the question is, do you know about them and do you know how to operate them? An Office of Northern Development can certainly help with that.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

