---
title: "Indonesia visit: transcript of joint press conference."
date: "2001-09-06"
creators:
  - "Reith, Peter"
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228477
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NUV46%22
---

  

 Transcript

 Indonesia Visit

 Joint Press Conference - the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock and the Minister for Defence, Peter Reith

 Question: Who will you be meeting in Indonesia?

 Ruddock: Well the plans are to meet with a range of Ministers whose portfolios are relevant to our respective interests.

 Question: But are there specific meetings set up at this stage?

 Ruddock: There are some meetings set up but we're not going into that at this stage.

 Question: Will you be discussing extradition for people smugglers?

 Ruddock: Look extradition is one of the issues that has been on the agenda, but we're not going to canvas all the specific matters that we might be addressing.

 Question: But that will be something that you'll be looking at?

 Ruddock: Well look extradition is something that we have been looking at and there are some issues

 in relation to extradition because it's a matter of law, it's their law and our law and they're matters that the Attorney has been working on.

 Question: Is there a possibility though that we could get (inaudible)?

 Ruddock: Well I don't know that I'll be doing that and I don't know that Mr Reith will be doing that. The extradition issues have been matters that the Attorney has been pursuing and I'm aware of that and I'm aware of some of the complexities and it is one of the issues that needs to be addressed because if we can bring people back to prosecute them here if they can't be prosecuted abroad, that is a good outcome and we've been seeking extradition in a number of countries of people where we have evidence of their involvement in people smuggling. But it is a difficult issue of law because generally matters of extradition require a degree of reciprocity and there are some legal issues that the Attorney has been working on.

 Question: Are you encountering some resistance to you from the Indonesian authorities or do you expect to?

 Ruddock: Look I think the Indonesians want to work with us, it's as big a problem for them as it is for us and we're going there with a very constructive approach.

 Question: What about intercepting boat people at sea?

 Ruddock: Well we've had all we want to say on that now.

 Question: Given that the President's been silent pretty much over the last few weeks how confident are you of actually getting some resolution to all of this?

 Ruddock: Well I think we'll see what the outcome is. We're going there with goodwill to work through a range of issues, we'll take it constructively and we want to talk those issues over with them.

 Question: Will you be meeting with the President?

 Ruddock: We'll be meeting with a range of Ministers.

 Question: How senior are those Ministers that you'll be meeting with?

 Ruddock: At this stage there are some appointments that have been made, there are others to be

 confirmed.

 Question: Sorry I didn't hear your answer to the other question about intercepting people smugglers, will that be something you'll be looking at?

 Ruddock: You heard what I had to say.

 Question: I didn't actually.

 Ruddock: Well I said that we'd made a number of statements on that, I'm not going to develop it any further.

 Question: Minister, when's the Manoora due to arrive in Papua New Guinea?

 Reith: Well the Manoora's making the progress we expected it to, but in respect to the trip to Jakarta we certainly will be having discussions with defence authorities there. We did have some very constructive meetings with them at a military level last week when we gave them some advice of the operations that the Royal Australian Navy and the Royal Australian Airforce were conducting between Australia and Indonesia and we expect to continue those discussions tomorrow.

 Question: Will you be asking for permission for Australian surveillance aircraft to fly into Indonesian territory or.?

 Reith: Well we've had, we've had discussions with them about port visits and refuelling, obviously that will be the subject of further discussion when we are there. But we're pleased with the responses we had with our military people in Jakarta last week and we'll be continuing those discussions.

 Question: Do you think Indonesians would have any problem with Australian aircraft, surveillance aircraft going into their territory?

 Reith: Well look I'm not going into the details of it, but look we've had a reasonably good relationship on the military to military level in the past and we would expect that to continue and from the remarks that have been made in the last 24 hours we think that there's a fair amount of goodwill on the Indonesian side. I saw Peter Cosgrove was playing golf with General Sukarto yesterday so you know that's a positive personal relationship there.

 Question: How well did the military handle the Tampa incident and so on, they seemed to (inaudible)

 fairly well?

 Reith: Well I do want to publicly thank the ADF for the effort that they made. It was done very professionally, it was done very well. The ship to ship transfer was managed in the professionalism that we expect from the ADF but we appreciate it when we see it. Question: Money well spent?

 Reith: Well the ADF is the subject of the Government's White Paper, which does mean that we'll be spending more money on defence but we have the very best people in the ADF and we've got to make sure that we've got the right resources going into it as our insurance premium for the next decade.

 Question: Have you had any progress reports on Manoora's progress since leaving?

 Reith: Well the latest report I had this morning was that she was progressing well overnight.

 Question: Mr Ruddock just on the issue of what Australia has on the table in terms of our visit to Indonesia, how many more millions will we be offering them for detention centres in Indonesia?

 Ruddock: The matters that we're going to discuss with the Indonesians are best discussed with them first.

 Question: But is it true that there are measures to offer them money for more detention centres in Indonesia?

 Ruddock: If you're going to have a discussion what you have a discussion about is what you might be prepared to do and what they might want to do themselves and those matters are best discussed with them.

 Question: But given detention centres already exist and we are funding them would it not be straightforward, you know, one link to another that we'd like more detention centres to hold more people over there?

 Ruddock: Well let me just say what we are doing. We have a regional co-operation model in place. That co-operation model enables Australian Federal Police to work with Indonesian police. A number of people are held by Indonesians at their expense and are located at their expense. We are funding the international organisation for migration which when they are handed over by police then ensures that people have sustenance and while any claims are

 being assessed by the UNHCR, they remain in Indonesia.

 A number of people have been returned having been found not to be refugees. A number of other people are being held in Indonesia pending resettlement opportunities and we've been assisting the UNHCR and the international organisation for migration. We've not been funding Indonesia directly in relation to these matters.

 Question: How's the operation going, the military operation, naval operation going off Christmas Island?

 Reith: Well the operation we put in place a couple of days ago is proceeding as we directed it to.

 Question: Have you intercepted any boats at all?

 Reith: I don't have any other comment to make. But the operation is proceeding as we required it to do. Thank you very much.

 Index of Transcripts

  

