---
title: "Refugee tragedy."
date: "2001-10-23"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230616
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XG856%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 23 October 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/653

 Refugee Tragedy The Australian Democrats are distressed at the reported drowning of more than 350 asylum seekers off the coast of Indonesia following the sinking of an over-crowded Indonesian fishing boat last Friday - all aboard were believed to be headed to Australia.

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats’ spokesperson for immigration said, “Without a doubt, the men, women and children aboard the ill-fated fishing vessel would have been aware of the risks, but their desperation and fear were such that they were prepared to risk everything in the hope of escaping oppressive regimes and war-torn lands.

 “Regrettably they were not the first to die, nor will they be the last. Desperate people will do anything, as this tragedy attests. The Australian Government knows this, but refuses to take appropriate and humane action. The boatloads will continue to come.”

  “The Howard Government’s handling of the refugee situation has been a debacle from day one,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Australian naval vessels roam the Pacific Ocean trying to off-load their human cargo of refugees at the nearest port, with the Australian Government offering questionable governments financial sweeteners as inducements.

 “The Howard Government will do anything to avoid confronting its responsibilities under the United Nations Human Rights and Refugee Conventions.

 “Recently, long-time friend and supporter Papua New Guinea agreed to help Australia by accommodating our latest unwanted human cargo, but at some point we’re going to run out of friends or islands, or both,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “For those asylum seekers that do survive the treacherous journey to Australia, they can look forward to literally hundreds of millions of Australian taxpayers’ dollars being used to accommodate, feed, incarcerate and punish them - far from Australia’s shores. Out of sight - out of mind.

 “The Howard Government, with support from the ALP, refuses to seek an internationally appropriate and responsible solution; instead Australia is compounding the suffering of an already traumatised and desperate people,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For further information contact Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789.

