---
title: "Vote for common sense and compassion."
date: "2001-11-09"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231979
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YND56%22
---

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 9 November 2001 MEDIA RELEASE          01/714

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 Vote for Common Sense and Compassion The Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja, will spend the last day of the Federal election, campaigning in South Australia defending her Senate seat and promoting Lower House candidates.

 Senator Stott Despoja will visit the electorates of Makin, Boothby, Mayo, Sturt and Adelaide. She will be joined on the last day of the campaign by one of the Democrats’ founders, Don Chipp.

 Senator Stott Despoja emphasised the opportunity for people to vote for common sense and compassion by voting for the Democrats.

 “The Democrats are committed to the triple bottom line: environmental protection, social justice and good economic management,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

 “In the lead up to this election the Democrats have launched more than 30 policies including education, reconciliation, health, employment, environment, tourism, innovation, science, welfare, women, and small business.

 “Following yesterday’s jump in unemployment figures, the Democrats are the only Party to offer a comprehensive employment policy which tackles unemployment. We have released responsible costed plans to create more than 200 000 jobs by spending $525 million.

 “I am proud of the campaign the Democrats have run in this election, particularly my colleagues, and the 150 Lower House candidates who have worked tirelessly through out this campaign.

 “The Democrats will not allow the further privatisation of Telstra, we will not support tax cuts for high income earners until the Government addresses the needs of the one million Australians living in poverty and improves funding for public health and education,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

 Senator Stott Despoja has launched the lead Democrat Senate candidates in all states and territories.

 “In this campaign I have launched the first time voters kit in Sydney, our reef relief policy in Cairns, employment in Newcastle, corporate governance in Perth, tourism in Hobart, education in Melbourne, welfare in Brisbane and our women’s policy in Adelaide.

 “For the Democrats, this is the toughest election we have faced with five out of nine of our Senators up for election. I urge Australians to take out third party insurance and vote Democrat in the Senate to keep whoever gets into government accountable,” concluded Senator Stott Despoja.

 Senator Stott Despoja will hold a media conference in Adelaide today at Marion Shopping Centre (in the Boothby electorate) at 1:15pm CST. For more details please contact Serena Rogers on 0419 833 571.

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats 9 November 2001 MEDIA RELEASE          01/714

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 Senator Stott Despoja’s launches leading up to Election 2001

 Boothby candidate Jo Pride Adelaide

 NT lead senate candidate David Curtis Darwin

 Work and Family  Wollongong

 Endangered Species Melbourne

 Victorian young lower house candidates Melbourne First Time Voter’s Kit Sydney

 Tasmanian lead senate candidate Debbie Butler Hobart No Tax on Books Melbourne

 Victorian lead Senate candidate Lyn Allison Melbourne WA lead senate candidate Andrew Murray Perth Small Business Canberra

 Higher Education Brisbane

 Mayo candidate John McLaren Adelaide

 NSW lead senate candidate Vicki Bourne Sydney It’s our ABC Sydney

 National Campaign launch Adelaide

 Employment Newcastle

 Education Melbourne

 Queensland lead senate candidate Andrew Bartlett Brisbane Women Adelaide

 Save the Reef Cairns

 Environment Brisbane

 ACT lead senate candidate Wayne Sievers Canberra Tourism Hobart

 Refugees, Immigration and Multicultural Sydney Launch of Democrats’ Pledge Sydney

 Corporate Governance Perth

 Innovation and Science Brisbane

 Reconciliation  Sydney

 Welfare Ipswich

