---
title: "Senator's office transformed into toy store."
date: "2001-12-16"
creators:
  - "Lees, Meg"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of LEES, SEN MEG"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232447
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9JM56%22
---

 www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Meg Lees                Sandra Kanck MLC Australian Democrats

 16 December 2001          MEDIA RELEASE                  01/747        /

 Senator’s office transformed into  toy store Senator Meg Lees’ Adelaide office now resembles a toy store, following the Democrats’ appeal last week to donate toys for refugee children at the Woomera Detention Centre.

 The gifts have been pouring in over the past few days and are now taking up most of the space in the board room and foyer.

 “I have been heartened by the generosity of so many people who have delivered new and pre-loved toys in response to our appeal,” said Meg Lees, Democrats’ Senator for South Australia.

 “The people of South Australia have obviously welcomed the opportunity to make a positive contribution. One man came in to my office with $200 worth of new toys he had just bought.

 “We will begin our journey to Woomera on Wednesday so there is still time for anyone who wants to make a donation,” said Senator Lees.

 “As a society we need a compassionate, humane response to the plight of the children held at Woomera,” said Sandra Kanck, State Democrats’ Deputy Leader.

 “Refugee children are the innocent victims of events beyond their control and detention at Woomera only adds to the trauma they have suffered.

 “We acknowledge there are those in the community who may feel that Christmas presents are inappropriate for Muslim children. However, most of these children will qualify for refugee status and a friendly gesture of goodwill now will greatly assist their eventual integration into Australian society,” Ms Kanck concluded.

 Meg Lees and Sandra Kanck will make the trip to Woomera this week to deliver the gifts in time for Christmas.

 Toys can be delivered to the office of Senator Meg Lees 322a The Parade, Kensington Until 5pm Tuesday 18 December Please choose culturally sensitive gifts for the children

 (toy guns are not appropriate)

 Media requests: Kerrie Thornton 0438 816 376

