---
title: "International action against people smuggling."
date: "2001-01-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211220234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1TB36%22
---

  

 News Room

 International Action against People Smuggling

 MPS 006/2001

 At the end of a four-day visit to Iran, the Australian Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, The Hon Philip Ruddock MP, said that he had encountered in all the countries he had visited recently - Jordan, Syria, Turkey and Iran - a readiness to take international action against the global problem of people smuggling.

 He said: "I have been struck by the agreement, in all four countries, to cooperate with Australia in areas like exchange of intelligence, enhanced technical cooperation and action in multilateral agencies, particularly the UN High Commission for Refugees." This demonstrated that, though national circumstances differed substantially, there was a growing awareness by governments that they stood to gain by pooling their knowledge and resources to fight crime.

 In Iran, Mr Ruddock had extensive consultations with senior members of the Government and the Parliament, with international agencies and representatives of other governments affected by illegal movements of people. He had also visited the Shahid Nasary refugee camp outside Tehran, which accommodates Afghan refugees.

 In all his contacts in Iran, Mr Ruddock said he had been given a clear insight into the burden Iran had carried for some years as a result of the presence of some two million refugees from Afghanistan and Iraq. He said "Iran is looking to the international community for greater assistance with this burden and I will be actively pursuing the push Australia has made in recent years for greater international burden-sharing while durable solutions are sought to intractable problems."

 Mr Ruddock emphasised the importance not only of effective action by the UN

 High Commission for Refugees, but also of successful conclusion of effective international instruments on combating transnational crime. He said "The global community must develop, and develop quickly, the same determination in fighting illegal people trafficking as it has shown in campaigns against the criminal drug trade."

 Mr Ruddock said that he had explained to Iranian Ministers the depth of concern in Australia about illegal boat arrivals, as well as the tough measures Australia had introduced to make illegal travel a less attractive proposition. He had given Ministers details of intelligence on people smugglers and had agreed to send senior officials to Iran to discuss a range of technical cooperation issues in areas such as training and identification of fraudulent documentation. "Overall," Mr Ruddock said, "we have a sound basis for working further with Iran, both bilaterally and in multilateral forums, to combat crime and make the international protection system more effective."

 20 January 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

