---
title: "New member appointments to the MRT and the RRT."
date: "2001-09-27"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229373
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QH156%22
---

  

 New Member Appointments to the MRT and the RRT

 MPS 165/2001

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today announced the appointment of Mr Philip Green as Deputy Principal Member of the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) and Ms Regina Perton and Ms Robin Hunt as Senior Members of the Migration Review Tribunal (MRT).

 Mr Ruddock also announced the appointment of six new full-time and six new part-time members to the RRT, and three new full-time and 14 new part-time members to the MRT.

 "Mr Green has had a distinguished career with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, has an excellent record in management, and has demonstrated sensitivity and sound judgment on international and domestic matters covering refugee issues," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Ms Perton has had substantial experience as a full-time and part-time member to a range of administrative law tribunals. She is currently a part-time member of the RRT and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and has demonstrated outstanding leadership and management skills in the provision of high quality, merits review decisions.

 "Ms Hunt is currently a full-time member of the MRT, has excellent legal credentials and has many years of administrative law experience."

 The appointments follow a nation-wide recruitment process and new members, appointed from a variety of professions, will contribute to the professionalism and productivity of both Tribunals.

 The MRT provides independent merits review of general migration decisions made by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. The RRT is responsible for providing independent merits review of decisions to refuse or cancel protection visas made by the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

 There are currently 37 members in the MRT. With the new appointments this will rise to 54, comprising 13 full-time members (one principal member, four senior members, eight members) and 41 part-time members.

 The RRT currently has 55 members. With the new appointments the RRT will have 67 members, 42 full-time (one principal member, one deputy principal member, three senior members, 37 members) and 25 part-time.

 The new appointees are:

 Mr Philip Green Ms Regina Perton Ms Robin Hunt Ms Danica Buljan Mr Edwin Delofski Mr Richard Derewlany Ms Suseela Durvasula Ms Mary Feeney Mr James Ferguson Ms Reena Ghelani Mr Patrick Gowans Ms Geraldine Hoeben Ms Giuseppina Hopkins Mr Denis Hurley Mr Rodney Inder Ms Sandra Kerr Ms Suzanne Leal Ms Elizabeth Lee Mr Gordon Matthews Mr Ian McCluskey Dr Fedor Mediansky Ms Carmel Morfuni Mrs Louise Nicholls Mr Michael Northcott Mr Christopher Packer Mr Stefan Romaniw OAM Mr Shahyar Roushan Mrs Karen Synon Ms Lisa Ward Mrs Joy Whitaker Mr Stephen Whitlam Ms Lucinda Wright

 RRT Deputy Principal Member MRT Senior Member MRT Senior Member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member RRT part-time member RRT part-time member RRT part-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member RRT full-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member RRT full-time member RRT part-time member MRT part-time member RRT part-time member MRT full-time member RRT full-time member MRT full-time member MRT part-time member RRT full-time member RRT full-time member RRT part-time member MRT part-time member MRT part-time member RRT full-time member MRT full-time member

  

 27 September 2001

 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

