---
title: "Democrats call on Government to repudiate false linking of terrorism and boat-people."
date: "2001-09-14"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228755
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8TX46%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 14 September 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/537

 Democrats call on Government to repudiate false linking of terrorism and boat-people

 Statements linking boat people to terrorism are absurd and dangerous and should be repudiated by the Government, say the Australian Democrats.

 The Australian Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the Democrats are very concerned at statements by Defence Minster Peter Reith that boats arriving in Australia could be a ‘pipeline for terrorism’.

 “The two issues are clearly different and it is irresponsible for Government Ministers to link the two.

 “The current community debate about asylum seekers should not be inflamed by falsely linking it to the unanimous outrage at the carnage in the USA.

 “A terrorist is highly unlikely to risk their life sailing long distances in a leaky boat.”

 Senator Bartlett said, “Clearly Australia should re-examine all our security processes in the light of the terrorist attack, but that is a separate matter to how to process asylum seekers.

 “It is crucial at a time like this that the Government acts responsibly to allay community fears and concerns.

 “Widespread reports of harassment and abuse of Muslims in Australia show how volatile the current situation is and it is crucial that further antagonism is not generated towards Muslims or to refugees.

 “The cold bloodedness of this terrorist attack shows exactly why people desperately flee persecution and tyranny to seek asylum in many parts of the world,” concluded Senator Bartlett.

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

