---
title: "Psychiatrist warnings the latest blow to Howard's crumbling refugee policy."
date: "2001-12-10"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232336
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EBL56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 10 December 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/742

 Psychiatrist warnings the latest blow to Howard’s crumbling refugee policy The Australian Democrats say a direction to members of the Australian College of Psychiatrists not to take jobs in Australian detention centres is the latest in a series of blows to the Federal Government’s unworkable refugee regime.

 Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett said the advice by the Chair of the College of Psychiatrists, Dr Louise Newman, that it would be unethical to work as part of the detention regime is a stark indication of how inhumane the mandatory detention policy of the two larger parties is.

 “Long-term detention of children, lack of certainty, spiralling expenses, growing trauma and suffering are all occurring as a direct result of Australia’s refugee policies, yet it is still having no effect on reducing the numbers of people seeking protection,” Senator Bartlett said.

 “Not only do we have the peak body of psychiatrists saying this approach is unethical, we have a Defence Minister saying costs are out of control, experts in the field saying the policy does not deter people smugglers, and community groups providing accounts of enormous suffering and deprivation.”

 Senator Bartlett continued, “The Government is responsible for the well-being of the people it detains, particularly children.

 “It is also responsible for the many unaccompanied minors who have been released from detention and who are now out in the community.

 “As Justice Marcus Einfeld has said, what is occurring is basically child abuse.  The Government may well one day find itself being held accountable for the huge trauma it is inflicting on children.

 “If that occurs, they will have no defence.  They won’t be able to argue there was no alternative and they won’t be able to say they weren’t warned.

 “The Democrats have highlighted for many years the unworkability of the Government’s policy. With each new warning, the urgency grows for the Government to change its course,” Senator Bartlett concluded.

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

