---
title: "Andren rejects government's ship removal bill."
date: "2001-08-29"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227803
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MRT46%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare

 M e d i

 a

 R e l e a

 s e

 29th August 2001

 Andren Rejects Government’s Ship Removal Bill   

 The Federal government’s “Removal of Ships” legislation hastily introduced and passed by the House of Representatives tonight is an over reaction, according to Member for Calare Peter Andren.

 “I had half an hour to study the draft copy of the bill provided by the Prime Minister tonight, and I decided it does nothing to solve either the current Norwegian Tampa asylum seekers problem or any future similar situation,” Mr Andren said.

 “The Bill defies Australia’s moral responsibilities.  

 “I firmly believe the Government is fanning racial tensions in our community by rushing legislation into Parliament both last night and tonight, to counter difficulties as they arise in handling the Tampa drama.

 “We almost risked a race-based election in 1998 over Native Title, we are headed down the same path in the current climate.

 “If this is the way to win Government in this country, then whoever exploits it that way holds a poisoned chalice, and the victory would be political but certainly not moral.

 “I told Parliament that whatever the law of the high seas, we asked the Tampa to pick up these people, and must accept them as our moral responsibility while in the long term seeking full co-operation of our Asian neighbours and the United Nations to rub out the multi-billion dollar smuggling trade.

 “I also told Parliament that while many in my electorate may support this legislation, I cannot, and I can only hope my constituents understand my position.

 “I told Parliament that we cannot claim the high moral ground in sending our troops against Saddam, we cannot condemn the Taliban extremists, if we aren’t prepared to accept there are thousands of persecuted victim of those regimes who manage to escape and head for Australia. Why wouldn’t they?  

 “ I have no problem with legislation designed to weed out frauds from genuine refugees, but the Prime Minister’s retrospective legislation will force not only this but any other boat onto the high seas, and I am not about to support a law like that whatever the personal consequences,” Mr Andren added.  

 For More Information: Peter Andren 6277 2341 or 041 961 2891.

