---
title: "White ribbons tie men in support for eliminating violence against women."
date: "2001-11-23"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232109
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WCI86%22
---

  . 

  MEDIA RELEASE  AUSTRAL Senator Amanda Vanstone 

  e Minister for Family & Community Services I Minister Assistina the Prime Minister for the Status of Women I 155.01 Friday 23rd November 2001 White ribbons tie men in support for eliminating violence against women Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women, Amanda Vanstone, today enlisted the support of a number of high profile men for lnternational Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women - to be held around the world this Sunday, 25 November. Men and boys are asked to wear white ribbons to show their support for the cause. The Minister today at Parliament House in Canberra presented two high-profile supporters, musician Alex Lloyd and rugby league star Ricky Walford, with white ribbons after they agreed to give their backing to the day. “Having the support of high-profile Australians like Alex and Ricky is very important because they are in a position to influence many people and I very much appreciate their involvement,” Senator Vanstone says. Other supporters, including Australian Cricket Team captain Steve Waugh, TV personality Rove McManus, Canberra Canons captains CJ Bruton and Brad Williams, captain of the Australian Men’s Water Polo Team Daniel Marsden, Olympic athlete diver Dean Pullar, rugby league star Allan Langer and athlete Matt Shirvington - are ail publicly declaring their support by wearing the white ribbons this week. “These men will be joined by many other individuals and community groups across Australia showing their support for the elimination of violence against women,” Senator Vanstone said. “Violence affects too many women in our society. There is an appalling level of violence in our community which cannot be tolerated. One in five Australian women in Australia has been sexually assaulted during their I if etime . One in four Australian women who have been in a relationship has experienced domestic violence. Nine out of ten victims of sexual assault in Australia do not report the incident to the police. Four out of five victims of sexual assault in Australia do not seek professional support. 

  -2- 

  Aria winning musician, Alex Lloyd, said, we have a personal responsibility to work  through problems in our own relationships without ever resorting to violence. 

  “Violence in any form is wrong. We all know it’s wrong. We should all stand up, together,  and say it’s wrong,” Alex said. 

  “Men and women working together -joining their voices in condemning violence - is  the only way we’ll stop violence against women. 

  “I want to live in a world where women feel safe - don’t you? Then wear a white ribbon  and show the world!” 

  Rugby league star, Ricky Walford, said we need to work together to keep women safe,  keep our families safe and to keep our communities strong. 

  “I know first hand that men can be tough, competitive and strong without ever needing to  be violent,” Ricky said. 

  The International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women provides a  reminder to us all that violence exists in our community and that we all play a role to  ensure it is prevented and, ultimately, eliminated. 

  “The White Ribbon Campaign aims to encourage men and boys to wear a white ribbon  as a personal pledge never to commit, condone nor remain silent about violence against  women ,” Senator Vanstone said. 

  “I urge members of the community, businesses and non-government organisations to  take part in activities to raise awareness and stop violence against women and girls.” 

  As part of its campaign against violence, the Federal Government, through Partnerships  Against Domestic Violence, will be supporting a national forum on the subject of  violence next month. 

  The forum, Across the Lifespan: Violence Throughout the lives of Women and  Girls, will be staged in Perth between December 10-1 1. 

  It’s the fourth in a series of Partnerships forums examining issues surrounding violence.  Others have covered violence in the lives of children, Indigenous communities and men. 

  The Federal Government has committed $50 million to Partnerships Against Domestic  Violence to develop measures to prevent domestic violence. 

  Minister’s Media Contact: Kevin Donnellan 041 9 400 078 

  More information about Partnerships Against Domestic Violence is available at  xcww.padv. dprnc. BOV. au 

  Messages from Supporters 

  MATT SHIRVINGTON  “The majority of men are not violent. We should stand up and let the world know that we  think violence against women is wrong. 

  “And, we should not ever turn a blind eye when we know it’s happening. I urge all of us  to speak out against violence.” 

  ALLAN LANGER  “Violence is experienced in too many families. It hurts men and women and children. 

  “But most blokes find it hard to talk about. So, if it’s someone you know, one of your  mates, then talk to them. 

  “Tell them to get help - it’s there for them and their families.” 

  DEAN PULLAR  “Putting women down, making unwanted sexual comments, intimidating them in any  way - this is violence. 

  “So is talking a woman into having sex when she doesn’t really want to. 

  “It’s wrong, dead wrong. 

  “I’m wearing a white ribbon because I don’t do this. And nobody else should, either.” 

  DANIEL MARSDEN  “The high instance of violence against women in Australian society and  across the globe is appalling. 

  “The time is certainly overdue for ’real’ men to take a stand against this violence and  become active in delivering the message to these impostors that think it ok to abuse  women. 

  “I encourage all ‘real’ men to wear a white ribbon and show these individuals, some of  whom you may even call friend or brother or father, that it is NOT ok.” 

  MEDIA BACKGROUNDER 

  International Day for the  Elimination of Violence  Against Women 

  On 17 December 1999, the United Nations  General Assembly adopted a resolution  designating 25 November as the  International Day for the Elimination of 

  Violence Against Women (I DEVAW).  Australia supported the adoption of this  resolution. The International Day for the  Elimination of Violence Against Women is  designed to encourage governments and  community groups the world over to support  activities to raise public awareness of  violence against women. 

  Violence against women 

  One in five women in Australia has been  sexually assaulted during their lifetime. 

  One in four women who have been in a  relationship has experienced domestic  violence in Australia. 

  Nine out of ten victims of sexual assault  in Australia do not report the incident to  the police. 

  Four out of five victims of sexual assault  in Australia do not seek professional  support. 

  Women and girls in some parts of the  world are victims of forced marriages,  female genital mutilation (estimated to  be 130 million) or are murdered in 

  ‘honour crimes’ (estimated at 5000 each  year) because their alleged conduct  shames the family. 

  White Ribbon Campaign 

  The White Ribbon Campaign is being run in  conjunction with IDEVAW, and aims to  encourage men and boys to wear a white  ribbon as a personal pledge never to  commit, condone nor remain silent about  violence against women. 

  10,000 ribbons are being distributed around  Australia by key men’s groups (Men Against  Sexual Assault and No To Violence) and the  National Women’s Secretariats, NCWA,  YWCA and BPW Australia, as well as being 

  placed in some liquor stores, video stores  and newsagencies. 

  Many high profile men are showing their  support for the Campaign in some way,  including Steve Waugh, Rove McManus,  Allan Langer, Ricky Walford, Daniel 

  Marsden, Dean Pullar, Matt Shirvington, and  CJ Bruton and Brad Williams from the  Canberra Cannons. 

  Web information sources 

  Domestic Violence:  ww w . padv. d pm c.aov.au/service. h tm 

  National Crime Prevention:  www.aq.qov.au/ncp/priorities 

  Violence in conflict situations:  www. redcross .orq .au or  www.unifem .undP.org 

  Refugee Council of Australia:  www.refuqeecouncil.orq.au/foundation. htm 

  Sources: Women’s Safety Survey (ABS 7996);  Crime and Safety Survey (ABS 1998);  Violence and Health (WHO 1999). 

