---
title: "Sydney, NSW: transcript of doorstop interview: refugees, political ticker."
date: "2001-09-09"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228588
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TPW46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Refugees, Political Ticker //media/0901/kbmcnsw090901.html Monday, 10 September 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Refugees, Political Ticker

 Transcript - Sydney, NSW - 9 September 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 BEAZLEY: The Labor Party stands as second to none in being prepared to protect Australian borders. After all, it was the Australian Labor Party which created many years ago the Royal Australian Navy.

 John Howard has proposed a piece of legislation in relation to our contemporary problems. If that is part of a real solution, he'll get real support from us, and he'll get real support from the community. But, increasingly, it looks like this Government is just making things up as they go along. As they seek an electoral outcome, as opposed to a long-term solution, all we're getting from them is short-term, ad hoc propositions.

 The Labor Party has real solutions. The first real solution is that we get a decent agreement with the Indonesians whereby on the one hand we offer to take, within our cap of refugees, legitimately determined refugees from Indonesian camps - play our fair share. In return for that, those who illegally enter Australia from that source go back to that source. That's part of a long-term real solution.

 It's quite clear from the visit of the Ministers to Jakarta, with all the vagueness that they've come back with, that whatever else they've been negotiating - apart from fine words - they've not negotiated that long-term solution.

 The second is the role of the Royal Australian Navy and the alternative of a coastguard. Whatever else happened on the high seas the other day, it is quite clear it is no job for the Royal Australian Navy. What is their job? Their job is to defend Australia in hot war situations. Their equipment, their training and the way in which they exercise has to be devoted to the essential task of being able to handle a major threat. Any involvement of the Navy has to be only short-term. What we have on our hands is a classic maritime police role, and a classic maritime police role is performed by a coastguard.

 For the last two years I've been advocating that real solution - a coastguard. It's high time the Government looked at the expense of the operations that they have now, look at the fact they'd make great savings in operating effectively with a coastguard and come on board with Labor's real solutions.

 JOURNALIST: As a former Defence Minister, what's your feedback from the armed services? What are you hearing?

 BEAZLEY: The Navy would take the view that, while they're always prepared to do what a government asks them to do, they are also proud of the role that they play in defending Australia. They devote their lives to ensuring that they can handle a high threat military environment. This is not a high threat military environment. They understand and know that this task would be best performed by a coastguard, leaving them to be the backup in extreme circumstance, but not always the front line. The tip-off that the Government knows that this is not what the Navy is meant for is seen in the fact that they've put this up as a three week solution which they'll review at the end of that. I've seen estimates around talking about this costing the defence forces $50 million. What we ought to be doing is providing a coastguard that can do the task for much less and properly trained in constabulary terms and trained in terms of dealing with international legal situations involved in picking up refugees. Those are the people that ought to be handling the problem in the long-term and we've got the long-term solution.

 JOURNALIST: Will Labor be supporting the legislation in the Senate over Ashmore Reef and Christmas Island?

 BEAZLEY: What I said at the outset was this: if John Howard can show this is part of a real solution, then he'll get real support from us and he'll get real support from the community. But so far all we have is evidence that this was dropped, if you like, in a seat-of-the-pants exercise. He shouts it over his shoulder as he boards an aircraft at what is looking like an increasingly non-event visit to the United States. They've got to do better than that. They've got to get out there and convince the Australian people that they actually have a long-term idea about how these things should be handled. There's no detail on this. And there is no detail on the problems that occurred on the high seas the other day.

 JOURNALIST: But there's obviously a lot of people ready to get on boats and come to Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef. What needs to be done in the short-term?

 BEAZLEY: What needs to be done in the short-term cannot be done by this Government. What needs to be done in the short-term is to put in place a long-term solution. He's had three Ministers in Jakarta. What we would do on election to office would be go to Jakarta with an offer that would see those who come illegally to Australia, returned to their port of embarkation in Indonesia. But we would be prepared to play a role within our existing ceiling of refugees - and there's plenty in that existing ceiling of refugees in seeing them processed legitimately through the Indonesian camps, through the UNHCR and we would take our fair share within that ceiling.

 JOURNALIST: But, Mr Beazley, in the short-term, wouldn't this legislation provide just one more hurdle in the flight to Australia, to the numbers who are still coming here?

 BEAZLEY: As I said, if he has got a real solution, and this is part of a real solution, then he'll get real support from us. But, increasingly, it's looking like this is all just flying by the seat-of-your-pants, just doing things on an ad hoc, vague basis. It's a heck of a thing to throw out an idea like that with no detail, no direction, then board a plane and disappear. What it requires is serious, long-term attention. They did try that after the failures of their diplomacy with Indonesia during the Tampa episode. But all it seems we've got from the Ministers who have returned is fine words, promises of action. We've had that before. But there is nothing in place. We have got to get something in place.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what would be the long-term solution?

 BEAZLEY: The long-term solution is this: negotiate an agreement with the Indonesians whereby people

 who come to this country illegally from that source are returned. In return for that, within the ceiling of our refugee program - which is 12,000 a year - in return for using part of those numbers for people legitimately processed through camps in Jakarta, Australia will play their part in dealing with the problem. But it takes a government that understands that the immediate problem is a problem which emerges from that area and is prepared to undertake not megaphone diplomacy, but intricate negotiations to get an outcome in place.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, are you saying that unless there's a deal done with Indonesia, you won't be supporting the new legislation?

 BEAZLEY: No, what I'm saying is this: if John Howard can convince us that it's part of the real solution, then he'll get real support from us. As I said, it increasingly looks like he's just making this up as he goes along.

 JOURNALIST: Today Mark Vaile has reiterated the problem for politicians for their families in light of Michael Wooldridge's decision. How concerned are you about the pressures on politicians?

 BEAZLEY: I've been a Member of Parliament for 21 years. I've been a Minister for 13 years. I've been a Leader of the Opposition for five years. I've had to haul myself from Western Australia over to the eastern States for all those 21 years. When are a few of these Liberal Party Ministers going to get a bit of ticker to govern?

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

