---
title: "Boats, Christmas Island: transcript of press conference."
date: "2001-09-10"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228602
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ORW46%22
---

  

 Transcript

 Boats, Christmas Island

 Press Conference - 10 September 2001

 Question: Minister can you update us on the latest with Nauru and (inaudible)

 Mr Ruddock: Well I understand Mr Reith is coming back today and we'll have something further to say on that. I mean the situation we have is this. We are determined to ensure that as from 2PM on Saturday Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef will be outside the migration zone. People who come to either Christmas Island or to the Ashmore Reef from now will be processed in accordance with the same criteria that would be used if they were on Nauru, if they were in Indonesia, if they presented their claims in Malaysia, if their claims were dealt with by the UNHCR in Pakistan and Iran.

 This measure will ensure that people who do not enter our migration zone will have their claims dealt with in accordance with the international standards and not the more beneficial approach that has been operative in Australia and which has not been addressed over sometime through the failure of the Parliament to approve a number of measures in several features of the immigration legislation.

 Question: Minister how confident are you about that deadline of Saturday given that the administrators of Christmas Island themselves are saying it's too early to judge -Ruddock: Too early to judge what?

 Question: That, whether they're expecting any changes are not.

 Ruddock: I'm sorry, the administrators on Christmas Island I think merely said that they are awaiting further advice from us. It's got nothing to do with administrators. This law will operate from 2PM Saturday. From that point in time Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef, if the legislation is enacted will be no longer part of the migration zone.

 That simply means that people will not land there and be flown off to Australia to be dealt with under our system for processing and dealing with asylum claims. What it means is there will be no basis upon which will be able to land on Christmas Island and see it as a taxi rank to brought automatically to Australia, engage our protection obligations, have the opportunity to have their claims considered first by the department, second by the refugee review tribunal and then to enter into the judicial review process which they are doing right now.

 Question: Won't most of them end up in Australia anyway?

 Ruddock: I mean you make that assertion I'm simply saying that if you look at the, if you look at the basis upon which people are assessed by the UNHCR, 80% getting claims accepted in Australia, 14% getting claims accepted in Indonesia. Now why the difference? The difference is because there are two systems operating. One which approaches the matter with rigour and one has been unwound in Australia's case by decisions taken over a long period of time by courts expanding the interpretation of the refugee convention. Now that's what's been happening.

 Those outcomes are demonstrable. If people are assessed elsewhere and the claims that they present are of the same order and that they present in Indonesia or the present in Malaysia or they present in Pakistan then most of them will not be coming to Australia. They will be going home. Or they will be going back to places in which they were otherwise safe and secure. And let me, I mean you ask the question as to what peoples intention will be.

 I can tell you when people had the option of going back to Pakistan or remaining in Cambodia, where they would have been safe and secure, let me make it very clear, they would have had protection in Cambodia. They said look we'd rather go home. And what we saw in relation to the Cambodian boat was that there were 25% on Pakistani travel documents. The rest of them were on documents that gave them an entitlement to return to Pakistan. And in fact of the 243 people who were on the boat arrested in Cambodia 174 volunteered to go back to Pakistan. Now that's what happened.

 Question: inaudible

 Ruddock: Well it's not a question of getting people back to Afghanistan. If you've have people who have been resident and in many cases born outside of Afghanistan where they have been safe and secure, it is not a question of moving them somewhere else for safety. It is not a question of them being entitled to refugee status elsewhere. And I want to say something

 else about the figures that I use because some people have tried to bring into question the example about Afghani's in Indonesia.

 The fact is that our figures are derived from the total population that we see in Australia making claims. And the figures we use in relation to the UNHCR are the total population that they see and the numbers of people who are found to be refugees. It's not a question of saying because some people take the view that they won't wait and press their claims because they have some doubts about whether they'd get up I assume that you can in some way disregard those for the purposes of comparison.

 The comparison has to be on the total number of people that the UNHCR sees, not the fact that some people at a point in time in the processing either withdraw from it or don't come forward and put their claims with anymore detail. And those people who have been trying to question the figures need to understand that you have to compare like with like, apples with apples and oranges and oranges, not compare oranges and apples which is what they've been seeking to do to try and suggest that that comparison is without credit.

 Question: Minister could I come back to the Parliament. The Democrats leader Natasha Stott Despoja was saying this morning that you didn't want to see policy made ad hoc. That the deadline for the legislation should be (inaudible)

 Ruddock: Hmm that's right.

 Question: So what will you do to convince her and the Labor Party to pass the Bill?

 Ruddock: Well let me just say this is not ad hoc. It is a matter that we have been considering over a period of time. It has arisen now because of the immediate situation that we face. Look if you had the luxury of sitting around and saying look we've got years to work this out and we can plan it, you might well take the view that, that you could present it to the Parliament, you could have a parliamentary committee go out and take evidence from all and sundry and you could bring it back next year.

 Which is I guess what the Democrats are suggesting they would like to do. But when you have, at the moment, according to the ABC, 5000 people in Indonesia, intent on coming to Australia and when you have reports that there are as many as 4000 now in Malaysia intent on travelling to Indonesia you are not dealing with the 4000 people that we saw last year. You're dealing with a potential population of 9000 and who could move fairly quickly and the traffickers are watching how we respond to these matters.

 A lot of the traffic was held up, and it was held up because they were watching, that is the traffickers, to see how we handled this issue. And what we've seen over this last weekend, were the traffickers having seen what happened to Tampa now wanting to test whether or not it is business as usual.

 And business as usual for them is landing people on Christmas Island, seeing them brought

 to the Australian mainland, seeing them able to lodge protection claims, seeing them able to take those claims through a system which produces very high levels of approval, even for people who have no legitimate claim for refugee status because they test the limits of the system. I mean let me make it very clear to you what happens and what has happened in Australia.

 I mean some people don't appreciate, they think we're talking about the same Refugee Convention. We have a jurisprudential model. What that means is that the courts end up adjudicating on particular cases and every case where a judge makes a decision becomes a precedent. I'm sure you're all familiar with precedent.

 What precedent means is that when a Judge makes a particular decision but every other decision maker, whether it's my department or officers, the Refugee Review Tribunal, has to follow those precedents, that's what it means and when you have a Judge making a decision as happened last, a couple of weeks ago, that in order to found a refugee claim in Australia all you had to do was establish that in your home country, you couldn't get the job that you wanted. Couldn't get the job that you wanted.

 This was the geologist who said I cannot get a job working as a geologist because most of them are employed by the Government and the Government will not employ me. He had other jobs, he had other incomes, he was free to get other jobs in his home country, but he was saying I cannot get the job for which I am best qualified. Well how many of you are aware of people in Australia who'd like to get jobs in particular fields and can't. And the fact is that it happens around the world and you can call it discrimination but it is not persecution.

 But under the Refugee Convention interpreted in Australia, by the courts, under the jurisprudential model, that's what it's become. And it means people now know that if you get to Australia into the migration zone that's how your claims will be dealt with. What we're saying is, if you get to Christmas Island, if you get to Ashmore Reef you are no longer in the migration zone.

 Your claims will not be determined in accordance with that jurisprudential model, they'll be determined in the same way that they'd be determined in Indonesia, as they'll be determined on Nauru, or as if they were being dealt with by the UNHCR in any other part of the world. And some people ask is this, is this unusual? Let me just say it is not unusual. The United States does not accept asylum claims under its system if somebody gets to Guantanamo Bay in Cuba. If you get there you're not in the United States even though it's a United States territory.

 I understand they do the same in Micronesia where, if you get to any of those Islands in Micronesia which have been part of the, part of the United States territories, that does not mean you go to the United States to (inaudible) part of their migration zone. The same applied to Hong Kong, when Hong Kong was a British colony, the Vietnamese who went by boat to Hong Kong, weren't taken to London to have their asylum claims dealt with, they were dealt with in Hong Kong and if you look at New Caledonia, there were boats that went there from China and as I understand it, it didn't entitle those people to go to metropolitan France, even though New Caledonia is part of France.

 I simply make the point, the fact that you have territories doesn't mean that you have to, that you have to take people from those territories and enter them into your migration zone.

 Question: And what if this legislation fails?

 Ruddock: Well if the legislation fails we'll know the reason it fails.

 Question: Inaudible

 Ruddock: If, if, well the legislation will get through the house. If the legislation fails in the Senate it will fail because of want of support and if that's what happens it will be on the heads of those who oppose it. I don't mean to make any greater point than that.

 The Labor Party's indicated that its (inaudible) to support the legislation and we would look forward to that support but let me just make it very clear that the approach that we are taking in relation to these matters is comprehensive and there can be no argument in the context of the paper that I released last week that the Government is dealing with these matters in an ad hoc way and leaving some issues unaddressed. The paper that I distributed last week sets out the comprehensive approach that we are taking in relation to this matter.

 Question: Inaudible

 Ruddock: Well look, I mean my view is that we will see from the discussions that we've initiated with the Indonesians some further developments. There are meetings that will be taking place today, or not today, I mean this week in Indonesia between Australian Defence officials, between Immigration officials and police and I came away from the discussions with my Indonesian counterpart and with other Indonesian Ministers, quite optimistic that they would view these matters, in a constructive way and as Alexander Downer said yesterday, in commenting on these issues, you can't expect when you first put these matters on the table that they'll be immediately responded to, thank you very much.

 We want to accommodate you and we'll deal with them immediately. People need to think about some of the ideas that you've put before them and I think you need to be realistic about that. I think that the point I made initially needs also to be understood. The smugglers have been, have been testing us, there's no doubt about that and they have withheld boats to see how the Tampa issue was dealt with and what they've seen is that those people have not entered the Australian migration zone.

 They've now tested it with another boat and they now know that that group of people are not destined to enter the migration zone and they will no doubt test us again and as from Saturday, Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef will, if the legislation is enacted, be no longer part of the migration zone. So they will be telling people either, we think we can still

 get you to Australia in the light of that and people will arrive (inaudible) I suspect that those changes will have a very significant impact on perceptions about whether Australians are going to be accommodating or not.

 All right well thank you very much.

 Index of Transcripts

  

