---
title: "Democrats: Government continues to vilify victims of oppression as bombs drop."
date: "2001-10-09"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229874
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ES356%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 09 October 2001  MEDIA RELEASE                          01/601

 Democrats: Government continues to vilify victims of oppression as bombs drop The Australian Democrats have condemned outright the Howard Government’s ongoing determination to vilify and demonise asylum seekers in Australian waters.

 "At the same time as their region is being turned into a war zone, Mr Howard and his team are continuing to paint asylum seekers as criminals rather than victims," said the Australian Democrats' Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett.

 "Reports that Australian defence personnel were required to open fire on a boatload of presumably unarmed people are an absolute disgrace,” said Senator Bartlett.

 "Mr Ruddock is posturing about people diving overboard as a publicity stunt at the same time as assault rifles are being used to try to terrify these people into submission.

 Senator Bartlett continued, "It is time for the Prime Minister to listen to the widespread voices of extreme concern coming from the leaders of our Christian churches.

 "The Democrats support calls from the Melbourne Anglican Synod for a Royal Commission to be held into our treatment and policies relating to refugees.

 "The lies of this Government, the grotesque misleading of the Australian people, must be exposed for the disgrace that it is.

 "The repeated lie of the Coalition that it is illegal to enter a country to seek protection must be exposed once and for all.

 “Now more than ever, when millions are fleeing through the region, it is also clear there is no real queue for refugees to use.  Australia has closed down its Immigration office in Pakistan and now expects people to apply through Bangkok!” said Senator Bartlett.

 "And Mr Howard's repeated claim that Australia takes its fair share of refugees is also as false and distorted as every other statement he makes about this issue.  The fact is that Australia is not even in the top 10 when it comes to accepting refugees.

 "When there is such a humanitarian crisis erupting, it's about time for the lies to end and the truth to be told to the Australian people,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

