---
title: "Nairn supports legislation restricting illegal immigration."
date: "2001-08-29"
creators:
  - "Nairn, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of NAIRN, GARY, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227797
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q2M96%22
---

 Gary Nairn MP  Federal Member for Eden-Monaro PO Box 232, Queanbeyan NSW 2620 Tollfree NSW 1800 041 539 Ph: (02) 6297 3952 Fax: (02) 6297 5768

 Press Release Ref: 481 Published: 29/8/2001 Title: Nairn supports legislation restricting illegal immigration

 The Federal Member for Eden-Monaro, Gary Nairn, yesterday supported the Minister for  Immigration, Philip Ruddock, who introduced legislation in an effort to reduce the burden on our  current refugee protection arrangements.

 He also strongly supports the Federal Government’s landing denial of the Norwegian vessel  currently off Christmas Island with over 400 illegal immigrants aboard.

 “This legislation will address two important issues:

 1. It will firstly address the current influx of illegal immigrants arriving through sophisticated  people smuggling schemes. The vast majority of these people are almost “coached” through the  immigration procedure before they arrive to maximise their chances of being deemed a refugee.  This includes the disposal of identification which would correctly identify them as not being  refugees.

 2. It will also address the increasingly broad interpretation given by the Courts to Australia’s  international obligations. Now, under current common law created by the Courts, the Courts are  providing protection visas in cases that fall well beyond the scope of what Parliament, and our  international agreements, originally intended. In short, people are being permitted entry, where  strictly they should not. 

 “Without this legislative change the effect has been to create the international impression that  Australia is a “soft target” for illegal immigrants. 

 The Government continues to appreciate the fact that there are genuine refugees who flee in  fear of their lives, from political or personal persecution. 

 “The aim of this legislation is to create a system more exact in its sifting of the genuine versus  the non-genuine applicants. Australia has an international reputation for our respect for human  rights, and this legislation will make us more capable of being able to assist those who are  genuinely in reed of refuge,” concluded Mr Nairn. 

