---
title: "Minister warns that illegal arrivals threaten Australia's Humanitarian Program."
date: "2001-04-27"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211223217
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AGX36%22
---

  

 News Room

 Minister Warns That Illegal Arrivals Threaten Australia's Humanitarian Program MPS 046/2001

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today warned that a continued influx of people arriving illegally seeking asylum was threatening Australia's ability to help those most in need.

 The Minister was speaking at the announcement of Australia's Humanitarian Program intake which will see 12,000 new places available for the 2001-2002 program year.

 "Every time someone coming here illegally seeking asylum is granted refugee status it means that someone in greater need overseas who does not have the money to pay a people smuggler misses out," the Minister said.

 "Australia has had the most generous per capita refugee and humanitarian resettlement program and while boat arrivals have seen our ranking drop to second behind Canada, we remain far more generous than most other nations.(see ranking table at end)

 "Most other developed nations, for example, the UK and Germany have no resettlement program at all, instead taking only those people who have the opportunity and resources to reach their border.

 "Australia's priority is to help those most in need - those people languishing in intolerable conditions in refugee camps, not those who have the substantial amounts of money to pay a people smuggler and who often live in relative safety and comfort outside of their country of origin."

 The Minister explained that in addition to the 12,000 new places, the program will be supplemented by any unused places rolled over from the current year's program.

 This will give management flexibility to meet the pressures placed on the system by the continued influx of unauthorised boat arrivals.

 Within the program, there will be an estimated 4,000 places for refugees to be resettled from offshore.

 "While the number of unauthorised arrivals has been decreasing, it is still difficult to predict what might occur and as a result, a notional 6,300 places have been set aside to meet possible onshore needs," the Minister said.

 "This would cover both unauthorised boat arrivals and claims from people who have arrived lawfully by air.

 "Consequently there will be limited scope to accommodate the demand offshore under the Special Humanitarian Program.

 "Australia, along with a small number of other resettlement countries, continues to be a major participant in global refugee resettlement, however this is currently being affected by the influx of unauthorised arrivals.

 "Within the Humanitarian Program we will continue to give priority to people who are in the most vulnerable situations, and have the greatest need for resettlement places.

 "I am very concerned about the threat to Australia's ability to find a place for those refugees offshore who cannot go home, but are not safe where they remain. Many will never be able to afford to pay a people smuggler, so as a compassionate country we must preserve places for them."

 Regional priority in the Program will continue to be given to Africa, the Middle East and South West Asia, and the former Yugoslavia.

 Offshore Resettlement Programs - An International Comparison - 2000

 Country

 Size of Offshore Program per 1,000 Head of Population

 Canada 45

 Australia 41

 Norway 33

 United States 29

 Sweden 20

 New Zealand 19

 Finland 13

 Denmark 9

 Netherlands 3

 27 April 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

