---
title: "Leadership."
date: "2001-10-02"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211229538
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NUT76%22
---

  THE SYDNEY PAPERS SPRING 2001 --‘:* 1;” / ! 

  iq . * 1 ( . * -* /_ t f’- ,- __ 159 

  LEADERSHIP 

  Natasha Stott Despoja 

  I acknowledge the traditional owners of this land.   Last month at the Yeperenye Festival, in the Northern Territory,   the Indigenous Peoples welcomed all Australians to their land in a   gesture of reconciliation. It was part of the Centenary of Federation,   but also, a landmark of significance in its own right, in our journey as a 

  nation. As an example of cooperation and good will between peoples, it   stands in contrast to the recent handling of asylum seekers.   Of course, it stands in even starker contrast to the acts of 

  terrorism in America, three weeks ago tonight.   I am honoured to be addressing the Sydney Institute for the first   time as Leader of the Australian Democrats. The Institute provides an   important stage for speakers to explore issues broader than either the 

  legislative or talkback agenda. It seems there is something of the   confessional about the Sydney Institute, albeit “on the record”. In   reviewing the contributions of previous political speakers, I noted some   surprising honesty, followed on occasion, by some frantic back   peddling. 

  Examples of candour include, Dr Carmen Lawrence calling for   her party to break free of the disproportionate power of unions. And   the New Zealand Minister who raised the possibility of a trans-Tasman   federation. I think we can assume that is off the agenda for awhile. In 

  the days after his speech to the Sydney Institute, Treasurer Peter   Costello was forced to rule out any “secret” plans to increase the GST.   Mind you, he did not say “never, ever”.   Addresses to the Sydney Institute can also be predictive, and an 

  opportunity to seed ideas. Last year, ACTU President Sharan Burrow   said Superannuation funds should be legally forced to disclose whether   they take the environmental, social and ethical impact of their 

  investments into account. This year, the Democrats successfully moved   amendments to the Financial Services Reform Bill, for this to occur.   So I congratulate the Institute for providing a space for political   ideas, outside the dichotic debate of the parliament. 

  160 

  LEADERSHIP 

  I was due to address the Sydney Institute the day after 11 

  September (terrorist attacks in America). Gerard Henderson agreed   that my talk should be postponed, as a number of events in the 

  following days, were. I know many of us were up most of the night,   watching the television, crying for strangers and fearing for friends. The   latest toll is almost seven thousand dead from all over the world.   Twenty-three Australians are believed to be dead, and the whereabouts 

  of another ten are still unclear. A friend of mine was in the World Trade   Centre and did not escape. The painful loss felt by his family and many   friends is replicated hundreds of times across the nation and thousands   of times across the globe. 

  The emotional, economic and political fallout of the terrorist   attacks, highlights how interlinked the world has become. One recent   impact, the cancelling of CHOGM, has brought   of the election campaign. 

  When I addressed the National Press Club   the Democrats would not support tax cuts until 

  forward the likely date 

  two months ago, I said   we first started to pull 

  people out of poverty and looked at necessary spending in health,   education and environmental protection. I expressed a concern that the   federal election campaign would degenerate into a contest for the   biggest fist full of dollars, as taxation looked set to dominate the federal 

  election, for the third time in eight years. I said at the time that when   you think of the great political movements, the inspiring leaders, the   most memorable speeches that have moved a nation, there was not that   many about taxation. 

  “Give me excise or give me death.” 

  “The only thing we have to tax, is tax itself” 

  “Ask not what your country can do for you, but what your accountant can.” 

  In retrospect, a tax based election now looks quite attractive, compared 

  to the prospect of a campaign based on a phoney war against a few   thousand asylum seekers, or Australia participating in a real war in the   Middle East. I still hope that this election will be about the triple 

  bottom line: the economy, the community and our environment. I call   on all parties to be truthful and positive in their campaigns. Hiram   Warren, in a speech to the United States Senate in the early 20* 

  Century, said, “The f&t casualty when war comes, is truth”. I do not   know whether that is true, but certainly truth is often a casualty in an   election campaign.   With around six weeks to a federal election, the topic of 

  leadership is being discussed daily. Gerard Henderson in the Sydney 

  Morning HeraZd a month ago, said, “Leadership is a fine concept. It’s   just that, emergencies aside, most of us don’t like being led for very   long.” l 

  THE SYDNEY PAPERS SPRING 2001 

  161 

  Well, we have had three emergencies in the last month: the 

  handling of asylum seekers to keep them offshore; the collapse of   Ansett; and the terrorist attacks in America.   US President George Bush’s capacity for real leadership will be   tested over the coming months and years. The 

  that a war - even a relatively successful one   second term. We are in a period of rapid 

  Australia, we are re-appraising our role. 

  “globalisation” or Fukuyama’s description, the 

  lesson of Bush senior is   - is no guarantee of a 

  global change and, in   Whether you call it 

  “Great Disruption”, we 

  are experiencing great change. There is a renegotiation of communicat-   ion, communities, and identities, as we move from an industrial society   to an information, or knowledge-based one; and from an international   world of independent nation-states and distinct cultures and societies,   to an interlinked, interdependent, global one. 

  In a political and social climate of rapid change, we must develop   the new institutions and approaches that can respond to human needs   as readily as to new economic and technological developments. At the   same time that Australia faces the challenges of change, we have a crisis   of faith in politicians and political institutions. For many people, 

  politics just sounds like two dogs barking. While too many members of   the government and opposition spend their time thinking up clever   ways of calling each other liars, Australians are looking for alternatives.   The public are clearly turning away from the politics-as-usual 

  approach of the old parties2. At the next election it could be as high as   one in three voters choosing an alternative to Labor or Liberal in the   Senate. The vote for the old parties is also dropping in the House of   Representatives.3 We are increasingly seeing governments elected   without a majority of support in their own right - less than 40 per cent 

  of first preferences.4   The electorate is volatile, and the vote for independent and minor   parties could be considerable.   These are interesting and exciting times for the Australian   Democrats. The polls and membership numbers have risen since   March. I hope we have the momentum to finally break the House   barrier. We are going to run a candidate in every seat and give every   Australian the chance to vote Democrat. The seats of Boothby and 

  Mayo offer real opportunity. There is a spot at the back of the House of   Representatives, on the left hand side of the curve, that looks just right   for the Democrats. It is even conceivable that - one day - the 

  Democrats could hold the balance of power, not only in the Upper   House but the Lower House as well, and that really will change politics.   In the Senate, five of the nine Democrat senators are up for 

  election, including me. How the Democrats poll, and what the 

  Coalition does with its preferences, will determine if Pauline Hanson’s   One Nation shares the balance of power role. Last week’s survey in The 

  162 

  LEADERSHIP 

  Financial Review listed her as the only woman in the list of the ten most 

  overtly powerful people in Australia, and she is not in the parliament.   If One Nation gains more seats in the Parliament, it would have a huge   impact on Australian public policy.   The choice facing the voters is not just which party will be in 

  government, but whether the Democrats will continue to hold the   balance of power in the next Parliament, or a coalition of minor parties   and independents. The Voter’s Voice series in   The Australian news-   paper, looking at the views behind the polls, uncovered deep dissatis- 

  faction in the community with the old parties.   I believe Australians want leadership. The Voter’s Voice survey   found that Australians say they want in their leaders honesty, strength,   dignity and ironically, in light of recent events, compassion. Great   leaders create a shared sense of pride and purpose in a nation, they do 

  not fan fears and play on prejudices. We surely would not want a leader   to pursue conflict, in order to create a crisis. We should avoid a leader   who deliberately demonised others, in order to create a sense of “us   and them”. Genuine social cohesion is about how we feel about 

  ourselves, not our enemies.   The handling of the Tampa issue was good populist politics, but   bad leadership. The Tampa situation was a manufactured emergency, a   created crisis, in contrast to the real crisis we witnessed in America and 

  the emerging developments in the Middle East. Events that could   potentially have serious implications for stability in Indonesia. 

  Australia’s problem with asylum seekers must be put in context. This is   a country of just fewer than 20 million people,5 with an immigration   program of 88,000 a year, and a few thousand asylum seekers a year   approaching on boats. That is not a crisis, unless you make it one. 

  The government set up an imaginary threat and then provided an   imaginary solution. There is unnecessary fear and panic about the   asylum seekers. On immigration, the country is suffering from extreme   roonism, as Tony Abbott might say. The tide of emotion in Australia,   built on years of government demonising of asylum seekers, and 

  convincing the public that there is an invasion occurring and a serious   threat to our sovereign borders.   Understandably, Australians got scared. They wanted 

  something to 

  be done. And John Howard did something. He sent SAS troops and the   navy, to provide a shuttle service to small Pacific Island nations. It was   not a solution, it was not humane, it is receiving international 

  condemnation, it is a lot more expensive than if had we just allowed the   asylum seekers to land at Christmas Island, and, in the long run,   I suspect it will make little difference as to whether the genuine 

  refugees eventually reach Australian shores.   But the Prime Minister did something. He put his foot down in   Canberra and declared no Afghani on the boat would   put their foot 

  THE SYDNEY PAPERS SPRING 2001 

  163 

  down on Australian territory. John Howard was taking a stand and the 

  asylum seekers were remaining at sea, at least in the short term. Prime   Minister John Howard chose the most dramatic, expensive option in   refusing to allow them to land. He added to the drama by putting   before the parliament, in an emergency sitting, legislation that was 

  arguably unconstitutional. Mr Howard was asking for a backdated “Get   Out of Jail Free” card for unspecified military action on the high seas.   He asked the parliament to pass laws that should not have even been   considered, unless Australia was at war. And that is the impression I   believe the Coalition was seeking to create, and they have had a degree 

  of success.   There has been a jump in the polls for Prime Minister Howard   once he started the Clayton’s war against asylum seekers. At the same   time, the Coalition Government was asking for immunity from prose-   cution, we were accused of the crime of treason, for doing what we are   supposed to do - scrutinise legislation and vote according to our   conscience. 

  Talk back hosts, and Coalition politicians, described those of us   who opposed Mr Howard’s so-called solution, as traitors, disloyal,   treasonous. Subsequently, we saw the anger and aggression from   members of the public overflow. “Tow them out to sea and sink them”, 

  “Shoot them on sight” are some of the comments that have been   received. This is xenophobia and racism dressed up as nationalism.   You do not run an immigration and refugee program like a reality   TV show. You do not vote people off the island. There is a sensible 

  solution to the issue of asylum seekers - we could just use our existing   immigration program. We could actually fill the existing quota of   12,000 humanitarian and refugee places. If necessary the 12,000 places   could be expanded to 16,000. That would still be less than one in five   places dedicated to refugees, out of the 88,000 places in the 

  immigration program. This is well within a migration intake that would   lead to a stabilised population of about 23 to 24 million, by the middle   of this century - this is a sensible population policy and supported by   the Democrats. 

  But that would not be a crisis, and Mr Howard would not have   got his jump in the polls.   Politics is more than following every poll. The French revolution-   ary, Ledru-Rollin, is alleged to have said, “There go the people. I must   follow them, for I am their leader.” Sometimes leaders have to lead. 

  Sometimes a leader has to say, “You are going in the wrong direction.”   Otherwise, it is not democracy, it is mob rule. The government’s   handling of the asylum seekers is the worst kind of wedge politics:   dividing the population and taking the bigger half. Australian politics   often follows the lead set by American politics and policy - be it Lee   Atwater’s “wedge politics” or Dick Morris’ “triangulation”. 

  164 

  LEADERSHIP 

  The Coalition, in its approach to reconciliation, industrial issues 

  and most recently immigration, has favoured wedge politics. The ALP,   as has “New Labour” in Britain, has tended toward triangulation -   drawing together the traditional policies of Left and Right movements   to appeal to a carefully-polled centre. If they think it cannot be sold to 

  “middle Australia” marginal electorates, the ALP usually runs scared.   Their “principled” stand against the Border Protection Legisla-   tion did not last.   The problem with triangulation is that it is not about taking the   best policy solutions from either side to address problems, but about   polling voters, and finding out which policies they like best and going   with them because they are more likely to win votes. The trouble is, 

  just following the polls does not lead to credibility. It bankrupts the   policy process and stifles real debate. It says vision and ideals are   irrelevant to getting elected.   Labor went along with the passing of seven extraordinary   migration bills and eventually a guillotine on debate, without proper 

  examination of the legislation. This left the Democrats as the only party   in the parliament that voted against. Labor members were saying “this   is terrible but we’re going to vote for it anyway”. Just like they did on   funding to private rather than public schools. It is like they are trying to   rebrand themselves as “Labor lite”, “low fat Labor”, “I can’t believe it’s   not Labor”. And watching them vote against refugees and public school   funding, I cannot believe it is Labor. 

  While the Democrats could not prevent the passing of these bills,   we could keep them honest, we could ensure that parliament does what   it is supposed to do, scrutinise legislation. We were able to reveal their   flaws, and ensure that the many arguments against the bills - that 

  emerged in the few days we had to consider them - were put on the   public record. We could give a voice to the many Australians who do   not support the legislation, to the many Australians who recognise that   these bills are unworkable, inhumane and unjust. 

  Part of the government’s new cunning plan, is that Christmas   Island and the Ashmore Reef, are no longer Australian territory for   immigration purposes. This of course, will merely encourage asylum   seekers to travel further. Do we really want to return to the situation in   the 1970s and 1980s where Vietnamese and Indochinese died in the   tens, possibly hundreds, of thousands because their boats sank, were   attacked by pirates or the people simply starved? 

  Do we want to return to the days when SOSs were ignored by   some commercial ships because the captains knew that no country   would allow them to unload their human cargoes? Do we want to   return to the late 1930s and 1940s when boatloads of refugees escaping   nazism were turned away from international ports? Another element of   the plan is to set up processing centres outside Australia, presently in 

  THE SYDNEY PAPERS SPRING 2001 

  165 

  Nauru. Outsourcing the problem is the most expensive, inefficient 

  option - as outsourcing often is. And it will not turn the tide. 

  Politicians need to tell the truth about refugees and immigration, about   defence, employment; about the growing gap between the “haves” and   “have nets”.   The old parties are tied to increasingly outdated ideologies when   it comes to economics, immigration, industrial relations and many   other policy areas. The Democrats are the real realists on a range of   issues including employment, fair trade versus free trade, family   structures, foreign affairs, and the role of women. 

  The Democrats have been years ahead in getting more women   into politics, because we recognised that structural changes in how   parties are run, give women real access and opportunities. And I   acknowledge Anne Henderson’s text, 

  Getting Even which points to 

  political pathways for women. I was honoured to launch that book in   1999.   The Democrats appreciate and respond to the changing nature of   family life, while conservative politicians blindly follow an ideology of   “protecting the traditional family” - which sometimes is just code for   making life difficult for single mothers, working mothers and same sex   couples. Over the Superannuation Choice bill, the Coalition was so   determined to deny same sex couples the same rights as heterosexual   couples in leaving superannuation and death benefits to partners - that   they withdrew their own legislation, rather than agree to the 

  Democrats’ amendments.   I know conservative politicians are obsessed with trying to 

  discourage homosexual sex, but the superannuation legislation was not   about sex, it was about long term relationships. The Democrats were   recognising the changing nature of families.   Similarly neither of the old parties are recognising the changing   nature of work and the industrial relations agenda is stuck in a pro   union / anti union debate. The Democrats recognise the real divide is   not between employers and unions, but between those Australians who   are overworked and those who are unemployed or underemployed   There are more than 2.5 million Australians now working more than 45   hours a week. On the other side, we have 670,0006 Australians who are 

  officially unemployed. One in five children is being raised in households   where no one has a full time job. We need to have a community 

  conversation about how to spread the work around.   Yesterday in Wollongong, I launched a key part of our election   campaign, the Fair Hours Fund and a maternity leave payment. These   initiatives will tackle the twin issues of overwork and unemployment,   and address the pressure on families. The 

  Fair Hours Fund will be 

  available to companies that move to adopt agreements that cap   overtime and reduce the length of the working week to an average of 38 

  166 

  LEADERSHIP 

  hours a week. By spending $244 million we can create 80,000 new jobs 

  and take unemployment well below six per cent, even on conservative   employment and tax assumptions. The paid maternity leave plan would   mean all working women in the private sector had access to basic pay -   12 weeks at the level of the minimum federal wage - when they had a 

  child.   We need to make it easier for parents to work and care, and easier   for employers to hang on to their productive, highly trained and 

  experienced workers - more and more of whom are women.   Workplaces are undergoing a revolution and so is the shape of our   households, but the debate about industrial relations does not seem to   recognise that. Our laws and workplace practices are out of step with   the reality of modern work and family life. Similarly, the government’s   zero tolerance drug policy does not recognise what is happening in our 

  society and does little to minimise harm to individuals. and their 

  communities. “Just say no” is ridiculous when many Australians may   have said “yes”.   The government is trying to prevent single women accessing IVF.   They are in the High Court arguing about whether single women 

  should have babies. Next thing you know, they will be banning turkey   basters.   And, while the government blindly pursues competition policy,   deregulation, privatisation and outsourcing - and all the other catch 

  cries of “small government” - the Democrats recognise that, not only   are people and communities being hurt by these policies, but 

  economically, they are often just not working. No economy can be   completely deregulated. Without regulation can you imagine the traffic,   the electricity and water supplies, health, education, etc? Without   regulations the television, radio and mobile phone industries would be   a chaotic confusion of static. W%o would buy Sydney airport if the   government didn’t have the regulatory power to control the airspace   around it? 

  Government regulation plays an important role in the operation   of a modern economy. Meaningless terms such as “deregulation” and   “free markets” ignore the need for all forms of government intervention   to be as simple and efficient as possible. The government’s ideological   commitment to smaller government has meant privatisation and   outsourcing. Contracting out the government’s IT services, fitted in   with the government’s preference for “free markets”, but the reality was   significant service difficulties and a tripling of the budget.7 

  National Competition Policy has meant farmers are paid less for   food but consumers are paying more. In the last five years, egg retail   prices have risen 

  16.4 per cent but producers’ prices fell 13.5 per cent.   Milk prices rose 15 per cent but the price paid to farmers fell 10 per   cent. It is not that the chickens and cows are getting paid more. 

  THE SYDNEY PAPERS SPRING 2001 

  167 

  HIH, One.Tel. and Ansett have all collapsed this year. Thousands 

  of other small businesses have also failed, but not SO spectacularly. The   collapse of insurance, phone and airline companies, highlights the   government’s important role in protecting workers’ entitlements and   ensuring the provision of essential services, particularly to 

  regional 

  areas. Markets can fail and firms can collapse. When markets are the 

  sole providers of essential infrastructure or services this leaves us in a   very vulnerable position.   The federal Coalition has spent the last six years trying to 

  convince the Australian people that there is no direct role for 

  government in the economy. It has led them down a policy dead end.   The problem for the federal government is that it can not make 

  practical and usable policy decisions, because it is so ideologically   driven towards deregulation, competition and small government.   Having placed all its faith in the capacity of markets to solve all the   problems, the federal government is either unwilling or unable to   intervene directly to solve the range of crises that are confronting   Australians today. 

  Finally, the old parties are basically stuck in the belief that we can   cause pollution or use finite natural resources, as long as it is good for   the economy in the short term. The reality is that our land clearing   practices, and our emission of Greenhouse gases, are not sustainable.   We have to find ways to tread more lightly on the planet. 

  Former US President Bill Clinton on his recent visit here, 

  pointedly pointed out that global warming will mean a genuine refugee   crisis, as opposed to a few hundred people seeking asylum. If South   Pacific island nations vanish because of rising sea levels, their residents   will become ‘cenvironmental refugees” looking to come to Australia.   A few years ago, the then director of a government economic 

  forecasting agency, said that rather than stopping global warming, it   might be more economically efficient to evacuate the inhabitants of   small island nations. It is weirder still that at present the government is   doing the opposite. They are sending people to small island nations. 

  There are issues - like global warming, the flow of refugees, and   terrorism - that the Australian government cannot do a lot about on its   own. The point is to do what we can as good global citizens, because it   encourages others to do the same, and these problems can only be   addressed by a united effort. The Democrats recognise that it is world   events, not Australian government posturing that determines the   movement of asylum seekers. Australia has to recognise our 

  international obligations and take our share. We need to work with   other countries and the United Nations to develop sensible, humane   and legal approaches.   Presently Indonesia is not returning our phone calls. 

  168 

  LEADERSHIP 

  Security problems in our region will include not just people 

  smuggling, but arms, and drugs smuggling, terrorism, independence   movements, and religious conflicts. These are issues that need to be   confronted not just with security forces but with multilateral diplomatic   efforts. The US expects Australia to take the lead and carry much of   the load in the region and we will need to work closely with other 

  regional powers. We must continue to pursue peacekeeping, diplomacy,   intelligence gathering, overseas aid, and promoting democracy. How   tough do we need to get in order to deter refugees from Afghanistan or   from Iraq? Tougher than the Taliban, presumably; tougher than 

  Saddam Hussein. The government’s approach does nothing to address   the causes of refugee flows.   The government’s tough approach to asylum seekers is foreign   affairs played for a domestic audience. If the Prime Minister wants to   wage war, then why not a war on poverty, or unemployment, or 

  corporate greed? That would genuinely benefit Australia in the long   run.   Behind the asylum seekers there are significant other issues on the   domestic political agenda. The latest forecast of a $500 million Budget   surplus for 2001-2002, opens up the conversation about what we want   to do with those funds. Rollback seems to be rolling again. Health and   education and protection of the environment are important priorities   for the Democrats. 

  If we are to come up with real solutions to the challenges which   confront us, political debate needs to be about more than winning   marginal electorates and creating imaginary enemies. We need to   change politics. 

  Endnotes 

  1. 

  2. 

  3. 

  4. 

  5.   6.   7. 

  Henderson, Gerard “Follow the Leader”, Sydney Morning Herald, 8-9 September   2001, Spectrum 5-6 

  In the Senate the vote for parties other than the two old parties, rose from 13.5 % in   1993 to 25% at the 1998 election.   In 1949 Labor, Liberal and National Parties collectively received more than 96% of   the vote in the lower house. That started to decline in the 1990’s. By 1998 it was less   than 80%’ the lowest major party vote since 1943. Tony Walker, “The threat of a   hung parliament” 

  Australian Financial Review, 188.200 1, p.22 (quotes Parliamentary   Library research)   In 1998, the Howard Government was elected with 39.5% of first preferences. In   1990, the Hawke Government was elected with 39.4% of first preferences 

  19,334,200 resident population ABS March 200 1.   668,900 seasonally adjusted, August 2001, ABS   The National Audit office report last September on compulsory outsourcing of   Commonwealth agencies information technology services quotes in 

  The Financial 

  Review, 4 September 2001 

