---
title: "Tanna Coal Terminal, Gladstone: transcript of doorstop interview: Seat of Hinkler, Gladstone industry, leadership, preselection of ALP candidates, Peter Costello, trade union movement."
date: "2001-11-29"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232161
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R2J56%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Simon Crean - Doorstop - Seat Of Hinkler, Gladstone Industry, Leadership, Preselection Of ALP Candidates, Peter Costello, Trade Union Movement http://www.alp.org.au//media/1101/scmcqld291101.html

 Friday, 30 November 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Simon Crean - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Seat Of Hinkler, Gladstone Industry, Leadership, Preselection Of ALP Candidates, Peter Costello, Trade Union Movement

 Transcript - Tanna Coal Terminal, Gladstone - 29 November 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, how disappointing was it to lose Hinkler?

 CREAN: Disappointing of course because we came so close and we have sought a recount and we will wait and see what the final outcome is. But I said, win or lose, I would come back to Gladstone and Central Queensland to say thanks for the support that was given to us in the last election. We have got a little bit of ground to make up for the next one and we will work on it. But it is more important to try and consolidate the message. I have always thought that Central Queensland had great potential for development, governments play a role in that development. It's that partnership that I want to foster. Foster in a positive way over the course of the next three years so that if we do win the election we are in a position to implement those programs very quickly.

 JOURNALIST: Losing by only 69 votes. Do you think it's a case of not so much that anything went wrong in Central Queensland, I mean in Hinkler, but that's just sort of the way the trend has gone?

 CREAN: We know why the Government won the last election. It won it because of the asylum seekers issue. They're trying to rewrite history but that's the reason they won it. That won't be an issue next time around. But there will be lots of different issues and Labor has to move with those issues. We can't stand still and that's why I'm here, so early in the piece, hitting the ground running, if you like, demonstrating yet again the commitment to this region. Ten years ago I got behind Gladstone and supported $20 million investment in keeping magnesium in this country. The effects of that are now showing up and so this is the importance of the government role - I want to build that importance into the future.

 JOURNALIST: Have you given up hope of Cheryl Dorran standing in the next election?

 CREAN: No, of course, Cheryl has been a great candidate. She had a huge swing on the previous occasion, she came very close, but like so many other candidates were not able to win seats because they

 stuck with the incumbents because of the fear campaign that the Federal Government ran. But Cheryl is a qualified nurse - we know the issues of aged care and caring in our community need representation. They're the sorts of people, as well as local champions, that we have got to encourage to stand for Labor.

 JOURNALIST: So are you pushing for her to run again? I mean, it has been two times now.

 CREAN: Well, of course I will be speaking to Cheryl and encouraging her but, look, it is her choice. She has run twice now it's not a decision that she has to take immediately but I would encourage her to run again.

 JOURNALIST: So no decision has been made yet?

 CREAN: No of course not. It is too early in the piece but we want quality candidates, candidates that bring a breadth of knowledge not just of their community but of the broader policy framework and she fits that…

 JOURNALIST: There has been some criticism of Cheryl Dorran being a puppet for the Labor Party when locally on a lot of issues she wasn't up to speed. What is your comment on that?

 CREAN: When I campaigned with her here she was across the issues. She was a worthy candidate for us and she almost made it. So let's understand the great contribution she has made but let's understand that the issues will change between now and the next three years, Labor has to move with them, it has to support them, it has to articulate them, it has to earn the respect and the votes of this area.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, what is your message to the people of Hinkler today?

 CREAN: The message is seize the opportunity. There is huge opportunities for jobs, regional development and trade. I have with me today the new Shadow Minister for Innovation, Industry and Trade because I want him to understand the potential of this region, to develop policies for Labor that can help this region. So it is a message of hope but it is one of partnership and it is one of conviction, a conviction born out of past knowledge and support for this region and a commitment to continue the agenda with the regions. Do it in partnership, work up constructive proposals to secure the future of this area.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Cheryl …would seek a recount …on that?

 CREAN: Cheryl has sought a recount when votes are that close and particularly with the counting yesterday, where she clawed back some, she sought a recount. The decision is in the hands of the returning officer we will await that decision.

 JOURNALIST: Even though she conceded defeat on Friday afternoon?

 CREAN: Well, she did concede defeat as I understand it on Friday but the vote is very close and I think she was of a mind to reconsider that position when a recount was ordered in another seat that was also very close, the seat of Solomon in the Northern Territory. So she sought the recount - that is her entitlement - and let's just wait and see what happens.

 JOURNALIST: How will you be a different leader to Kim Beazley for the Labor Party?

 CREAN: I bring to the leadership the fact that I am a conviction politician, that I am inclusive, that I am open to ideas and I want new ideas and challenges. I've also shown the capacity to take the lead and push

 the change to achieve a modern look on the front bench. The challenge now is for that front bench to come up with modern ideas, ideas attractive to the Australian people. Ideas that support job opportunities as well as opportunities for people to be educated, to be cared for in their health and in their aging. These are the qualities of a decent society and they're the policies that I want to lead.

 JOURNALIST: Are there any different tactics from Kim Beazley though, because he said basically …in his leadership qualities?

 CREAN: I think that you will see us continue to campaign on the positives. The last election was lost because John Howard succeeded in an election campaign where fear succeeded over hope. We have got to convince the Australian people that hope and aspiration is what we are going for and to get hope and aspiration up over fear. That is the task we will be setting ourselves for the next three years and look forward to it with great excitement.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, can I ask you about a call from your Attorney-General for some internal reform to the ALP particularly with respect to preselections, concerns over branch stacking and the way that candidates are preselected in the ALP? How do you respond to those calls?

 CREAN: We can't reward branch stackers. There is no room for branch stackers in the Australian Labor Party. There needs to be an end to that. But what we want is to encourage openness in the preselection process to get the best quality candidates going and I will be looking to any recommended reforms that achieve that outcome.

 JOURNALIST: There even was a suggestion that he would like to see some candidates perhaps who were not necessarily ALP members, Labor Party members.

 CREAN: Well, we have done that on previous occasions. There is a capacity under the current rules to achieve that outcome. So I think that we do need to be more open in terms of encouraging people who want to identify with Labor values, with Labor policies and to stand on those policies in particular regions.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that perhaps you lost some seats because you preselected the wrong candidates?

 CREAN: I believe that we lost the election because John Howard succeeded in a campaign - they translated into seats. There weren't many seats that changed hands - people stuck with the incumbents. They weren't looking for the change because the fear campaign succeeded over the hope. Now that is something that we have got to analyse, it is something that we have got to counter next time round but we know that had the campaign been fought on the weight of policies in hospitals, in aged care, in education, on jobs it was Labor's policies that were preferred. It is just that they didn't get air particularly in the last week of the campaign where the Government spent massive amounts of money advertising and playing to the fear.

 JOURNALIST: And what will be the timetable for you, you know, looking at this internal reform for preselection of candidates? How quickly is that going to happen?

 CREAN: Well, I think that you can't rush these things but you do have to seize the moment. I mean I have been in this job but one week so give me some time to work these issues through. I am committed to a positive agenda, I am committed to partnerships, I am committed to opening the party up to new

 ideas and I am committed to getting the best candidates available to stand for us.

 JOURNALIST: It is likely that you will go up against Peter Costello at the next election. How do you compare yourself?

 CREAN: I can't wait to campaign against Peter Costello but let's wait and see if he gets there. We have to deal with the leadership that is there and with promoting alternate policies that attract. That is the task that I am setting myself immediately, not worrying about who I am up against but if he wants to run, let him run.

 JOURNALIST: What do you think about the ACTU and the relationship that the Labor Party has…

 CREAN: Well, I think the Labor Party has to have a close relationship with working people and their representatives. And the trade union movement does represent a significant number of working Australian families in this community. They have aspirations for them and we have to understand it. But just as it's important to work closely with them, to try and meet those aspirations, we also have to work closely with other groups that are just as representative in the community - representatives of small business, of regional development, of community groups, and my call is we will still have a good working relationship with the trade union movement but we will be wanting to widen our relationships and to appeal to a broader base.

 JOURNALIST: … remember the Labor Party roots…

 CREAN: You should never forget your roots but you have got to understand to society does move on, it changes, and we have got to move with it. If Labor hopes to appeal it can't be stuck in the past - it's got to modernise but it has got to do it without ignoring its traditional values and its traditional base. What leadership is about, is taking people with you, not standing still. It's adapting, it's modernising and that's what we will be about.

 JOURNALIST: How big an impact do you think Gladstone will have on Australia as a nation in industry?

 CREAN: I think the potential here is unlimited. Gladstone and Central Queensland can be the light metal centre for the nation. It can also be a great education and innovation hub if it's prepared to look at the opportunities for vertical integration of the industry base. It has the infrastructure, it has the resources, it has the skills, it has the commitment, the task is to pull it together, to develop that partnership that realises the potential to the maximum and they are the policies that I want to put into place.

 JOURNALIST: Value adding as well?

 CREAN: Absolutely. That's where we have to go - value adding, combining the skill and the resource base, exporting to the rest of the world. Giving career opportunities value adding through innovation -that is what the Knowledge Nation is about. It is about skilled jobs, better paid jobs, rewarding jobs, jobs that attract people.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

