---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 29 August 2001: Salvation Army report on breaching."
date: "2001-08-29"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Salvation Army report on breaching."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227815
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TXT46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Anthony Albanese - Doorstop - Salvation Army Report On Breaching //media/0801/aamcact290801.html Thursday, 30 August 2001

 Doorstop Interview

 Anthony Albanese - Parliamentary Secretary to the Shadow Minister for Family and Community Services

 Subject: Salvation Army Report On Breaching

 Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 29 August 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 ALBANESE: What the Salvation Army report highlights is that we have a Government that is more than willing to ignore breaches of tax laws by its own party but determined to punish those vulnerable people for minor breaches of Centrelink guidelines.

 This Salvation Army report backs up previous reports by ACOSS and by St Vincent de Paul and other charities, which highlight just how much stress they're under to provide emergency relief as a result of Government policy. It highlights the fact that people are being breached not for fraud or for failing to try to find work but are being breached for minor indiscretions. 35% of those people being breached who go to the Salvation Army for emergency relief have been breached for failing to respond to a letter. If you compare that with the Government's inaction against those who've breached its own GST guidelines I think the comparison is stark.

 What we have here is the implications of Tony Abbott's view that the poor are to be blame for their own circumstance being put into practice.

 JOURNALIST: What happens to these people who are being breached?

 ALBANESE: Well, one in six are having to turn to crime and what that means in practical terms is that whilst the Government is saving some money on Centrelink payments the increased costs in homelessness services in health and in the justice system means that those savings are largely illusory and create a circumstance whereby it is the most vulnerable people who are being punished. It is also backed up by the fact that some 40% of people who appeal their breaching have that overturned. That is a figure that indicates that people are being breached unfairly. It also is an under-estimation given that many of the most vulnerable people - the homeless and the people with multiple disadvantage - being

 breached are less likely to know their rights and go to a welfare rights centre or some other organisation to appeal that breach.

 JOURNALIST: The Government's launched a review of this process we've probably got about four weeks until that's due, what sort of changes do you think ought to happen to the breaching regime, given that they changed it to amend Labor's old scheme of instant breaches, so what changes would you like to see made?

 ALBANESE: Well under Labor's scheme what you had was you didn't have such a growth in the number of people being breached. You have a 189% increase in twelve months alone in people being breached. So what Labor says should happen; firstly we've already announced that we would increase funding to charities - that's $45 million over a three year period - because charities are having to pay out increased money and the emergency relief services are under increased pressure, are under stress and the Salvation Army has backed that up with this report. We believe that one, they are under stress, and two they are being hit in having to pay the GST when they pay an electricity bill or pay other bills to provide other services - basic human services - and we believe there should be compensation for charities on that basis.

 We also believe that people who do not meet their obligations or people who are engaged in fraud should be the subject of investigation. We don't shy away from our commitment to reciprocal obligation but what we have under this Government's policy, is a policy of unilateral punishment not one of reciprocal obligation.

 JOURNALIST: Are you saying then that the Federal Government is directly responsible for an increase in crime then?

 ALBANESE: Well, what's important isn't that we are saying. What's important is that the Salvation Army, not known as a radical organisation, one that's traditional erred on the conservative side of politics and one which the Prime Minister has previously said is a charity that he supports greatly - has received a great deal of moral and financial support from this Government. Well, this problem is now in the Prime Minister's own backyard. We don't say it, the Salvation Army say it.

 JOURNALIST: How many Labor backbenchers are uncomfortable with the position you've taken on this Norwegian freighter?

 ALBANESE: Well, the Leader of the Opposition has outlined our position this morning.

 JOURNALIST: Do you support your own Party's support for the Government in its handling of the people on the Tampa?

 ALBANESE: Look, I'm here to talk about the crisis in Australian poor people and I'm prepared to talk about that, that's why we're here today.

 JOURNALIST: So you do support your Party's position?

 ALBANESE: What I'm here to talk about today is the issue of Australia's poor and their breaching and the circumstances in which they find themselves.

 JOURNALIST: I understand that, I was just wondering whether you support your own Party?

 ALBANESE: I support the Leader of the Labor Party.

 JOURNALIST: So you do support the Party Leader?

 ALABANESE: I support the Leader of the Labor Party.

 JOURNALIST: In its handling of the Tampa, do you support that?

 ALBANESE: I support the Leader of Labor Party in the position that he's outlined and well my position with regards to refugees has been on the record in other circumstances if you want and come and talk to me about that you can at another time.

 I'm here to talk about the fact that we have a major report and one of the issues, I guess, is the reason why certainly the Government has taken many of the positions that it has on the refugee issue is that they would like this to be the major issue before Australia today.

 I happen to think that 350,000 Australians being breached and of that, one-quarter of the people who go and seek assistance, emergency relief off the Salvation Army are people who have been breached. Of that 84% are going to the Salvation Army to get food or medicines. I actually think that that is an issue that should be on the front of every paper in Australia.

 JOURNALIST: Does Labor's support for the homelessness position you're putting now - doesn't it stand somewhat in contrast to your calling for a continued hardline on refugees like the Tampa?

 ALBANESE: Look, I'm here to talk about the issue of the Salvation Army report and I am happy to answer any questions on that. I think that is a priority today and I think Australians have a right to know what's in this report and I think it would terrific if the media focused on these sorts of issues as well as international issues.

 JOURNALIST: Is this an issue that - the refugee issue and the Tampa issue, one that you would speak up about if you did not agree with your Party's support?

 ALBANESE: Look, I am here to talk about the Salvation Army report. You know I'm happy to answer any questions on that - if you've got any questions on that I'm happy to answer them, if not I guess you've all got your grabs.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

