---
title: "Ruddock must allow independent doctors to investigate health of asylum seekers."
date: "2001-12-10"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232327
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CBL56%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 RUDDOCK MUST ALLOW INDEPENDENT DOCTORS TO INVESTIGATE HEALTH OF ASYLUM SEEKERS.

 Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock must allow independent doctors to examine the health of asylum seekers in Australian detention centres.

 An article in the December edition of the Medical Journal of Australia, co-authored by Dr Aamer Sultan, who is himself a detainee, and an Australian doctor, Dr Kevin O’Sullivan, reveals that 16 of the 33 asylum seekers studied were suffering from a very serious depressive condition associated with suicide and self-mutilation attempts.

 Australasian Corrections Management, (ACM), the company which runs Australian detention centres, appears to be concerned about health issues given it advertised on the weekend for doctors to work in detention centres.  The Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists has urged its members not to take these jobs because of conflict of interest issues.

 Given this doctors’ boycott, action needs to be taken to ensure health issues in detention centres aren’t left unaddressed.  Australians have a clear practical interest in ensuring asylum seekers are kept healthy because many will be found to be genuine refugees and released in to the community.  It is in everybody’s interests that genuine refugees start their new lives in Australia in the best possible health.

 The solution to the current problem is clear.  The Minister should step in and direct that the monies earmarked by ACM for the provision of health services in detention centres should be used to pay for the services of external independent doctors.

 These independent doctors would then be free to report to the Australian community on the health of detained asylum seekers without being worried about losing their jobs or breaching employee confidentiality agreements.

 The Minister has claimed that the Medical Journal of Australia article is inaccurate.  If the Minister is so certain this is the case then he should have no objection to ensuring independent doctors investigate the health of detained asylums seekers.  If the Minister has nothing to hide he has nothing to fear.

 Monday 10 December 2001

 For further information contact:  Julia Gillard, MP  0417 361 637

