---
title: "Democrats call for inquiry into asylum seekers."
date: "2001-11-09"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231965
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FUD56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

  Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 09 November 2001             MEDIA RELEASE  01/715

 Democrats call for Inquiry into Asylum Seekers The Australian Democrats have called for a judicial inquiry to be held into the Federal Government’s treatment of asylum seekers.

 Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson Senator Andrew Bartlett said the Democrats were the first to raise questions about the veracity of Government’s claims that asylum seekers has thrown their children into the sea after being intercepted by the navy last month.

 “This smacks of an attempted cover-up and should be subject to independent scrutiny to establish the facts. A retired judge could conduct the inquiry and make the report public,” said Senator Bartlett.

 "The Government allowed the fear and divisiveness this issue provoked, to run throughout the campaign and only produced the video under pressure in the dying days of the election.

 "The Howard Government's credibility has been undermined by the head of the Australian Navy on the eve of the Federal election.

 "The Prime Minister made asylum seekers a defining issue in this election, a stand that has fuelled racial tensions in Australia and led to international condemnation.

 "He is asking to be re-elected on his leadership over this issue. However, his credibility on this issue is now in tatters.

 “Australians deserve to know the truth about the claims Government has made about asylum seekers.

 “Today, the Australian Democrats challenge the Prime Minister, Mr Howard, and the Opposition leader, Mr Beazley, to commit to an independent inquiry following the election.

 “Months ago I called for an judicial inquiry to investigate detention centres, there is an urgent need for an inquiry to investigate the Government’s treatment of asylum seekers,” concluded Senator Bartlett.

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

