---
title: "Australia's aid Budget 2001-02"
date: "2001-05-22"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211224047
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DS646%22
---

  - MEDIA RLELEASE 

  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   ALEXANDER DOWINER 

  AA01 011 Tuesday, 22 May 2001 

  AUSTFkALIA’S AID BUDGET 200 l-02 

  I am pleased to announce that Australia will provide $ I .725 billion as Official   Development Assistance (ODA) in 200 l-02, an increase of approximately $125   million over the 2000-O 1 budget figure and a real increase of more than 6 per cent.   This is an ODA/GNP ratio of 0.25 per cent, well above the latest (2000) donor   average of 0.22 per cent. 

  ODA represents only one part of the Australian Government’s assistance to   developing countries. Austraha’s total effort includes other oft’lcial flows and   generous tax deductions for contributions from the Australian people to non-   government organisations providing overseas aid. When these other flows and   deductions are taken into account, the Australian Government’s total assistance to   developing countries stands at around $2.75 billion, which is 0.40 per cent of GNP. 

  The aid program will continue to advance Australia’s national interest by assisting   developing countries to reduce poverty and achieve sustainable development. Our   neighbours in Asia and the South Pacific will remain the focus of our development   efforts. As a strong and stabl’e nation, Australia is committed to promoting regional   stability and prosperity. The aid program will continue to have a vital role in   demonstrating that commitment and responding effectively to the development   challenges and opportunities of social and economic changes in the Asia Pacific   region. 

  AID BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS 

  . Australia’s commitmenr to the nations of the South Pacific will be further   strengthened. Total aid flows will increase to around $165 million, including an   increase to $20 million for the Pacific Policy and Management Reform program   to support economic and public sector reform, and peace and nation building   programs. 

  . Australia’s $300 million aid program will continue to help Papua New Guinea   meet its considerable d’evelopment challenges, sustain the momentum for   economic and public sector reform and consolidate peace and development in   Bougainville. 

  . Total aid flows to East Asia are estimated to be around $552 million, with an   emphasis across the region on supporting sustainable economic recovery and   intensification of reform efforts. 

  - - .__“_l-_l_--”  - 

  - 

  Total flows of $12 1.5 million to Indonesia demonstrate Australia’s   continuing strong commitment to helping secure Indonesia’s future as a   democratic, prosperous and stable nation.   - As East Timor moves towards independence, Australia’s aid budget 

  commitment of $150 million over four years is helping develop East   Timorese capacity to govern a democratic and stable nation, and deliver   basic services. 

  . A study is examining the opportunities presented by information and   communication tecbnolcgies to improve education and access to knowledge in   developing countries. 

  . Implementation of the $200 million HIV/AIDS initiative will continue, with a   focus on securing strong international political leadership and commitment to   action. I will host a regional ministerial meeting on HIV/AIDS in Melbourne in   October 200 1. 

  In appreciation of the magnificent contribution of volunteers and recognition of   2001 as the International. Year of Volunteers, the Government pledges $60   million over the next three years to overseas volunteer activities. This builds on   support for the highly successful Australian Youth Ambassadors for   Development Program and other volunteer organisations. 

  . The Government has ma.de a strong commitment to Rotary International, in   partnership with the World Health Organisation, UNICEF and the US Center   for Disease Control, to help eradicate polio from the world by 2005. The   Government will match Australian corporate private sector contributions on a   dollar for dollar basis up to $10 million over 2001-05. 

  . The aid program will continue to implement practical activities in support of   human rights, including through an increase to $1.6 million for the Human   Rights Fund. 

  OTHER FEATURES 

  Beyond East Asia and the South Pacific, total flows to Africa, the Middle East and   South Asia will be maintained. in real terms. Within the overall total flows of $9.9   million to the Middle East, assistance will be provided to Palestinian Territories and   Palestinian refugees througho-ut the region. 

  As in past years, natural disasters and conflicts will continue to cause immense   suffering. The aid program will maintain the capacity for rapid, effective and flexible   responses to emergency and humanitarian crises in the Asia Pacific region and other   parts of the world. 

  NGOs continue to be an effective way to deliver aid and emergency relief to   developing countries. In recognition of this, the Australian Government will provide   an estimated $115.6 million total flows through NGOs in 200 l-02. 

  Australia will continue to play its part in providing debt relief; completing our three   year $35 million contribution to the IMFWorld Bank Heavily Indebted Poor   Countries initiative. Australia’s total contribution to HIPC will be $55 million in   nominal terms. In line with the Government’s pledge to provide 100 per cent bilateral   debt forgiveness to countries that qualify for debt relief under HIPC, Nicaragua will   not be making repayments on its outstanding debt to Australia, following the 

  country’s qualification for interim debt relief under the HIPC Initiative. Following its 

  cease-fire with Eritrea, Ethiopia is again being considered for debt relief and is   expected to qualify under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in the near future. All   Ethiopia’s debt to Australia will be forgiven when it qualifies for HIPC relief. 

  Media inquiries: A4att Francis (Ministeria[) 02 6277 7500   Fionna Douglas (AmAIL,) 02 6206 4960 / 0412 804 489 

