---
title: "Australia 2030 National Youth Challenge [Iona Presentation College, WA]"
date: "2001-09-07"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Iona Presentation College"
  - "WA"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228494
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2NW46%22
---

  

 News Room

 Australia 2030 National Youth Challenge MPS 140/2001

 A vision for the future of Perth has earned Jane Arnolda from Iona Presentation College a place in the Australia 2030 National Youth Challenge in Canberra on 14 September.

 Jane researched the effects of immigration and multicultural issues on Mosman Park and selected 'Illegal immigrants in relation with immigration' as an example of that impact.

 Jane investigated attitudes towards illegal immigrants and interviewed fellow students on such issues as 'What is an Australian?', 'What action should be taken against illegal immigrants?', and 'Criteria for accepting refugees'. Jane discovered a lack of factual information among her fellow students, which translated into ill-formed opinions. The research enabled Jane to develop and justify well-informed and thoughtful opinions.

 Students in years 9 -11 from around Australia were asked for their vision of the future of Australia as part of the Australia 2030: Investigating the FACTS of Immigration  project, which was distributed to all schools earlier this year.

 The project includes an interactive CD Rom, a video, and an accompanying website, enabling students to develop informed views on the future of Australia and the role immigration will play in that future.

 Earlier this year, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock attended a series of Youth Challenges in several States and Territories. Parliamentary Secretary, Senator Kay Patterson, attended the Perth Youth Challenge.

 Students from Schools in the Perth area participated in the Perth Youth Challenge.

 "The Youth Challenges have enabled students throughout Australia to work together and increase their awareness of immigration issues," Mr Ruddock said.

 Winners from each State and Territory will take part in the National Youth Challenge, which will be webcast live from the National Museum of Australia in Canberra on 14 September.

 "The National Youth Challenge will provide an exciting opportunity for the finalists to reveal their views on how immigration will shape our future," Mr Ruddock said.

 The students' visions for the future of Australia will be placed on the website www.australia2030.gov.au, which will be presented as a gift to the nation during the webcast in this year celebrating the Centenary of Federation, as well as becoming a part of a permanent interactive display at the National Museum of Australia.

 7 September 2001 Media Inquiries: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

