---
title: "Greens celebrate!"
date: "2001-11-11"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232002
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YUD56%22
---

 11 November 2001

 Greens Celebrate!

 The Australian Greens are celebrating a doubling of their vote across the nation and two Senate seats with two more possible. Senator Bob Brown has been returned with a quota (14%) in his own right in Tasmania and the Democrats have conceded Greens candidate Kerrie Nettle will win in New South Wales. The Greens remain hopeful in both Victoria (Scott Kinnear) and Western Australia (Rachel Siewert).

 “The electorate has rewarded us on our humanitarian and environmental policies, in particular on asylum-seekers, funding of public education and health, and ending the woodchipping of old-growth forests,” Senator Brown said.

 “The Greens have arrived as the national party of progressive politics in the social, economic and environmental arenas. There was a surge of young voters to us. We are consolidated in the Senate, but this is still just a beginning.

 “Many Australians are fearful: One Nation has collapsed because Mr Howard has absorbed some of its key policies. The Greens are the bright spot in this darker politics of the day. Had the Labor Party taken on Mr Howard over his inhumane policy on asylum-seekers, it would be in office today.

 “The wonderful vote for the Greens in Tasmania, on top of a swing to Labor, show that Mr Howard is not popular here. His forest-wrecking policies earned him no support, despite the efforts of the logging industry.

 “The Greens are a community-based party and this result reflects the enthusiasm and commitment of thousands of people all around the country. That gives me great confidence and optimism as we go into the new parliament”, said Senator Brown.

 More information: Ben Oquist. 02 6277 3170 or 0419 704 095

 Category:  Senate Office

 Author:  Ben Oquist

