---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: Tampa asylum seekers, Liberal Party's GST avoidance scam\n"
date: "2001-08-29"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227764
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2YT46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop - Tampa Asylum Seekers, Liberal Party's GST Avoidance Scam //media/0801/kbmcact290801.html Thursday, 30 August 2001

 Kim Beazley - Doorstop Interview Subjects: Tampa Asylum Seekers, Liberal Party's GST Avoidance Scam

 Transcript - Parliament House, Canberra - 29 August 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 JOURNALIST: How comfortable are you with the fact there are pregnant women, people who are sick, now on a boat which has put out a distress call for urgent medical attention?

 BEAZLEY: Firstly, let me say, we're backing the Government on its stand in relation to Tampa because they're acting in accordance with our international legal obligations. Let's get that clear. There's been no radical shift in policy at all. What this is related to is the obligations on all of us and on rescue at sea. If it had occurred within the Australian zone the ship would be making landfall somewhere in Australia. It occurred within the Indonesian zone, therefore, it makes landfall somewhere in Indonesia. That's why we're supporting this proposition. There's been no change in policy - that is a long standing set of legal obligations upon the Australian people, and on, I'd say, upon the Indonesian Government. So, that's the first point I'd make.

 The second point is, we support humanitarian assistance to those on board that ship and putting in place mechanisms to get it to them. And the Government has said that it is prepared to provide medical support, prepared to provide food, it's prepared to do what is necessary to keep people healthy on that ship while it goes through the processes of the international legal obligations that are there being addressed.

 Now, this is a test of the Government's newfound relationship with Indonesia. They've been 13,000 boat people come to this country over the last decade. This Government has been in office for half of that period of time. Of those 13,000 - 11,000 have come since this Government has been in office. Part of the reason for that goes to the character of the relationship that we have with Indonesia. Now, if that is back on track, what used to be the principal means of resolving these sorts of problems, that is, they'd get no further than Indonesia, will be there as an option again.

 But for this Government, the challenge is this: to ensure that the chance that they've had to build a new relationship with Indonesia, or taken in the course of the last couple of months, gets translated into an outcome here.

 JOURNALIST: What's your understanding of what our obligations, or any country's obligations, Norway or Indonesia's obligations are under that international law?

 BEAZLEY: The obligation is that when there's a rescue at sea being affected, if it is in your zone, that's where landfall is made. So, if it had been in the Australian zone, landfall would be made in Australia. Because it was in the Indonesian zone, landfall gets made in Indonesia. There's been no radical change in policy. This is not some new idea that people who are coming to this country illegally - some of whom may be refugees - are going to get turned around at sea and sent out. That's not what's happened here. What has happened here is simply the observance of the legal obligations which are upon us. And in this case, the legal obligations are that the boat makes landfall and discharges the rescued passengers in Indonesia. What we have to do, as a humanitarian country, is to make certain that supplies, or whatever necessities there are, to ensure that people can do that in a healthy way, that those things are done. And I hope that what the Government is doing is putting in place the mechanisms by which that can occur. That seems to be the case.

 JOURNALIST: Does that have the potential to strain relationships between Australia and Indonesia?

 BEAZLEY: It's a challenge for the Prime Minister. He allowed relationships with Indonesia to go into cold storage. For a year and a bit, while they had this argument about whether or not the Indonesian President should come to Australia before the Australian President went to Indonesia. And that went on, I think, for the best part of a year and a half. But that's over. The Prime Minister has….firstly, the former President came here and the Prime Minister has now gone to Indonesia. It's about a year and a half or so gap in being able to rebuild that relationship. But, nevertheless, it's now back on track. So, the challenge is what the Prime Minister has thought to be a return to a good relationship with Indonesia producing the sorts of outcomes here that they used to produce.

 JOURNALIST: Is Labor supporting the Government because it detected, as the Government does, that most Australians couldn't care less about these people?

 BEAZLEY: I, instantly, when we became apprised of the facts, supported the Government - as you know, instantly, as we became apprised of the facts. It doesn't mean that we agree with the Government on everything in relation to migration policy. An awful lot of what is being done is simply not working. But we understand our legal obligations. And if the information from the Government is correct, and I believe it to be correct, that under our rescue at sea obligations the picking up of the distressed passengers in this circumstance has occurred in Indonesia's zone, it is a clear-cut issue. And we are obliged to conform with our international obligations. So are others. We have to conform with it in a way which is humanitarian, in a way which takes cognisance of the fact that we have got to be concerned about the lives and safety of other people and provide them as they go about the business of complying with international law in this regard, the means of staying at least healthy and reasonably fed.

 JOURNALIST: Is it a fair view that these people have simply been unlucky because if their boat hadn't have foundered at sea, they would have been on Christmas Island by now; they just happened to be unlucky to get picked up in international waters?

 BEAZLEY: We've got to do a number of things differently. We've got to put much more effort now into international efforts to stop these things happening. I know the Government has been doing some things in that regard, but we have to put renewed effort into that. We have got to start getting the people who are organising criminally to move people around the globe in the way in which they are. This activity is

 of a piece with gun running, with drug running. The same sorts of criminals are running all three. Those people have to be dealt with. And we have to have enormous diplomatic effort to obviously get the assistance of the Indonesians in our immediate vicinity and other countries from which these folk are coming in the first instance to block, to stop the illegal movement of people. But we do it - always - in a way that acknowledges our international obligations. And I believe that at the moment that's what we're doing in this case.

 JOURNALIST: If Indonesia continues to refuse its international obligations to take these people, I mean, shouldn't we as a humanitarian country step in and take them?

 BEAZLEY: That's the challenge for the Howard Government. It says that its got its relationship with Indonesia back on track. Well, this is the first test. Those who are on board the Tampa at the moment should make landfall in Indonesia under international law. And that should occur. And the job of the Government is to ensure that that happens.

 JOURNALIST: What's your chance of the UN being called in to resolve this and the ship sitting out there for the next six to eight weeks while bureaucrats decide what to do about it?

 BEAZLEY: That may happen, in which case, the second leg, if you like, of ensuring that we're upholding our international obligations comes into play. And that is to make sure that people who are experiencing health problems or related problems on board that ship get properly tendered to. Now, it seems that the Government is putting in place people who can perform those tasks. They've put in place service personnel who have a capacity to deliver on-board health care, they're bringing up a ship which has a helicopter, has a capacity to ensure that people who are in extreme circumstances get properly looked after as well. So, these are the things that have to be done too. There are issues here of international law which we uphold and there's been no change in policy in that regard. That's the first point. There are also issues that are humanitarian which we must comply with. And we are heeding statements from the Government that they intend to do something about that and we will see what the effect of the movements they've made so far have on upholding that obligation as well.

 JOURNALIST: It's been reported this morning that your Labor backbenchers are not happy with the decision that you've taken on this.

 BEAZLEY: We had a good discussion on this in Caucus. It was a good mild discussion about refugee issues generally and, of course, this one specifically. And I was very happy with that discussion.

 JOURNALIST: Do you admit there are some that aren't happy with the position you're taking?

 BEAZLEY: There are always going to be members of Caucus of diverse views. But, I must say, in these circumstances, I thought that right through the Caucus there was a strong understanding of the fact that there's not a change of policy here, that what was going on here was simply a continuation or upholding of the international legal obligations under which we do all our responses to refugees. There are obligations on us under refugee treaties and arrangements. There are obligations on us under international sea rescue obligations. And it's all part of a package of being a decent international citizen.

 JOURNALIST: Is there anything left in your campaign to claim Macfarlane?

 BEAZLEY: We have shone a light on the Government's hypocrisy. While imposing on business - small business in particular - the most enormously difficult compliance system in relation to the GST, they

 have been finding active ways of scamming, getting out of it. And we are going to continue to shine a light on that process. I don't think there is single objective observer of Australian politics who doesn't think Macfarlane should go.

 Ends Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

