---
title: "Labor's immigration policy?"
date: "2001-11-05"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211231349
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HJD56%22
---

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 CPS 013/2001

 LABOR'S IMMIGRATION POLICY?

 With over 30 policies released and only five days until polling day, there is no Labor Immigration policy.

 Immigration spokesperson Con Sciacca has been gagged by Mr Beazley and has hardly been seen or heard during the entire campaign.

 When Labor frontbenchers have spoken out, it has been to contradict their leader.

 So what is Labor's immigration policy?

 On Border Protection

 Mr Beazley has said that 'if elected, Labor will retain the Border Protection Bill in the form that was passed by Parliament this year.'

 However, in pamphlets distributed during the election campaign by frontbenchers Robert McLelland and Cheryl Kernot, it is clearly stated that Labor will:

 'Completely overhaul our border protection laws as they related to vessels, persons and goods entering Australia''

 Election pamphlets put out by some candidates, including the ALP candidate for Swan, Kim Wilkie, and the ALP candidate for Wentworth carry a commitment to 'overhaul our border protection laws'.

 During the launch of Labor's Plan for Justice, frontbencher Robert McClelland refused to rule out a roll back of the border protection laws. When asked if Labor would make no changes to the Act, Mr McClelland said:

 'You're asking the Attorney-General, the potential Attorney-General. Those are matters that Con Sciacca needs to address. I'm not going to tread on his turf particularly at this point in the election cycle.'

 Mr Beazley is completely silent on the other six bills that formed part of the border protection package. These bills included measures to:

 • Excise Christmas Island, Cocos and Keeling Islands and Ashmore Islands from the Migration Act, • Introduce a new more restrictive visa regime for illegal entrants; • reduce the extensive use of class actions by failed asylum seekers to delay removal; • restrict the definition of 'refugee' in domestic law, and • allow private sector organisations such as airlines to provide information about people's

 travel to the Department of Immigration.

 Judicial Review

 Mr Beazley had denied passage of the Judicial Review Bill for five years as it directly contradicts the Labor Party Platform. Opposition spokesperson Con Sciacca indicated that he would seek to change the bill if they won Government.

 Roll back in judicial review would again put the courts in charge of who can and who cannot enter Australia. We would be back to Tampa.

 All of these Acts are vital to the protection of Australia's borders, yet Mr Beazley and Labor have refused to commit to retaining them.

 Illegal Entrants

 On ABC's PM program Labor frontbencher Laurie Brereton raised the possibility of bringing illegal entrants ashore, saying that Mr Beazley would have an inquiry into offshore processing. This is on top of an inquiry into detention facilities, and a further inquiry into the immigration program already announced by Mr Beazley.

 Member for Chisholm Ms Anna Burke and Member for Bruce Alan Griffin have joined an ever lengthening list of ALP figures who are opposed to the Government's tough stand. That list includes ALP candidate Annette McCarthy, ALP candidate for Gilmore Peter Knott, ex-Labor Premier Neville Wran, Labor Chief Minister Claire Martin, frontbenchers Con Sciacca, Laurie Brereton, Robert McClelland, Senator Faulkner, and 14 Labor backbenchers.

 Furthermore, the 'ALP Support Group for the Rights of Asylum Seekers' has been created to put added pressure on the ALP leadership to abandon its support for the Government's tough and principled position.

 Beazley lacks courage of conviction

 The truth is, Mr Beazley has no real conviction about how to handle illegal entrants or immigration

 Without the courage of his conviction, Mr Beazley will be captured by sectional interest groups and be pressured into abandoning the Government's tough position.

 This can only signal the people smugglers that its business as usual if Labor wins on Saturday.

 The people of Australia deserve to know what Mr Beazley intends to do.

 Is Mr Beazley going to determine who comes to Australia and under what circumstances, or is he going to cave in and give the job to the courts and the people smugglers?

 5 November 2001

 Media Inquiries: Steve Ingram 0419 278 715

