---
title: "Melbourne, Victoria: transcript of doorstop interview: mid-year economic and fiscal outlook."
date: "2001-10-17"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230242
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J4756%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Simon Crean - Doorstop - Mid-Year Economic And Fiscal Outlook

 http://www.alp.org.au//media/1001/scmcvic171001.html Thursday, 18 October 2001

 ALP News Statements

 Doorstop Interview

 Simon Crean - Shadow Treasurer

 Subject: Mid-Year Economic And Fiscal Outlook

 Transcript - Melbourne, Victoria - 17 October 2001

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 CREAN: Well today we finally got the figures that we've been calling for for months. Figures that the Treasurer said he couldn't release. Today he's released them and what do they confirm? They confirm this as the highest taxing government in Australia's history. The papers themselves show that government revenues, under the new economic forecasts, are projected to grow by $1.6 billion over what the budget forecast and that's before the GST is counted, before, the GST is counted. What we have therefore is the highest taxing government in history but it can just scrap through on a cash surplus. If in fact you take the fiscal balance, the balance that he said when he introduced the charter of budget honesty was the real measure, we've gone significantly into deceit to the tune of $3 billion.

 It was very interesting in the announcement today by the Treasurer, of what he didn't mention. Because what these papers also demonstrate is that employment prospects are set to deteriorate. Not only is unemployment forecast to rise above 7% and remember this was a Treasurer that said with the GST we'd get a 5 ahead of it, it's now forecast to rise above 7%. But significantly job creation has been cut by a significant amount. The ability for the economy to grow jobs over the next year has significantly been cut back. So it's bad news for people seeking work.

 The other factor that he didn't mention was the inflation figure, an inflation figure higher than the budget forecast. Why is that? Again the GST. The other factor that's a significant deterioration in these figures compared to when the budget came out, is business investment, forecast in the budget to be 5%, now zero, zero. And this is the legacy of a Treasurer that claims to manage the economy well. The final figure that wasn't given much prominence by him at all is the contribution of net exports. Net exports are a negative contributor to growth over the coming year. And what we have despite the record low dollar, exports themselves are not going to contribute anything. They're going to be zero.

 So here we have the legacy of this government's record. An obsession with introducing a GST. An obsession that has cost the economy in terms of jobs, inflation, business investment. But a legacy that's also cost ordinary Australian families in higher prices and higher total interest repayments. This is not good management of the Australian economy and no wonder he's been hiding these figures.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean what does it mean for the scope of rollback now?

 CREAN: We'll interestingly enough we always expected the surpluses to be small. And why? Because the Treasurer twelve months ago boasted that he was going to spend the surplus so Labor couldn't. It's the only promise that he's delivered on in relation to his GST. We therefore have made our decisions and our commitments in accordance with where we expected these figures to be. We will be analysing the further detail of these and the PFO, the Treasury's figures tomorrow, and we will be making the detailed announcements of our rollback plan then. I might say that it is still our intention to give relief by way of tax cuts by taking the GST off thing because these figures show this is a government that's highest taxing government in Australia's history.

 JOURNALIST: But will that be done in the first or second years or will you have to wait until the third year?

 CREAN: You will need to wait and see the detail of our announcements. But we are still committed to do it because ordinary Australian families need taxation relief. The GST has hurt them and hurt them hard and these figures confirm the extent of that increased tax take. And despite slugging people with higher taxes, the highest on record, he still can hardly manage a cash surplus and what he's produced is a fiscal deficit.

 JOURNALIST: What impact do you think this morning's Defence deployment will have on the budget in next year and future years?

 CREAN: Well as you know the government is claiming that most of its expenditure in terms of Defence associated with the deployment can be met from the announcements made in funding the White Paper. Announcements that we gave bipartisan support to overall envelope for. Well the government was very vague on that to date. I think they're questions that you've got to direct towards them. They should be prepared to disclose more fully the cost. I can understand for operational and strategic reasons they may not be able to go into some detail. But we should be able to get some indication of that, in a caretaker context at least, that we can operate on.

 JOURNALIST: You were criticising the government for spending the surplus, what areas of expenditure would you not have spent money on?

 CREAN: Well let's understand, I've explained, I've given my response in terms of Defence expenditure. But the other item that the Treasurer talked about was refugees. That is a $100 million of expenditure according to these papers. Advertising the GST was five times that amount. This goes to show the magnitude of the fiscal deterioration that can come about by wasteful expenditure. The other expenditures that they've been forced to do have essentially been backflips associated with being forced to honour promises made in relation to the GST - petrol, beer, pensioners and the housing sector. These all highlight the continuing cost and the excessive cost of introducing the GST. The legacy of this government is a GST that's mugged the economy, hurt ordinary Australian families and deteriorated the budget so that when you do need capacity to spend, for exceptional circumstances, our capacity to do so is severely limited.

 JOURNALIST: The Treasurer says that when you complain about the budget disappearing the two biggest items were an increase in Defence spending and removing petrol excise and he made the challenge that you're saying that those shouldn't have gone ahead. Is that the position?

 CREAN: The Treasurer says all sorts of things and makes it up as he goes along and of course always tries to narrow the debate on his terms. I've answered the position Sid in relation to Defence. So far as petrol is concerned this government made a promise, it was forced to honour it because of a campaign that Labor ran and we won't be changing that. But these are not the items, these are not the items alone that have driven the budget to the position where it is. There are also expenditures, wasteful expenditures that this government has made. We're about reordering some of those, and announcements you've seen us make in certain regards we've already done that. We'll continue to put that detail out during the campaign. But I make the point again, everything we announce will be fully funded, fully costed and indicated by Access to be properly costed.

 JOURNALIST: You'll be asking the Treasury and Finance to also cost your proposals under the Charter of Budget Honesty?

 CREAN: We will be putting forward our proposals to them in accordance with the charter of budget honesty. But the problem for us is that because the Government was sitting on the books, because the government to do for months what it did today, we had to go to Access to get the costings done. We're confident about our ability to meet the commitments and we will continue to release that detail as we see appropriate.

 JOURNALIST: Are the numbers for the out year similar to what you expected, or will they further limit your ability to provide new programs?

 CREAN: Yes well the out years figures show a continuing deterioration. I think that for the four years that we're looking at we're only looking at cumulative surpluses, I think under $8 billion from memory. These are factors obviously that we have to take into account. But I think for all of it, this government inherited an economy growing consistently above 4%. This government introduced a GST and saw the growth rate reduce to 1.4% - cut by more than half. And this ahead of the world downturn. Now it wants you to think its good economic management to be able to grow next year at three, ahead it says of what a lot of the rest of the world is doing. What they've still got to answer is why it is they've presided over a domestic economy that saw its growth rate cut by two thirds because that's what's impacted upon jobs. It's what impacted upon business investment, it's what impacted upon business investment, it's what impacted upon inflation and it's what is now showing up in terms of the significant fiscal deterioration this year. A half a billion dollars in cash terms, $3 billion deficit in fiscal terms.

 JOURNALIST: But were those numbers worse than you expected. I mean it's 6 or 7 billion wiped off the combined cumulative surplus for the next four years?

 CREAN: I think that we were always expecting them to spend as much of the surplus as they could, because that was what Costello boasted he would do. The question you've got ask yourself is what have we got in return? Higher inflation, rising unemployment, business investment in decline, net exports not able to contribute to growth despite record low levels of the dollar, and a fiscal deterioration that leaves significantly reduced scope in circumstances to provide stimulation where that otherwise might be the case. We'll be taking all this into account. We'll be making our promises as we see fit. But all of them fully costed, fully funded.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean will you be keeping the net cash figures as the official budget bottom line?

 CREAN: What we've said is we'll be producing the cash as well as the fiscal result. But in terms of this campaign we're going to fight on the level playing field. They're claiming it's the cash balance that you should look to - that's the basis upon which we'll be making our commitments.

 Ends

 Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

