---
title: "True cost of 'Pacific solution' revealed."
date: "2001-12-12"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232360
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4YL56%22
---

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats Treasury Spokesperson 12 December 2001                     MEDIA RELEASE                                    01/745

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 True cost of ‘Pacific Solution’ revealed Democrats’ Leader and Treasury spokesperson, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja, said if today’s revelations about the extent of the costs of the ‘Pacific Solution’ are true, they demonstrate both the inefficiency of Government policy towards refugees and the Government’s duplicity.

 “Throughout the election this Government insisted that its policy was affordable.  Today we discover that apparently the Government knew all along that the costs were much higher than it has previously admitted,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

 ‘Today’s revelation also demonstrates how ineffectual the Government’s Charter of Budget Honesty is.

 “The Government has failed to meet the standards set by the Charter of Budget Honesty, secreting the cost of its asylum seekers’ policy across three departments. It is only now that we are discovering the true cost.

 “The Australian Democrats condemn the Government’s treatment of boat people on all levels. We think it is inhumane, we think it is unnecessary, we think it is ineffective and we now know it is unaffordable.

 “500 million dollars could employ more than 8,000 teachers for a year. Only last week the Treasurer, Peter Costello, said that it was time the Government ensured that it was spending its money on priority one issues, not priority five issues.

 “I challenge the Treasurer to tell the Australian people that processing asylum seekers in Nauru is a priority one issue for Australia,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

 Democrats Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said this was further evidence of the unsustainability of the Government’s ill fated, poll driven approach to asylum seekers.

 For more information please contact Alison Rogers on 08 8232 7595 or 0419 867 649 or Senator Andrew Bartlett 0418 743 789.

