---
title: "[Letter] to the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr John Howard."
date: "2001-08-30"
creators:
  - "International Transport Workers' FederationCOCKCROFT, David"
source: "INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT WORKERS' FEDERATION"
subjects:
  - "Letter"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227823
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6ZU46%22
---

  To: The Prime Minister of Australia, Mr John 
Howard

  From: David Cockroft, General Secretary 

  

 30 August 2001

  

 Dear Prime Minister,

  

 I believe it is my urgent duty to advise you and your 
government that its refusal to allow the migrants on board the vessel 
Tampa to disembark on land places Australia in breach of international 
conventions to which it is a signatory. It also endangers the members 
of the ship's crew, who have done nothing more than comply fully with 
their responsibility to aid a ship in distress. Additionally I must 
advise you that even the military action undertaken so far is dangerously 
close to the definition of an act of war.

  

 Australia's actions so far put it in breach of the 
following international conventions, which are the keystones of international 
maritime governance:

  

  

  These infringements must be placed alongside the  apparent flouting 
of Australia's obligations under the 1951 UN Convention Relating to 
the Status of Refugees. It is difficult to see how any course of action 
other than allowing the migrants on the Tampa to land (ready for processing 
by the relevant national authorities) is compatible with Australia's 
continuing in its position as a member of the Council of the International 
Maritime Organisation (IMO) - a body whose central concern is the safety 
of life at sea.

  

 As well as these matters we feel obliged to put on 
record that the unwanted and unrequested occupation of the sovereign 
territory of Norway - a friendly country - by Australian soldiers is 
dangerously irresponsible. It is difficult to see how this, let alone 
any use of troops or a frigate to turn around the Tampa, is anything 
less than a technical act of war. Were it to have been carried out on 
the high seas, rather than in territorial waters, there would be a good 
case to be made for calling it piracy.

  

 We are mindful of the difficult position in which 
your country has been placed by the appalling behaviour of Indonesia 
and its refusal to effectively crack down on the horrible trade in people 
smuggling and to police its own waters. However, unlike Indonesia, Australia 
is a signatory of all these conventions and has until now been recognised 
as a state with a proud tradition of maritime excellence. That its Government 
seems willing to jeopardise that reputation by risking people's lives 
for short term domestic political gain is abhorrent.

  

 I sincerely hope that you will pass on this message 
to your Government, and that it will take heed of the rising number 
of voices around the world calling on your nation to act in accordance 
with both its humanitarian duty and its well known reputation for fairness.

  

 Yours faithfully,

  

 David Cockcroft,

  General Secretary

