---
title: "Labor's international strategy to combat people smuggling."
date: "2001-09-06"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Brereton, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211228478
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NXV46%22
---

   Australian Labor Party   National ALP   Back

 Kim Beazley, Laurie Brereton - Labor's International Strategy To Combat People Smuggling //media/0901/kblbmsps060901.html Friday, 07 September 2001

 Labor's International Strategy To Combat People Smuggling Kim Beazley, Leader of the Opposition, and Laurie Brereton, Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 Media Statement - 6 September 2001

 Closing the gate on people smuggling is a critical international challenge for Australia.

 Australia is a good hearted-country, but we cannot afford to be an easy target for the people smugglers -who are the real villains in this issue. We must not allow our immigration policy to be subverted by unchecked illegal arrivals. We must protect our borders.

 Labor believes we cannot be a soft touch, but that means having a smart touch in gaining international cooperation. It means having a cop on the beat 52 weeks a year in the form of a Coast Guard, not just for 3 weeks when you decide it's suddenly a problem. It means recognising you can't protect your borders without working with your neighbours.

 I announced our plan to establish an Australian Coast Guard early last year. It will be responsible for conducting Australia's coastal surveillance and meeting Australia's maritime protection needs, including in relation to illegal immigration, drugs, fisheries, and quarantine-related issues.

 Australia won't fix the border problem without fixing the relationship with Indonesia. We won't fix this problem without a year-round dedicated Coast Guard. Only one political party is promising to do these things.

 Effective measures to combat people smuggling require cooperation with neighbouring countries that are serving as transit routes for illegal people movement to Australia. People smuggling poses a significant national security problem not only for Australia, but also for our neighbours including Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.

 International and regional cooperation is vital. Labor is determined to meet this challenge with a comprehensive diplomatic strategy.

 A Labor Government will pursue the issue of people smuggling with the highest levels of the Indonesian Government. We will do so in the context of a wholehearted commitment to build a new mutually beneficial relationship with the new Indonesia.

 Labor will seek a comprehensive agreement with Indonesia to extend bilateral cooperation against people smuggling. This will be accompanied by the provision of increased technical support for Indonesian law enforcement authorities to disrupt people-smuggling operations and additional assistance to Indonesia in the area of maritime surveillance.

 We should seek Indonesian agreement to accepting the return of vessels and people who are trying to use Indonesian territory as a jumping off point to illegally enter Australia. At the same time Australia must be prepared to help Indonesia deal with the humanitarian aspects of this problem.

 We must put a great deal more effort into encouraging the international community to find homes for those people in Indonesia who have been assessed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to be genuine refugees. Australia must be prepared to accept our fair share of this responsibility within the Government's existing humanitarian program.

 Efforts to combat people smuggling must be pursued on a regional basis. A Labor Government will appoint a Special Australian Representative to promote regional action on people smuggling issues. The appointment of a senior Australian diplomat to this full-time role will provide a powerful focus for Australia's efforts to improve regional cooperation.

 A Labor Government will put the issue of people smuggling firmly on the agenda in Australia's regional security dialogues - bilaterally and at the ASEAN Regional Security Forum (ARF). The ARF has in recent years expanded the scope of its dialogue to cover transnational crime issues including drug trafficking, arms smuggling and piracy. Greater attention must to be given to people-smuggling and refugee issues across the region.

 As a major initiative, the Special Representative will explore the potential for convening an Asia-Pacific Summit focussed on the question of combating people smuggling.

 A regional Summit involving Heads of Government, Foreign Ministers, and Ministers responsible for Immigration and Law Enforcement, together with United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other UN agencies and relevant experts would provide a valuable forum to develop a comprehensive framework for cooperation against people smuggling. Australia should be prepared to fund such a conference and related meetings of technical experts in 2002-2003.

 Timely action against people smuggling requires both an improved national capacity to assess relevant developments in distant regions where Australia's diplomatic representation is limited, and effective intelligence collection, especially in relation to clandestine people smuggling networks.

 A Labor Government will improve the capacity of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Department of Immigration and other agencies, to assess developments overseas relevant to the unauthorised movement of people to Australia. This will require additional resources at diplomatic posts in the Middle East and South Asia. We will also boost the capacity of Australia's intelligence agencies to collect and assess intelligence relating to clandestine people smuggling networks.

 We understand that any long-term solution to the problems of people smuggling depends, in part, on assisting other countries to overcome their serious economic and social problems.

 Labor will make targeted aid contributions and settlement support to countries of first asylum. This will help reduce the number of people who illegally make their way to Australia. A Labor Government will

 further increase Australia's contributions to assist the UNHCR in processing of Afghani, Iraqi and other refugee claims in transit countries such as Indonesia and Pakistan. Authorised by Geoff Walsh, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.

