---
title: "Detention contingency planning announced."
date: "2001-08-23"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211227662
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RRS46%22
---

  

 News Room

 Detention Contingency Planning Announced MPS 123/2001

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today announced plans to increase the contingency capacity for detaining unauthorised boat arrivals.

 The Minister said while around 20 per cent of detention capacity was still available further boat arrivals were expected so it was prudent to have contingency plans in place.

 "Preparations will begin in three centres," the Minister said.

 "A section of HMAS Coonawarra in Darwin will be prepared as a temporary contingency reception centre for unauthorised boat arrivals located off northern Australia.

 "This temporary facility will only be used when required as an initial processing point with detainees moving to other centres around the country, usually within a few days.

 "It will be replaced by the new permanent immigration reception and detention centre in Darwin that I announced in the 2000 Budget."

 The Minister said work would also start at the Defence facility at Singleton in NSW and El Alamein near Port Augusta in South Australia to prepare contingency immigration detention capacity. Once El Alamein becomes operational it will be used as a contingency centre ahead of Singleton.

 "Current detention capacity is increasingly being taken up by people who have exhausted their claims or who, having had their claims for asylum rejected, are pursuing appeals through tribunals and the Courts, prolonging the time they spend in detention," the Minister said.

 "The Government will continue its efforts to disrupt the activities of smugglers and to reach

 return arrangements with source countries by working closely with other Governments and international bodies."

 So far this year almost 3,700 people had arrived in Australia unlawfully by boat compared to 2,939 arrivals for the 2000 calendar year.

 23 August 2001 Media Contact: Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

