---
title: "Review of asset management. [National General Assembly of Local Government: Community renewal: citizens in action, Canberra, 26 November 2001]"
date: "2001-11-26"
creators:
  - "Burns, Penny"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Asset management"
  - "Roads to Recovery Program"
  - "Local councils"
  - "Roads"
  - "Local government issue"
  - "Accounting standards"
  - "Government expenditure"
  - "Interstate comparisons"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "National General Assembly of Local Government: Community renewal: citizens in action"
  - "Canberra"
  - "26 November 2001"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232128
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/P0L56%22
---

  [National General Assembly of Local Government: 
Community renewal: citizens in action, Canberra, 26 November 2001]

  

  By Dr Penny Burns, AMQ International

  

  The Roads to Recovery grants have been well 
received by co  uncils but there is no certainty that they will be renewed at the 
end of the current four-year period.   In fact, with recent 
increased demands on the Federal Government for defence, border security 
and refugee relief, it is clear that any extra funding for local government 
is going to have to be very well argued indeed.

  

  That argument will need to

  Roads are the dominant asset for councils and 
are highly visible.  But while it is the largest group of assets, 
roads still only account for about half of local government assets when 
taken across the nation - and the other   half (buildings, parks, drainage, footpaths, bridges water and sewerage) 
also need maintenance and upgrading.  All of these assets are important 
to councils.

  

  This is why the Mildura Committee has adopted 
a broader asset management focus rather than a purely roads funding 
focus as the means to a solution for the rural roads problem identified 
by the Moree Local roads Congress in 2000.  The report that resulted 
from the Moree Congress (the ‘Butcher Report’) was instrumental 
in   identifying the problem.   
It argued that local roads and bridges throughout Australia were in 
poor condition, with deficiencies particularly serious in rural and 
remote areas.  Moreover, bad roads were increasing transport costs 
faced by country industries, hindering export trade, impeding the delivery 
of education and health services and were having a negative effect on 
the general social amenity of regional areas.

  

  It is now time to work towards a solution.  

  

  To this end, the ALGA initiated the current study of asset management 
practices in local government, which has been supported by the Federal 
Government through its local government initiative program (LGIP).  
Its purpose was to

  

  

  From workshops held in every state, the study 
sought to under  stand

  It also sought suggestions of councils that 
could be considered sites of good practice   for one aspect or another of asset management.  

  

  1.  Major Influences on Asset Management Practices

  

  States varied in many ways; in some, councils 
had undergone serious restructuring through amalgamations, in others, 
they had not; some had semi commercial assets in the form of water and 
sewerage whilst others did not; some had a high proportion of small, 
rural, councils; others did not.   Yet, despite this range 
of differences, councils had, nevertheless been exposed to very similar 
influences

  

  

  Each of these has impacted on councils in two 
major ways:

  The high level o  f interest rates in the late 1980s and early 1990s caught many councils 
unaware and in some places has left a legacy of ‘debt shyness’.  
Many councils see being ‘debt-free’ as a desirable, indeed a prudent, 
position.  This has been encouraged by many State organisations. 
Those councils, however, that fought to repay debt and are now net lenders 
are finding that the present downturn in interest rates has reduced 
their revenues, whilst others that could use the current low interest 
rates to advantage to fund renewal of essential infrastructure are reluctant 
to do so, being deterred by attitudes within their own councils or by 
State pressures.  Managing cash flows through appropriate use of 
debt is a means of funding asset management and debt needs to be seen 
as a tool to be used, rather than a liability to be avoided at all costs.

  

  AAS27, accrual accounting, valuation and depreciation 
of infrastructure assets

  The move to accrual accounting in the early ‘90s 
and the requirement to report asset values and depreciation under AAS27 
was the stimulus to asset management for all councils.  However, today, 
it’s accounting/reporting focus is holding asset management back.  
In particular the convention of valuing infrastructure in terms of its 
replacement cost has taken away the need to determine whether these 
assets are really ‘valuable’ to the community at all, and whether 
their ‘value’ exceeds their ‘cost’.

  In all workshops, participants were eager to discuss some of the newer 
methods being developed for appropriate valuation and depreciation of 
infrastructure assets.  Guidelines have been prepared by a number 
of the Audit Offices, particularly Queensland and Tasmania. In Queensland, 
councils are required to fund their depreciation, but are permitted 
to ‘unfund’ elements that will not be renewed. This has led to great 
interest in the work being carried out in South Australia where the 
Local Government Finance Group are conducting a project looking at ‘required 
depreciation’ and  the use of asset management plans to costlessly 
‘spin-off’ management-relevant infrastructure depreciation is moving 
into the pilot stage.  (Incidentally, the concept behind this work 
is the same as that recently adopted by the United States in its alternative 
to straight line depreciation of infrastructure, known as GASB 34 or 
the ‘modified approach’.)

  

  The South Australian research drew a great deal of interest because 
of the costs currently incurred in producing figures that serve no other 
purpose than to complete balance sheet requirements.  A number 
of participants pointed out that, with the accounting approach, interest 
in ‘asset management’ was spasmodic, limited to the five yearly 
valuation reviews.  All recognised that what was needed was a management 
accounting rather than a financial accounting approach.

  

  Review of council acts

  During the 1990s all councils reviewed their acts and all put a greater 
emphasis on asset management and the financial reporting of assets.   
New South Wales has adopted ‘Schedule 7’ which requires all councils 
to report the current state of their infrastructure and how much it 
would cost to bring sub-standard assets up to an acceptable level.  

  

  National Competition Policy.    Implementation of the national competition policy has helped 
councils to consider which of their services are, in fact, market services, 
and to encourage an attitude of full costing of council services, at 
least for those services that compete in the market place, eg caravan 
parks, swimming pools and, of course, water and sewerage services.

  

  Roads to Recovery Grants  .  

  At the moment, reporting requirements are focussing on the benefits 
of the road projects funded under the grants.  All workshops, however, 
recognised that more needed to be done by way of generating federal 
support for continuation of the grants.

  

  High Court Decision on Non-Feasance.    

  Perhaps the most significant of the recent influences has been the 
2001 High Court Decision removing immunity for non-feasance from councils 
in respect of roads, bridges and footpaths.  Although some are 
fighting to have the decision reversed, this is a decision of great 
importance for improved management of council assets.  The High 
Court Decision does not mean, as a recent Sydney Morning Herald article 
concluded, that litigation will skyrocket and  “council money 
is going to be soaked up maintaining existing facilities”.   
However, councils will need to demonstrate that they are correctly allocating 
resources and that they are doing the best they can within their limited 
funds.  In other words, the onus will be on good asset management.

  The major data source in all States is the 
Grants Commission.  The   data is used for the distribution of Commonwealth Road Financial 
Assistance Grants (general purpose and roads component) to local government 
and it may also be used for the distribution of some State programs.  
Their information on roads is generally limited to road length and road 
type (ie standard).  Rural (non-urban) roads are generally also 
separated from those in urban areas.    

  

  Queensland has introduced a comparative data template that they send 
to Councils with the Grants Commission returns.  It not only includes 
expenditure but also data for calculating servicing and renewal levels.   
Western Australia has a strong emphasis on estimating the depreciated 
replacement value of the road assets based on the amount of work undertaken 
over the year.

  

  Several years ago, ALGA sought the assistance 
of the State Grants Commissions to collect a standard set of road expenditure 
data.  The p  urpose was to profile the total expenditure on local roads and bridges 
across Australia.  Two states (NSW and QLD) added the ALGA template 
to their own, while three other States (VIC, SA and WA) integrated the 
ALGA items into their own templates.  All States (with the exception 
of TAS) have provided data for ALGA for the last three years.  
The data was used to estimate the total annual expenditure by local 
government on roads and bridges and to determine the unit road expenditure 
for different classes of Councils.

  

  ALGA has recently revised its template to better reflect type of expenditure.  
In particular, it wanted to identify the amount allocated to recurrent 
expenditure as opposed to renewal and upgrading.  Not all Grants 
Commissions were able to accommodate the more detailed request at the 
time but three States (NSW, VIC and QLD) agreed to trial the template 
in 2001/02.

  

  The more detailed breakdown of expenditure will provide an insight 
into the Council’s asset management strategy.  This will supplement 
the current expenditure profiles and unit rates with information on 
asset management.

  Where the ABS reports asset information, the 
data is derived from that supplied to the Grants Commission.  Most 
states also produce   comparative statistics.  However, with a few exceptions, these 
are mostly limited to comparisons of inputs.  Measures of outputs 
and measures of assets were not generally available.  To add to 
the variation, not only data use but data definitions and their interpretation 
also varies widely between States and also from council to council within 
States.  

  

  3.  State by State

  The level of interest and awareness was high 
in all States but especially so in Victoria, which undertook a systematic 
review   of asset conditions and asset management practices in 1997-1998, “Facing 
the Renewal Challenge”.   For the first time, it was possible 
to project infrastructure renewal requirements for all councils within 
the State on a relatively consistent basis and over an extended period 
of time.   That study showed that councils in Victoria

  

  The “Facing the Renewal Challenge” study 
created great interest and support from Victorian councils.  The 
Office of Local Government is considering updating the data because 
consistent data across all councils in the State that can be aggregated 
for purposes of submissions to the Commonwealth or to State Governments 
is extremely valuable. 

  

  Recently, the Municipal Association has followed 
up with a benchmarking study looking at   the quality with which Councils are managing their asset management 
inputs.  The report identifies the current status of asset management 
in Victoria with respect to:

  

  Other innovations in Victoria include adoption 
of ‘best value’ which,  if correctly applied, will enable Victorian 
councils to gain a much better appreciation of what their communities 
really want - and are prepared to pay for - by way of service provision.

  South Australia has recently   completed the first completely voluntary infrastructure 
asset management study involving all councils in the state.  This 
has recently been released in brochures and CDs entitled “A Wealth 
of Opportunities”.   The report focuses on what can be done, 
and why, to overcome current and future asset management problems.  
Copies are available for interested ALGA members.  The study covered 
much of the ground that the Victorian study covered but it was not a 
‘one shot in time’ study like the Victorian study - instead databases 
for each council, and for the state in aggregate, have been established 
on an accessible website and councils are encouraged to use the software 
to continuously update their information and to carry out simple scenario 
analysis.  Councils can also swap passwords for benchmarking purposes.  

  

  The South Australian Local Government Finance 
Group has been developing a method of valuing and depreciating infrastructure 
assets that takes into account the fact that these assets are not consistently 
run down and replaced but rather are renewed in a piecemeal fashion. 
Because of this, assigning a ‘life’ to an infrastructure asset and 
following the normal straight line depreciation is artificial and often 
results in council books generally showing very low depreciated values 
for assets which are still operating well. At the same time, the valuation 
and depreciation provide no guidance for managers  . 

  

  This is being corrected in the SA work that measures the costs required 
to keep the assets in a suitable condition for service delivery.  
The concept behind this form of infrastructure accounting was developed 
in Australia, adopted in New Zealand, and has now influenced the development 
of an acceptable alternative to traditional commercial depreciation 
for use with infrastructure assets in the United States.  There 
is an indication that the Accounting Standards Board may be prepared 
to consider the infrastructure approach as an alternative.   
SA has developed the concept and draft guidelines for use by councils 
and these will be piloted in the New Year. 

  Innovative work in Tasmania has been led by 
the Audit Office which has produced guidelines for the valuation and 
depreciation of road assets that require councils to depreciate on a 
residual value/residual life basis.  At each revaluation, councils 
nee  d to estimate depreciation by dividing the remaining value by the 
remaining life instead of the traditional approach of dividing replacement 
value by the total economic life. This method allows councils to more 
accurately value their assets since it is being done on an asset by 
asset basis.  

  

  The Auditor General is also requiring that councils treat the re-metalling 
of gravel roads as capital renewal rather than maintenance.  This 
has the great benefit of enabling councils to be able to demonstrate 
improvement (or the reverse) in their gravel road network.  

  

  This residual value/residual life approach is only used for roads 
at the moment but has the potential to be extended.  It requires 
each council to examine the replaceable elements of the road (the surface, 
the pavement, the sub-form) and to take account of the different geographical 
conditions and usage patterns of their roads rather than ascribing all 
of them the same accounting life.

  

  In general, councils are reacting well to this new approach for it 
enables them to get a much better understanding of their road assets 
and they can measure changes in overall performance as well as target 
their maintenance and renewal spending more efficiently.  The information 
lends itself to being incorporated in an asset management plan and could 
easily be adopted to the infrastructure depreciation approach being 
developed in South Australia.  It has great potential for demonstrating 
wise management of Roads to Recovery funding.

  Queensland have been very ac  tive in asset management and much excellent work has taken place in 
the area of water and sewerage in particular.  

  

  The Queensland LGA recently conducted a survey of road asset management 
practices.  It   identified that Queensland local governments recognise 
that road condition information is important in the capital works and 
maintenance prioritisation processes. However the types of data and 
the use of this data varies significantly within Queensland local governments. 
Moreover, despite this recognition there is currently a weak connection 
between the collection of data and the integration of this data into 
pavement management or road asset management systems, in order to better 
identify and prioritise works requirements. Better management of this 
process, particularly on a regional level, will require a greater commitment 
to supporting road investment decisions with consistent road condition 
information, as well as planning, programming and reviewing works requirements 
over common time frames. 

  

  This information is important for the development 
of a road asset management strategy which is a key component of the 
proposed Alliance between the Main Roads Department and Local Governments 
in Queensland.

  WA has the most advanced general reporting 
system on road assets and condition of any state.   

  

  Councils in WA are responsible for a road network 
with a replacement value of almost $10 billion (1998-1999 values).  
Until recently they la  cked information on the age of their roads, their condition, their 
rate of deterioration, and how much should be spent on them each year.  

  

  As the WAMA Transport and Roads Unit argued 
‘if Local Government lacks crucial information on its own roads, how 
ca  n it convince others that it is managing its roads efficiently?’  

  

  The latest Report on Local Government road Assets and Expenditure 
tries to overcome these deficiencies.    It is based 
on

  

  The major deficiency is that assessed condition 
is based on the ‘written down value’ which is itse  lf derived from depreciation percentages which are neither described 
nor accounted for.  

  

  A combination of the Tasmanian Audit Office approach to depreciation 
plus the reporting mechanism of the Western Australians would be an 
excellent basis for a national approach.

  NSW had an early start to collecting condition 
data and expenditures through the requirements of the Local Government 
Act, 1993-1994, Section 428.  They are required to prepare estimates 
of desirable annual expenditures and es  timates of the amount required to bring assets up to an acceptable 
level.  This information was required to be presented in council’s 
annual reports.  This could have provided a very useful time series 
to analyse asset management performance had guidance been available 
at the start to ensure consistent responses by councils.  It is 
now realised that this was not provided and the level of variance in 
the information provided has considerably reduced its value.  As 
a result new guidelines have been prepared within the Asset Accounting 
Manual.   There is considerable value in annual reporting 
on the costs to bring infrastructure assets up to a satisfactory standard 
and this idea could well be adopted by other jurisdictions.

  

  The major issues of concern were surprisingly similar across states:

  

  A common message from the workshops that have 
been   conducted is the need for some basic consistency of data and approach.  
No-one is seeking complete standardisation but rather a common core 
of data that would enable a better understanding.  An industry 
standard detailing minimum information requirements and procedures would 
be of great assistance not only to councils but to those bodies such 
as Audit and the Grants Commissions who deal with them

  

  Preferably, the common 
core would be acceptable for external reporting as well as for internal 
management: all councils report the difficulties they have experienced 
in recent years dealing with u  ncertainty and constant change.  It would 
also make possible the aggregation necessary for dealing with national 
funding and enable nation-wide improvement and benchmarking. But data 
by itself is not the answer; councils are also seeking help in using 
and applying the data.  In every state there was a plea for simple, 
sensible, cost effective and useful measurements for valuation and depreciation.

  

  It is also clear that far too many still see 
asset ma  nagement and asset renewal forecasts as synonymous.   Many 
pavement management and other asset management systems are capable of 
projecting required funding and action - if funds were unlimited! 
But few are capable of sound prioritisation, even within the asset class 
being recorded, and none are able to handle the difficult prioritisation 
tasks that daily face councils across their entire range of assets and 
non-asset responsibilities.  This is where the need for a framework 
within which data can be analysed and changes made to give best results 
for a limited budget is urgently needed.

  

  This is reinforced by the message from the 
recent High Court decision removing the immunity for non-feasance with 
respect to roads in that the only reasonable   defence in the case of accident involving any council asset will be 
that the council is doing the best it can with the resources available,   which requires demonstration of this sound across-the-board 
prioritisation.

  

  All of the ab  ove, namely consistent data which can be aggregated to form a national 
picture, managed in a cost effective manner, and used within a general 
framework that will enable demonstration of sound prioritisation is 
, of course, exactly what is needed to argue the case for higher Commonwealth 
funding for the local road network.   For a strong and winnable 
case to be put, there is a need to 

  

  That Local Government utilise the three year 
‘window’ it now has before the ending of the Roads to Recovery grants 
to gather the necessary   data within a suitable practice framework so as to be in a position 
to present a solid case to the Commonwealth for increased local road 
funding.

  

  The first stage of preparation should be a feasibility study examining

  

  As data is only as good as the use made of it, 
the first stage of preparation should also include 

  

  The overall aim of this investigation would 
be to present to this body at its next annual general meeting, a proposal 
for a common data set and a best practic  e framework that would win the in-principle support of all members 
with the intention that the chosen option be put in place over the following 
two years.

  

  Such a common data set and best practice framework would not only 
support the case for increased road funding but it could

