---
title: "Afghanistan: Australia should make additional contribution now to mine clearance to enable refugee repatriation."
date: "2001-12-16"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232435
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YTM56%22
---

 KEVIN RUDD M.P. Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 01-084

 MEDIA RELEASE

 Islamabad

 AFGHANISTAN - AUSTRALIA SHOULD MAKE ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTION NOW TO MINE CLEARANCE TO ENABLE REFUGEE REPATRIATION

 Shadow Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said today from Islamabad that Australia should make a significant additional contribution now to the critical task of mine clearance in Afghanistan.

 Mr Rudd made these remarks following meetings with Mr Mike Sackett, UN Coordinator for Afghanistan, and Mr Dan Kelly, Program Manager of the Mine Action Program.  Both said a major priority now was mine clearance, because unless this happened, it created major impediments to the repatriation of 3.1 million refugees to Afghanistan and the return of more than 1.5 million internally displaced persons within Afghanistan.

 Afghanistan is one of the three most mined countries in the world.  Nearly 1,000 sq kms of the country is mined, and the UN estimates that 334 sq kms of this is in high priority residential and agricultural areas - including 34 sq kms of priority roads.

 “The UN Mine Program advises me that up to 300 civilian casualties a month (that is, ten every day, including children) are still occurring through mine accidents and probably many more, as fatalities, by definition, do not report themselves,” Mr Rudd said.

 The mine problem has been compounded by massive amounts of unexploded ordinance arising from the current conflict - including unexploded, yellow-coloured cluster bombs which are particularly visually attractive to children.

 “All UN agencies with which I have spoken in the last week have emphasised the critical importance of mine clearing because, unless it is done now as a matter of priority, it will radically impede repatriation efforts by the UNHCR, the distribution of emergency aid by the World Food Program and UNICEF, as well as efforts at economic reconstruction.  Very simply, if roads, fields and villages are mined, people are not going to go back,” Mr Rudd said.

 Prior to the current conflict, the UN annual program of $US 30 million was calculated to be able to rid the country of mines after twelve more years.

 The UN Co-ordinator for Afghanistan and the Head of the Mine Action Program have advised me that their revised mine clearance program for the next six months will need US$ 34 million.  As of now, this remains under-subscribed by donor countries by $US 17million.

 Australia has been a modest contributor to the UN Mine Action Program for some years, although this contribution was reduced to zero in 1999.  In the year 2000, Australia contributed one tenth of the amount contributed by the Netherlands, a country of comparable economic size to Australia.

 “I note that Mr Downer has been able to find an additional AU$ 10 million to pay Nauru to take an additional 400 Afghan refugees.  I would ask Mr Downer to consider whether it would be productive to now make a new and additional contribution to the UN Mine Clearance Program in Afghanistan itself in order to make it physically possible for Afghans to begin to return home,” Mr Rudd said.

 “The burden of all the discussions I have had in Islamabad and in refugee camps on the Afghanistan/Pakistan border in the last week (where I also met and talked with many civilian victims of mine accidents) is that, if the international community, including Australia, is serious about solving the problem of international people movements, we must begin to address the problem at source.

 “Clearing Afghanistan of mines is a fundamental part of addressing this problem at source.  Australia must make an additional substantial contribution now - either in cash or in kind (through the considerable expertise of the Australian military and others) or both.”

 Mr Rudd returns to Australia today.

 Ends Sunday, 16 December 2001

 For further information contact: Greg Tonks on 0418 796 931

