---
title: "New settlement services launched in Tasmania for refugees."
date: "2001-10-26"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211230899
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WCF56%22
---

  

 New Settlement Services Launched in Tasmania for Refugees

 MPS 183/2001

 A new model of settlement services for refugees was launched by the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Philip Ruddock, in Launceston today.

 The new model of the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy (IHSS) provides initial settlement services to humanitarian entrants resettled under the offshore Humanitarian Program.

 These services include help with initial information and orientation, accommodation support, household formation, early health intervention and torture and trauma counselling.

 "Every year under the offshore Humanitarian Program, Australia welcomes thousands of refugees and people in humanitarian need," the Minister said.

 "The Government recognises that humanitarian entrants being resettled in Australia generally require a great deal of social support and friendship in their new environment.

 "Those who arrive in Tasmania under our offshore Humanitarian Program are now able to access new services to help them settle into the community and become independent members of the Australian society," Mr Ruddock said.

 The IHSS was originally established in 1997-98 to provide a national framework for a better-targeted and responsive approach to the settlement needs of humanitarian entrants.

 Minister Ruddock also took the opportunity to thank the many volunteers who give up their time to help settle the new arrivals.

 "Volunteers under the Community Support for Refugees play a crucial role in reducing the sense of isolation and disconnection through their friendship and social support," the Minister said.

 "They make refugees feel welcome and help them establish contact with their neighbours, places of worship, sporting organisations and help link them up with their ethnic associations.

 "It helps them develop social networks and makes them feel part of the broader community," Mr Ruddock said.

 It is expected that about 220 people from the Humanitarian Program will settle in Tasmania this financial year.

 26 October 2001 Media inquiries Steve Ingram (02) 6277 7860

 Media Release Index

  

