---
title: "Oh that I were made judge in the land."
date: "2001-12-10"
creators:
  - "Allan, Jim"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Bill of Rights"
  - "Human rights"
  - "New Zealand"
  - "Judicial activism"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Federal issue"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232328
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K0T66%22
---

 CASTAN CENTRE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS LAW

 "HUMAN RIGHTS AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES"

 10th - 11th December 2001

  "Oh 
That I Were Made Judge In The Land"

 Associate Professor Jim Allan

     
Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which hath any 
suit or cause m ight come unto me, and I would do him justice! 
(2 Samuel 15:4)

 Imagine a Westminster common law jurisdiction without 
a bill of rights. As things stand at present, all important social policy 
decisions in this jurisdiction, including decisions about how rights 
are to be balanced against one another and against overall community 
welfare claims, rest with the elected legislature and executive. Not 
everyone in this jurisdiction is happy with this arrangement, however. 
There are some politicians who are not averse to joining the world-wide 
trend by adopting some sort of bill of rights. A handful of them in 
fact, mostly from the main left of centre political party, are positively 
keen on the idea. They see the post-Second World War Americanisation 
of constitutional law, with its emphasis on formalising the role and 
place of human rights in a legal instrument the judges oversee, as unambiguously 
a good thing. They would like an entrenched, justiciable model.   
Even more enthusiastic about adopting a bill of rights are the preponderance 
of judges and legal academics in this jurisdiction. Many of the latter 
have a barely disguised disdain for elected politicians. Certainly they 
tend to think these creatures of democratic elections less trustworthy 
- especially when it comes to giving specific content to rights - than 
is the unelected judiciary. Truth be told, most of the judges deep down 
agree. When it comes to delivering justice and fairness and upholding 
fundamental human rights, who better than they, they think. After all, 
they have life tenure, independence, a proclaimed commitment to objectivity 
and they must give written reasons for their decisions.   
Imagine further that the first goal of those who support a bill of rights 
is to move their jurisdiction towards some sort of Canadian or American-style 
model - to adopt a constitutionalised, justiciable bill of rights against 
which the judiciary can scrutinise primary legislation and if necessary 
strike that legislation down for infringing one of the broad, rather 
indeterminate protections listed therein. Alas, in this suppositious 
scenario there proves to be insufficient support for such an entrenched, 
over-riding model. So the fall-back position of pressing for a statutory 
bill of rights is taken up. This seems less revolutionary to some opponents, 
and even wins a modicum of converts. But opponents still outnumber proponents. 
Hence the statutory bill of rights itself is watered down through a 
series of rather messy compromises - perhaps the remedies section is 
removed and a new operative provision is added explicitly stating that 
this Act will lose out to all other Acts, future or past, in the event 
of mutual inconsistency. The mover in the House of this enervated compromise 
instrument even has to assure parliament that "this will be a parliamentary 
bill of rights; it will create no new legal remedies for courts to grant 
irrespective of whether the bill of rights is an issue".    
At last, with these concessions and assurances in place, the enfeebled 
Bill of Rights Act limps through parliament and becomes law.   
Now put away your imagination. The picture painted above is not a visionary 
(or even chimerical or quixotic) conjecture of how events may play out 
here in Australia. No, there is nothing imaginary at all about the events 
related above for they describe what in fact took place in New Zealand 
leading up to the passage of its Bill of Rights Act a dozen years ago.1 
What I want to do next in this paper is briefly to recount what happened 
in New Zealand subsequent to the passage of this seemingly enervated 
Bill of Rights Act. Then, I want to focus on a few of the leading cases 
to date to see what is involved when judges give specific content to 
broad, indeterminate rights guarantees. Finally, I will conclude with 
a brief summary of the main grounds I have for objecting to bills of 
rights and for hoping Australia sets its face against the worldwide 
trend towards their adoption.

     
1. Judicial inflation of the statutory bill of rights in New Zealand

  Almost immediately after passage it became clear that the section 
6 operative provision (which roughly seems to amount to an instruction 
to 'do what you can - with a straight face - to i nterpret this 
other statute as consistent with the rights in this Bill of Rights'2) 
would be emphasized over the operative provision that had had to be 
inserted specially to get the Act passed and which became section 4 
(in essence commanding that 'all other inconsistent statutes over-ride 
the rights in this Bill of Rights'3). In the first ever Bill of Rights 
Act case to reach the Court of Appeal4 the then President, speaking 
for the Court, suggested in obiter that section 6 may require a court 
to depart from a long established judicial interpretation of the meaning 
and intent of a particular statutory provision.5 There followed a steady 
stream of dicta to the effect that the enervated Act actually enacted 
should, contrary to the clear legislative history, be treated as some 
sort of extra-special, quasi-constitutional Bill of Rights.6   
Meanwhile, despite the specially added qualification at its start to 
help ensure the Bill's passage ('Subject to section 4 of this Bill of 
Rights'), even the third main operative provision - the section 57 abridging 
inquiry - was given pre-eminence over section 4. In fact, in a 1992 
case the present President of the Court of Appeal announced that "[i]t 
is worth emphasising too that in principle an abridging inquiry under 
s. 5 will properly involve consideration of all economic, administrative 
and social implications".8 And this, remember, in a Bill of Rights 
Act where any abridging inquiry is ultimately otiose because if any 
statutory limit does happen to be found unreasonable or unjustified 
it nonetheless prevails over the Bill of Rights Act because of s. 4! 
Still, the judges would keep open the option of an abridging inquiry 
regardless, as they made clear eight years later in the case of Moonen:9   
In determining whether an abrogation or limitation of a right or freedom 
can be justified in terms of s. 5, it is desirable first to identify 
the objective which the legislature was endeavouring to achieve by the 
provision in question. The importance and significance of that objective 
must then be assessed .... Of necessity value judgments will be involved. 
In this case it is the value to society of freedom of expression, against 
the value society places on protecting children and young persons from 
exploitation for sexual purposes .... Ultimately, whether the limitation 
in issue can or cannot be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic 
society is a matter of judgment which the Court is obliged to make on 
behalf of the society which it serves and after considering all the 
issues which may have a bearing on the individual case, whether they 
be social, legal, moral, economic, administrative, ethical or otherwise.10

 Wow, seems the only appropriate response. Here is 
the section 5 operative provision - an amended so as to be subject to 
section 4 carry-over from the earlier thoroughly rejected, constitutionalized 
Bill of Rights model - being made the basis for judges to make all these 
sweeping value judgments 'on behalf of the society which they serve'. 
And for what ultimate purpose? In that same Moonen case the judges tell 
us:

 That purpose necessarily involves the Court having 
the power, and on occasions the duty, to indicate that although a statutory 
provision must be enforced according to its proper meaning, it is inconsistent 
with the Bill of Rights, in that it constitutes an unreasonable limitation 
on the relevant right or freedom which cannot be demonstrably justified 
in a free and democratic society. Such judicial indication will be of 
value should the matter come to be examined by the Human Rights Committee 
... New Zealand society as a whole can rightly expect that on appropriate 
occasions the Courts will indicate whether a particular legislative 
provision is or is not justified thereunder.11

 In other words, out of nowhere, a full decade after 
the Bill of Rights Act came into force, and with only the flimsiest, 
most implausible statutory basis for doing so at all (namely, section 
5), the New Zealand Court of Appeal in Moonen announced that henceforth 
when some statute is found to be inconsistent with the Bill of Rights 
Act, although the courts will be bound by section 4, they may also make 
a declaration of inconsistency.   
At least as remarkable as the Moonen case, however, was the 1994 Baigent's 
Case.12 There, in a 4-1 decision of the Court of Appeal, the judges 
simply read back into the Bill of Rights Act the remedies provision 
that parliament had specifically removed (and had removed as the price 
of getting the Bill enacted). In doing so, the judges ignored everything 
in their way, in particular the Crown Proceedings Act 1950 which precluded 
all known Crown liability at the time, and simply created an ad hoc 
public law remedy sounding in the Bill of Rights Act (going on to indicate 
this remedy was distinct from the common law tort of breach of statutory 
duty). In effect, the New Zealand Court of Appeal, in the name of giving 
life and force to fundamental human rights, 'discovered' that the Bill 
of Rights Act subjected the Crown to potentially unlimited liability 
for its breach.13   
Need I say more to make the point that judges, at any rate New Zealand 
judges, can travel a remarkable distance in the name of "keep[ing] 
pace with civilisation",14 not least because they see "basic 
human rights ... [as] inherent in and essential to the structure of 
society ... [and as] not depend[ing] on the legal or constitutional 
form in which they are declared"?15 I will assume not. At any rate, 
suffice it here to say that the history of New Zealand's seemingly enervated, 
statutory bill of rights amounts to this: In fewer than a dozen years 
the judges there have transformed it into an instrument that allows 
them to do not that much less than their Canadian judicial brethren 
who operate an entrenched, over-riding, fully justiciable model. New 
Zealand now has the possibility of declarations of inconsistency; judges 
there can indulge in potentially sweeping abridging inquiries (with 
the Brandeis Brief-type reliance on contestable social science which 
such inquiries necessitate); those same judges have simply created a 
sui generis Baigent Bill of Rights Act cause of action subjecting the 
Crown to potentially unlimited liability for its breach; they have refashioned 
the common law to take account of the Bill of Rights Act;16 astonishingly, 
judges on their highest domestic court are prepared to say that because 
of the Bill of Rights Act it is no longer the case that later statutes 
impliedly prevail over earlier, inconsistent statutes;17 to an extent 
unimagined before the Bill of Rights Act's passage, New Zealand now 
has the regular exercise of political value judgments by unelected judges.   
That is all I intend to say in this paper about the inflationary effect 
of the Bill of Rights Act in New Zealand. In the next section I would 
like to change focus slightly to consider what sort of issues and value 
judgments were at stake in the leading bill of rights cases in New Zealand. 
How debateable - debateable in terms of rights that is - were the outcomes 
favoured by the judges? Was there a clear answer dictated by rights, 
a rights 'right answer' as it were? Are these cases more aptly characterized 
as i) judges protecting us from ourselves in a moment of widespread 
moral weakness; ii) judges protecting a vulnerable minority from the 
tyranny of the majority; or iii) unelected judges taking sides (and 
having a massively disproportionate say) on highly debateable social 
policy issues where both sides to the dispute are sincere and reasonable? 
This question, and one's answer to it, is likely to have no small influence 
on whether one approves of bills of rights. 

     
2. How to characterize what is happening when judges decide bill of 
rights cases

  Under a Bill of Rights judges must give specific content to broad, 
indeterminate rights guarantees. Of course, on the plane of vague generalities 
these emotive guarantees ins pire widespread (at times almost 
universal) agreement. Virtually all of us may hold our hands up high 
when asked if we are in favour of freedom of expression. We nod in agreement 
that society should ensure the right to life, the freedom of religion, 
no undue delay before trying an accused, and no unreasonable police 
searches. Here, on this plane, there is little contention and disagreement. 
Likewise, it is here that most of the selling of bills of rights is 
done, namely, under the guise of upholding and protecting universally 
desired and uncontentious rights. It is almost as though these instruments, 
with their judicial overseers, will be there to stop the elected organs 
of government from indulging in obviously wicked acts.   
Of course it may be that this sort of apocalyptic scenario is little 
more than a myth. It may be that when the broad and imprecise standards 
enunciated in a bill of rights are applied to specific situations any 
notion of consensus or near universal agreement quickly dissolves and 
that widespread dissensus is in fact the reality. Similarly, in saying 
that "[a] Bill of Rights, drawn in open-textured terms, necessarily 
requires individual human rights to be defined with a content specific 
to the case in hand"18, it may be that the judges will end up deciding 
controversial questions of social policy over which sincere, intelligent, 
well-meaning people disagree - questions about where to draw the line 
when it comes to free speech, privacy, who can marry, police powers, 
abortion, religious practices, how refugee claimants are to be treated, 
and much else. In other words, it may well be that giving "a content 
specific to the case in hand"19 means that bills of rights are 
overwhelmingly about delivering from elected politicians to unelected 
judges power to decide highly contestable, debateable, social policy 
issues. The frequently painted picture of judges holding fast to obviously 
correct moral standards (embodied in the language of rights) against 
the attempted backsliding of grubby politicians solely concerned with 
where their next vote is coming from, therefore, may prove to be a remarkably 
inapt description of what actually happens under a bill of rights.   
In the rest of this section I want to tackle this question of how best 
to characterize what is happening when judges decide bill of rights 
cases by considering the leading New Zealand cases.   
Let us start with what is probably the most significant New Zealand 
Bill of Rights Act case to date, Baigent's Case.20 This was the case 
where the judges created a new sui generis cause of action, a public 
law remedy sounding in the Bills of Rights Act subjecting the Crown 
to potentially unlimited liability for its breach. In doing this the 
judges overcame two obstacles. Firstly, not only did the Bill of Rights 
Act lack any provision for remedies for infringement, the remedies clause 
that had been in an earlier draft version had had to be removed, seemingly 
to ensure the Bill's passage. Secondly, there was a statutory immunity 
provision which seemed to apply and if so, would trigger s. 4 ('all 
other inconsistent statues over-ride the rights in this Bill of Rights') 
and so prevail. Needless to say, both obstacles were overcome by the 
judges.21 At the very least this was a clear example of judicial activism.22   
Our question, though, is what was at stake to give rise to all this 
judicial creativity. Stripped to the bone, it was this: Should the police 
be held liable (by reason of the Bill of Rights Act's s. 21 right to 
be secure against unreasonable search and seizure) where they, in good 
faith but erroneously, search the wrong house? Keep that query in mind 
as I prÃ©cis the facts and elaborate on the main issue.   
The Baigent appeal occurred at an interlocutory stage and the question 
before the Court of Appeal was whether the pleadings disclosed any cause 
of action. The relevant pleaded facts were these: A police officer seeking 
a drug offender obtained information (from a source that had been reliable 
in the past) that the suspect lived at 16 Main Road. On checking, the 
officer found there was no such address but that the likely address 
was one of two permutations. The officer made a mistake and sought and 
obtained a warrant for the wrong alternative. (The suspect in fact lived 
at the other of the two alternatives.) The pleadings then allege that 
in executing the search the officer was told he had the wrong house. 
Indeed, it was alleged that during the search the plaintiff's son called 
his sister, a barrister, and she told the officer he had the wrong address. 
Most damningly, the officer was alleged to have replied to the sister 
"We often get it wrong, but while we're here we will look around 
anyway".   
I include that alleged quote just because it is so damning. But notice 
something straight off. Five causes of action were pleaded, four in 
tort and one in the Bill of Rights Act. If, when the action eventually 
reached trial, this damning statement by the officer could have been 
proved, the plaintiffs had a perfectly orthodox tort action open to 
them. The search, continuing after the officer knew he had the wrong 
house, would have been conducted in bad faith and the statutory immunity 
would not have applied.    
But, by creating this new ad hoc Bill of Rights Act cause of action, 
the judges broadened liability to instances where the damning alleged 
reply to the sister could not be proven. Liability under this new Bill 
of Rights Act cause of action did not require the search to have been 
conducted in bad faith as the tort actions did. Instead, it only required 
that the search be unreasonable under s. 21.   
So what the judges effectively decided in Baigent is that (a statutory 
immunity notwithstanding) the police would henceforth be liable for 
a good faith, lawful search provided it was also unreasonable. In other 
words, the judges used the Bill of Rights Act to extend police (and 
vicariously Crown) liability beyond mere bad faith searches to those 
that are also good faith but unreasonable.   
Is that an uncontentious, obviously good outcome? Is it a decision that 
needs to be taken out of the hands of the legislature? Does the understanding 
of all right thinking people demand that liability be imposed for lawful, 
good faith police searches that are unreasonable? My guess (backed up 
by yearly student polls) is that many people in society would be prepared, 
probably for the sake of a more effective police force, to take the 
risk of suffering the inconvenience of such good faith - but erroneous 
and unreasonable - searches. (Remember, no one would have to suffer 
a bad faith search.) More to the point here, though, the sort of judge-made 
liability that emerged in Baigent hardly seems open to being characterized 
as uncontentiously appropriate, obviously a good thing, transcendentally 
needed or anything remotely similar. Making the Crown (and so taxpayers) 
liable for good faith but unreasonable searches (to say nothing of simply 
announcing liability for breaches of the Bill of Rights Act generally) 
is a highly debateable outcome. It is a question of public policy on 
which sensible, well-intentioned people could (and do) take opposite 
sides. In fact, I, for one, fail to see why unelected judges should 
have a special, privileged say on such an issue. Therefore, in terms 
of the three classifying options I offered at the end of section one, 
this case seems clearly to fall under iii).   
The Moonen23 case is another leading New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 
case, and one - I have suggested above - in which the Court of Appeal 
justices were verging on the audacious in the manner in which they inflated 
the status and potency of the Bill of Rights Act. The case involved 
the classification by the Film and Literature Review Board of certain 
publications as 'objectionable' in terms of section 3 of the Films, 
Videos and Publications Classification Act 1993. At issue was a book 
and various photographs belonging to Mr. Moonen. The book was described 
by the Board as containing stories outlining sexual activity between 
men and boys under the age of 16. The relevant photographs were of naked 
children, mostly boys. Section 3 of the Act set out the meaning of 'objectionable'. 
In particular, s. 3(2)(a) read: "A publication shall be deemed 
to be objectionable for the purposes of this Act if the publication 
promotes or supports, or tends to promote or support, - the exploitation 
of children, or young persons, or both, for sexual purposes."   
Moonen appealed the classification to the New Zealand High Court on 
the basis of error of law. His appeal was dismissed. He then appealed 
to the Court of Appeal, which allowed his appeal and sent the matter 
back to the Board.24 The judgment of the five justice court rested on 
the claimed impact of the Bill of Rights Act (in particular sections 
13 and 14 dealing with freedom of thought and expression) on the correct 
interpretation and application of the Films, Videos and Publications 
Classification Act 1993, in particular section 3 of that Act.   
Leave aside the implausibility of judges using this case to give themselves 
the authority to issue declarations of inconsistency,25 and ask yourself 
whether my characterization iii) - unelected judges taking sides on 
a highly debateable social policy issue where reasonable and sincere 
people can disagree - is again the most apt. Even after calm deliberation, 
all but the most rabid libertarians would want some limitations on paedophiliac 
pornography, so i) seems inapt. Nor does the Moonen case seem in any 
way analogous to one in which, say, a group of fellow citizens is being 
shipped to detention centres because of their race.26 So ii) is also 
inapposite.   
Here again it is not immediately obvious, to me at least, why we would 
want guidance from unelected judges when it comes to decisions about 
what is and is not objectionable, about who should and should not be 
able to publish sexually explicit photos of men and boys, on the basis 
of little more than the emotionally stirring quality of the phrase 'everyone 
has the right to freedom of expression'.   
Quilter27 is another case worth considering. There the issue was gay 
marriage and s. 19 'freedom from discrimination' the right in play. 
Three of the five Court of Appeal justices took the view that the prohibition 
on same-sex marriages in the Marriage Act 1955 did not infringe the 
s. 19 discrimination provision. (For two of these three this was an 
obiter holding.) The other two, both in obiter, held the prohibition 
did discriminate against the appellant lesbian couples, though one of 
these two left open the question whether it is justifiable discrimination. 
All five justices agreed, however, that the Marriage Act 1955 was intended 
to confine marriages to those between a man and a woman, and that whatever 
s. 19 of the Bill of Rights Act might imply about discrimination for 
lesbian couples wanting to marry but being unable to do so, section 
4 ('all other inconsistent statutes over-ride the rights in this Bill 
of Rights') dictated that the Marriage Act 1955 must prevail.   
The point for us is not that this is one of the very, very few cases 
in New Zealand where the judges have actually used section 4 to say, 
in effect, that this sort of social policy-making is for Parliament.28 
Nor is the point the cynical one, namely that there was no explicit 
prohibition of same-sex marriage in the Marriage Act 1955 and so - compared 
to cases such as Baigent and others where the judges managed to ignore 
or interpret away blatantly clear statutory inconsistencies - room enough 
here for otherwise rarely deferential judges to find in favour of the 
lesbian couples. No, the point is again that gay marriage is a highly 
contentious issue over which reasonable, sincere, even nice, people 
disagree. Is it really beyond the Pale to think such an issue should 
be decided democratically, by 'letting the numbers count' as Jeremy 
Waldron would say? Do we really need first to be told as much (grudgingly, 
and very infrequently) by the unelected judges themselves?   
We could go on and on. Instead, let us consider the only New Zealand 
Bill of Rights Act case of which I am aware that comes anywhere close 
to falling under the rubric of characterizations i) or ii). This is 
the Pora29 case. The facts there are as good as it gets for believers 
in strong judicial review and powerful Bills of Rights. If you cannot 
make a case for delivering the final say from elected politicians to 
unelected judges there, you are unlikely ever to succeed.   
The gist of Pora revolves around a form of retrospective legislation. 
A 1999 Act amended an earlier 1985 Act so that one sort of murder - 
murder involving 'home invasion' - had to result in a minimum term of 
imprisonment of at least 13 years.30 That 1985 Act had been amended 
in 1993 to provide for a minimum term of 10 years for murder. Pora was 
first convicted of a murder committed in 1992. This conviction came 
in 1994 but was set aside in 1999 and a new trial ordered. At the re-trial, 
Pora was again convicted. He was sentenced in 2000, after the 1999 Act 
had come into force. By this stage, Pora was arguably subject to a harsher 
minimum non-parole period than he would have been at the time of the 
offence, thereby potentially breaching s. 25(g) of the New Zealand Bill 
of Rights Act.31   
If the 1999 Act were held to apply then the question was whether this 
sort of retrospectivity applied back to 1993 (when the 1985 Act had 
been amended), or applied back indefinitely. The only other possibility 
was a refusal to apply s. 2(4) of the 1999 Act, in effect to say that 
because of the Bill of Rights Act the provisions of the earlier 1985 
Act defeat the inconsistent provisions of the 1999 Act.    
As I noted above,32 the justices split 3-3 on whether the doctrine of 
implied repeal is now, because of the Bill of Rights Act, outmoded. 
As the three justices who stood up for orthodoxy had found that retrospectivity 
carried back only to 1993, the deciding justice was able to agree that 
the 1999 amendment did not apply before 1993 (thereby leaving Pora unaffected) 
without having to take a stance on the revolutionary view that an earlier 
statute can prevail against a later, inconsistent statute.   
At this point it may be worth reminding readers that New Zealand's Bill 
of Rights Act is not entrenched or constitutionalized and that the sovereignty 
of Parliament is supposed still to be alive in New Zealand. All obfuscation 
aside, had the revolutionary view prevailed, that would now be debateable.   
[W]hen there is stark conflict [between an earlier provision and later 
provision], as there is in this case, the doctrine of implied repeal 
between provisions enacted at different times, is not a mechanical rule 
[as the three revolutionary justices asserted], but a consequence of 
the sovereignty of Parliament.33

  Leave to one side the merits of any such revolutionary view, however, 
and look at what was at stake in Pora. In fact, let us put the case 
as strongly as possible for bill of rights advocates. In Pora the elected 
legislature had passed a law increasing by t hree years the minimum 
non-parole period for a certain type of murder. And these same elected 
legislators had determined that that increased non-parole period would 
apply retrospectively to murders committed before the new law came into 
force. On these facts, the most favourable we can find after nearly 
a dozen years of the Bill of Rights Act being in force, do we want unelected 
judges over-ruling the elected legislators? Is there a clearly 'right 
answer' here, one so clear that democratic decision-making needs second 
guessing? (I ignore the much harder question for Bill of Rights enthusiasts 
of whether, if this is the best they can point to after twelve years, 
it is worth giving judges a say on all the myriad other cases just so 
they can have a say here.)   
I suspect some will say yes. For them, retrospective legislation can 
never be justified. I disagree. There are two grounds for my disagreement. 
Start with the narrower point first. What the legislature did here was 
to change the non-parole period for an offence that was already an offence. 
The legislature did not retrospectively make criminal conduct that, 
at the time, had been perfectly legal. Murder, unsurprisingly, was illegal 
even in 1992. So what was happening in Pora was that parole conditions 
were being changed with retrospective effect. This is important to get 
clear because I suspect that many who would object virtually automatically 
to criminalizing conduct retrospectively would be much less averse to 
altering parole conditions during the term of incarceration. And the 
Pora scenario falls much closer to that latter end of the spectrum than 
to the archetypical retrospective-criminalization-of-hitherto-legal-conduct 
end of the spectrum. Add to that the fact that a thirteen year non-parole 
period for murder is still very much on the low side in international 
terms and you have my first ground for asserting that even the Pora 
case is best characterized as iii), as an issue of social policy-making 
on which reasonable people can differ and not one we need unelected 
judges to decide for us.    
As it happens I also have a wider ground for coming to that same conclusion. 
Let us go back to the basic issue of retrospective legislation and consider, 
in the abstract, whether such legislation can ever be justified. Frankly, 
I think it can. Here, I am much of H. L. A. Hart's mind.34 Retrospective 
laws are an evil that has to be weighed against the evil sought to be 
remedied. So, for example, I too think - like Hart - that that was what 
was happening after World War II when the top Nazis were tried, convicted 
and executed. The Allies, in effect, simply passed retrospective laws, 
dressed up in natural law clothes. In addition, I suspect most of us 
today, in undertaking any balancing exercise, would agree that the evils 
perpetrated by the top Nazis outweighed any evil attached to the passing 
of retrospective laws enabling their prosecution. A broadly similar 
analysis would apply to the prosecution of East German border guards 
after the fall of the Berlin Wall, though there the weighing of evils 
may well, in my view, point against prosecution.35 The point is that 
I believe retrospective laws, even the archetypical sort that make illegal 
backwards in time what had been perfectly within the law as it then 
stood, even this most extreme sort of retrospective law-making can be 
justified in some situations.   
In Pora, of course, nothing remotely similar to the extreme sort of 
retrospectivity was involved. But let us ask, nonetheless, what the 
balancing exercise would involve. We would have to ask how the evil 
of this law which after the fact added three years to a minimum sentence 
for murder compared to the evil of home invasion murders. Or more accurately, 
we would have to ask whether in balancing the two competing evils the 
retrospective minimum non-parole change is so obviously wicked that 
we need judges to protect us from our elected representatives' proclivity 
to pass such a law. Is i) the best characterization of what the justices 
were doing in Pora? (I think it safe to rule out ii) on the grounds 
that murderers convicted after a fair trial, whose sentences would still 
remain on the low end of any international comparison, hardly fit easily 
into what is generally understood by 'a vulnerable minority'.) Or is 
it, even here, iii)? Is this, yet again, just another example of a highly 
debateable social policy issue over which reasonable people can and 
do disagree and over which unelected judges have no obvious advantages 
in terms of greater moral perspicacity, intuition or insight?

  I do not doubt that many - perhaps most - lawyers, judges and legal 
academics think the rights enunciated in a bill of rights are too precious 
to be left to 'the tyranny of the majority', even if that means such 
rights are simply transferred over to a diff erent set of overseers 
who, as it happens, also reach their decisions about them purely procedurally 
by voting.36 But whether one thinks this or not, one must concede that 
the effects of a bill of rights are felt not up in the Olympian heights 
of rights guarantees which are so broad, indeterminate and emotionally 
appealing that nearly all can support them, but rather down in the quagmire 
of detail. Down there, where these rights have to be given a content 
specific to the case in hand, there is always disagreement, debate and 
dispute about how they should play out. Nor can those who disagree with 
one's own views about how rights should rank against one another, who 
is to possess them, and whether and when they should lose out to broader 
social interests be easily dismissed as unreasonable, morally blind, 
uninformed, evil, in need of re-education, or some such other comfortable 
categorization that eliminates the need to take one's opponents' views 
seriously.    
It is naÃ¯ve (at least in a democracy) to expect to be on the winning 
side of every argument, even arguments about rights. The same point 
is true of bills of rights, at least if one agrees with me that they 
throw up debateable case after debateable case. In New Zealand, after 
a dozen years in force, supporters of the Bill of Rights Act can point 
to no more than one case - and that too is debateable - that seems remotely 
like the sort of scenarios on which such instruments are sold to the 
public. I would say the same is true in Canada, and in all likelihood 
the US too. That realisation, perhaps, might just affect whether one 
approves of bills of rights with their transfer of immense power from 
elected politicians to unelected judges.

 3. Reasons for objecting to bills of rights

 For a sustained, powerful critique of strong judicial 
review under bills of rights one could not do better than to read the 
works of Jeremy Waldron.37 Here, however, I shall be very brief and 
simply set out a summary of those arguments against the adoption (or 
retention) of bills of rights that I find most persuasive. Some degree 
of overlap can be expected.

 A. Bills of rights diminish democracy. Few today believe 
that how rights should play out, including how they should rank against 
one another and who is to possess them and when, is self-evident. So 
put in place a bill of rights and what the judges end up deciding are 
controversial questions of social policy over which sincere, intelligent, 
well-meaning people disagree.   
B. Bills of rights transfer too much power to unelected judges.   
C. Resolving disagreement about rights (or indeed about morality generally) 
is in no way analogous to resolving disputes about what is happening 
in the external causal world, the world of science if you like. In the 
latter there is an imposed, external reality - however much it may be 
filtered and interpreted by humans. In the former, there simply is nothing 
remotely equivalent. Therefore, rights 'right answers' must be understood 
quite differently from right answers in the world of medicine, aviation 
or engineering. The implications for bills of rights is obvious.   
D. Bills of rights undercut citizens' participation in decision-making. 
As most supporters of rights these days reject utilitarianism and support 
rights on non-consequentialist bases, they would put this point in terms 
of the undermining of a right to participate, tying that right to the 
notion of humans as autonomous, self-governing beings. However, under 
a bill of rights the overwhelming majority of the population is disenfranchised 
(in favour of a select few judges) on a significant number of major 
social policy questions, indeed on basic rights questions. At the very 
least it is highly ironic if the only defence such non-utilitarian rights 
advocates can give for the diminishing of the right to participate is 
a thoroughly utilitarian justification (viz., the unelected judges get 
the 'right' answer more frequently than the elected branches of government).   
E. In fact, judges do not deliver noticeably better rights outcomes.   
F. The Sirens analogy defence of bills of rights fails. Adopting a bill 
of rights and handing over the policing of such rights to an unelected 
elite is not analogous to having yourself strapped to a mast now because 
you know you will be weak - dangerously weak - later.   
G. Arguments in favour of bills of rights that disparage the deciding 
of rights cases and rights outcomes by means of a purely procedural 
system such as the counting of legislators' votes miss the fact that 
bills of rights also establish a purely procedural dispute resolution 
system, not a substantive, 'best answer wins' system. In the event of 
disagreement under a bill of rights regime the judges vote and 4 votes 
beat 3, full stop. As Jeremy Waldron notes, without a bill of rights 
the rule would be 6 million electors beat 5 million or 80 legislators 
beat 70.   
H. Bills of rights bring with them the danger of an excessively politicised 
judiciary.   
I. Bills of rights usually are accompanied by interpretive techniques 
which do not constrain judges to deciding in accord with the original 
intent of the enactors nor to the original understanding at the time 
of passage. Instead, such instruments are often interpreted as 'living 
trees' where judges pay heed to what they think are 'contemporary values'. 
Ancestor worship is the name given to such forsworn originalism constraints, 
and it is derided. The result is an interpretive regime that places 
few if any constraints on the judiciary.   
J. Attempts to find refuge in non-entrenched, statutory models, or in 
over-ride clauses, fail. There is little evidence that I have seen to 
show that either of these devices do anything much to curb the power 
of unelected judges. Relatedly, the metaphor of a 'dialogue' to describe 
the power relations between the elected Parliament and the unelected 
judiciary in Canada seems manifestly inaccurate.

  These arguments against the adoption of a bill of rights take on extra 
force in a country such as Australia with a long, and comparatively 
excellent, democratic history. The notion of democracy is no doubt protean. 
A cursory glance around the globe reveals  the myriad different 
combinations possible when selecting from a menu of republicanism or 
constitutional monarchy, bicameralism or unicameralism, federal or unitary 
structure, written or unwritten constitution (and the methods for altering 
the former), presidential or parliamentary executive, flexible or inflexible 
dates for elections, and of course the host of different voting systems 
on offer. However, for those who think that the essence of democracy 
is self-government by the people, then Australia is one of the most 
democratic countries in the world. From its preferential voting system 
for lower house elections to its differently constituted, genuine House 
of Review second chamber to its forcing recourse to referenda (and so 
to all the electors) in order to charge the constitution to its compulsory 
voting requirement, Australia is a remarkably democratic country.   
   
That it is also now the only country in the western world without some 
kind of bill of rights - be it a constitutional or statutory model, 
series of Basic Laws, or incorporation in justiciable form of the European 
Convention on Human Rights - reinforces that judgment in my view. It 
is nothing to be ashamed of. Indeed, I hope Australia continues to set 
its face against the world-wide trend of the last half-century in favour 
of such instruments. Were Australia to opt for a bill of rights, the 
judges would certainly end up deciding controversial questions of social 
policy over which sincere, intelligent, well-meaning people disagree. 
The judges, in other words, would end up drawing many of the lines currently 
drawn by elected politicians. None of those lines would be about stopping 
politicians and the rest of us from indulging in obviously wicked acts. 
Simply put, the adoption of a bill of rights would diminish Australian 
democracy.   
Those in favour of such an adoption might at least admit as much. They 
might at least be open and honest in their preference for judges.   
* Thanks to Grant Huscroft for his comments on an earlier draft.   
1 For more on the history of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act see 
John Smillie, "The Allure of 'Rights Talk'; Baigent's Case in the 
Court of Appeal", (1994) 8 Otago Law Review 188 and Paul Rishworth, 
"The Birth and Rebirth of the Bill of Rights" in Rights and 
Freedoms: The New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights 
Act 1993 (eds. G. Huscroft and P. Rishworth, Brooker's, Wellington, 
1995). For my full views on how the New Zealand judiciary 'upgraded' 
an enervated Bill of Rights Act, see "Turning Clark Kent into Superman: 
The New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990", (2000) 9 Otago Law Review 
613; "The Effect of a Statutory Bill of Rights Act Where Parliament 
is Sovereign: The Lesson from New Zealand" in Sceptical Essays 
on the Human Rights Act 1998 (eds. A. Tomkins and T. Cambell, OUP, 2001); 
and "Take Heed Australia - A Statutory Bill of Rights and its Inflationary 
Effect", (2001) 6 Deakin Law Review 322.   
2 Section 6 reads: Interpretation consistent with Bill of Rights to 
be preferred - Wherever an enactment can be given a meaning that is 
consistent with the rights and freedoms contained in this Bill of Rights, 
that meaning shall be preferred to any other meaning.   
3 Section 4 reads: Other enactments not affected - No court shall, in 
relation to any enactment (whether passed or made before or after the 
commencement of this Bill of Rights), -    
a) Hold any provision of the enactment to be implicitly repealed or 
revoked, or to be in any way invalid or ineffective; or   
b) Decline to apply any provision of the enactment - by reason only 
that the provision is inconsistent with any provision of this Bill of 
Rights.   
4 Flickinger v Crown Colony of Hong Kong [1991] 1 NZLR 439.   
5 "[The court saw] force in the argument that, to give full effect 
to the rights ..., [a particular statutory provision with a long-standing 
interpretation] ... should now receive a wider interpretation than has 
prevailed hitherto." Ibid., p. 441.   
6 See my articles cited above in fn. 1 for more details.   
7 Section 5 reads: Justified limitations - Subject to section 4 of this 
Bill of Rights, the rights and freedoms contained in this Bill of Rights 
may be subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can 
be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.   
8 Ministry of Transport v Noort [1992] 3 NZLR 260 at p. 283 (italics 
mine), per Richardson J. (as he then was).   
9 Moonen v Film and Literature Board of Review [2000] 2 NZLR 9. This 
was a judgment of a five member Court, delivered by Tipping J. Richardson 
P. was also a member of this Court.   
10 Ibid., pp. 16-17 (italics mine).   
11 Ibid., p. 17.   
12 Simpson v Attorney-General [Baigent's Case] [1994] 3 NZLR 667.   
13 I discuss Baigent's Case in the papers cited in fn. 1 above and in 
the further papers cited in those papers.   
14 Ministry of Transport v Noort [1992] 3 NZLR 260 at p. 271, per Cooke 
P.   
15 Baigent's Case, op. cit. fn. 12, p. 702 (italics mine), per Hardie 
Boys J.   
16 See the two Lange cases: Lange v Atkinson & Australian Consolidated 
Press Ltd [1998] 3 NZLR 424 and then two years later after returning 
back from the Privy Council at [2000] 3 NZLR 385.   
17 See R v Pora [2001] 2 NZLR 37. In Pora, three of the seven Court 
of Appeal judges took this rather revolutionary view. Three others disagreed, 
and the fifth judge and President of the Court, deciding the case on 
other grounds, remarkably left open the possibility the revolutionary 
view might prevail. For an excellent analysis of the implications of 
the three rather revolutionary judgments, an analysis that comes to 
the conclusion that these three judges' views undermine the rule of 
law, see Jim Evans, "Questioning the Dogmas of Realism", [2001] 
New Zealand Law Review 145 from p. 166.   
18 Sir Gerard Brennan, "The Impact of a Bill of Rights on the Role 
of the Judiciary: An Australian Perspective" in P Alston (ed.) 
Promoting Human Rights through Bills of Rights (Oxford University Press, 
1999), 454-464 at p. 458.   
19 Ibid.   
20 Op. cit., fn. 12.   
21 See the articles cited in fn. 1 above for more detail.   
22 Professor Michael Taggart, friendlier than I to bills of rights, 
describes the case as follows: "Baigent's Case gives some indication 
of the potential potency of the technique known as 'reading down' (and 
its travelling companion 'reading in'). My colleague, Paul Rishworth, 
has championed the use of these techniques in the context of the [Bill 
of Rights Act] from the beginning. In essence, his argument is that 
in respect of statutes which affirm fundamental rights the courts are 
justified in departing from even clear words by reading the statute 
down (or reading words in) so as not to infringe rights as long as by 
so doing the legislative purpose is not frustrated. This well-supported 
thesis opens up considerable scope for attaining rights-respecting outcomes 
by the judiciary." See Michael Taggart, "Tugging on Superman's 
Cape: Lessons from Experience with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 
1990", [1998] Public Law 266 at p. 284.   
23 Op. cit., fn. 9 above.   
24 The Board ultimately came to the same conclusion as it had originally.   
25 The five justices said that the purpose of section 5 of the Bill 
of Rights Act "necessarily involves the Court having the power, 
and on occasions the duty, to indicate that although a statutory provision 
must be enforced according to its proper meaning, it is inconsistent 
with the Bill of Rights ...". Not only is this incredibly far-fetched 
in terms of interpreting section 5 (a sort of finding-the-purpose-that-best-allows-you-to-reach-the-outcome-you-want 
exercise), it is simply untrue in its last assertion. The Courts will 
not be indicating inconsistency with the Bill of Rights Act. In fact, 
what courts will be doing is indicating that some statutory provision 
is inconsistent with their view (i.e., the judges' view) of what the 
Bill of Rights Act covers or of what is a reasonable or unreasonable 
limitation on some right. However, it is simply fallacious to assume 
that judges' views are a better indication of truth (about what a Bill 
of Rights does or does not require) than are the views of elected legislators. 
This point is made by Jeffrey Goldsworthy, "Legislation, Interpretation 
and Judicial Review", (2001) 51 University of Toronto Law Journal 
75 and by Grant Huscroft, "Rights, Bills of Rights and the Role 
of Courts and Legislatures", chapter one in (eds. Huscroft and 
Rishworth) Litigating Rights: Perspectives from Domestic and International 
Law (Hart Publishing, 2002). In the New Zealand context the assumption 
is doubly fallacious, given that the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 
is - or was passed on the basis that it was meant to be - a parliamentary 
bill of rights, one that reserves the power to the legislature to determine 
the meaning of rights in the event of a dispute with the courts.   
26 In my opinion, in any imaginable scenario in which elected legislators 
would contemplate the sort of things most of us today (when times are 
good and there is no external threat) would consider wicked, the judges 
too would contemplate the same measures. Cf. the plight of Japanese 
Americans in World War II. See Korematsu v US 323 US 214 (1944).   
27 Quilter v Attorney-General [1998] 1 NZLR 523.   
28 As it happened, within a couple of years a new government had been 
elected that passed legislation putting all de facto couples in the 
same position as married couples, save for the 'symbolism' of being 
married.    
29 Op. cit., fn. 17 above.   
30 Section 2(4) of the 1999 Act reads: "Section 80 of the principal 
Act (as amended by this section) applies in respect of the making of 
any order under that section on or after the date of commencement of 
this section, even if the offence concerned was committed before that 
date."   
31 Section 25(g) reads: "Everyone who is charged with an offence 
has, in relation to the determination of the charge, the following minimum 
rights: The right, if convicted of an offence in respect of which the 
penalty has been varied between the commission of the offence and sentencing, 
to the benefit of the lesser penalty". See too the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.   
32 See fn. 17 above.   
33 Jim Evans, "Questioning the Dogmas of Realism", op. cit., 
fn. 17, at p. 169.   
34 See H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law, chapter nine.   
35 Indeed, anyone tempted to condemn all retrospective law making in 
some blanket fashion must either also condemn all international war 
crimes prosecutions (until very recently, at least) or make a case for 
there having been laws in existence at the time outlawing the misdeeds. 
The latter seems to me to be a very difficult task indeed, requiring 
the full battery of natural law assumptions many find highly implausible.    
36 Jeremy Waldron makes this point in various places. See, for one instance, 
Jeremy Waldron, "Freeman's Defense of Review", (1944) 13 Law 
and Philosophy 27. See too section 3 below.   
37 In particular, start with Waldron's Law and Disagreement (Clarendon 
Press, 1999).

