---
title: "Top End East Timorese protection visa applicants rejected."
date: "2002-11-08"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211249744
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ORT76%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 TOP END EAST TIMORESE PROTECTION VISA APPLICANTS REJECTED

 Labor is concerned that approximately 80 East Timorese in the Northern Territory have had their protection claims rejected and have been told to leave Australia in 28 days by the Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs.

 Labor believes that the East Timorese asylum-seekers are a very special case deserving of the utmost compassion.  Most of these asylum-seekers have lived in Australia for over a decade and fled East Timor at a time when executions, torture and arbitrary arrest were common.  There are around 1,700 such claims from East Timorese.

 The asylum-seekers involved are now entitled to appeal to the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT).  Should the RRT reject their claims, the asylum-seekers involved are able to approach the Minister on the basis that they have compelling humanitarian reasons to stay and the Minister in an exercise of discretion may grant a special humanitarian visa.

 In September, when the first group of 168 East Timorese were rejected, Minister Ruddock appeared to be prejudging both the outcome of the RRT appeals and precluding an exercise of Ministerial discretion in favour of these asylum-seekers.  In his media release at the time, the Minister asserted that it is reasonable to expect these asylum-seekers to return home to East Timor and that it is now time for them to move on with their lives.

 Both the then-Labor Government and the current Coalition Government failed to respond with real compassion to their plight.  In particular, the hearing of their claims was substantially delayed.

 Today, East Timor has fundamentally changed and it is true to say that if these asylum-seekers returned to East Timor they would not be subject to persecution.  In that sense, as today’s decisions reflect, the asylum-seekers are no longer refugees under the Refugee Convention.

 However, these asylum-seekers do deserve our compassion.  They fled real persecution, the delay in the resolution of their claims was due to the actions of the Australian Government, they have lived for a very extended period of time in Australia and many have no real ongoing connection with their former homeland.

 Labor therefore urges the Minister to resolve this long-running sore by creating a special visa class for these individuals.  There is no reason to fear the setting of a precedent that could be used by others, as the circumstances of these asylum-seekers are truly unique.

 Through their support for the deployment of Australian forces in East Timor, Australians showed their real concern for the East Timorese.  Many Australians understand the debt of gratitude we owe them from World War II.  Many other Australians believe that as a nation we waited too long to help them in their time of need.

 I urge the Minister to reflect the views of Australians, their compassion and kindness to the East Timorese by resolving this issue through a special visa class.

 For further information contact Julia Gillard  0417 361 637 Jamie Snashall, Adviser (02) 6277 4349 or 0407 438 746 8 November 2002

