---
title: "Changes to settlement strategy will benefit humanitarian entrants."
date: "2002-05-08"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236843
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D5I66%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H42/2002 - 8 May 2002

  

 Changes to Settlement Strategy will Benefit Humanitarian Entrants

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today announced in Perth changes to improve the delivery of vital services to Australia's refugee and humanitarian entrants.

 Mr Hardgrave said the changes were to the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy, an important service that provided intensive settlement assistance to Australia's humanitarian program entrants.

 He said the changes would guarantee service providers a minimum number of entrants.

 "The flow of entrants to Australia is not steady and experience so far has shown that periods of low entrant numbers will occur but services need to be kept in place," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "By giving service providers a guaranteed minimum level of entrants, the Government is able to provide a stable income stream for IHSS service providers which will assist them in keeping the infrastructure for providing these vital services to refugees and humanitarian entrants in place."

 Through the Government's offshore Humanitarian Program, Australia welcomes thousands of humanitarian entrants, including refugees, who have faced serious violations of their human rights.

 Many are severely traumatised as a result of their experiences, which include persecution and torture, which has caused them to leave their home countries.

 The IHSS program provides services to humanitarian entrants through a range of service providers, many of whom are community based, and volunteers.

 These service providers and volunteers help humanitarian entrants rebuild their lives in Australia and become self-sufficient as soon as possible.

 "I am aware that the fluctuating arrival rates and external factors beyond the Department's control make it very difficult for contractors to meet the cost of delivering services under the present arrangements," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "I would like to commend the service providers who have successfully

 operated the IHSS program for well over a year now despite the periods of low numbers that have occurred during this time."

 The Department will prepay 60 per cent of the guaranteed minimum numbers for the financial year 2002-03 in July and the balance will be prepaid in January 2003.

 The minimum level of entrants is based on a conservative estimate of the refugee component of the Government's humanitarian program for the next financial year.

 8 May 2002

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch (02) 6277 7890 or 0419 123 862

 Minister's Media Release Index   All Ministerial Media Releases

