---
title: "'Kyoto lite' hypocrisy."
date: "2002-02-15"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D1Y56%22
---

 Senator Lyn Allison Australian Democrats Energy Spokesperson  15 February 2002 MEDIA RELEASE 02/065

 www.democrats.org.au

 ‘Kyoto lite’ hypocrisy The  Federal  Government  should  not  draw  legitimacy for  a  rejection  of  Kyoto  from President  Bush’s  decision  to  go  with  plan  ‘B’  on  greenhouse  emissions,  the Australian Democrats warned today.

 Democrats’  Greenhouse  Spokesperson,  Senator  Lyn  Allison,  said  Australia  and  the United  States  were  already  seen  as  global  hypocrites  for  taking  a  narrow,  self-interested stand on climate change.

 Senator  Allison  said,  “Australia  wants  international  cooperation  with  the  refugee situation, as does the US in combating terrorism, but neither country will commit to an international effort to reduce greenhouse emissions.

 “It  is  highly  unlikely  the  Bush  plan  will  deliver  the  18  percent  reduction  in greenhouse gas intensity that it promises over the next 10 years.

 “The  plan  appears  to  be  voluntary,  which  means  it  is  unlikely  to  be  successful,  as experience shows.  Australia already has a voluntary program for industry, called the Greenhouse Challenge, but it has not come close to delivering the necessary emission reductions.”

 Senator Allison said the Federal Government should choose to be a team player and ratify the Kyoto Protocol instead of eyeing Bush’s rogue approach.

 “Australia  would  be  foolish  to  join  President  Bush  in  ignoring  the  enormous economic potential in green industries,” Senator Allison said.

 “A  recent  report  by  three  notable  Australian  energy  groups  found  that  renewable energy  industries  consistently  showed  greater  employment  creation  per  dollar invested than conventional generation options.

 “Renewable  energy  companies  were  also  found  to  generate  higher  demand  for Australian goods and services than fossil fuel industries,” Senator Allison concluded.

 Further Information:  Senator Allison  03 9416 1880 John Derry  0408  056  167

