---
title: "Ruddock's further island excisions an act of absurdity."
date: "2002-12-18"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211251404
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/W2686%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 JULIA GILLARD M.P.   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration   

 RUDDOCK’S FURTHER ISLAND EXCISIONS AN ACT  OF ABSURDITY   

 Minister Ruddock was today caught out when it was revealed he had secretly excised from  the Migration Zone four islands off the Western Australian coast - after Parliament had risen  for the year - without any consultation with the Parliament, the State Government or affected  communities.   

 The Minister knows that the regulations excising Bernier, Dorre, Faure and Dirk Hartog  Islands will continue in legal force until disallowed.  Given that Parliament does not resume  until February 2003, they would have operated for seven weeks as law.   

 With his scheme uncovered in the media today, the Minister is apparently moving to rescind  the regulations of his own accord.  He claims this is because the initial intelligence that  sparked the excision turned out to be wrong, and it was a boatload of illegal fishermen instead  of suspected asylum seekers. 

 

 What we have here is a blunder of mammoth proportions.  First, the Government moves in  secret on a Saturday to excise four islands with no reference to consulting with affected  parties.  Second, the intelligence itself proves to be completely wrong.  Third, if the  Minister’s grand plan is to deny potential asylum seekers access to a more favourable  mainland processing regime by excising islands at will, he should listen to one affected  resident who said, regarding one of the islands, “you would run into the mainland before you  found it”.   

 Finally and of most concern, the Minister confirmed that his approach to further boat arrivals  will be to excise potentially affected islands on an ‘as needs’ basis.  He has effectively  admitted he has no plan to manage future arrivals and will be just making it up as he goes  along.     

 Labor’s plan was detailed two weeks ago when it launched a comprehensive policy entitled  ‘Protecting Australia and Protecting the Australian Way’.  I urge the Minister to study it  instead of engaging in policy on the run. 

 

 

 18 December 2002 

 

 

 For further information contact:    Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637  Jamie Snashall on 0407 438 746 

