---
title: "Constitutionally protected rights for asylum-seekers?"
date: "2002-06-11"
creators:
  - "Mathew, Penelope"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Human rights"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Constitution"
  - "Federal issue"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239537
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QVU66%22
---

 1

 Constitutionally Protected Rights for Asylum-Seekers?

 By Dr Penelope Mathew∗ ∗ ∗ ∗

 paper for

 TRUST THE WOMEN

 This paper discusses the need for constitutionally protected rights for refugees in light

 of the Tampa affair. It then turns to consider which refugees'  rights could be better

 served by constitutional guarantees.  It concludes with a caution concerning the need

 for  public  recognition  of  the  validity  of  refugees'  claims  upon  Australians  as  a  co-requisite for successful constitutional reform.

 The arrival of the Tampa and the subsequent legislation which provided the domestic

 legal  framework  for  the  'Pacific  Solution'  demonstrated  the  inadequacy  of  existing

 protections for human rights in Australia.  It also exposed some exploitable silences in

 the international protections for refugees.

 In  my  view,  the  new  legislation  violates  or  puts  at  risk  some  fundamental  rights  of

 refugees.  They include the cornerstone of protection for refugees -- the right not to be

 returned  to  persecution;1  the  right  to  liberty;2  and  the  right  to  family  unity.3   The

 Pacific  Solution  is  also  a  punitive  regime  which  may  breach  norms  of  non-                                                          

 ∗   B.A. (hons), LL.B., Melbourne; LL.M., J.S.D., Columbia.  Faculty of Law - the Australian National University. 1

   Article 33, 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees ("Refugee Convention"). 2   Article 9, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ("ICCPR"). 3

   Articles 17 and 23 ICCPR.

 2

 discrimination.4   However,  the  Australian  government  has  been  able  to  exploit

 acknowledged ambiguities in international law.  For example, the government is able

 to  point  to  both  silences  in,  and  an  ambiguous  textual  basis  for  its  argument  that

 asylum-seekers have no right to choose the place of asylum and may therefore be sent

 elsewhere.5  Refugee law has not developed to the point of a universally recognised

 right  to  asylum  in  the  sense  of  permanent  residence  in,  or  even  admission  to,  a

 particular country.

 Meanwhile,  the  international  legal  standards  we  do  have,  imperfect  as  they may be,

 have not been implemented in Australian law.6  Legislation must be passed before a

 treaty has the force of law before Australian courts.  Consequently, when the judicial

 challenges were mounted in relation to the Tampa, international law served merely as

 a backdrop.  The focus of the challenge was the common law protection of liberty and

 the availability of the remedy of habeas corpus.7

 Even that ancient protection proved tenuous.  On appeal to the Full Federal Court, the

 majority of two judges found that the executive retained power to repel persons from

 Australia, despite the fact that extensive legislatively-based powers had already been

 enacted in order to protect Australia's borders.8  As the Tampa asylum-seekers were

 removed from Australia's jurisdiction and disembarked on Nauru and New Zealand, a

 High Court challenge failed.  In the Court's view, the case had become moot.9  In any

 event, new legislation had been passed in the intervening period, which validated the

 

 4   In particular, Articles 31 of the Refugee Convention and Article 26 of the ICCPR are relevant.  For my views on the rights violated or put at risk by the legislation underpinning the 'Pacific Solution' see P. Mathew,  "Refugee Protection in the Wake of the Tampa", American Journal of International Law (2002, forthcoming). 5

   The  government  relies  upon  the  fact  that  while  Article  33  of  the  Refugee  Convention  prevents refoulement or return to a place of persecution, it does not contain a guarantee of entry to a particular country.   In  addition,  it  may  point  to  the  reference  to  refugees  "coming  directly  from  a  place  of persecution  in  Article  31  of  the  Convention,  which  protects  against  the  imposition  of  penalties  for illegal entry. 6

   For example, the Refugee Convention is referred to in s 36 of the Migration Act, but it is not fully implemented by legislation. 7  See Victorian Council for Civil Liberties Incorporated v. Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (2001) 110 FCR 452. 8

  Ruddock  v.  Vadarlis  (2001)  110  FCR  491,  per  French  and  Beaumont  JJ.   The  existing  legislative powers  included  the  rights  to  chase,  warn  and  board  boats  and  were  introduced  by  the  Border Protection Legislation Amendment Act, 1999. 9

  See  the  transcript  concerning  the  application  for  leave  to  appeal  to  the  High  Court  in  Vadarlis  v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs & Ors M93/2001 (27 November 2001, High Court), available at .

 3

 actions  taken  in  relation  to  the Tampa.10   The  legislation  contained  a  proviso  that  it

 did not affect executive powers to repel people from Australia's borders.11

 The  passage  of  that  legislation  belies  one  of  the  great  myths  of  Australian  political

 life, which is that democracy protects human rights.12  The founders of the Australian

 Constitution were generally not in favour of a Constitutional Bill of Rights, believing

 that  the  vote  would  provide  sufficient  protection  of  rights.   Those  who  had  the  vote

 then -- and as this conference recalls, most women and Indigenous people did not  --probably agreed with the founding fathers.  Citizenship is like membership in a club:

 having  attained  membership  according  to  existing  rules,  its  members  are  often

 unwilling  to  challenge  those  rules,  however  iniquitous  they  may  be.   In  fact,

 democracy is a necessary, but not sufficient protection for human rights as majorities

 are often unsympathetic to the rights of minorities.

 Refugees'  particular  vulnerability  revolves  around  citizenship.   They  have  lost  the

 protection of their country of nationality and they have not yet attained citizenship of

 any other State.  Refugees' very entitlement to be in Australia is challenged, and their

 arrival is often greeted with fear and suspicion.  The speed with which the legislation

 underpinning the 'Pacific Solution' was enacted, along with 4 other bills that affected

 refugees'  rights,13  and  the  corresponding  lack  of  measured  debate  in  parliament,

 demonstrates  the  fragility  of  democracy.   Entrenched  constitutional  guarantees  of

 rights could help to prevent this panicked diminution of refugees' rights.

 What then, might we want to see by way of constitutional protection for the rights of

 refugees in Australia?  Given that the most fundamental right of refugees is the right

 not to be returned to a place of persecution, a constitutional protection against returns

 could  play  a  role  in  protecting  refugees.   Courts  might  interpret  the  practice  of

 dragging boats back to the High Seas -- now permitted by the Migration Act14 -- as a

 violation of that right.  Even better would be a constitutionally protected right to seek,

 

 10    Migration Legislation (Validation and Enforcement Powers) Act 2001. 11   See s 7A Migration Act, inserted by ibid. 12

   See Hilary Charlesworth, "The Australian Reluctance About Rights" 31 Osgoode Hall Law Journal 195 (1993). 13  All seven bills passed between 26-27 September, 2001.  While some had been books for years, the three bills which enacted the 'Pacific Solution' into law had only recently been introduced. 14

   S245F (8) and s 7A Migration Act.

 4

 and preferably to be granted, asylum, similar perhaps to the provision in the German

 constitution prior to its amendment in the nineties.

 The category of persons entitled to benefit from that right to seek asylum should be at

 least the same as that protected by international law.  This would require the inclusion

 of  a  reference  to  international  legal  standards.   Currently,  these  standards  would

 include the definition of a refugee contained in the 1951 Convention Relating to the

 Status  of  Refugees,  along  with  persons  likely  to  suffer  torture  or  cruel,  inhuman  or

 degrading  treatment  or  punishment.15   Such  a  move  might  help  to  constrain  the

 legislative tinkering with the definition of a refugee that has taken place in Australia

 recently.16

 Guarantees  of  due  process  and  judicial  review  in  relation  to  determination  of

 eligibility for asylum would also be important.  Such guarantees have gradually been

 removed  from  the  refugee  status  determination  system.   Most  recently  and

 dramatically, a "privative clause" has been enacted,17 which seeks to remove judicial

 review in most immigration cases.  Since the jurisdiction of the High Court in relation

 to  certain  actions  against  the  Commonwealth  and  its  officers  is  entrenched  in  the

 Constitution,18  the  validity  of  the  privative  clause  is  currently  the  subject  of  a

 constitutional challenge before the courts. If the challenge is unsuccessful, it will be a

 sad  illustration  of  the  lack  of  the  right(s)  stuff  in  our  Constitution,  highlighting  the

 need for reform.

 A  protection  of  liberty  would  be  important.   This  would  enhance  the  possibility  of

 challenging mandatory detention, along with detention of intercepted asylum-seekers

 such as those on board the Tampa.  The general scheme of mandatory detention19 has

 withstood  constitutional  challenge,  essentially  because  of  the  limited  constitutional

 tools  with  which  to  mount  the  challenge.   In  Lim's  case,20  the  main  planks  of  the

 

 15   Under  Article  3  of  the  Convention  against  Torture  and  Other  Cruel,  Inhuman  or  Degrading Treatment or Punishment, return to a place of torture is prohibited. 16

   See Migration Legislation Amendment Act (No. 6) 2001. 17  s 474 Migration Act. 18

  s 75 Australian Constitution. 19   It  should  be  noted  that  the  precise  legislative  provisions  have  changed  since  the  constitutional challenge  mounted  in  Chu  Kheng  Lim  v.   Minister  for  Immigration,  Local  Government   and  Ethnic Affairs, (1992) 176 CLR 1. 20

  ibid.

 5

 challenge were the separation of powers (an argument which had some success) and

 the  limited  legislative  power  of  the  Commonwealth.  By  contrast,  a  constitutionally

 protected  individual  right  to  liberty  could  be  framed  so  as  to  require  Courts  to

 consider the individual merits of a person's claims to be released from detention and

 to  permit  meaningful,  periodic review of immigration  detention.21   This  would  spell

 the end of mandatory detention.

 It is also important that any persons held in immigration detention have access to the

 outside world and to information concerning their rights.  At present, the Department

 of  Immigration  is  not  required  to  give  access  to  lawyers  or  assistance  with

 applications  for  visas  unless  the  detainee  requests  it.22   This  has  the  effect  of

 undermining many of the rights referred to in this paper.

 Protection of family unity and reunification based on the jurisprudence of the United

 Nations  Human  Rights  Committee  concerning  the  right  to  found  a  family  and  the

 protection  against  arbitrary  interference  with  the  family,23  and  on  provisions  of  the

 Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child,24  would  be  important  too.  Constitutional

 protection for these rights would have ramifications for the temporary visas on which

 many  refugees  are  now  placed  if  accepted  into  Australia25  and  which,  by  virtue  of

 their  temporary  nature,  deny  the  possibility  of  family  reunion.26   Similarly,

 entrenchment  of  economic,  social  and  cultural  rights  could  serve  to  repair  the  basic

 safety net through which many refugees and asylum-seekers have fallen as a result of

 measures such as temporary visas.27

 

 21   This kind of analysis was undertaken by the United Nations Human Rights Committee in relation to a  Cambodian  asylum-seeker  detained  by  Australia  for  four  years  in:  A  v  Australia,  U.N.  Doc. CPR/C/59/D/560/1993 (Human Rights Committee, 30 April 1997). 22

   Wu Yu Fang v. Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,  (1996) 135 ALR 583. 23  For analysis of the jurisprudence of the Committee on this point, see Mathew, note 4 supra. 24

  For example, Article 10 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child provides that applications for family  reunion  by  a  child  or  his  or  her  parents  shall  be  considered  in  a  positive,  humane  and expeditious manner. 25

   See  visa  sub  class  786  (temporary  protection  visa  available  to  unlawful  arrivals  on  mainland Australia), and visa sub class 447 (temporary visa available for unlawful arrivals on Christmas Island, Cocos Island and Ashmore and Cartier Islands). 26

   In order to  sponsor family members for immigration to Australia, a person must be an Australian citizen or permanent resident of Australia. 27   See generally, Savitri Taylor, "Do On-Shore Asylum Seekers Have Economic and Social Rights? Dealing  with  the  Moral  Contradiction  of  Liberal  Democracy"  1  Melbourne  Journal  of  International Law 70 (2000).

 6

 Finally, a norm of equality or non-discrimination that prevented distinctions which are

 not  reasonable  and  objective  could  help  to  demolish  the  hierarchy  among  refugees

 that now exists in Australia.  Currently, refugees arriving on a visa may be granted a

 permanent protection visa.28   Those  who  arrive  on  the  mainland  without  a  visa  only

 receive  a  temporary  protection  visa.29   Those  who  arrive  on  Christmas,  Cocos  and

 Ashmore and Cartier Islands are barred from applying for a visa, unless the Minister

 for  Immigration  exercises  a  non-compellable  discretion  in  their  favour,30  and  they

 may be removed to Nauru or Papua New Guinea.31

 The  likelihood  of  achieving  a  constitutional  bill  of  rights  is  remote.   Given  the

 notorious failure of constitutional referenda, the list of provisions I have generated is

 extremely optimistic, if not hopelessly Utopian.  One change that might be possible to

 achieve  is  an  entrenched  guarantee  of  equality.   Surely,  no  Australian  would  assert

 that  invidious  discrimination  is  permissible:  it  is  not  in  line  with  the  long-standing

 club rule of a "fair go".

 The challenge will be to secure progressive interpretation of a guarantee of equality.

 Constitutional  provisions  may  serve  the  interests  of  the  powerful,  rather  than  the

 weak.32  Even when they do work effectively, it is argued by rights sceptics that the

 wins  are  simply  an  example  of  the  stealthy  process  whereby  the  rules  occasionally

 serve to constrain the powerful, in order to uphold a generally unjust system.

 The problem for refugees is that they are seen as "other"33 -- fundamentally unlike --precisely  because  they  do  not  already  hold  the  club  membership  that  Australian

 nationality  confers.   In  order  to  contribute  to  a  debate  about  equality  that  includes

 refugees, any push for a constitutionally protected guarantee of equality should openly

 address long-standing Australian fears concerning immigration.  Arguably, this would

 

 28   Visa Sub Class 886 (permanent protection visa). 29   Visa Sub Class 785 (temporary protection visa) 30

   s 46 A Migration Act.. 31   s 198 A Migration Act. 32

   See Jenny Morgan, "Equality Rights in the Australian Context: A Feminist Assessment"  in Philip Alston (ed) Towards an Australian Bill of Rights (1994) 123. 33   For  an  analysis  of  refugee  policy  as  a  reaction  to  Australia's  "Asian  Other"  see  Don  McMaster, Asylum-Seekers: Australia's Response to Refugees (2001).

 7

 be preferable to the alternative course of adopting of an equality norm so vague as to

 pose no challenge to Australians' sense of self, and crossing our fingers.34

 An open and successful debate -- and by successful, I do mean one in which my side

 of the argument wins on the basis that it is logical and right -- would encourage the

 judiciary  in  progressive  interpretation  of  the  proposed  equality  norm.   It  would  be

 clear  that  the  framers  intended  to  protect  refugees.   In  turn,  this  would  protect  the

 judiciary  from  the  abuse  which  it  increasingly  suffers  for  unpopular  judgments.

 Finally,  such  a  debate  would  serve  to  generate  more  enlightened  public  policy,

 diminishing the need to rely on the constitutionally protected equality norm.

 

 34   I  am  drawing  here  on  Mary  Joe  Frug's  description  of  the  inadequacies  of  gender-neutral  equality theory,  which  she  describes  as  equality  theory  with  "your  fingers  crossed":  Judith  G.  Greenberg, "Introduction to Postmodern Legal Feminism", in Mary-Joe Frug, Postmodern Legal Feminism (1992), at xii.

