---
title: "New figures on asylum seekers in Indonesia."
date: "2002-03-26"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235410
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/19766%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s eThe Hon Philip Ruddock MP Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Telephone: (02) 6277 7860  and Indigenous Affairs Facsimile: (02) 6273 4144Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

 Portfolio information is also available on the Internet:  www.minister.immi.gov.au

 MPS 020/2002

 NEW FIGURES ON ASYLUM SEEKERS IN INDONESIA

 New figures from the asylum seeker caseload being processed by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) in Indonesia have demonstrated just how important recent changes to Australian immigration laws have been.

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock said that it is clear that Australia’s approach had been much more generous than the world’s refugee body.

 “With  advocates  on  behalf  of  asylum  seekers  still  questioning  the  effectiveness  of Australia’s  decision  making,  an  examination  of  the  UNHCR  outcomes  in  Indonesia assessing a similar cohort of asylum seekers is very sobering,” Mr Ruddock said.

 “Where  Australia’s  acceptance  of  people  claiming  to  be  Afghan  nationals  has  been as  high  as  84%,  the  UNHCR  in  Indonesia  has  found  less  than  19%  of  a  similar caseload meet refugee criteria.

 “The Iraqi caseload in Australia, until recently had an acceptance rate of more than 90%,  but  the  similar  cohort  in  Indonesia  recorded  an  acceptance  rate  of  less  than 63%.

 “Even those figures have been distorted upwards by a situation in which a number of Iraqi nationals in Indonesia had to be accepted as refugees because their identities had been potentially exposed to the Iraqi government.

 “It is also interesting that another 13-hundred people did not wait around to hear the outcome of their cases with the UNHCR,” Mr Ruddock said.

 Australia’s acceptance rates have been coming down following updated information on  relevant  countries  and  changes  to  the  law,  to  better  define  and  target  refugee determination processes.

 “While  some  people  suggested  the  acceptance  rate  in  Indonesia  was  more  in  line with Australia’s, the latest figures demonstrate the importance of the measures taken by the Government last year to bring our laws back in line,” Mr Ruddock said.

 “Australia’s  approach  to  refugee  determination  had  been  broadened  out  by  court precedent over many years and if we are to help those who have a well founded fear of persecution, it was important that the Government take the steps it did.”

 26 March 2002

 MEDIA CONTACT:  Steve Ingram  0419 278 715

 Page 2

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs   Philip Ruddock

