---
title: "'Future dilemmas': official launch speech, Sydney."
date: "2002-11-07"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Future dilemmas (CSIRO/DIMIA)"
  - "Environmental impact"
  - "Immigration"
  - "Population size"
  - "Trends"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211249655
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0VX76%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Population Change Border Protection Migration Program Humanitarian Program Multicultural Affairs Indigenous Affairs

 Home Minister's Profile Frequently Asked Questions Contact the Minister Media Centre

 MEDIA CENTRE

 Future Dilemmas launch in Sydney

 7 November 2002.

 Official launch speech

 Mr Ruddock

 Can I then just say first that I am delighted to see so many of you here today for the launch of this very important report from the CSIRO.

 The report is the product of a question that I and the Department have often asked, and that is 'what difference would varying the level of net overseas migration make to Australia's environment over the next 50 years?'

 You might be surprised why I would ask that question, but at every series of consultations that I would hold as Minister, there would be arguments about the size, primarily the size of immigration programs as if they are the only determinant, and linking our capacity to settle migrants in an orderly way to what impact they may have on Australia's well known fragile environment.

 And of course this has meant that people have focused on very much on one issue. It is called a 'population issue', and really a population issue is never really on population policy, it was on the size of future populations, it was always predicated on the basis that I, as the Minister for Immigration today, could determine for the next fifty years at each point along the way what Australia's population should be. It always seemed to be predicated on that basis.

 Now I must say it then did play itself out into polities, because people would make some judgements about where they thought we should be at different points in time in the future, and then they would give you some policy prescriptions as to how you would achieve it. And the first policy prescription, and it was argued by some, was that we could easily reduce the size of the population of Australia if we had a net zero overseas migration. A net zero overseas migration. That would mean that we would have smaller populations in Australia, if you only replaced those who were leaving, and that's all you did. And you had a declining fertility rate.

 Inevitably your population would go into decline and a smaller population was the key to solving all of our environmental problems. I often used to ask the question, 'who'd be the first to leave?'. It wasn't necessary to find anybody to leave, all it was, was a matter of saying 'net zero'. And that view was reflected by groups that I have to say I think now have moved on, but it included the Australian Democrats and Australians for an Ecologically Sustainable Population, they both propounded very vigorously policies that called for net zero overseas migration on environmental grounds.

 On the other hand, there were some very prominent individuals, I even invited some of them to come today, business groups who called for a much larger population than where we think we will be if current migrations programs are continued into the future. I think those of you who've heard me would know that I have outlined what the demographers tell me will be the result if here in Australia we have a declining fertility, but declining I think within a range of perhaps a minor reduction of where we are now which is about 1.75 per fertile couple, with a moderate decline in fertility, with net overseas migration at about 100,000 per annum, we would have a population in Australia fifty years of between 25 and 27 million people and stable.

 Now I must say that population always seemed to me to be a projection that most people didn't take a particular alarm at, but I think it was important to know what the demographers will tell us. But if you have a view that the population should be very much larger, and sometimes the sorts of figures that have been spoken of have been as high as 50 million people, then it seemed to me that we needed to know what those various scenarios might yield if they were to be the outcomes.

 And so, there you have it, net zero on the one hand, 50 million on the other, two very different calls, but they have given us the parameters for the study that we have asked the CSIRO to look at. And we used close to the middle, that is the average net migration in recent years, as the point of reference for the middle point of this particular study.

 Now it is of course no surprise to us that the result of the study is to tell us that the matters of size of our population and the relationship to our

 environment is a very complex issue. That is no particular surprise to me. From my perspective as Minister for Immigration I can tell you that there is no feasible migration formula that could simply make our environmental problems disappear, and that's really I think also a view that you can deduct from this particular study. I think the study is showing us that if you pick up any of these scenarios, for instance if you had a fixation on net zero as the key to fixing the economy, what it would essentially do is divert your attention from the way of dealing with far more complex and affective approaches to deal with the environmental issues that do bedevil Australia.

 Now I think the debate has progressed in recent times since we first commissioned this report. I know that neither the Democrats nor Australians for an Ecologically Sustainable Population now has net zero overseas migration as policy. I think there is a greater appreciation that Australia is a Country with one of the most well managed programs in the World.

 A program that does bring us very tangible and valuable benefits in other forms and I think when you ask yourself the question, and I do, 'how many Australians would truly want to shut the door, leaving Australia only to let in one person for every person who leaves', I think that most Australians do recognise that that would have very significant impact. It would mean that you probably would not be able to accommodate all Australians who find their overseas partner.

 I am sorry, their partner for life overseas. It would certainly have a very significant impact upon addressing the fairly significant de-skilling of Australia that would occur if you were to see the young and highly mobile Australians who take their places in various parts of the World, replaced only with people who came through refugee of humanitarian programs, and we weren't effectively replacing skills.

 And of course it would probably mean that we would have to constrain very significantly the refugee and humanitarian programs that we have operated so generously over the years. And I think, of course, it would lead to us being a reclusive, inward looking, aging and shrinking Nation, and I think it would lead to an impact where Australia would be seen in World terms very differently to the outward looking, I think, innovative and engaged Country that we are at the present time.

 But this report does show us that we can't simply shrug off the very serious problems that do occur as a result of the increasing population of this Country of ours. For their part, those advocating a very much larger population then currently projected do have to answer some questions that are clearly posed in this report. And one of those question is 'how can we learn to reduce our impact upon our environment?'.

 Now I don't think right now that anyone has a clear set of answers, but I think that we should at least be grateful for this report for framing the question that has long been with us in a new and very challenging way. My motive in commissioning this report was to stimulate and inform public debate and I think that this report will indeed start us thinking about this very hard issue in a much more informed way, and I think you can see that from the reporting of this particular study well before its official launch. Now the current drought of course and the discussions that it has engendered about how we can better prepare ourselves for such an eventuality, illustrate that we do have very real environmental problems in Australia, and that we do need to address them seriously over the next fifty years.

 And in this context it is heartening that the report identifies the next few decades when our population growth with slow significantly, as a time of opportunity in which we can address these questions. The report also highlights the fact that during this time we will become wealthier. Now this is a very good example of the choices and dilemmas that lie before us, because as the report illustrates, wealth is a double-edged sword. I think the CSIRO has convincingly showed us that the economic wealth that we have has marched in step with greater impact upon the Australian environment. In fact the wealth affect out ways the population affect to such an extent that a population arising from the net zero migration would in fifty years time have a worse impact on the environment than today's population would have, even though it would be about the same size.

 And this is simply because it is projected to be a significantly wealthier society, and one that would be therefore consuming more and as a result would have that impact. Now on the other hand, wealth can be a positive, it can help to pay for the measures to address our most pressing environmental problems. And the Government's efforts I think to combat salinity for instance is one good example of the way in which we are grappling with those very issues right now, along with more affective management of our very scare resource, water.

 And so it is possible to make choices that benefit the environment, but these choices need to be made by Australian's and their Government's based upon sound analysis, and this report, of course, is helping to stimulate that debate and enabling that analysis to occur. And of course ultimately the values that we place on competing objectives will have to be sorted out by Governments and Australians in addition.

 Now I wont go into the relative technological options that may become available to assist us in making them, or the ways in which Australians could address environment problems into the future. My responsibility as Immigration Minister has been to maximise the economical and social benefits from migration, and to produce the result that is in the best overall interest for all Australians, both now and into the future.

 This means, also taking into account in that analysis, environmental implications, and of course it is for that reason we have this report. But while immigration is important for Australia, it is not the only key policy lever that moves our economy, that guides our society, or determines our overall impact upon the environment. It is only one.

 The solutions to our environmental problems of course do lie, in my view, in other direction than immigration. Now I don't want to downplay the difficulty of seeking solutions in each of these other directions, nor does this report. But in the end, such solutions will be far more effective than relying upon the simplistic view that centres on moving the immigration program up or down.

 And in the spirit of this report, I would now like to invite Barney Forum, the principal author, and the Environmental Scientist who has played a very significant role in preparing this report for us to speak, and he will be followed by Chris Murphy who will give an economic modelist perspective, and then I will ask Dr Roger Bradbury to Chair the report's Steering Committee to help with the summing up.

 But ladies and gentlemen first I'd like you to welcome the author, Barney Forum.

 | Next Page |

