---
title: "The High Court decision in Muin v RRT and LIE v RRT."
date: "2002-08-09"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211246144
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XE576%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 THE HIGH COURT DECISION IN MUIN v RRT AND LIE v RRT

 Yesterday, the High Court of Australia found that two Indonesian nationals of Chinese ethnicity who claimed refugee status and sought the grant of a protection visa under section 36 of the Migration Act 1958 had not been afforded procedural fairness by the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT).

 In the case of Mr Muin, the High Court found he was denied procedural fairness on the basis that he was misled into thinking it was unnecessary for him to draw information favourable to his case in the documents to the attention of the RRT and that he was not given an opportunity to answer adverse material relating to the situation in his home country in the possession of the RRT.  In the case of Ms Lie the High Court found procedural fairness had been denied on the grounds that she had been led to believe that the RRT had considered all the relevant material and that it was unnecessary to bring favourable material to the attention of the RRT.  Mr Muin’s and Ms Lie’s cases will now be reheard by the RRT.

 The cases of Mr Muin and Ms Lie are ‘test cases’ in a class action involving 7,600 asylum seekers.  A case-by-case examination of each claim in the class will be required to determine whether or not the claimant is now entitled to a rehearing of their asylum seeker claim as a result of the High Court decision.  Similarly, there may be a significant number of claims affected which are not in the class action but the number affected can only be determined through case by case assessment.

 Clearly, this case has major implications for a large and unknown number of individual cases.  It also points to a systemic failure in the way information on which the Departmental officer has relied in making a decision was brought before the RRT.

 Labor has consistently advocated for a fast and fair processing regime for refugee claims that ensure genuine refugees are found to be such as quickly as possible and those without genuine claims are identified and sent back as quickly as possible.  Labor has consistently said that to ensure the system is fast there cannot be endless rounds of appeals.  To ensure the system is fair, the first instance decision-making by Departmental officers has to be of the highest possible quality and the relationship between the Department and a review tribunal clear.

 The Howard Government is presiding over a system that is a complete failure.  It is neither fast nor fair.

 This High Court case has created an opportunity for the Howard Government.  It is now time to stop patching a system which is a failure with legislative amendments designed to overcome the latest Court decision.  It is now time to create a new system that meets the test of being fast and fair.

 As I have consistently stated in Parliament, Labor stands ready to work with the Howard Government to create such a system.  This should not be a matter that is held hostage to party politics.  I invite Minister Ruddock and Attorney-General Daryl Williams to meet with Labor’s Shadow Attorney-General Robert McClelland and me to commence discussions about legislating in the coming Parliamentary session for a fast and fair refugee claims processing regime.  This approach will see the matter resolved before the end of this year.

 If the Howard Government ignores this offer and prefers to play party politics with this issue, then the Howard Government will have to explain to the Australian people why it is continuing to operate a chaotic system that keeps genuine refugees waiting for recognition while those with claims of no merit stay in Australia year after year.

 For further information contact Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637 9 August 2002

