---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: [children overboard affair; suspension from the House]"
date: "2002-03-21"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS"
subjects:
  - "children overboard affair; suspension from the House"
  - "children overboard affair"
  - "suspension from the House"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235313
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QT566%22
---

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - Anthony Albanese MP

 PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, Thursday, March 21, 2002: 11.15am

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 ALBANESE: Last night I gave a speech in the Main Committee of the House of Representatives which was basically centred around the deceptive actions of the Government in the area of aged care where they promised during the election campaign 4,600 beds would be built in the last quarter of 2001 and when in Senate Estimates we asked the Department,  “Did they provide that figure to former Minister Bishop?” we were told, “No”.  And when we asked where that figure came from we were told “No”. Even worse the reality of the bed situation is that only 1,200 beds were built or less than one in four.  I used that as an example of the actions of this Government in being prepared to say anything and do anything in order to win an election.  And we have seen two other prime examples of that.

 One of course is the issue of the disgraced Senator Bill Heffernan who was prepared to stand up in the Senate and denigrate a High Court judge in what can only be seen as a homophobic and despicable attack on not just the judge but on the institution of the High Court.

 The second example I used was of course the children overboard affair where the Government as part of its campaign of vilification and dehumanisation of asylum seekers was prepared to peddle a lie throughout the election campaign.

 This is a Government without morals and without a preparedness to defend our institutions in a way which I believe is unprecedented in Australia’s political history. Never before have we seen a group of people prepared to attack institutions, prepared to make up stories about the most vulnerable people in our community in order to seek a political advantage.

 I was asked to withdraw the statement that lies had been told about children overboard and I of course refused because it is a fact.  We now have Air Vice Marshall Houston, we have even Admiral Barrie as well as of course the captain of HMAS Adelaide, all confirming that children were not thrown overboard off SIEV 4 and yet it has taken months and months of questioning in order to get the Government to actually concede that.

 Today I was thrown out of the House of Representatives for 24 hours which denies my electorate of Grayndler proper representation in the House of Representatives. My electorate will be very angry that I’m not allowed to participate in the debate in the House of Representatives and yet a disgraced Senator such as Bill Heffernan whose mere presence in the chamber and support from the Prime Minister in an ongoing way to remain in the chamber as a Liberal Party senator I think brings the whole institution of the Parliament into disrepute.

 JOURNALIST: Are you suggesting it’s immoral that you’ve been thrown out of the House or in anyway wrong?

 ALBANESE: I am certainly suggesting that there’s lot of precedents - we went through the Hansard, there are 24 cases of individual members saying that Government lied over children overboard.  I know it, the Government knows it, Peter Reith knows it, John Howard knows it and the people of Australia know that it was a lie.

 JOURNALIST: But the Speaker is suggesting that it was because you refused to withdraw your comment to the Deputy Speaker that you were thrown out.

 ALBANESE: Well the point is to withdraw something that you know is the truth is itself to tell a lie.  I was not prepared to lie by withdrawing that true statement that children weren’t thrown overboard because my standards are standards a lot higher than that of this Government.

 JOURNALIST: So are you then suggesting that the Standing Orders are lacking in this case?

 ALBANESE: I am certainly suggesting that the Speaker was put in a difficult position by the ruling of the Deputy Speaker last evening and I think he made it clear to the Parliament today that he didn’t agree with that decision but that he was upholding the Deputy Speaker’s ruling.  Now in my view to use an analogy some of you will be familiar with, if a referee of a minor game on the week after a performance such as Deputy Speaker Causley put in last night went before the referee’s panel then I think he’ll find himself refereeing the Mascot Under Six games in the weekend following.

 [END]

