---
title: "Ruddock's refusal to accept Tampa refugees will undermine the whole global refugee process."
date: "2002-01-08"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232628
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5TQ56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 08 January 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/003

 Ruddock’s refusal to accept Tampa refugees will undermine the whole global refugee process

 The Australian Democrats have accused Minister Philip Ruddock of seeking to undermine the international process for dealing with asylum seekers with his refusal to accept responsibility for the refugees who were on board the Tampa.

 Democrats' Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said Minister Ruddock was continuing to spread the falsehood that Australia was amongst the most generous countries in accepting refugees.

 "The fact is that there are many other countries who take in many more refugees than Australia does. Now Mr Ruddock is wanting to get other countries to accept some refugees from the Tampa, when they are clearly Australia's responsibility," Senator Bartlett said.

 "The reality is Australia must accept those people from the Tampa who the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) have found are genuine refugees."

 "Australia has already forced the UNHCR to use up scarce resources with the Tampa refugees to do the work that Australia should have done."

 "Now that some of the Tampa people have been assessed as refugees, it is ridiculous and immoral for the Australian Government to be continuing to stall on accepting them into the country."

 "Further stubbornness by the Government will simply increase the already outrageous costs that the taxpayer has had to wear and further weaken the international system for helping asylum seekers and refugees."

 "Instead of bullying the UNHCR, we should be assisting them in their difficult task.  It is about time Australia again started pulling our weight in dealing with the refugee issue,” Senator Bartlett concluded.

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

