---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: further excision of Australian territory; ICC; Barry Jones and Party reform."
date: "2002-06-20"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211240989
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D6T66%22
---

 1

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE - 20TH JUNE 2002.

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Further excision of Australian territory; ICC; Barry Jones and Party reform.

 CREAN: You don’t protect your borders by surrendering them and that’s what this legislation does. It’s running up the white flag. It’s the invitation to the people smugglers to head to the mainland of Australia. Now I believe that we have to stop the people smugglers. We have to secure our borders but the most effective way to do that is to prevent the people smugglers leaving the country of embarkation, prevent them leaving, not wait till they get here. And I will be outlining in the Parliament today a framework by which that can be achieved. I welcome the fact that this debate has been brought on. The public is entitled to have an alternative proposition to secure our borders and I’ll be outlining that today.

 JOURNALIST: It appears the Government’s using every opportunity to raise the stakes on this, regulations, now legislation, what do you think is next?

 CREAN: Well the Government’s all over the place on this. I mean twenty four hours ago it wouldn’t bring the laws into the Senate. And now when we force them to bring the laws into the Senate, they’re bringing them into the House of Representatives as well. But understand what the laws involve, they involve surrendering parts of Australia. You do not protect your borders by surrendering them. It’s as simple as that. And the Australian people need to understand that this legislation is not about protecting us, it’s about surrendering ourselves. Now that’s an admission of defeat and I’m not for defeat and if the Prime Minister’s serious he will determine not to surrender Australia. He will determine to protect Australia, stand firm for Australia, but ensure that the people smugglers are prevented from leaving countries such as Indonesia. He can do that if he reaches agreements with Indonesia, he can build off the framework established at the Bali Conference, he can identify the threats when they’re known and reach agreements and

 2

 understandings with the Indonesians to prevent the boats coming. That’s the basis for a successful solution and that’s what I’ll be proposing today.

 JOURNALIST: You wouldn’t welcome another election on asylum seekers though would you?

 CREAN: Listen, if the Government wants to have an election at the moment, bring it on. Because what we’ll be voting on, they might like to think it’s around this issue alone, but this issue is about surrendering parts of Australia. But they’ve also got to go out and justify why they’re putting up pharmaceuticals 30%, why they’re taking people seriously disabled off entitlements, why they’re cutting their benefits. There a whole range of issues out there that this Government lied to the Australian people about and that’s what the election will be about.

 JOURNALIST: So how real is the threat of a double dissolution election?

 CREAN: I don’t believe it’s real at all. This is the Government playing politics, it’s got no policy solution in terms of border protection it’s merely playing politics. Now we will address the politics, but more importantly, I’ll be developing the policy response. A policy response that stops the people smugglers leaving countries such as Indonesia. That’s what will protect our borders, that’s what will make Australia more secure and that’s what Labor will be proposing.

 JOURNALIST: What’s the point of Australia ratifying this treaty set up to be, to be a founding member on the ICC if you’re going to retain your jurisdictional rights back home?

 CREAN: Well I think it’s just window dressing to the red necks in the Caucus and I’m pleased that they’ve been rolled, finally. With the Prime Minister showing a bit of leadership, finally and honouring a decision that the Cabinet had ten years ago, but the Prime Minister was allowing his backbench to run loose on. We will have to look at the detail of the so called provision, qualification that the Government has put forward. If it is mere window dressing we have no concerns about it but if it fundamentally changes our obligations and commitments, then that’s an effective defeat for Alexander Downer. So let’s see the detail.

 JOURNALIST: Has Labor lost its way as Barry Jones suggested?

 CREAN: The Barry Jones submission. Now listen I think if you had of been watching the 7.30 Report on, when was it Stephen? The 3rd of June, this submission was referred to I was questioned at length by Kerry O’Brien about this submission. I think it says something about the Australian that it catches up with it about a month later and makes it front page news. But Barry Jones, a month ago, put in a submission saying Labor had to reform

 3

 itself, I’ve been saying that for the last eight months. And I’ve also been out there driving agendas that will reform, not just the Party, but the policy. So I’m delighted that Barry Jones thinks that our way forward is through reform. I’m committed to reform and I’ll deliver it.

 JOURNALIST: But he goes a bit further then just calling for reform, he says that Labor hasn’t laid a glove on the Government in six months and can’t tackle the sorts of very clever tactics the Prime Minister’s using.

 CREAN: Well if Barry Jones thinks it’s clever tactics to surrender Australia in the name of protecting its borders then I disagree with him. But Barry is entitled to his views but the clear message that came from him is that the Labor Party needs to reform. Not only do I agree with that, I’ve been advocating it for the past eight months.

 JOURNALIST: How much of this internal soul searching do you think the Labor Party can survive, how much more?

 CREAN: Not only will we survive, we will strengthen out of it. I think it’s been very instructive that in all of the issues that we’ll have to address, we’ve come forward with constructive propositions. All of them developed, all out there being debated. The issues of real note to the Australian public are the issues we’ve put out there. We’re about serious policy proposals like Paid Maternity Leave, like improvements to the living wage, like tax cuts for working families, like protection of worker entitlements. These are the issues that the Australian public want to hear about and they also want to know that their pharmaceuticals are not going to be whacked up 30% and that people who are seriously disabled are not going to lose $52 a fortnight of their benefits. In each of those cases, not only have I put forward the proposals, I’ve shown how they can be funded in a fiscally responsible way. It’s the Government that’s blackmailing the Australian public. They will not stand for blackmail, they want serious policy responses and they’ll get those from me.

 ENDS

