---
title: "Welfare reform betrayed: all sticks, no carrots."
date: "2002-11-28"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211250607
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KXZ76%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Leader of the Australian Democrats

 28 November 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/570

 WELFARE REFORM BETRAYED: ALL STICKS, NO CARROTS The promise of welfare reform has turned into a series of measures to punish welfare recipients, Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett, told the ACOSS Congress in Hobart today.

 “Two years on, it is clear the Government has abandoned the McClure welfare reform agenda, which included many positive recommendations,” Senator Bartlett said.

 Outlining some of the Democrats’ policy priorities in a major address to the Congress, Senator Bartlett said the Government had failed to act on core aspects of the McClure report including more individualised assistance and simplifying the income support structure.

 “All the Government’s so-called Mutual Obligations and Social partnerships have been a one way deal.

 “Welfare reform has been all sticks and no carrots,” Senator Bartlett said.

 “There is no point trying to force people into employment without addressing their other needs including education, childcare, housing, and particularly without creating more jobs.

 “The Government has confined ‘reform’ to punishing welfare recipients by increasing the bureaucratic and activity test hoops they have to jump through.  A few years ago it was largely the unemployed who were the target, now it is sole parents, refugees, and disability pensioners.

  “It was only last week we saw the Government again attempt to pass disability support pension changes that would create two classes of Australians with a disability.  The Australian Democrats will stand by the promise we made on Budget night.  We will never support legislation that disadvantages Australians with a disability,” he said.

 “The Government’s approach to sole parents is hypocritical. For couples, even those on high incomes, the Government encourages one parent to stay at home, paying them baby bonus tax rebate and family tax benefit B. However the Government wants sole parents to leave children as young as 12 at home, and participate in work or training, even if the child has a disability as serious as cystic fibrosis.

 “Under the ‘Australians Working Together Bill’, which comes before the Senate next week, sole parents could be ‘fined’ $987 for just one perceived breach of these requirements.   The Democrats moved to split the Bill to provide for speedy passage of beneficial elements including working credits, and the personal support program but the Government looks unlikely to agree,” Senator Bartlett said.

 The Democrats will also oppose a Bill extending breaching to temporary protection visa holders.

 “Compelling a refugee, illiterate in her own language, let alone English, to enter into a written activity agreement while denying her access to English language classes, and then applying breach penalties when she inevitably fails the hoops and hurdles, is an appalling indictment on this Government’s social policy,” he said.

 Senator Bartlett said the Democrats sought to negotiate improvements to legislation where possible but would not pass these Bills without major improvements.

 “We are always open to negotiation,” said Senator Bartlett pointing to the Democrats recent successful Telstra negotiations to get a better deal for low-income earners, despite being opposed by the ALP and the Green Party, “but we will not compromise basic principles.”

 To arrange interview with Senator Bartlett call 0419 867 649

