---
title: "Government refuses to see what the UN can."
date: "2002-06-06"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239381
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D9Q66%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Spokesperson

 6 June 2002                          MEDIA RELEASE                      02/292

 Government refuses to see what the UN can The Australian Democrats have slammed the Federal Government over its reaction to the United Nation’s criticisms of the long-term detention of asylum seekers.

 Democrats’ spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the reaction of the Government was predictable.

 “This Government refuses to acknowledge there is anything wrong with its policy. Yet this policy has attracted condemnation both nationally and internationally,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “How long will the Government ignore expert advice and blame detainees for the abuses they are suffering?

 “The Minister’s claims that people deliberately prolong their pain through court claims are particularly worrying. In fact the Minister is equally responsible for extending the time people stay in detention.

 “In many cases, it is the Minister taking people back to court, who have won the right to a review of their decision.

 “There are a number of cases where people have been declared to be refugees and they have a legal right to freedom, but are kept in detention whilst the Department does character checks. This is clearly a process, which should be completed earlier.”

 The Australian Democrats said they remain concerned about the conditions facing detainees on Nauru and Manus Island.

 “These people are in a legal limbo.”  Senator Bartlett said.

 “If the UN can find that detention centres run within Australia under the provisions of Australian law constitute a gross abuse of human rights, what must conditions in the centres on these remote islands be like?” Senator Bartlett said.

 The Australian Democrats said there was an urgent need for the Government and the Opposition to acknowledge that the policy was fundamentally flawed and constituted a breach of human rights.

 “It is not about processing asylum claims it is about punishing those who dare to seek asylum,” Senator Bartlett said.

 For further information: Brenda Kemp, Media Adviser to Senator Bartlett, on 0411 019 742 or an interview contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

