---
title: "HREOC report highlights government lies on refugees."
date: "2002-02-07"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234039
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RDV56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 07 February 2002     MEDIA RELEASE                          02/047

 HREOC report highlights Government lies on refugees The Australian Democrats say that the Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commissioners’ (HREOC) report casts doubt on claims made by Philip Ruddock, Minister for Immigration, and Dean Brown, South Australian Deputy Premier and Minister for Human Services, that parents in Woomera’s Detention Centre forcibly sewed children’s lips together.

 Democrats’ Spokesperson for Immigration, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the HREOC report clearly states that HREOC officers, in discussion with ACM, found no evidence of parents encouraging children to engage in acts of self-harm.

 “It’s all there in black and white. But once again, the Federal Government and the SA Liberal Government have sought to defame and vilify refugees for electoral gain,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Just over two weeks ago, the South Australian Deputy Premier said that he would send his department and police into the Woomera Detention Centre to investigate the various claims - to date we have heard nothing but silence.

 “With the South Australian election to be held this Saturday, it is imperative that the Deputy Premier come clean today on what has been uncovered, not next week.”

 Senator Bartlett said, “All the evidence to date suggests that this is just another case of the Federal Government lying for the sake of political expedience, as they did last year when they made false claims of refugees throwing their children into the sea.

 “The HREOC report confirms what the Democrats and others have been saying for years - that we are clearly breaching our basic obligations to protect children from harm and torment. Instead, the Howard Government is actively inflicting that harm, and does not spare unaccompanied children who have the Minister as their legal guardian.

 “The Government has a clear obligation to rectify the many breaches that the Commission has found.

 “The Democrats call on Labor to join with us in pressuring the Government to accept these findings, and to act upon them immediately. Australians have had enough of seeing children needlessly suffer because of this Government's intransigence.

 “The report does not attempt to unwind mandatory detention as the Minster has stated - it simply reports the facts of what some children have experienced and the harm and suffering they have endured.  This is what the Government must remedy,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

