---
title: "Government's human rights priorities all wrong."
date: "2002-02-06"
creators:
  - "Greig, Brian"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of GREIG, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234017
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VDV56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Brian Greig Australian Democrats Law and Justice spokesperson

 6 February 2002   MEDIA RELEASE                           02/045

 Government’s Human Rights Priorities All Wrong

 In a week when Australia has been the focus of international concern over the detention and treatment of  asylum  seekers,  the  Attorney  General  has  publicly  identified  the  Government’s  human  rights priorities  as  age  discrimination,  reforming  the  Human  Rights  and  Equal  Opportunity  Commission (HREOC), and attending to disability discrimination.

 Democrats’  Law  and  Justice  spokesperson,  Senator  Brian  Greig,  says  the  statement  reflects  a Government out of touch with the most pressing issues.

 "This Government has its priorities all wrong," Senator Greig said.

 “Whilst  age  and  disability  discrimination  are  important  human  rights  issues,  they  are  not  the  issues which  will  change  the  understandable  view  that  the  Government  has  little  respect  for  human  rights, either domestically or internationally.”

 Senator  Greig  says  that  proposed  changes  to  HREOC  also  fail  to  include  the  addition  of  ‘Sexuality Discrimination’  to  its  jurisdiction,  ensuring  that  Australia  remains  one  of  the  few  Western  countries without national laws to prevent and penalise discrimination against gay and lesbian people.

 The  Attorney  General’s  address  to  senior  officers  of  his  Department  yesterday,  made  several extraordinarily  superficial  observations  about  the  Government’s  legislative  agenda  and  glossed  over crucial issues such as legal aid funding.

 "Community legal centres in rural and regional Australia are screaming about lack of adequate funding and resources, yet the Attorney General says the Government  ‘will  continue its  excellent  work in  this area’,” Senator Greig said.

 “Rather than fudging the facts, the Government should be pledging to improve services in these areas.

 “Claims by the Attorney General that Australia has a human rights record to be proud of, are not only false and misleading, but are insulting to the many Australians who are appalled by the human rights record of this Government,” Senator Greig said.

 Contacts:  Senator Brian Greig, 08) 9228 3133 or Di Graham on 0417 177 523

