---
title: "Perth: transcript of joint press conference: paid maternity leave; 'Pacific solution';\nDemocrats and party reform."
date: "2002-07-31"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Gallop, Geoff"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245845
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R6376%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH PREMIER GEOFF GALLOP, WAYNE BELCHER, CEO CHURCHES OF CHRIST HOMES AND COMMUNITY SERVICES INC. AND SUE LINES, LHMWU - PERTH, 31st JULY 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Paid Maternity Leave; ‘Pacific Solution’; Democrats and Party Reform. 

 CREAN: As you know the Labor Party is committed to the introduction of Paid Maternity Leave.  And today we’ve had the opportunity here, interestingly, to see how an aged care facility can actually drive an agenda for maternity leave.  I think that’s very interesting because we have to understand the complexity of us as a society these days and the fact that the needs of the people that work in an industry are really determined to really have an important factor in determining the standard of care within that industry.

 What’s been negotiated here and through the whole of the facilities that’s run by the Churches of Christ is Paid Maternity Leave for six weeks.  It’s essentially parental leave but directed to the primary carer, which in most cases is the mother, but there’s the flexibility around parental leave in this arrangement.

 We want to see more of these win-win outcomes, a recognition that this can be looked at simply as a cost to aged care and to the Churches of Christ, but it’s a cost that‘s offset and the offset is associated with the fact that in retaining experience in caring and nursing staff, the costs of re-employment, rehiring are obviously reduced.

 And so I think that we have to see that this is of benefit, not just to families who want to make a better choice between work and family, but it’s also of benefit to the employer as well.  It’s a win-win outcome.

 It always worries me that the Government says that it wants to investigate … particularly investigate and research issues associated with that childcare. Well, I’d say, come and have a look here, come and investigate the model

 2

 here, so far as maternity leave is concerned.  Because it’s the practical example on the ground that I think sends the strongest signal of the lot.  We can talk the policy and we can talk the need for the Commonwealth Government to be involved in the funding arrangements, but the practical application has to be done through the workplaces.  Today is a great example of that.  I congratulate the management of the Churches of Christ aged and nursing care facilities, and of course, the union.  This is an outcome that came through enterprise bargaining, it’s part of negotiated arrangements, and they’re arrangements that the proposal that Labor will introduce will supplement.  This is an example of a workplace working together, a community understanding its responsibilities, but a commitment from governments to support and encourage this type of outcome.

 JOURNALIST: This has been negotiated through enterprise bargaining, why make maternity leave compulsory and force it on employers who maybe can’t afford it?  Why shouldn’t the Government just encourage, and let it be an outcome for, enterprise bargaining?

 CREAN: Well, no-one’s ever argued that what we’re going to do is to compulsorily require it of employers.  Indeed, we’ve specifically said that we will be exempting small business.  That’s important to understand.  But I think that what we’re trying to encourage is the shared commitment and to encourage employers to understand it’s of benefit to them.  Of course, what we have to have is the core of the scheme being government-financed, the core of the scheme.  But we want to build on it, and I think once people start realising that there are benefits to their industry, it’s not just a benefit to the employee.  I think once they start understanding benefits all around we’ll build the coalition of support, because that’s what we’re looking for - a coalition in support of maternity leave, arguments to back it, not excuses for avoiding it.  All you’ll ever get from John Howard are excuses to ignore the problem.  We want examples like this to drive the agenda.  It’ll be a cooperative partnership but it’s one in which the Commonwealth has to play a role.

 JOURNALIST: What level of government funding are you talking about? Are you talking about a minimum wage-type deal and then putting contributions on top of that?

 CREAN: We haven’t finalised the detail of the model of course, we haven’t.  That’s why we’re continuing to have discussions.   We want to know what’s happening in industry.  We want to know what the demand and the need for this is.  Interestingly, the more employers you talk to in private - not when they’re asked publicly, necessarily, but when you talk with them in private, they acknowledge the need to do it.  In fact, I’ve had discussions recently in which the CEO hadn’t realised how important it was to his industry because it kept getting blocked by males who were making the decision in terms of whether to refer the issue on to their level of consideration.  Now, I think we’ve just got to break down that sort of stupidity.  We’ve got to realise

 3

 the benefit all around and I think government’s role - and we’re going to do it from Opposition - but government’s role is to try and encourage that coalition of support, that partnership, to achieve the outcome.  What the final detail is will be a function of those discussions.

 LINES: If I could just make the point from the union’s perspective, of the Miscellaneous Workers Union very clear, to say that we were able to negotiate pay increases with this establishment. To get back to the question that you asked about why it shouldn’t be negotiated at the workplace, this has been negotiated as part of an EBA. That meant that employer and union had to agree to the deal that they got up at this workplace. Now that’s a very slow process but if that is the way it ended up being it would mean that certain sections of the workplace, the workforce, would be disadvantaged because it would reduce the bargain that you do need.  So, what we want to see is a universal scheme that’s available to all workers but in the meanwhile, our union and other unions in Western Australia and nationally in the workplace but we do want to see a universal scheme that is accessible and available to all workers in Australia.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean do you envisage a Federal Labor Government will be a model employer for this area and with Paid Maternity Leave across the board in the Government sector?

 CREAN: Obviously, as part of the approach, we would be encouraging the negotiations in the public sector to embrace what we’re arguing should be considered in the private sector.  It does separate these out and in many senses a lot of the demand is going to come in the public sector.  So, of course, we wouldn’t be quarantining the Commonwealth as an employer.  There’s no point arguing the Commonwealth should take the lead in terms of what the community does and then not do it itself.  It’s got to lead the community but it’s also got to be an example to the community.

 JOURNALIST: How do you propose rewarding employers for participation?

 CREAN: Well, this employer - and they can speak for themselves - believe that the agreement is a reward to them.  That’s why I call it a win-win outcome …

 JOURNALIST: Will the Government offer incentives?

 CREAN: Well, again, you’re talking about what sort of encouragement do we give to other employers to come in.  I think that’s a consideration in terms of the final model that we come up with.  And, you know, I think it depends, there are a lot of examples in terms of overseas experience whereby that share partnership can be arranged.

 4

 JOURNALIST: You must have thought about some of the possibilities of giving them …….

 CREAN: Yes, we have but we’re not going to announce them today.  Today is an example to focus the minds in terms of the fact that we can get the cooperation.  You see, what’s interesting about this, this is an example where, regardless of what the Federal Government was saying, the employer and the unions sat down to work for a common outcome.  That’s the very climate we want to encourage.  Just imagine how much better it could be if the government of the day was actually out there arguing this should happen and we’re going to back you, we’re going to support you with a government support scheme.  Just imagine how much better the argument would be and the opportunity would be and the outcomes would be.  But what we need is leadership, it’s sadly lacking at the moment.  What we’re trying to do from Opposition and in conjunction with State Governments is to drive this agenda forward.

 JOURNALIST: You talked just basically about maternity leave, this agreement is paternal leave, would you support any future scheme being extended to fathers as well?

 CREAN: Well, I think it’s got to be that … we’ve got to look at what suits the particular family unit.  I mean, this is the point; we’re not trying to be prescriptive about this in saying there’s only one scheme that you all have to take.  What we’re trying to create is the climate, the environment in which benefit is there but it can be utilised to suit the needs of the particular family.  And that’s the model that’s been adopted here.  That’s the type of model that we would want to encourage.

 LIONS: And again from our union’s perspective, against what we’re saying is, John Howard is well behind community views and standards because in all of the claims that we put forward in our enterprise agreement, we do talk about parental leave.  We’ve moved on from maternity leave and John Howard needs to catch up with current thinking in the community. It’s very much about parental leave.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, Pru Goward came out last week and said some small businesses are refusing to hire women of childbearing age.  What’s the solution to that now, in the here and now?

 CREAN: Well, I’m taking the opportunity to speak with her sometime in the future.  I think this is the big problem that we’ve got. I think it is ignorance and I think education is part of overcoming ignorance.  But that’s what I think we have to use opportunities like today and I just hope, as a result of this press conference, as a result of this visit, we can actually get a story up that’s about positive outcome and is an example for others to follow and is an employer saying this isn’t a cost to us, we can offset this cost, this is a benefit to us.  It’s that sort of example, looking at it through the

 5

 employer’s eyes, I think that we’ve got to try and get the better understanding of.  I’m sure Pru Goward would agree with that.  But take the opportunity to look at the scheme here, to look at the detail of it, publicise it, promote it, because that’s the way we’ll get acceptance of it.

 BELCHER: We’re not atypical of any agency provider in the nation. About 90% of our staff are women, many are not of childbearing age that we would typically say, but a lot are.  We have about a 20 per cent turnover of staff every year.  That’s not sustainable from an economic viability perspective.  If there’s any way that we can reduce that we know we’re going to save recruitment costs, training costs, whatever.  I guarantee, and with due respect to the Premier, you don’t have to be a Rhodes Scholar to work out that if you offer parental leave, the employer of choice, if you have to take time off, then want to come back to work, the employer of choice is the one that you just left, not only are you going to get paid your leave but you built that relationship with the employer. And, you know, it may just seem to be … but we really believe that the role that we can provide to assist families that work with us and work with families who live with us, is really important. Any way that we can think of any creative difference, that doesn’t come … by government or unions, any creative way we can work together to achieve this, we’ll consider.  We do consider the costs but we also consider the opportunity costs of not changing.  And I would challenge that to every aged care provider across the nation, big or small, work out what the benefit of some of the different approaches to employment relations are.  Now, aged care has been in the spotlight for three or four or five years, really heavy-duty stuff.  We’ve talked about it being a crisis but we’ve got a lot of options available to us to improve the lot of our clients and our staff and our organisations to move towards this is one. It won’t be the last, I can tell, not from this organisation.  But, you know, we beat the politicians at this. Was it difficult?  We took three meetings. It is not the first EBA that was struck. (Inaudible) But there you go.  It’s not actually hard when people are working together for better outcomes.

 JOURNALIST: But if you don’t get returns if you don’t get the staff coming back will you think about abandoning the EA rules?

 BELCHER: No.

 PREMIER: I was just going to make the point how much easier it would be if we had a Commonwealth Government committed to the concept and working with employers, be they State Governments or be they private sector, to deliver a better result in this area. I mean when we came to Government early last year, Western Australia was way behind the eight ball in terms of the provision of parental leave. We’ve already, of course, progressed the matter within our own Government with our limited financial capacity as different Departments of Government have come together and the anomalies between different worker’s conditions were exposed as we bought different Departments together with progress … parental leave within

 6

 the Government. But how much better for us it would be if we had a Commonwealth Government with an overall plan and approach to this issue where they could work with employees, employers, be they State Government or private sector, to progress this issue. Which all of us agree is crucially important for the workplaces of the future. I mean family friendly workplaces are crucial for productivity and I think crucial for community values. And so from our point of view we’re delighted Simon and his team are going to work upon a national approach to this issue so they can enter into partnership with us as employers at a state level to progress the issue. Because we are way behind in Western Australia. I mean 58% of our public sector workers are covered by six weeks parental leave. As you know the objective standard international is around fourteen, I think the Federal Government has twelve. So we’ve already behind. To progress the six weeks through the public sector, which we intend to do, over this term of Government, is going to cost us, we estimate $10 million a year. To go to fourteen weeks is going to cost us over $20 million a year. So there are big cost implications and we want to be working with the Federal Government on what should be a universal objective for Australia as a nation.

 JOURNALIST: Premier, how long will it take to get to that fourteen weeks?

 PREMIER: Obviously our target at the moment is the six, which we’ve agreed, with fourteen weeks as an objective and that was announced following the Labor Party Conference earlier this year. But that will all be subject to two factors I think: financial capacity and degree of interest and involvement of Federal Government because clearly that’s going to be a factor in the future. And that’s why we’ll be working with Simon’s team, to get a good policy together at the next national election so we’ve got a national Government working with us and not against us on health, aged care, education etc.

 JOURNALIST: But given that you’ve just made 800 public servants redundant and you claim that you’re saving $20 million a year through those redundancies, isn’t that fourteen weeks achievable?

 PREMIER: Well I think you’re forgetting one part of the equation, you’re forgetting the extra nurses, the extra teachers and the extra police that we’re funding from those arrangements. So when we took the public sector in Western Australia, our commitment at the election was, we need more nurses in our health system, we want more teachers in our schools, we need more police. So we redirected the priorities within Government away from areas that we don’t believe have the value for the people to areas that do. So it’s costing us a lot of money to add those teachers, nurses and police to the system.

 JOURNALIST: But you expect by, what within two years time, every public servant will have…?

 7

 PREMIER: Well our objective in this term of Government is of course to go for the six weeks parental leave and that’s difficult. But we’re trying to work with the agencies to find the funds to do that.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean can we just ask on another issue? The fact that there’s about thirty refugees, I think, asylum seekers who were kept at Papua New Guinea that have been granted refugee status. Does that show that the whole Pacific Solution has been a huge waste of money?

 CREAN: It shows that the Pacific Solution that John Howard touted prior to the last election hasn’t worked and it has been enormously costly. It hasn’t worked because he and Philip Ruddock persistently argued that not one person that was taken off the boats and sent to the countries -be they Nauru or PNG, Manus Island - the Pacific Solution would set foot in Australia. They are now setting foot in Australia. John Howard and his commitment before the election, he’s not able to ensure after the election. The other point goes to cost. We’ve consistently argued that the Government has hidden the true cost of the Pacific Solution. They have to come clean with the cost. Because if we’re to develop alternatives for a lasting solution for this problem, which I’m committed to doing, we need to understand the cost structure associated with it. One final point that I will make is that the Prime Minister must disclose whether any of the people now coming to Australia were on the boat that sank and were, sorry, what he has to come clean on is whether any of the kids and the families were people he said were being thrown overboard. Now either no one was being thrown overboard or his promise that none of those that were threatening to throw overboard would ever set foot in Australia. The public has a right to know. He made this an issue in the last election, they need to know whether they can believe him today.

 JOURNALIST: They might argue that, well they do argue, that the Pacific Solution has worked because the boats have stopped coming so it has acted as a deterrent to people?

 CREAN: In discussions that I’ve had, in confidential briefings that I’ve had, the single most important factor in the boats not coming to Australia has been stopping them leaving countries of source. That’s the single most important factor. And that’s why we have to redouble the effort to get agreements with Indonesia about stopping the people smugglers plying their trade. That’s going to be the most effective deterrent we can have in securing ours borders. The next effective deterrent of course is the establishment of a US style Coastguard in Australia. Both of these are policy initiatives that I’ve been calling for and we’ll have something further to say about it down the track. No one argues against the need to secure our borders. But we need an international framework in which asylum seekers are processed in countries of first asylum. There needs to be a consistent processing regime and therefore the international framework needs to be established. But John Howard can

 8

 say whatever he likes about the effectiveness of his solution. We won’t be able to judge it unless he tells us the cost and unless he tells us whether people who are coming to this country now were those he said would never set foot in this country.

 JOURNALIST: Are the Australian Democrats a spent political force?

 CREAN: I would never write off political parties or political participants on the basis of what might have happened over a three or four day life cycle. There’s great resilience in Australian politics. The question as to whether they’re a force or not is up to them. But I think that just as I’ve had to face up to the need for organisational change and am committed to it, because I think that all parties need to modernise, I think that that’s the lesson to other political parties. But let’s not let the Liberal Party off the hook. They’ve got their problems with branch stackers in Queensland, in Tasmania and here. I’m determined that part of the reform process of the Labor Party to weed out the branch stackers and to develop rules that ensure that. My challenge to John Howard is to do likewise.

 JOURNALIST: Do you have any concerns that Meg Lees has now signalled she’s willing to negotiate on the PBS Budget measures?

 CREAN: I haven’t heard those statements. I’ll just make the point that if it were not for Labor’s opposition to the PBS charges, tomorrow we would see pharmaceuticals going up 30%

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that could be the outcome though?

 CREAN: We’ll wait and see.

 JOURNALIST: Do you have a message for her?

 CREAN: I have a message to her and that is honour the commitment that you told to Parliament and that is that you’re not supporting a 30% increase because it’s unfair. That’s a commitment that must remain regardless of where she sits, because that also goes to trust in the Australian people. You can’t say one thing one day and reverse it the next day so I would be surprised if she reversed her position on that. She made a very strong statement about it and I would be surprised.

 JOURNALIST: You talk about the need to modernise and you’re standing shoulder to shoulder with a union representative and a state representative of course. But you’re still intent on reducing union influence in Labor forums?

 CREAN: I’ve made my position clear. We have to build the relationship with the trade union movement and build it around issues and agendas. That’s why we’re pushing and supporting Paid Maternity Leave.

 9

 That’s why I’m supporting the protection, 100%, of all workers entitlements, not just if you happen to be lucky enough to work for the Prime Minister’s brother’s company. That’s why we’re opposed to the unfair dismissal laws and the way in which the Government puts them forward. Our relationship with the trade union movement will be defined by our commitment to the common agenda not by the proportions of conference. The reason why the proportions, I believe, need to be addressed is because in addition to developing our relationship with the trade union movement we need to develop it with other groups in the community. With small business for example, we need to reach out and lift our primary vote. I don’t believe that we can do that unless we’re offering them an equal partnership as part of the Party structure if they so choose to join, not a minority partnership. That’s what the proportions is about. It’s equal partnership.

 ENDS.

