---
title: "Britain following Australia's lead."
date: "2002-02-08"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234080
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZRV56%22
---

 M e d i a  R e l e a s eThe Hon Philip Ruddock MP Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Telephone: (02) 6277 7860  and Indigenous Affairs Facsimile: (02) 6273 4144Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation

 Portfolio information is also available on the Internet:  www.minister.immi.gov.au

 MPS 009/2002

 BRITAIN FOLLOWING AUSTRALIA’S LEAD

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock today said he would watch with interest a package of immigration reforms being introduced in the United Kingdom.

 “The  measures  announced  overnight  in  Britain  reflect  many  of  the  measures,  policies  and practices already employed in Australian immigration,” Mr Ruddock said.

 “The British government’s concern about the integrity of their refugee determination system and the integrity of their borders mirror the concerns Australia has had for many years and the action we have taken to respond to this challenge.

 “I  welcome  measures  to  increase  penalties  for  the  insidious  trade  of  people  smuggling  and hope our two countries will continue to work together on this issue.

 “The  British  Government  is  expressing  concern  about  abuse  of  the  refugee  system  and extended  appeals,  as  well  as  the  propensity  of  failed  asylum  seekers  to  disappear  into  the community.

 “This  diverts  resources  away  from  those  who  have  been  found  to  be  refugees  and  are  in greatest need of our assistance.

 “Measures to address fraud in spouse migration reflect action taken by Australia several years ago.

 “The  measures  being  outlined  in  relation  to  citizenship  in  the  UK  also  bear  a  remarkable similarity to practice in Australian citizenship.

 “Britain is also looking at following Australia’s lead on skilled migration and while I watch this with great interest, it could mean more competition for us in seeking out skilled migrants who bring expertise and economic capital to our nation.

 “Overall  harmonisation  of  immigration  laws  is  important  in  a  global  economy  and  I  look forward to observing Britain’s implementation of the new policies,” Mr Ruddock said.

 8 February 2002

 Media Contact:  Steve Ingram  0419 278 715

