---
title: "Prospective demographic change and Australia's policy agenda for the 21st century."
date: "2002-04-04"
creators:
  - "Guest, Ross"
  - "Mcdonald, Ian, (economist)"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Living standards"
  - "Population ageing"
  - "Gains from immigration"
  - "Reproductive fertility"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Trends"
  - "Economic models"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235739
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UKA66%22
---

 

 Towards Opportunity and Prosperity: The 2002 Melbourne Institute 

 Economic and Social Outlook Conference 

 April 2002 

 

 

 

 Prospective demographic change and Australia’s policy 

 agenda for the 21st century   

 

 Ross Guest 

 School of Accounting and Finance  Griffith University  and 

 Ian M McDonald 

 National Australia Bank Professor of Economics  University of Melbourne   

 

 ABSTRACT 

 

 Australia is facing a substantial ageing of its population. Our research  calculates under various assumptions the future level of living standards. It shows that,  notwithstanding the ageing population, there will be a substantial increase in living  standards in the future, almost doubling in the next 50 years. Furthermore, future living  standards are more or less independent of future rates of fertility and future rates of  immigration. Lower fertility and higher immigration have slight positive effects on  living standards but the effects are so small that we feel the best way to describe the  relation is one of independence. 

 

 In considering the policy agenda for the future, an important lesson to be  learned from the past is that decisions by Australian residents in the past have led to a  healthy growth in living standards. From this and from our finding that decreases in  fertility or changes in rates of immigration will have an essentially zero impact on  living standards, one can conclude that no radical changes in policy in the future are  required to ensure that living standards continue to grow. If we carry on as we have  been doing, then living standards will continue to grow. There is no crisis for living  standards on account of population ageing.  

  1

 

 Prospective demographic change and Australia’s policy agenda for the 21st 

 century 

 

 Ross Guest 

 School of Accounting and Finance  Griffith University  and 

 Ian M McDonald 

 National Australia Bank Professor of Economics  University of Melbourne 

 

 

 Australia is facing a substantial ageing of its population. At current rates of 

 fertility and immigration, by 2050 the ratio of people aged 65 years or more to people 

 of working age will double, from 20:100 to 40:100. Furthermore, if rates of fertility 

 and immigration fall this measure of old dependency will increase further. This 

 prospect of an ageing population has caused alarm in some quarters. It has led to fears 

 that the ageing population will threaten the future living standards of Australians. To 

 meet this apparent threat, some have called for measures that are claimed to raise 

 fertility and others have called for a higher rate of immigration. 

 It seems very likely that fertility will fall in the near future. Peter McDonald of 

 the ANU argues that to predict a fall in the fertility rate in Australia to 1.65 in the next 

 decade, from its current rate of 1.75, seems justified. Thereafter the fertility rate could 

 fall further. In some countries, such as Italy and Germany, fertility rates have fallen to 

 1.3. Perhaps a similar low rate is in store for Australia. 

 The future course of immigration into Australia is more uncertain. Currently 

 immigration is a major national issue. For over a decade the rate of immigration has 

 been an important factor in federal and state politics. More recently the refugee issue 

 has become an important topic, with many in the community appearing to fear a 

 massive influx of refugees. The outcome of these debates could be a reduction in the 

 immigration quota. On the other hand, there are pressures for increased immigration. 

 Influential groups, such as the Business Council of Australia, are advocating on 

 economic grounds a higher rate of immigration. Furthermore humanitarian pressures 

 and the demand for access to Australia by potential immigrants may cause the rate of 

  2

 immigration to be increased. On balance the rate of immigration in the future could go 

 either way.  

 Our research addresses the central issue of this conference - the living 

 standards of Australian residents in the future. Our particular focus is to calculate the 

 impact of prospective demographic change for future living standards. The results of 

 this research suggest that over the next 50 years living standards will almost double. 

 Furthermore, our results challenge the view that low fertility will be a threat to future 

 living standards. We find that lower fertility actually raises future living standards, 

 although by a very small amount. Our research also shows that living standards are not 

 strongly affected by the rate of immigration. Higher immigration increases future 

 living standards, although by a very small amount. So the effect of fertility and 

 immigration on living standards is best described as slight.  

  A crucial feature of our research is that we move beyond demography and 

 demographic ratios by using economic analysis to look directly at living standards. In 

 doing this we find that the demographic ratios are misleading. Economic analysis 

 reveals some subtle effects that change radically one’s interpretation of the 

 implications of low fertility and changes in the rate of immigration.  

 

 Economic modelling of future demographics 

  For economic welfare, demographic measures are not of intrinsic interest. Their 

 use is due to the belief that they give insight into the effect of demographic change on 

 living standards. Obviously to look at living standards directly is a better approach, 

 especially because it emerges that the demographic approach is misleading. To directly 

 calculate future living standards we proceed as follows. 

  We define living standards as consumption per person. (As described below, 

 “persons” are defined to take into account the relatively high consumption demands of 

 old people). To calculate how consumption per person will change in the future and to 

 assess how different assumptions about the future demographic profile will affect 

 consumption per person we use an economic model of the Australian economy that 

 embodies changes in the demographic structure.   

 In our model, the total level of output available for Australian residents to 

 consume, that is consumption, is determined by the total level of output produced less 

 any output used for investment purposes and any output used to make payments to 

 foreigners. The level of output produced is determined by projections of the level of 

  3

 employment and the capital stock. From demographic projections of the working age 

 population and from assumptions about the future pattern of employment participation 

 of age and gender groups, the future pattern of employment can be projected. The 

 future capital stock is determined by investment. 

 By subtracting from output investment and payments to foreigners, we can 

 calculate aggregate consumption.  

 Investment and payments to foreigners have intertemporal implications for 

 consumption. More investment today means less output available for consumption 

 today. The intertemporal aspect comes from the fact that investment today influences 

 the future pattern of the capital stock. If we invest more today then the future capital 

 stock will be larger. This implies that more output will be produced in future. Other 

 things being equal, that is good for consumption in the future. 

 Similarly, if we make more payments to foreigners today, say through reducing 

 the current account deficit, then less output will be available for consumption today. 

 However in the future our obligations to foreigners would be lower and so more of the 

 output produced in the future would be available for our consumption. 

 In converting aggregate consumption into living standards, we take into 

 account the fact that consumption demands vary by age. Most importantly, old people 

 have higher consumption demands. This is due to the large amount of health services 

 consumed by old people. Our calculations suggest that a typical person 75 years or 

 older consumes 19 per cent more than a younger adult. The higher consumption 

 demands of old people imply that an increase in the proportion of old people will 

 reduce the living standards supported by a given level of aggregate consumption. 

 In summary, our projections of future living standards take into account the 

 future demographic structure of the economy. They recognise that some output is used 

 to maintain and enhance the capital stock. They use production functions well 

 established from many economic studies to convert employment and capital into 

 output. They include the obligations of Australian residents to foreigners, that is 

 foreign debt. They leave Australian residents at a level of wealth, defined as the capital 

 stock minus foreign debt, in the future comparable to their levels of wealth now. And 

 they include the high expenditures on health for old people.   

 

 Living standards in 2050 

  4

  Chart 1 reports our projections of living standards for the year 2050 for 

 Australian residents derived from our economic model briefly described above. The 

 chart shows the increase in living standards in 2050 compared with their level in 1999. 

  Consider first the column labelled “Base”. Base refers to a demographic 

 projection that assumes the current value of the total fertility rate (TFR) remains 

 unchanged in the future at 1.75 and that the annual rate of (net) immigration remains 

 unchanged at its current rate of 0.54 per cent of population. Mortality is assumed to 

 follow the standard ABS assumption, that is life expectancy increases by 0.4 years for 

 every 5 years. So Base is a continuation of current demographics. Under this 

 projection, Australia’s population will increase to 28.5 million by 2050 (from 19 

 million in 1999). 

 If current demographics continue then as Chart 1 shows, living standards will 

 be 84 per cent higher in 2050 compared with 1999. People will be almost twice as well 

 off as they are today.  

 The large projected increase in living standards is driven mainly by our 

 assumed rate of increase of labour productivity of 1.4 per cent per year. This is not an 

 unreasonable projection. It is equal to Australia’s experience over the last 80 years. It 

 is comparable to other high-income countries. There is no compelling reason to expect 

 a growth slowdown.  

 As we explained above, our projections allow for the increasing proportion of 

 old people in the future. Above the columns in Chart 1 we record for 2050 the number 

 of people 65 years or older per 100 people of working age (that is 20 to 64 years). For 

 the Base case there will be 40 old people per 100 working age people. This is double 

 the number now. 

 This increase in the proportion of old people does have a negative impact on 

 living standards. This can be seen from the column labelled “No ageing”. For this 

 projection we assumed that the age structure is unchanged in the future. This is not a 

 real possibility of course. We use it to measure the effect of ageing. If the age structure 

 could be magically frozen at its 1999 composition then by 2050 living standards are 

 projected to be 107 per cent higher. So there would be an extra 23 per cent on living 

 standards if ageing did not occur.  

 Some people may be tempted to argue that foregoing an extra 23 per cent in 

 living standards in 50 years time is a problem. However, this “problem” will be 

 “suffered” by people who will be almost twice as well off as we are. This sounds a bit 

  5

 like people in Greece worrying about how to increase the living standards of people in 

 the United States.  

 The other two columns in Chart 1 show how our projections of living standards 

 would be affected by low fertility and low immigration. The column labelled “Low 

 fertility” is based on a demographic projection in which the TFR falls to 1.3 by 2009, 

 at which level it remains. This is a considerable fall compared with the current rate of 

 1.75 but is not outside the experience of high income countries. Immigration and life 

 expectancy are assumed unchanged from the Base case. The low fertility projection 

 generates a population in 2050 of 24 million.  

 Using the demographic future implied by the low fertility projection we find 

 that living standards will be 89 per cent higher than their level in 1999. Thus low 

 fertility actually increases living standards, but the increase is very small. It would be 

 better to conclude that living standards are independent of fertility, at least for TFR’s 

 in the range of values we consider.1 

 The fourth column, labelled “Zero immigration”, shows the projection of living 

 standards for 2050 based on a complete cessation, in net terms, of immigration into 

 Australia from 1999 onwards. Fertility and life expectancy are as in the Base case. The 

 implied population for Australia for 2050 under the zero immigration assumption is 9 

 million.  

 Using the demographic future implied by the zero immigration projection we 

 find that living standards will be 78 per cent higher than their level in 1999. Thus zero 

 immigration is bad for living standards, but not very bad. Bear in mind that a drop to 

 zero is a massive change. Given the massive size of this change, the sensible 

 conclusion is that living standards are independent of the rate of immigration.  

 We infer from our projections and the behaviour of our model that an increase 

 in the rate of immigration above the current rate of 0.54 per cent of population would 

 lead to slightly higher living standards in future. Again we emphasise the smallness of 

 this effect and our interpretation that living standards are essentially independent of the 

 rate of immigration. 

 

 The misleading guidance given by demographic indicators 

 

 1  If the TFR falls even lower to 1 then we project living standards in 2050 to be 96 per cent above their  1999 level. 

  6

 Our projections of future living standards make clear that the large rise in the 

 number of old people per people of working age from 1999 to 2050 gives poor 

 guidance for the impact of demographic change on living standards. Many people have 

 reacted with surprise that living standards can grow so much. Their surprise is 

 probably a result of the alarm spread by commentators who rely on demographic 

 indicators alone.  

 The unreliability of demographic indicators can be seen by comparing the 

 projected levels of living standards with the associated projected levels of dependency. 

 The figure above the column labelled low fertility shows that for the low fertility case 

 there are projected for 2050 to be 46 people aged 65 years or more for every 100 

 people of working age. Thus for the low fertility case, old dependency is projected to 

 be greater than for the base case. But living standards will be higher. The relation is the 

 opposite from the one casually assumed by many. For the zero immigration case the 

 increase in old dependency over the base case is projected to be even greater than for 

 the low fertility case. The zero immigration case projects for 2050 51 people aged 65 

 years or more for every 100 people of working age.  But in this case living standards 

 are not as high as in the base case. Clearly there is no simple relation between old 

 dependency and living standards. Instead there can be substantial variation in the old 

 dependency with effectively no variation in living standards. 

 The lack of an informative relation between old age dependency and living 

 standards suggests that the debate should focus on the latter, not the former. 

 

 The optimum population size 

   Within the living standards framework of our work, the optimum population 

 size would be that which maximises living standards.2 Can Chart 1 give us guidance 

 on the optimum population for 2050? Ignoring the “No ageing” column in Chart 1, 

 because it is based on an artificial projection that could never exist, the other three 

 columns show a clear hump shape. The highest living standards for 2050 come from 

 the low fertility case. So, amongst these three alternatives, low fertility generates the 

 optimum population. 

 However this interpretation of Chart 1 is not the one we favour. Instead what is 

 striking about these three columns in Chart 1 is how flat is the surface defined by their 

 

 2  Of course, given that under most scenarios population is changing over time, the optimum population  is usually changing over time. 

  7

 peaks. That is the interpretation we emphasised above. What that interpretation 

 suggests is that, using living standards as defined by us as the criterion, there is not for 

 practical purposes an optimum population. One cannot derive a meaningful target 

 population. 

 

 Why do fertility rates and immigration rates have a negligible effect on living 

 standards? 

 The negligible impact of demographic variables on living standards is due to 

 some subtle economic mechanisms associated with demographic change. These 

 economic mechanisms appear to be little understood by commentators in the 

 population debate. There are two “consumption dividends” to be reaped from the 

 prospective demographic change that Australia will experience. One is generated by 

 the lower investment requirements from low employment growth. A second is 

 generated by a decreasing proportion of children. These dividends enable living 

 standards to be enhanced, thereby offsetting the demographic effect of more old people 

 to support.  

 Lower employment growth implies reduced investment requirements. For 

 example, fewer workers in the office implies fewer PCs, fewer desks and fewer office 

 buildings. This means that more of national output is available for consumption, rather 

 than investment. This boosts living standards. Reduced fertility implies fewer young 

 dependents to support. The saving in this support is available to enhance the living 

 standards of others, either immediately or in the future through higher saving.  

 These two consumption dividends allow Australia to allocate more of its output 

 to consumption. This effect is illustrated in Chart 2, in which the ratios of consumption 

 to GDP generated by the three demographic cases are shown. Compare Base with the 

 zero immigration projection. The consumption ratio for the latter is consistently above 

 the consumption ratio of Base. With a smaller number of immigrants, Australia can 

 allocate a higher proportion of its GDP to consumption. This is beneficial for living 

 standards, offsetting the negative impact of higher old dependency. 

 For the low fertility projection the story is more complex. Up to the year 2035 

 the consumption ratio is lower for the low fertility case than for the Base case. Living 

 standards do not suffer. Instead the consumption dividend from a decreasing 

 proportion of children allows aggregate consumption to be lower without reducing 

 consumption per head. After 2035 the consumption ratio generated by the low fertility 

  8

 projection moves ahead of that generated by the Base case. In these years the reduced 

 investment demands are kicking in. Chart 2 shows that this effect is strong. The 

 consumption ratio for the low fertility case increases fairly smartly. By 2050 it is ahead 

 by three percentage points of GDP.3  

 

 Questioning our assumptions 

 Of course there are a range of assumptions that go into the economic model 

 that we use to calculate the impact of fertility and immigration on living standards. 

 Most importantly, we assume that the rate of growth of labour productivity will 

 increase at around 1.4 per cent per year. In our view this is easy to defend. It is the rate 

 Australia has enjoyed over the last 80 years. It is commensurable with rates observed 

 in other high-income countries. Furthermore, as one would expect on the basis of 80 

 years of experience and evidence from other countries, there are no credible forecasts 

 that this growth is about to permanently stop or will even slow over the next 100 years. 

 We assume constant returns to scale. Some people criticise this assumption 

 with vigour, although in different ways. Glen Withers, on one side, argues that there 

 are increasing returns to scale. Withers (2000) cites Simon (1989) as showing that 

 economies of scale exist in manufacturing. Also the study for Australia by Caves 

 (1984) found evidence for economies of scale in manufacturing, up to a certain level of 

 output. However manufacturing is a small part of the economy. Furthermore, as Caves 

 pointed out, reducing tariffs reduces the importance of economies of scale by 

 encouraging specialisation.  

 Other people see diminishing returns to scale. Environmental groups are 

 sometimes forceful proponents of this effect. They argue that increased population 

 causes damage to the environment. The premier of New South Wales argues that 

 population growth causes congestion costs.  

 The evidence from economic studies of the aggregate economy suggests 

 constant returns to scale, that is the mid-point of the two groups of critics. It appears 

 that in practice for measured GDP, the economies of scale in some activities are offset 

 by congestion costs in other activities.4 

 

 3  The increase continues for the rest of the century. By 2100 the consumption ratio for low fertility  exceeds that of the Base case by eight percentage points of GDP.  4

  From an econometric test on the production function for the private sector, Otto and Voss (1994) find  that constant returns to scale for the private sector cannot be ruled out. 

  9

 There is a qualification to our results, the importance of which is impossible to 

 judge. Our measure of living standards, based on measured consumption, ignores some 

 important influences on well-being. In particular environmental deterioration is 

 imperfectly measured, indeed often ignored, in consumption. Growth in population 

 and in GDP may lead to further environmental deterioration. How much will depend in 

 part on the measures used to regulate pollution, such as pollution taxes.  

 If the higher growth scenarios lead to increasing environmental deterioration, 

 then our measure of living standards will overestimate the growth of economic 

 welfare. If instead threats to the environment are controlled by effective regulation 

 then our living standards measure would be more accurate. However, even if the 

 degree of regulation is optimal, it could be that it implies a lower rate of productivity 

 growth compared with the past. It may change the constant returns to scale observed in 

 the past to diminishing returns to scale. In this instance our projections of living 

 standards would tend to overestimate their actual growth in the future and this 

 overestimate would be greater for the faster growing population projections.  

 As far as we know, there is no work to give guidance on these issues. It is the 

 case that in the past increased environmental regulation has not led to diminishing 

 returns being observed. In the lack of evidence to the contrary we feel that this is likely 

 to continue into the future and thus that our projections will not be upset. 

 We also assume an unchanged retirement age and unchanged employment 

 participation rates of men and women. However, one cannot say that these 

 assumptions are biased in support of our conclusions. It seems likely the retirement age 

 and labour force participation rates, especially of women and especially if the birth rate 

 falls further, will increase instead of decrease. This would increase output and thus 

 living standards. 

 On balance we feel that our assumptions are conservative, and in that respect 

 underestimate the future increase in living standards. They may also underestimate the 

 gains from low fertility. 

 

 Government outlays 

 Our work clearly suggests that in the future, even if fertility and immigration 

 fall, there will be enough consumption to go around to make everybody much better 

 off than they are today. However supporting a higher proportion of old people may 

 require an increase in government outlays as a percentage of GDP. This is because a 

  10

 significant part of consumption by old people is supplied through government 

 intervention. In particular health services and income support. How does this 

 consideration affect our assessment of the impact of fertility and immigration on living 

 standards?   

 Our calculations suggest that government social outlays are likely to rise from 

 about 23% of GDP to about 31 to 33% of GDP by 2050, depending on by how much 

 fertility falls and on the future rate of immigration. This is a substantial increase. 

 However yet again the impact of different rates of fertility and immigration is slight. 

 Furthermore, these increases in government social outlays are consistent with our 

 projections of living standards. Because of productivity growth, workers can finance 

 these transfers and, in after tax terms, still be nearly twice as well off as they are today. 

 One can be much less confident about the accuracy of projections of 

 government outlays than about projections of living standards. Government outlays are 

 influenced by changes in government policy. Many commentators have observed that 

 the link between government outlays and demographic changes is weak. 

 It might be argued that the uncertain nature of future projections of government 

 outlays implies they are a serious problem. But this does not follow. A better 

 interpretation is that projecting future government outlays on the basis of current 

 policy is analogous to Club of Rome projections of natural resource shortages. For 

 example Hurd (1997) has projected, on the basis of past trends, a level of health 

 expenditures in GDP of between 30 and 40 per cent in 25 years time. But if people are 

 not prepared to finance these huge amounts then they will not happen. Government 

 policy will adjust to what people will be prepared to finance.  

 The projections of government social outlays we referred to above imply, due 

 to productivity growth, much higher levels of services. For example, should, as seems 

 reasonable, the health sector enjoy the same growth in labour productivity as the rest of 

 the economy then these projections embody an increase in health services per person, 

 including health services received by old people, of about 85 per cent compared to 

 today. If health expenditures increased to Hurd-like levels then the level of services per 

 person would be three or four times greater. It would be a problem of abundance! 

 

 Conclusion 

 This conference is attempting to contribute to the development of policies to 

 generate higher living standards in the future for Australian residents. Our research 

  11

 calculates under various assumptions the future level of living standards. It shows that 

 there will be a substantial increase in living standards in the future, almost doubling in 

 the next 50 years. Australian residents will be much better off in the future than we are 

 today. Furthermore, future living standards are more or less independent of rates of 

 fertility and rates of immigration. Lower fertility and higher immigration have slight 

 positive effects on living standards but the effects are so small that we feel the best 

 way to describe the relation is independence.  

 These results will no doubt surprise many people. It is true that demographic 

 ratios will change. The demographic projections on which our conclusions about living 

 standards are based have the ratio of old people to working age people increasing by 

 large amounts, by 150 per cent in one case. However there are economic mechanisms 

 that offset the increase in old dependency. These are the consumption dividends arising 

 from reduced investment requirements and reduced youth dependency. These 

 consumption dividends will allow Australia in the future to operate with a higher 

 aggregate consumption to GDP ratio. Through this living standards can be protected. 

 Because of these consumption dividends, the growth in the future of living 

 standards is comparable to the growth witnessed in the past. From 1971 to 1999 living 

 standards increased by 68 per cent. This is a slightly higher rate of growth than that 

 which we can expect in the future, because of the turnaround in demographic trends.  

 In considering the policy agenda for the future, an important lesson to be 

 learned from the past is that decisions by Australian residents in the past have led to a 

 healthy growth in living standards. From this one can conclude that no radical changes 

 in policy in the future are required to ensure that living standards continue to grow. If 

 we carry on as we have been doing, then living standards will continue to grow. Our 

 finding that decreases in fertility or changes in rates of immigration will have an 

 essentially zero impact on living standards reinforces this conclusion. There is no 

 intertemporal crisis to address.  

 Some commentators have suggested that family friendly policies be extended 

 using the argument that these policies will raise the rate of fertility and thus improve 

 future living standards. Our research shows that this argument is not relevant for the 

 reason that increasing fertility will not improve future living standards.  

 There may be good reasons for the extension of family friendly policies. 

 Raising the fertility rate to improve future living standards is not one of them. From 

 this it follows that the success of family friendly policies should not be judged by 

  12

 whether they raise the fertility rate. It should be judged by their record in vindicating 

 these other reasons put forward for them, whatever they may be. 

 For immigration, our calculations of living standards ignore an important 

 factor. Many immigrants gain considerably by coming to Australia. Some gain from a 

 large rise in living standards as they move from the lower level of their pre-immigrant 

 experience to the higher levels enjoyed in Australia. In addition, for some immigrants 

 there are substantial benefits from moving to a country with a stable democracy and a 

 rule of law. To add in these gains would boost considerably the benefits from higher 

 immigration relative to the levels that we calculate.  

 

 

 

 

 

 The calculations in this article are reported in detail in R.S.Guest and I.M.McDonald, 

 “Ageing, Optimal national saving and future living standards in Australia”, Economic 

 Record, June 2001, pp. 117-34. and R.S.Guest and I.M.McDonald, “Would a decrease 

 in fertility be a threat to living standards in Australia”, Australian Economic Review, 

 March, 2002. For other of our papers on demographic change and living standards, go 

 to http://melbecon.unimelb.edu.au/staffprofile/imcdonald/home.html  

 and look under “Consumption Balance”.  

 

 

 

 

 

  13

 

  Chart 1 Projected growth in living standards 

 from 1999 to 2050 (per cent increase)

 107

 84

 89

 78

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 120

 No ageing Base Low fertility Zero

 immigration

 no.of 65+ per  100  20-64 20 40 46 51

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Chart 2 Consumption/GDP ratios, Australia,  1999 to 2050

 70

 71

 72

 73

 74

 75

 76

 77

 78

 79

 80

 1999 2009 2019 2029 2039 2049

 pe r  c

 e nt Zero immigration

 Low fertility

 Base

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  14

 References 

 

 

 Caves, R.E. (1984) “Scale, openness and productivity in manufacturing industries” in  Caves, R.E., and Krause, L.B. The Australian Economy: A View from the North,  George Allen and Unwin, Sydney, Boston and London.   

 Guest, R.S. and McDonald, I.M., (2000), "Population Ageing and Projections of  Government Social Outlays in Australia", Australian Economic Review, 33, 1, pp.49-64. 

 

 Guest, R.S. and McDonald, I.M., (2001) “Ageing, Optimal National Saving and Future  Living Standards in Australia”, Economic Record, 77, 237, 117-134.   

 Guest, R.S. and McDonald, I.M., (2002)  “Would a decrease in fertility be a threat to  living standards in Australia”, Australian Economic Review, March.   

 Hurd, M.D. (1997) “Effects of Demographic Trends in the US” in Hurd, M.D. and  Yashiro, N. The Economic Effects of Aging in the United States and Japan, University  of Chicago Press, NBER, Chicago   

 McDonald, P. (2000) “The Shape of an Australian Population Policy”, Australian  Economic Review, 33, 3, 272-80.   

 McDonald, P., and Kippen, R., (1999 a) “Ageing: The social and demographic  dimensions” in Productivity Commission and Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic  and Social Research, Policy Implications of the Ageing of Australia’s Population,  Conference Proceedings, AusInfo, Canberra, 1999, pp47-70.   

 McDonald, P., and Kippen, R. (1999 b) “Population Futures for Australia: The Policy  Alternatives”, Research Paper 5, Canberra: Department of the Parliamentary Library,  available at http://www.aph.gov.au/library/pubs/rp/1999-2000/2000rp05.htm.    

 Nevile, J., (1990) The Effect of Immigration on Australian Living Standards, AGPS,  Canberra.   

 Otto, G., and Voss, G.M., (1994) “Public capital and private sector productivity”,  Economic Record, 70, 209, 121-132.   

 Simon, J.L., (1981) “The Ultimate Resource”, Princeton University Press, Princeton.   

 Simon, J.L., (1989) The Economic consequences of Immigration, Blackwell, Oxford.   

 Withers, G. (1999) “A Younger Australia?”, Discussion Paper 63, Graduate Program  in Public Policy, Australian National University.   

 Withers, G. (2000) “Population Issues and Options: Investing in People”, Australian  Economic Review, 33, 3, 265-71. 

