---
title: "Treasury Gardens, Treasury Place, Melbourne: transcript of doorstop interview: the Prime Minister's proposal to pay Afghan asylum seekers to return to Afghanistan; Wayne Swan."
date: "2002-01-31"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233893
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AMT56%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - TREASURY GARDENS, TREASURY PLACE, MELBOURNE, 31ST JANUARY 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects:  The Prime Minister’s proposal to pay Afghan asylum seekers to return to Afghanistan; Wayne Swan

 CREAN: I welcome the announcement of the Prime Minister to offer cash payments to asylum seekers returning home to Afghanistan.  But there is more information that we need.  We need to know the full costs. Yesterday we called for the full disclosure of the costs associated with the Pacific Solution.  The Pacific Solution isn’t working, it’s very costly.  We need to know what we are up for.  The second thing is we need to understand is: does the interim administration in Afghanistan agree with the proposal that the Government has put forward and were there any other issues that they raised with the Government?  What this highlights is the need to reach agreement with the source country to stop the future flow of asylum seekers where that’s possible.  We want to know has such an agreement been reached.  The other issue that is not clear in the Prime Minister’s statement is what circumstances apply to the asylum seekers from Iran and Iraq who are also in the detention centres, some of whom have been found not to be genuine refugees.

 These are all issues that require further clarification by the Prime Minister and he should give a full report to the Australian people.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: Well again, I think that the circumstances, each individual circumstance has to be assessed.  Here we have a framework for people to go back, that’s welcomed.  What we need is a lasting solution for the future.

 JOURNALIST: Why would the Afghan refugees want to go back?

 CREAN: Well because circumstances have changed in Afghanistan.  The Taliban regime is no longer in control.  The refugees were fleeing that regime.  A new government is in place. It’s indicated its

 2

 preparedness to change the way in which the country was governed. Fundamentally, the circumstances surrounding the asylum seekers has changed and that has to be taken into account by the authorities when assessing the claims of the asylum seekers.

 JOURNALIST: Some of the media would make it a very …?

 CREAN: Well asylum seekers has never been justified on the basis of ability.  The whole basis of refugee status and seeking asylum is that people are in fear of their lives.  And that’s the circumstance that pertained when the Taliban was in control.  Those circumstances have changed and the changed circumstances have to be taken into account in case of all of the applications.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible) destroyed by the current war against the Taliban …?

 CREAN: Well those are factors that clearly go to the question, not so much of the status of the individual, but the aid package necessary to repair the damage that you talk about.  I don’t think that these solutions can ever be approached in a one dimensional way.  Clearly the international community has to face up to appropriate aid and Australia should be prepared to start off that solution.  But these are all issues that have to be worked through and it would be in interesting to know what requests the Afghanistan Government has made of Australia in relation to aid.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, is it true that …we did the same thing with Kosovo Albanian refugees?

 CREAN: Correct and in those circumstances Labor supported that approach too.  It’s on that basis that we welcome the thrust of this initiative. But we want to know what the cost is and in particular we want to measure that cost against the cost of the Pacific Solution.  The Government won’t come clean on either figure and they must.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: Well, I am not going to put a figure on it because I just don’t have the technical expertise to do it.  But I think that we need to know what the cost is and how that’s justified.  But significantly the Government does know what the cost of the Pacific Solution is. It’s just not telling anyone. And the reason for that, of course, is it has blown out.  There has been leaked Cabinet documents that suggest that the cost of the Pacific Solution to date is $285 million and rising.  This is a huge blow-out on what the Government told us before.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 3

 CREAN: Yes and I think that the aid package is something that has to be part of a lasting solution to the problems in Afghanistan but whilst Australia needs to be a participant in that it’s also an international responsibility.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: It is not a question on which comes first.  They have to be done in a complementary way.  I think that have to go together and clearly it would be silly to be adding further problems to Afghanistan trying to recover in the current circumstances.  It needs a comprehensive resolution and I hope that the Government is prepared to be part of it.  But this is something again that the Prime Minister hasn’t even commented on, it is something he should comment on and importantly it would be interesting to know what Mr Hamid Karzai has said and called for.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: Well, I responded to that before.  I think that if in fact it is going to add to their problems that would clearly be a fact that in a timing sense related to the return of the asylum seekers.  That is something that we don’t have information on at the moment.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: Well I think that these as always, as with the Kosovars, they have to be assessed in the context of the circumstances.  We have rules against which asylum seekers are assessed.  If the circumstances have changed that don’t warrant their basis for asylum seeking, then under those circumstances they should go back.  That was the position adopted in relation to the Kosovars and that is the position that should apply here.  But again it’s something that we need further details from the Government on.  It is not good enough to simply say there is preparedness to provide a resettlement allowance even when we don’t know the amount.  But it is not good enough to just talk about the allowance, what we need to know is the full extent of the resettlement program.

 JOURNALIST: What would be the cost of a resettlement program?

 CREAN: I don’t know, I have no idea.  That’s something that the Government should come clean on.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: Well it would have to be significantly less than what it’s costing to house them under the Pacific Solution but I don’t know.  In the case

 4

 of the Kosovars the figure, I think from memory, was around $3,000 - $3,500. But you would need to get that information from the Government.

 JOURNALIST: …Afghan refugees …?

 CREAN: Well no, I don’t know that.  But those being detained on Nauru are being processed on Nauru. Their status will be determined presumably against the same criteria as is determining the status in Australia.

 JOURNALIST: …these protests by …UNHCR…?

 CREAN: Well my understanding is that in Nauru they are being processed in according to the same rules and under the auspice of UNHCR.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: I am not going to be drawn by that hypothetical.  I think that what we have here now is the beginning of a lasting…  What I want to know is has the Prime Minister reached an agreement with the Afghanistan Government to deal with the problem at the source not just provide a commitment to a resettlement amount?.  We need a lasting solution not just one that deals with the current problems that we have.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)…

 CREAN: Well, I welcome the contribution from Wayne in this debate.  I have called for the modernisation of the Party.  I have called for the fact that we need to reach out and include more people in the decision-making processes of the Party.  His involve some interesting suggestions. They can be taken into account by the review committee that has been established like many other proposals that have been put forward.

 Ends.

