---
title: "Phillip Street, Sydney: transcript of doorstop: parliamentary reform; refugees; Ansett; Indonesia."
date: "2002-02-07"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234026
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IGV56%22
---

 1

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PHILLIP STREET, SYDNEY, 7th FEBRUARY 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects:    Parliamentary reform; refugees; Ansett; Indonesia

 CREAN: Today I’ve written to the Prime Minister proposing some important changes that will improve the behaviour in Parliament. I think that the people are sick to death of the confrontational nature of Parliament and these proposals seek to modernise the way in which Parliament operates so we can make it more relevant to the Australian people.

 I think the behaviour issue in Parliament is the fault of both sides of the Parliament. This is not about apportioning blame and I’ve got to admit I’m one of those that has contributed to it but I think it is time that we moved on, made the Parliament more relevant and made it better controlled. The nature of the initiatives that I am proposing today, firstly, go to the question of trying to ensure that we get a more independent Speaker and what I’m proposing in this regard is that the Prime Minister agree that the Leader of the Government and the Leader of the Opposition reach agreement upon who the Speaker should be and that Speaker should hold the position for the next two terms.

 At the same time as agreement is reached on that position, agreement also be reached on the Deputy Speaker’s position that would come from the other party. Again, the position to last for two terms. As a demonstration of our good faith, I ‘m indicating today that the Labor Party would, when we meet next week, be prepared to support Speaker Andrew, holding that position for the next two terms. And what we would want is agreement with the Prime Minister about the appropriate Deputy Speaker for the next two terms coming from the Opposition Party.

 It’s not just enough though to try and make the Speaker more independent. The Speaker also has to be equipped with the rules and Standing Orders that enable him to enforce the discipline and require Ministers to answer questions fully. What we’re proposing is that Standing Orders be changed such that questions be limited to one minute in their duration, answers to those

 2

 questions to four minutes. Similar to the Senate procedures. There’d be the capacity for supplementary questions, but there also be a requirement for the Speaker to insist upon the question being fully answered.

 People are sick to death of the points scoring that goes on in Question Time without real answers being given to the question. We need to clean that up. We also need to have a procedure where by Ministers don’t abuse question time by using it to announce policy statements. There are procedures in the House for statements by the Ministers on policy and we want those procedures to be utilised for that purpose. That of course gives the opportunity for the Opposition to respond to the particular policy area.

 We’re also saying that Questions on Notice, which are being ignored by Ministers presently, be required to be answered in a shorter time frame. Thirty days instead of sixty and for the Speaker to make a declaration that a Minister, if they refuse to answer the questions, is in breach of the Standing Orders.

 We also want to see the opportunity in the Parliament for the taking of note of answers to Minister’s questions. This too is a procedure, a useful flexibility in terms of getting more and greater information in the Parliament. We wouldn’t see this taking up additional time in the Parliament. It would be, when used, take the place of the Matter of Public Importance.

 Now, this is a comprehensive suite of initiatives. We’ve been working on this over the Christmas break. I genuinely believe we have to improve the standing of the Parliament. If we’re to build confidence back in the institution of Parliament, we’ve got to show the leadership that demonstrates that we’re serious. I’m prepared to turn over the new leaf. I hope the Government responds and I look forward to a positive response from the Prime Minister.

 JOURNALIST: How soon do you think these reforms could be put into place?

 CREAN: The reform in terms of the Speaker could be put in place on Tuesday, when we meet to determine the Speaker. As for the other reforms they could be put in place very quickly if there was agreement from the other side, because that would simply require a change to the Standing Orders. What I am trying to get is agreement to these procedures because I think if we get agreement to the procedures and a common ownership of them, then there is much more likelihood of them being followed.

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Crean when’s an occasion when you’ve been out of order do you think in Parliament? What comes to mind?

 CREAN: Well there’s many come to mind. But I think that what people need to understand is that when the Government’s not fully answering a question and this is a frustration that we’ve had over the last five years, you

 3

 have to resort to other forms in the Parliament to try and make your point. If the Government of the day is treating the Parliament with contempt, it invites the response that’s out of order, to prove the point. What I think we’ve go to get back to is the realisation that the Parliament is an important forum for debate, information and discussion. And the Australian people are entitled to that institution performing to the best of its ability, not the worst of its ability. So I think that if we can get the changes as well as build true independence into the role of the Speaker, I think we’ll significantly improve the standing of the Parliament and I think it is everyone’s interest, the public’s interest that we do so.

 JOURNALIST: So are we going to see a change in time from you and your front bench so the classic images of yourself and other people standing at the dispatch box yelling, belting away. Those sort, is that what can get changed just as well as things being answered. We going to stop screaming?

 CREAN: Yes, but we don’t do it all the time. I mean this is an important point to understand. The image of Parliament that you see most often is simply what’s reflected in Question Time. And that’s where the unseemly brawls can often happen. They happen as a result of the frustration at the fact that either pressure is being put on the Speaker from the Government, or that questions are not being answered. If we can get the procedures right, you will see the end to that. And I hope that we can see the end to it. I think it’s important that we do see the end to it.

 JOURNALIST: Just on a different topic about Ansett, do you think the Federal Government what should they be doing to help progress the sale of Ansett?

 CREAN: Well, I think the Government, if its role in terms of Sydney airport is holding up the agreement, that the Administrators need then the Government should seek to get itself involved to ensure that that necessary agreement is reached. I don’t know the detail of the hold up, I’ve only read what I’ve seen in the papers. But the sticking point seems to be the arrangements at Sydney airport. The Commonwealth Government still has a responsibility in that regard. It should be looking in to seeing whether it can free up that circumstance, get an agreement.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, Carmen Lawrence is planning to speak outside a refugee rally at Parliament House next week. Given your comments about people limiting what they talk about to matters of their own portfolio. Will you be endeavouring to stop her in any way? 

 CREAN: No, not at all. I mean I’ve never tried to stop people speaking out in public forums or anywhere else to promote the position that we as a Party are putting forward. We will have the opportunity at the Caucus meeting on Monday to discuss our position, and I’m looking forward to that as an important contribution to developing our policy response. What I have

 4

 called for in the past is that if people are going to speak in areas of portfolio that overlap with other colleagues that they should consult with that colleague.

 JOURNALIST: So if it turns out that, that Member has a different view to that of the Party would you be looking to muzzle them?

 CREAN: Well again I think that, let’s wait and see what comes out of Monday. I’m confident that we can get agreement about the direction forward that we pursue. And that does involve, and I‘ve already signalled important changes in the way in which we should approach the issue of asylum seekers. Therefore, if we can advance that debate then Carmen will have the opportunity to present that at the rally.

 JOURNALIST: Is it a bit difficult for the Labor Party because you don’t want to alienate the traditional blue collar vote who might feel frightened about their jobs and have a fear about refugees and then you’ve small ‘l’ Liberals who are deserting the Party because of the stance Labor Party took on Tampa for example and think the support of mandatory detention that you’ve taken is too harsh?

 CREAN: I don’t see it as one or the other. I think that we can have a policy that’s tough on border protection but compassionate at the same time. I think that when people actually understand the issues, and this has been the interesting development in this debate, there’s a huge complexity, there’s no easy solutions to this. Huge complexity with the issues, but I think that once people have looked through it they understand that there has to be the retention of mandatory detention. There can be issues about how long people are held in detention. There can be issues about what happens when certain processes are achieved, but all that highlights is that there’s no one formula that fits every circumstance. We’ve therefore got to have a policy response that takes account of those differences, but I’m firmly convinced we can develop an outcome that’s tough on the borders but compassionate. And that’s the direction that the Party has set itself to try and develop a policy response to. That’s what Monday will be about.

 JOURNALIST: Why do you support mandatory detention where it isn’t in any other country?

 CREAN: Well it is in practically every other country that people arrive in, because if people arrive without papers, it’s essential that they’re, they be cleared. That an assessment be made as to their health. As to their background, whether there’s any criminal background, as to any other activities that may be against the national interest. It’s a national interest protection, and if we’re serious about border protection I think mandatory detention still has to play an important role, for people who arrive here illegally.

 5

 JOURNALIST: And so will you be getting as tough on the illegals like the over stays, the British and the Americans who overstay on their Visa’s? Nobody seems to talk about those.

 CREAN: Well I think there is a lot of discussion about it, but just what I said before there are different circumstances attaching to these. Some are in detention now and have been for some considerable time because they have been assessed as not genuine refugees but they can’t be sent back to their own countries or there have not established third countries to which they can be sent. But we’re not going to address the ability to send them back properly until we reach the relevant international protocols. And that’s why I think it’s absolutely vital that the Prime Minister seek to get an agreement with President Megawati, not just in relation to Indonesia, but in relation to the region. The opportunity exists at the Bali Summit to address that and unless you’ve got Prime Ministerial imprimatur, its not going to be as effective in driving Foreign Minister outcomes. But, I also believe there’s a golden opportunity at the CHOGM meeting, next month. Because we have the ability to get regional agreement with those Commonwealth countries, many of whom still need to be signatories to a protocol in relation to refugees, which if they do become signatories again provides a better framework for addressing the flow of refugees, from anywhere between the Mediterranean down to here. This is not a solution that Australia can address on its own. It does require a comprehensive approach and I just hope the Prime Minister is prepared to look at these opportunities to get that comprehensive approach.

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of his performance in Jakarta, in Indonesia of what we’ve seen?

 CREAN: Well, I think that the meetings he didn’t have highlights the extent of the problem that we have with that country. I welcome the fact that he’s visiting there and that’s his fifth visit and I congratulate him for that. But I do believe that he has to use the opportunity with Mrs Megawati to try and get some understanding about the way in which, as a region, we treat this issue of asylum seekers. It’s not good enough for him to say over there, they’ve got other issues of greater importance. It may well be that they have, but that doesn’t preclude us addressing this issue, because this issue is important to this country. And if it’s a genuine relationship there should be the capacity to deal with the issues that effect countries respectively where a common solution is needed.

 JOURNALIST: Both leaders seem to agree that the relationship between our two countries has to be based on reality I think was the word that was being used. How unreal do you think the relationship has become because of what the Government did with Tampa and have said about Indonesia’s role in people smuggling? 

 CREAN: I think it became strained. I wouldn’t call it unreal. I’d call it strained. All relationships go through strains from time to time. The task is

 6

 to move forward and I think that if there is that meeting again, the formal meeting between the two heads of the country, and listening to them at the reception last night there seemed to be genuine good will from both sides lets tap the good will. Lets get a lasting solution. That’s what we want. Ok? Thanks very much.

 ENDS.

