---
title: "Minister confers Australian citizenship in Hobart today."
date: "2002-05-21"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211238402
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NBM66%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H49/2002 - 21 May 2002

  

 Minister Confers Australian Citizenship in Hobart Today

 A Sudanese family who came to Australia as refugees and a Nigerian family who came under Australia's skilled migration program will become Australian citizens in a ceremony conducted by the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, in Hobart today.

 "I am thrilled these newest citizens of Australia have shown their commitment to their adopted country in this important way," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "I urge other eligible Tasmanians who were born overseas and have not yet become Australian citizens to follow their lead."

 Faroug Ateem, his wife Aziza and their four children fled Sudan and came to Australia in 2000 as refugees under the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs' Humanitarian program.

 Dr Ateem is a lawyer and the family live in West Hobart. They have taken the opportunity to become Australian citizens as soon as they met the two-year permanent residence requirement.

 Gabriel Ojeah, his wife Diana and their three children migrated to Australia from Nigeria under the skilled migration program after Mr Ojeah was sponsored by an employer through the Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme.

 They live in Moonah and Mr Ojeah works as an electrical engineer.

 Mr Hardgrave said there was still more than 900,000 overseas-born people living in Australia who were eligible to apply for citizenship but had not done so.

 More than 13,500 of these were living in Tasmania, which accounted for about 1.4 per cent of all eligible Australians.

 Mr Hardgrave encouraged all eligible non-citizens to consider becoming an Australian citizen, which was an important link towards developing community harmony.

 "Australian Citizenship is a cornerstone of our culturally diverse society. Choosing to become an Australian Citizen is an important expression of loyalty and commitment to Australia and its people," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "Since 1949, more than 3.1 million people have become Australian citizens, providing them with privileges as well as a number of important responsibilities."

 "Citizenship is the single most unifying force in our society and I welcome the newest additions to the Australian family who I am sure will contribute greatly to the shared future of all Australians," Mr Hardgrave said.

 While in Tasmania, Mr Hardgrave will also meet with community groups around the State.

 Details on applying for Australian citizenship can be obtained by telephoning the Citizenship Information Line on 131 880 or by calling at the DIMIA office in Hobart on Level 13, 188 Collins Street, Hobart.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

 Minister's Media Release Index   All Ministerial Media Releases

