---
title: "What do we want to be? 2002 Walter Murdoch Lecture, Murdoch University, Perth, 18 September 2002"
date: "2002-09-18"
creators:
  - "Fraser, Malcolm"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "National identity"
  - "Foreign policy alignment"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Cultural values"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "Leadership"
  - "Defence alliances"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Aboriginal reconciliation"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211247808
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DVF76%22
---

  2002 WALTER MURDOCH LECTURE

 Murdoch 
University, Perth

 18 
September 2002

  

  WHAT DO WE WANT TO BE?

  

  I am honoured to be asked to give this lecture commemorating the memory 
of Sir Walter Murdoch.  Sir Walter had a long and distinguished 
career in teaching and  in journalism and his influence reached 
a wide audience.  He wrote eloquently and often with a healthy 
scepticism.  Thank you for asking me to give this 2002 Walter Murdoch 
Lecture.

  

 There is little or no public debate about what Australia 
will or could become.  What sort of nation do we want to be?  
What sort of influence do we want in the world?  Do we have any 
idea what our situation might be in fifty years time?  These are 
questions that ought to be on the political agenda but they are not.  
The political agenda is crowded with issues which seem important for 
a moment but do not necessarily have any lasting impact.

  

 If we are to debate these issues, I believe we also 
need to ask ourselves what we have achieved, over a hundred years since 
Federation.  In the early days the task was to establish the fabric 
and the institutions of a nation.  By and large our Founding Fathers, 
with the knowledge they had at the time, did a good job in establishing 
Australia.  Our institutions gained in strength and effectiveness.  

  

 In the early days, some of the most vigorous debates 
revolved around protection and free trade.  For a while, these 
issues were the main dividing line in Australian politics.  The 
new federation led the way on some social issues, especially in relation 
to women, who gained the vote in 1902.  The same democratic right 
was only accorded to women in Britain in 1918 and in the United States 
in 1920.

 

 Our early labour laws sought to establish justice 
for Australia’s workers. The Arbitration Commission, which served 
Australia well over a long period was established in 1904.  One 
of the earliest judgments was by Justice Higgins in 1908 which established 
the concept of the basic or foundational wage, known as the Harvester 
judgment.  This was a component of the federal award for 60 years.

  

 One of the early policies which united the new Federation 
was the establishment of a White Australia policy, which was strongly 
supported by all political parties for far too long.  

  

 It wasn’t long before the new Federation was put 
to a severe test.  The First World War started in 1914 and Australia, 
as a loyal member of Empire, was expected to play its part.  Its 
government made a commitment to provide five divisions on the Western 
Front and to keep them fully manned.  At the time Australia relied 
on volunteers.  The casualties were so heavy that Prime Minister 
Billy Hughes, in government, believed that Australia could not meet 
its commitment to Britain by volunteerism alone.  He sought to 
establish conscription but was committed not to do so without a referendum.

  

 In perhaps the worst act of any Prime Minister in 
Australia’s short history, Prime Minister Billy Hughes turned that 
first referendum on 28 October 1916 into an anti-Catholic and anti-Irish 
referendum.  The referendum failed.  A second referendum held 
on 20 December 1917 also failed.  The arguments were not so much 
about the merits or demerits of conscription but about the merits and 
demerits of the Irish and Irish Catholics.  This left deep scars 
and divisions in Australia which damaged our early history and cohesiveness.  
These scars did not start to heal until the 1950s.  

  

 My father who in most things was a very reasonable 
person, had been in France for the period of the First World War, in 
the British army, not the Australian, simply because he was in Britain 
when the war broke out.  As a result of those conscription debates, 
he seemed to believe everything that Prime Minister Billy Hughes had 
said and on the subject of Irish Catholicism, a reasoned conversation 
was well beyond the horizon.  Nearly all Australians fighting in 
France would have had similar views.  These arguments affected 
the conduct of a number of professions in Australia and recruitment 
for the public service, as well as influencing social issues.

  

  We should have learnt from these experiences that, if politicians 
start to use religion or race for political purposes, they will damage 
the nation and damage our futures.  I had thought we had learnt 
these lessons effectively but today I am not so sure.

  

 In the World Depression of the 1930s, Australia suffered 
as much as any nation and up to 30% of people would have been unemployed 
and thousands would have had their first job when they joined the army 
in 1939.  It was a period of sacrifice and of poverty.  But 
we learnt from that.  Despite these problems, our early governments 
established the young nation as an effective and strong entity.

  

  The Second World War began just 21 years after the end of the First.  
The War to end all wars had resulted in a peace  treaty which 
probably destroyed any chance of a democratic Germany surviving once 
the World Depression started to bite in the late twenties and early 
thirties.  World leaders in this time did not do well.  They 
took steps during the Depression which deepened the Depression and increased 
the numbers unemployed.  It was a time of hardship and difficulty 
for people and for nations.

  

 During World War II, when we needed assistance it 
was clear that Britain was fighting for her own survival.  

  

 We appealed therefore to the United States.  
When General McArthur came to Australia, he made it plain that America’s 
only interest in Australia was as a launching pad for an offensive that 
would drive Japan off her conquered lands.

  

 Even before the Second World War had ended, world 
leaders knew that, if the human race was to survive, we had to do better.  
The old League of Nations had failed because America hadn’t joined 
it and also because it had proved totally ineffective in stopping Mussolini’s 
aggression in North Africa.  Plans were set in train, plans with 
which Australia cooperated fully, to establish the United Nations, which 
was meant to safeguard peace and establish a better and a more equitable 
world.

  

 In the complex business of running a country and managing 
the world economy, there had to be great improvement.  The International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank were established;  the General 
Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, was meant to promote open trade, although 
early efforts to establish a World Trade Organisation, which would have 
been a stronger and more effective instrument, were scuttled by the 
United States.

  

 The United States, in the single, most generous act 
of any nation in recorded history, provided resources for the Marshall 
Plan, designed to rebuild Europe and Japan after the War.  Without 
it, war-destroyed nations would have struggled much longer to re-establish 
a decent life for their people.

  

 We should also note that there is another side to 
generosity.  During the war, as the price of achieving assistance 
and help from the United States in the provision of war supplies, Britain 
had to bankrupt herself absolutely, as she was by 1941.  Gold had 
been transferred to Fort Knox, assets had been sold and it seemed the 
United States, whose industries were doing remarkably well was concerned 
to make sure that Britain could not be a world financial power after 
the war.

  

 In Australia our political leaders also recognised 
that they had to do better than they had in the period between the wars.  
We had so nearly been invaded.  If it wasn’t for Japan’s strategic 
mistake in attacking Pearl Harbour in 1941, we would have been invaded 
and occupied.  Despite a close rapport between Roosevelt and Churchill, 
the United States had left Britain fighting alone - not quite alone 
because Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa were also on 
side - for two years and five months against the most terrible enemy 
modern civilisation had experienced.

  

 In 1946 in Australia a nation-building programme was 
established.  Without our migration programme, Australia’s population 
today would only be 13 million people. Arthur Caldwell, Labor Minister 
for Immigration, was able to persuade the Union Movement to accept a 
major migration programme.  Considering this was no more than seven 
years after the end of the Depression and that 600,000 servicemen and 
women were waiting to be demobilised and they would all want jobs, it 
was a considerable feat.  If the Liberal Party had been in power, 
there is no way it could have persuaded the Union Movement to support 
such a policy.  Harold Holt, responsible for these matters for 
the Opposition, gave strong support to the programme, as did the Australian 
community.

  

  Both major political parties, however, made one commitment that was 
not capable of being kept.  They hoped that the majority of migrants 
would come from Britain.  There had been so much turmoil across 
Europe, so many tens of thousands of people wanting to  flee the 
divisions and horror of what had happened over the preceding years that 
the number from Europe far exceeded those from the United Kingdom.  
These movements of people were enormously increased by the Soviet occupation 
of Eastern Europe, by the subjection of Czechoslovakia and of Hungary.

  

 At the time the political parties also made a commitment 
to maintain the White Australia policy in which too many still believed.  

  

 The only defence of political leaders at the time 
is that if Australia had tried to end the White Australia Policy, Australians 
would then have turned their backs on migration as a major instrument 
of national progress.  Australia’s leaders of the day achieved 
as much as could be achieved.

  

 The migration programme was, for Australia, by far 
the most significant element which has brought us to today’s Australia.  
It made a multicultural Australia inevitable.  It was not possible 
and it was certainly not desirable, to impose on Australia’s new migrants 
the requirement that they become members or quasi members of the old 
Anglo-Saxon, Celtic community which had dominated Australia in its first 
fifty years.  They brought their own culture, their own history, 
their own memories, their own diversity which substantively enriched 
Australia’s life.  Diversity became a strength.  Today, 
even those who in earlier times opposed the establishment of the Special 
Broadcasting Service or who opposed the concept of multiculturalism, 
accept the reality of today’s Australia.

  

 Another part of that reality was that, in this brave, 
new, post-war world, the White Australia Policy should not and could 
not survive. It was whittled away over the years and effectively ended 
in 1966 by Hubert Opperman, as Minister for Immigration, with some legal 
remnants finally abolished in the Whitlam years.  It was also inevitable, 
though we were again too late, that we start to take proper account 
of Australia’s Aboriginal population, that we recognise that Australia’s 
early history had been harsh, bloody and cruel and that we needed to 
make amends.  

  

 Through this period, the new nation, formed of six 
states, small in numbers and resources, duly developed into a reasonable 
middle power.  In our early years, despite the challenges, it was 
a question of establishing the fabric and institutions of a nation.  
In the second fifty years, far more substantive decisions were taken, 
which led to government-inspired programmes which have truly transformed 
Australia.  So now we are knocking at the door of 20 million people.

  

  Except during pe riods of war, we have been preoccupied with 
what we are doing in Australia.  It should be remembered that for 
most of our first fifty years we relied on Britain to conduct our foreign 
policy and our defence.  It was Menzies, writing to Bruce in 1939, 
who indicated that Britain did not understand the Pacific and Asia and 
that we needed to be advised by our own people.  The day he became 
Prime Minister in April of 1939, it was reported that we would establish 
missions in Washington, Tokyo and Beijing.  This was the embryonic 
establishment of Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs.

  

 In our second fifty years, reliance on Britain was 
transferred to reliance on the United States.  I will argue that 
we should now be more independent and more assertive in pursuit of our 
own national interest.

  

 There had been complaints about the terms of Menzies’ 
commitment of Australia to war in 1939.   He made it seem 
that the British decision to go to war with Germany pre-empted any Australian 
decision.  If one looks at the speech of Foreign Minister Henry 
Gullett, one will see that he made it plain that there could be circumstances 
in which Britain might go to war when we might not be involved.

  

 We should note that ANZUS relates to the Pacific.  
Even then, there is no automatic obligation.  ANZUS does not relate 
to Europe, to the Middle East or to continental United States and it 
does not related to pre-emptive wars.

  

  In our first fifty years we were a narrow, Anglo-Saxon community, 
derived almost exclusively from Britain or Ireland.  At the end 
of our first one hundred years, we are a more substantive and more significant 
multicultural nation which has, for the most  part, been an example 
to the world, about the way in which people from different lands and 
from different cultures can live and spend their lives in harmony in 
one place.  There is a determination amongst Australia’s new 
citizens and amongst their ethnic leaders that ancient quarrels should 
not be imported into this country, even if they continue in their former 
countries, as they have in the Balkans.  There are people in Australia 
from every racial or ethnic group of the Balkans, but they have not 
imported those quarrels to this country.  That is an example of 
nation building and of Australia’s influence on its citizens which 
is to be much commended.  Australia’s ethnic communities also 
emphasize the primacy of loyalty to Australia.

  

 That says a great deal about the requirement for good 
citizenship.  In today’s world there has been an expansion of 
democracy.  A basic requirement for a democratic society is that 
it governs well, according to law, that it manages its economy effectively, 
that has a system of law accessible and open to all.  But this 
is not a sufficient requirement for good citizenship, for good leadership, 
for a good country.  Much more is involved.

  

 A country, a government, needs to show concern and 
compassion for those who are less fortunate.  It needs to develop 
both institutions and programmes that can help people in what is often 
a harsh and competitive world.  Concern and compassion are an essential 
part of good government and the real test of concern and compassion 
is not whether or not a country or a government has programmes designed 
to help the needy, it is whether it is also prepared to make sure that 
those programmes are available without discrimination.  Today’s 
Australia does not meet that test.  There should be no discrimination 
between people or groups within Australia.  The rule of law, habeas 
corpus, should apply to all people at all times. 

 A true democracy also must have the courage to deal 
with past errors and past mistakes, especially when those mistakes have 
involved harsh and inequitable treatment of particular groups in the 
community. 

  

 We need greater debate about what to expect of Australia 
and what we want this country to become.  

  

 Are we indeed a liberal country?  I do not mean 
it in the bare political sense but in the terms of philosophers whose 
writings strongly suggest that the concepts of liberalism and of decency 
are universal in their implications.  It is probably best described 
in the American Declaration of Independence.

  

 If we accept this, a truly liberal society has to 
promote a liberal attitude in all its dealings, not merely in its dealings 
within its own borders.  This means that we should promote the 
establishment of an international system of rules, of laws and of order 
so that the protection of people can become more effective in more of 
the world.  

  

 Against this background, what are the main issues 
that we need to address?  What is our vision for Australia in the 
years ahead?  Do we want to have influence, to advance our values 
internationally?  

  

 To be a more credible and effective nation, we need 
to clear our decks on some domestic issues, resolve the problems and 
put them behind us.  Two important issues in this regard relate 
to Australia’s indigenous population and to our current treatment 
of refugees.

  

 There should be an apology for past wrongs.  
This does not mean that today’s Australians are guilty of those sins.  
An apology does not connote guilt.  An apology makes it clear that 
we regret that something happened, we recognise that it should not have 
happened, that the past had a grievous and tragic impact on a particular 
class or group of people within our society.  It would open a new 
door to the future. 

  

 It is not possible to work as effectively as we would 
want to work to redress the present problems of the Aboriginal population 
without a recognition of past wrong.  We should not seek to live 
in a state of denial concerning our past.

  

  Practical reconciliation is fine as far as it goes but it doesn’t 
touch matters of the spirit and it restricts what can be and should 
be done to ameliorate present problems and to recognise the dignity 
and self-esteem of Aboriginal Australians.

  

  Washing t he past out of our hair as the New Zealanders have, 
as the Canadians have, in significant ways, would make it so much easier 
to make advances in practical terms.  Those advances are sorely 
needed.  Life expectancy of indigenous people in Australia is about 
20 years less than for other Australians.  In the United States, 
Canada and New Zealand, the difference is four or five years.

  

  The second issue in which we should clear the decks within Australia 
is in relation to our current treatment of refugees.  

  

  W hen I am at meetings in other parts of the world, people are 
well aware of our current policies and their implications, especially 
for women, for families, for children.  No government in Europe 
runs the kind of policies that we run.  No government in Europe 
shuts up people without charge, without conviction and leaves them in 
a desert jail, possibly for years.  Are we the only one that is 
right?  Monsieur Le Pen, in his failed election, had said that 
Australia’s policies were ones he would like to apply in France.  
He was resolutely rejected by the French people.

  

 How many people are aware that there is an alternative?  
We are already running two separate policies.  The Refugee Council 
advises me that about 8000 asylum seekers arrive in Australia each year 
and live in the community.  They are not put into detention.  
These people mostly arrive by air, they could have any form of visa 
but generally a student or visitors visa, they would have been immigration 
cleared, and then they apply for refugee status.  Most of them 
would have had the intention to do that before they embarked, before 
they arrived in Australia.  They would have papers but, at the 
same time, they have deceived the authorities.  I make this point 
only to draw a comparison with boat people.  Those who can get 
access to a passport and to travel documents and to a visa are indeed 
the lucky ones.  The figures also show that their application for 
refugee status is far less likely to be granted than for boat people. 

  

 The tests both groups go through in relation to refugee 
status are precisely the same but there are major differences between 
applicants who are out in the community and those who are in our desert 
prisons.  The latter group overwhelmingly arrive by boat, even 
if they have papers, they are not immigration cleared and therefore 
they end up in detention.  

  

 The Refugee Convention, which we ratified as long 
ago as 1954, recognises that asylum seekers often cannot go to their 
government authorities and get a passport and exit permit papers and 
visas and that they often arrive without papers and by unorthodox means.  
Australia, by international treaty, is committed not to discriminate 
but Australia does discriminate.  

  

 The unauthorised arrivals are only eligible for a 
Temporary Protection Visa, they are only eligible for limited welfare 
support, they are not eligible for family reunion, there is no certainty 
as to what will happen to them at the end of three years.  The 
ones who are out in the community are given a Permanent Protection Visa 
with full access to support services, to family reunion, ultimately 
to permanent residence status and travel rights.

  

 There is another discrimination.  Again according 
to international practice, if one member of an immediate family group 
is classified as a refugee, other members of the family are meant to 
be able to join them.  This applies in relation to those who have 
come with papers and are immigration cleared.  Most of such people 
arrive by air.  For those who arrive without papers and who are 
not immigration cleared, most of whom arrive by boat, a different situation 
applies.  If a father, for example, came first and was granted 
refugee status, that decision will not flow through to other members 
of his immediate family.  Members of the immediate family who arrive 
later must separately demonstrate that they are entitled to refugee 
status.  This is another discrimination against those who mostly 
arrive by boat.    

  

  The main argument against such attitudes and policies is not that 
they are in contravention of international agreements, is not that they 
are, to this point, rejected by other Western countries.  It is 
that they defile the best Australian standards and ou r own concepts 
of a fair go.  

  

 We sometimes forget that anyone who is able to stay 
here, classified as a refugee, does so as a result of decisions made 
by Australians in Australian institutions.  There is no threat 
to our borders and there never was.  Five or six thousand people 
offered no threat to Australian sovereignty.  While some of these 
people are not ultimately classified as refugees and will be deported, 
the concept of human decency requires that we treat them decently and 
with respect while decisions are being made.  The Government’s 
alternative for those who come by air and subsequently seek asylum, 
represents the humane and decent approach.  Why not apply it to 
all asylum seekers once health, identity and security checks have been 
made.

  

 The blame for this situation does not only rest with 
the Government, the Labor Party has also deserted its principles and, 
during the last election supported such policies.  There has been 
a total abdication of political leadership from both of the political 
parties.  We should ask ourselves what has caused it and what might 
reverse it.

  

 If we are to address these issues effectively and 
if we are to contribute as I believe most of us would want, to a more 
effective international system, we need to ask ourselves why there has 
been an interruption to the positive contribution we have made through 
most of the post-war years.   

  

 Has Australia changed?  I do not believe that 
we have.  At any time in the last fifty years it would have been 
possible to play politics with immigration and refugee policy.  
It is to the credit of the political parties that until recently this 
was not done.

  

  If you had asked trade unions to vote on the issue, rather than have 
a decision made by the ACTU in 1946, they almost certainly would hav e 
voted No, recalling the unemployment and poverty of the Depression.  

  

 If you had asked Melbourne if it wanted to be the 
biggest Greek city outside Greece, they would have said No, but now 
it has happened, they are proud of it.  

  

 If the Government in the late seventies had asked 
Australians whether they wanted over 200,000 Indo Chinese to settle 
here, beginning with large numbers of refugees as a consequence of the 
Vietnam War, they would have said No.

  

 But in all these instances, government said that these 
are things that ought to happen and these are the reasons they ought 
to happen, and Australians  accepted it.  I expect now, with 
the art of polling so much more scientific and so much more refined, 
that the political parties take polls before decisions are made, giving 
far too much weight to an uneducated view of affairs.  

  

 How often is our instinctive answer wrong, when a 
thoughtful and educated answer would lead to a quite different result?   
Both Government and Opposition appealed to our rawest nerves and because 
there was no disagreement, there was virtually no political debate about 
the issues.  Australians accepted the abdication of leadership.

  

 It is easy enough to arouse nationalist fervour against 
broad international objectives.  Claims that we govern ourselves, 
that we do not wish to be governed from New York or the United Nations 
are claims against the system of international law, are claims against 
our voluntary accession to international rules and agreements, designed 
to make the world safer, more equitable for everyone.  We have 
to make up our minds whether we want to be part of a peaceful and equitable 
international system, whether we want to contribute to that system’s 
development or whether we want to be an island to ourselves, marginalised, 
made ineffective internationally as a consequence of the attitudes of 
recent years.

  

 Resolution of these issues would enable Australia 
to sit more comfortably in the world and to continue the effective role 
that we played in most of the years since the Second World War.  
The world we must strive to achieve is one in which an equitable system 
of laws governs the behaviour of nations in the manner in which an equitable 
system of laws governs our behaviour within a nation.

  

  This was recognised most effectively after the end of the Second World 
War.  Events during that War had been so terrible that the West 
had to redeem itself, it had to start to establish customs and laws 
that would protect and advance human rights worldwid e.  
The first peg of course was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
in 1948.  Then followed the Convention Relating to Status of Refugees 
(acceded 22 January 1954), the International Convention on the Elimination 
of all forms of Racial Discrimination (ratified 1975), then the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ratified 1975) and 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ratified 1980), 
followed by the Convention on the Rights of the Child (ratified 1990).

  

 While Australia in the past played an effective and 
useful role in helping to draft and formulate these instruments, including 
not least the International Criminal Court, we have more recently turned 
our back on the international system in a number of ways.  We have 
failed to ratify or to comply with international conventions and agreements.  
It is worth asking why.

  

 Let me use the question of prison inspections involved 
in the additional protocol to the Convention Against Torture and Other 
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.  This Convention 
was signed by Australia on 10 December 1985 and ratified on 8 August 
1989.  

  

 It might seem a small matter and it may well be that 
we know how to run our prisons and don’t need external inspections 
to demonstrate that they are run in a humane fashion.  But if we 
say we don’t torture people in Australia and therefore we don’t 
need to accede to the additional protocol that will enable a U.N. authority 
to come and inspect our prisons without warning, we weaken the international 
system seriously.  

  

 It is the very willingness of countries such as Australia 
to stand and be judged on human rights issues which enables the United 
Nations and countries like Australia to argue for more effective protection 
of human rights in those parts of the world where human rights are not 
well regarded.  If we reject such mechanisms, we encourage dictatorships 
and tyrannies, wherever they may be.

  

 Despite shortfalls, Australia has had many successes.  
The greatest is the building of a multicultural and humane society within 
our borders but as I have indicated, our domestic records must still 
be improved.  We have had successes internationally and in our 
work with the United Nations and with our aid and assistance programmes 
to developing countries.  For much of our second fifty years, our 
diplomacy through East and South East Asia was effective and positive.  
We have had successes in running an economy effectively.  

  

 What are the main challenges for the future?  
What do we want to be?  How do we wish to advance Australian values?  
Do we have the courage to really exercise our independence?

  

  I believe there are two challenges which are critical to the kind 
of nation which I would like to see Australia become.  

  

  We should make a co mmitment to continue to build Australia, 
to continue the work begun at the end of the Second World War, to expand 
and to grow Australia.  There are many reasons for this.  
We have a large, wealthy country, in ethical terms, difficult to justify 
for so few people.  If we take our own values seriously, if we 
believe we can contribute to a better and a more secure world, especially 
through regions closest and most important to us, we could do so much 
more with forty million people than with twenty.

  

 Our present population policies are really designed 
to maintain a static working population as Australia ages.  That 
might lead to 25 million people by the end of the century.  Such 
an approach to the future in a world full of population and environmental 
pressures, will tend to marginalise Australia and certainly greatly 
diminish our influence in the world’s councils.  A commitment 
to use the riches of Australia wisely and for the greatest benefit to 
mankind would do much to enhance respect for Australia and would assist 
greatly in promoting values we hold dear.

  

  There are some who say we are already over-populated, that our environment 
is fragile, that we are short of water.  There is no time to debate 
these issues at length here.  But they are problems that the allocation 
of resources and careful planning and fo resight can overcome, 
they are not ones that should deter us.  They are arguments that 
should spur us to continue the job of nation building as well as we 
are capable.

  

 An Australia of 7 million people with relatively few 
resources accepted a far greater commitment than the one I am suggesting 
we should accept today.  It would also do much to enable us to 
advance my last objective effectively and vigorously and that is to 
pursue greater independence of mind and action in our international 
affairs.

  

 People forget that, for the best part of our first 
half century we didn’t even run our own defence and foreign policy.  
While we were technically a nation, we didn’t exercise the powers 
of nationhood.  When we accepted the need to do so after the Second 
World War, we transferred our sense of dependency from Britain to the 
United States.

  

 The reasons for doing this during the Cold War were 
clear enough, they are reasons that I strongly supported but since the 
end of the Cold War, with only one super power, with no danger of an 
ideological Communist threat to this country, the pursuit of dependency 
should be replaced by a greater independence, by a greater confidence 
and belief in ourselves.  Such a change does not involve tearing 
up current relationships, it involves dealing with them in a proper 
perspective, with a sense of Australia’s own worth.

  

 The ultimate security for Australia will derive from 
relationships with countries of the region in which we live, rather 
than from relationships with Britain or the United States.  It 
is nations of our region who have the greatest interest in security 
of our region and therefore the most to lose by any lack of security.

  

 There are still problems to be overcome on the Korean 
Peninsula, in attitudes to Japan, in resolution of Taiwan.  American 
policies can play a positive role in these matters, as they often have, 
but in recent times, dialogue between North and South Korea has been 
interrupted by changing American attitudes.  I am not sure that 
the United States still accepts that the policies first enunciated by 
Nixon and repeated by every President to Clinton, still represents American 
policy in relation to China and Taiwan.  One of the powerful reasons 
for independence of mind is that we should be pressing the United States 
to use her influence to achieve a resolution of this issue that will 
not involve armed conflict.  We will not do that if we are merely 
to follow.

  

 The United States’ view of the world has also changed 
dramatically in the last twelve months.  There was an enormous 
well of sympathy for the United States in the wake of the Twin Towers 
attacks but now there is an increasing realisation that there is a serious 
risk that the War Against Terror will be mismanaged and might come to 
be regarded as a War Against Islam.  There are dangers that unilateral 
action will break the broad international coalition against terror.  
Disparate countries in the Middle East are nervous of a unilateral American 
attack on Iraq. 

  

 In these circumstances, Australian security is not 
well served by total alignment.  It is not a question of condoning 
or appeasing dictatorships or the terrible things done in their name, 
it is a question of recognising our own real interests and debating 
the best way to advance those interests.

  

 The possibility of a pre-emptive attack on Iraq raises 
many issues.  It could alter the world even more than terrorism 
has altered the world.  Who has the right to determine how and 
when a pre-emptive war will be started?  It is, after all, starting 
a war.  How can one be certain that a country or a person is so 
terrible that such a course must be taken?  What are the criteria 
that would justify such a war?  What evils must a government be 
perpetrating against its own people?  What dangers must they be 
creating for their neighbours?  Standards and principles would 
need to be established.

  

  The only protection against a unilateral abuse of power is the requirement 
that there must be, as a minimum, Security Council support for such 
a conflict. If a person, a regime, is so bad, so dangerous, so evil, 
that a pre-emptive strike is necessary, the n surely we should 
accept that the Security Council should make the decision and could 
be so persuaded.

  

 The new world situation establishes strong arguments 
for Australian independence in mind and in spirit.  The kind of 
world which required a close allegiance with our country of origin and 
then with the United States no longer exists.

  

 A policy of development and of independence for Australia 
would give us a cause.  It would give us an objective and a sense 
of purpose which would carry us forward through this century with confidence 
and pride.

  

  

  5840 words

