---
title: "Government decisions dragging us into a war with Iraq."
date: "2002-10-26"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211249302
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M7S76%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Leader of the Australian Democrats Spokesperson for Defence

 26th October 2002 MEDIA RELEASE         02/512             

 Government decisions dragging us into a war with Iraq The Government is increasingly making Australian resources available to assist the United States in a future war against Iraq, Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett, will tell a rally in Sydney today.

 “They say no decision has been made about our involvement in a war with Iraq but the Howard Government is already supporting the US through the use of Australian ports by US warships serving in the Persian Gulf and utilising Pine Gap as a major intelligence facility,” Senator Bartlett said.

 The Democrats have questioned the Minister about both these issues in the Senate.

 “These decisions drag us into a war that Australians do not want and that the Parliament has never voted for us to join,” Senator Bartlett said.

  “The Democrats are using our balance of power role in the Senate to state the case against war, and question the Minister for Defence, Senator Robert Hill.

 “We have already been successful with a number of motions pushing the Howard Government to consult the Australian people more and to come out against a first strike,” Senator Bartlett said.

 This week the Democrats presented to the Parliament a ‘No First Strike’ petition with over a thousand signatures.

 “The Democrats remind the Government of its responsibility to focus its military, diplomatic and peacekeeping efforts on our region,” Senator Bartlett said.

 “Our military and intelligence resources are limited and we must be sensitive to how they are used.

 “Too many of our military and financial resources are committed to the so-called Pacific Solution - targeting those fleeing persecution rather than genuine threats to Australia’s safety and security.

 “The Democrats will continue to advocate against Australia’s involvement in a first strike against Iraq.”

 WHAT: Senator Andrew Bartlett, Leader of the Australian Democrats, will address the Rally for the Truth about Refugees and War

 Where: Town Hall Square moving to Martin Place, Sydney

 When: noon, Saturday 26 October 2002.

 To arrange interview with Senator Bartlett contact Daele Healy on 0409 3000 47

