---
title: "Coastwatch flying hours dramatically increased: Budget 2002-2003"
date: "2002-05-14"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211237197
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BDJ66%22
---

 BUDGET 2002-2003

 Media Release

 SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON

                                                 Minister for Justice and Customs

                                             Senator for Western Australia

 14 May 2002

 COASTWATCH FLYING HOURS DRAMATICALLY INCREASED

 “The greatest civil maritime surveillance in Australia’s history will be provided with an additional 1600 hours in Coastwatch flying capacity in 2002-03,” Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison, said today.

 “The $28.5 million boost to Customs funding over three years means our borders will be protected better than ever before,” Senator Ellison said

 Senator Ellison said this Budget delivered on the Governments Protecting Our Borders election commitment to strengthen the role and effectiveness of Coastwatch to protect Australia’s borders.

 An additional $20.9 million will also improve aircraft to ground communications security and allow the evaluation of a new high technology radar system that can detect targets beyond the horizon.

 Senator Ellison said the additional funding would enable Customs Coastwatch to increase its Dash-8 flying program to more than 21,000 flying hours annually. This will enable Coastwatch to maintain its intensive flying program in the north and north-west while still retaining effective surveillance in other areas of Australia.

 “These funds will help Customs Coastwatch further tighten the security net protecting our borders, assisting in the detection of unauthorised arrivals, drug smugglers, illegal fishing and a range of other border threats,” Senator Ellison said.

 Senator Ellison said the additional funding would allow Coastwatch to maintain the integrity of its standing national surveillance program and continue its commitment to Customs Operation Eddington, a support program for Defence’s Operation Relex, which provides surveillance of unauthorised boat arrivals in northern Australia.

 “It will also expand Coastwatch’s ability to respond to taskings and operations from other law enforcement and government agencies,” Senator Ellison said.

 Senator Ellison said two other measures would significantly improve Coastwatch’s service to Australia.

 “High Frequency Surface Wave Radar technology has the potential to provide  ‘continuous’ over-the-horizon surveillance of Australia’s maritime approaches.  This technology could offer significant additional benefits in civil maritime surveillance,” Senator Ellison said.

 “In addition, the funding for better communication between airborne Coastwatch aircraft and on-ground monitoring centres will allow for real-time information, providing for better decision-making processes in complex operational situations.”

 Senator Ellison said Coastwatch provided an effective civil maritime surveillance and response service, and these enhancements would improve its service at the border to the Australian community.

 Media inquiries:  Louise Patroni 02 6277 7260 or 0418 420 917

 www.law.gov.au/budget

