---
title: ""A parcel o' rogues in a nation": Australian attitudes to politics and politicians. The 2002 Reid Oration, 16 October 2002"
date: "2002-10-16"
creators:
  - "Macintyre, Stuart"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "REID, Gordon"
  - "Parliament"
  - "Executive government"
  - "Political image"
  - "Ministerial responsibility"
  - "Members"
  - "Westminster system"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211248850
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GPA86%22
---

 

 

 “A Parcel o’ Rogues in a Nation”: Australian Attitudes to Politics and Politicians   

 Stuart Macintyre   

 The 2002 Reid Oration  [University of Western Australia, 16 October 2002]   

 

 I am honoured by the invitation to deliver the Gordon Reid oration. Gordon Reid was  a distinguished academic and public servant, a greatly admired Governor of this State,  an accomplished author and a consistent champion of representative and accountable  government. As a student of politics, then an officer of the national parliament and  eventually as a constitutional head of state, he had unusual insight into the strengths  and weaknesses of our democratic system.   

 Gordon Reid observed that the system of responsible government embodies a series of  principles of responsibility. Ministers are responsible for their actions, and the actions  of their departments. They are responsible to the parliament, and in this way the  executive branch of government, through the doctrine of collective responsibility, is  accountable to the people’s representatives. A keen student of constitutional history,  he observed that these principles are barely discernible in the written Constitution of  the Commonwealth. Read it and you could be forgiven for thinking that the Crown  possesses a remarkable discretion; it is only the understanding that the head of state  will act on the advice of responsible ministers that modifies this monarchical  appearance. For that matter, the Constitution is silent on the Prime Minister, the  Cabinet, how ministries are brought into office and how they are removed from it.  Our system of government, in short, rests on a set of practices, habits, maxims, usages  and customs that, as he pointed out, tend to be referred to somewhat vaguely as  conventions of the Constitution and were taken over from the British system of  government as it had come to operate by the end of the nineteenth century.    

 Those who drafted the Constitution possessed an intimate familiarity with the  Westminster model through their membership of the colonial parliaments. All but one  of the delegates to the Federal Convention of 1897-8 was a parliamentarian and every  one of the leading figures possessed extensive ministerial experience. But these  delegates were not simply replicating that system of government on a continental  basis. Rather, they were constructing a Commonwealth in which the new national  government was to operate in conjunction with the older colonial ones, now called  state governments; and the Westminster system of responsible government was to be  combined with federal provisions that necessarily limited its operation. The first  ingredient derived from a lineage of constitutional monarchy, the second was  influenced strongly by the republican tradition of the United States and with that  tradition came a democratic ethos of popular sovereignty: ‘government of the people,  by the people, for the people’.    

 The divergent tendencies came together in the Commonwealth Parliament, with its  three components — the Crown, the Senate and the House of Representatives. In  these very titles we see already the admixture. The Senate and the House of 

 Representatives (the federal fathers rejected Westminster terminology, not least  because of their discomfort with the connotations of commons and lords) are the  elected branches of the parliament, but the Constitution declares that the members of 

 the lower house are ‘directly chosen by the people of the Commonwealth’, while the  senators are ‘directly chosen by the people of the State’. The Crown in fact means the  Governor-General (an appointed rather than elected head of state) who has both  executive and parliamentary functions, including the appointment of ministers.    

 In this original design Gordon Reid discerned a trinitarian struggle for supremacy that  would strengthen the executive at the expense of the elected representatives and rob  the parliament of its democratic capacity. Any expectation that the Senate would  operates as a states’ house was quickly dashed. Government business dominated the  House of Representatives. As he put it, the parliament had been ‘sapped of its vitality,  deprived of its dynamism, and subordinated to the monarchical components of earlier  autocratic regimes which lingered in the constitutional mix of 1901’.    

 Gordon Reid traced out the effects in the extended analytical study of the Parliament  he commenced when Vice-Chancellor of the University of Western Australia and  completed, with assistance from Martyn Forrest and others, when he was Governor of  this State. The study presents ten perspectives on the Parliament, and each one of  them registers the weakness of the institution. We learn of the devices whereby the  executive branch of the government has imposed its will: the limited sitting days, the  time limits on speeches, the restrictions upon members proposing amendments and  the dwindling consideration of legislation. We are shown the evasion of the doctrine  of ministerial responsibility, the lack of independence of presiding officers, the  misuse of question time, the control of the media.   

 The book was commissioned by the Parliament as a contribution to the Australian  Bicentenary and it appeared as the country’s legislators moved out of the quarters  they had occupied ever since they shifted to Canberra in 1927. This temporary  parliament house was constructed of Australian materials in a stately but restrained  vernacular style with which most Australians had become familiar through its  appearance on the ten-shilling note. Reid noted that the building betrayed some signs  of executive usurpation. Back in 1901, when the 75 members and 36 senators of the  first parliament had assembled in Melbourne, they were attended by 53 officials. By  1988 the 148 members and 76 senators had gathered a support staff of almost 1000  and a press gallery of more than 200. It was the creation of executive offices — an  arrangement foreign to Westminster, whereby the ministers, their advisers and support  staff operated out of the parliament — that exhausted the building’s capacity. In one  of his articles Reid quoted a Clerk of the House who observed that ‘Parliament House  is nothing more than a large government secretariat. Ministers do not work in their  departments. They occupy rooms round the chamber of the house with their staffs,  while ordinary members share rooms in the distant wings.’   

 This usurpation of the legislature by the executive has extended even further in the  new Parliament House. The sunken edifice on Capital Hill surmounted by the flag-bearing coathanger is excessive in both size and taste. It provides separate entrances  for the members and senators on either side, removed from the public areas at the  front, so that legislators and citizens no longer rub shoulders in the manner that was  possible in the Queen’s Hall of the Old Parliament House. The new one is most 

 remarkable for its blurring of parliamentary and administrative functions. The  ministers have their own access at the rear of the complex to an executive precinct  that extends symbolically into the centre and separates the legislative chambers. Here  in ostentatious grandeur is a physical expression of the process that Gordon Reid  decried.    

 His ten perspectives make up a powerful indictment of parliamentary decrepitude.  Behind the accretion of executive control he discerns the operation of parties. These  are another of the elements of the system of government that find no mention in the  Constitution, yet were implicit in the principle of collective ministerial responsibility.  The expectation that the ministry should possess a majority in the lower house turned  Australian democracy into partisan democracy, which quickly took institutional form.   Hence Reid noted that the decision in 1902 to establish a first-past-the post electoral  system was intended to benefit the three parties in the first parliament. Then came  compulsory enrolment in 1911 and compulsory voting in 1924. Public broadcasting  laws entrenched the privileges of the major parties in the 1950s. Later still, public  funding of electoral campaigns (it is telling that the funds are paid directly to the party  organisation) and the inclusion of party names on ballot papers reinforced their grip  on the composition of the parliament.    

 Gordon Reid was a realist. While critical of executive aggrandisement, he did imagine  that government ministers would resist the opportunities to extend their control of the  legislature. The fault lay with its members for allowing their freedom to be  circumscribed, but of course he appreciated that the members of parliament were also  members of political parties. More specifically, they were party members first and  parliamentary members second, and the primary loyalty dominated their performance  of parliamentary duties.    

 Nor did Reid think there was much to be gained by recourse to constitutional  conventions or by codifying such conventions in law. He had no confidence that the  High Court could make good the failures of the parliament. Towards the end of his  examination of Australia’s Commonwealth Parliament, he suggested that some of the  most important tasks of the parliament — its scrutiny of the actions of the  government, its maintenance of responsibility and accountability — were not based  on any constitutional or legal conventions but rather were ‘values imposed upon the  political arrangements’. Such values depended for their efficacy on politics, and in the  final analysis on their impact on the ballot box. As he put it elsewhere, public 

 expectations are the ‘final arbiter of political practice’.    

 We can see this proposition in operation with respect to the foundational principle of  ministerial responsibility. In its classical form a minister was responsible for the  actions of his department, so that a significant failure of policy or administration was  expected to incur the censure of the parliament and the minister’s resignation.  Australian practice quickly abrogated this doctrine, principally through the  government’s control of censure motions. Yet allegations of maladministration and  impropriety are the stock-in-trade of a parliamentary opposition, indeed they bedevil  Australian politics as a substitute for discussion of policy. When a scandal breaks, the  first response of a minister is denial, followed if necessary by denial of knowledge  and attribution of any fault to others. The minister’s fate will rest on the prime  minister’s judgement, not of the probity of the minister, but the likely effects on the 

 affair on the government’s standing: if the storm can be ridden out, the minister will  stay, and if it threatens to cause damage the minister will be jettisoned.    

 Realism shades here into cynicism. Recent Australian politics has been characterised  by a brazen disregard for the truth. Think of the government’s collusion with a  stevedoring company to train strikebreakers in Dubai and remove the Maritime Union  from the country’s ports: the minister responsible for this clandestine exercise had an 

 unfortunate habit of signalling his mendacity with speech markers such as ‘in all  sincerity’.    

 Think again of the incident on the eve of the federal election last year when the  government announced that refugees had thrown children into the waters off  Christmas Island. Peter Reith was adamant: ‘The fact is that the children were thrown 

 into the water.’ When naval officers told Senate hearings after the election that there  was no such fact, and that they had told both senior public servants and government  advisers at the time that the government’s statements were not founded on fact, the  prime minister’s advisers were driven back to the defence that they had not advised  the prime minister. This prime minister had previously enunciated a distinction  between ‘core’ and ‘non-core promises’ — the undertakings that have to be kept  because the political cost of breaking them is too great, and those that can safely be  broken.    

 Episodes such as these do considerable damage to our public institutions. The misuse  of supposedly neutral and independent branches of government, including the armed  forces, is compounded by the flagrant contempt for principles of accountability — in  the Children Overboard case, as so often before, the ministers used their numbers in  the House of Representatives to prevent an examination of their actions and the  doctrine of executive privilege to avoid appearing before an inquiry in the Senate. The  dishonesty is probably more damaging to the public standing of politicians. It  confirms the public suspicion that those entrusted with political authority are  untrustworthy in word and deed.    

 I do not suggest that the present government is alone in such cynical misuse of office.  I recall visiting the Parliament during 1994, when I was engaged in an inquiry into  civics and citizenship education, and encountering an old friend. He invited me to see 

 where he worked, and led me into a large room lined on every wall with shelves of  lever-arch files. Each series of files bore the name of a Liberal or National Party  member of the parliament, and each series in turn consisted of photocopies of 

 newspaper articles, or transcripts of television and radio broadcasts. Every statement  the Opposition member had made on every conceivable subject was filed in  alphabetical order — from aerodromes to zoological gardens — so that it could be  provided to the appropriate minister and used in question time to catch the Opposition  out in some inconsistency. This was the National Media and Liaison Service — an  arsenal funded by the taxpayer to assist the government in partisan abuse. My friend  took great pride in it. Dismissing the True Believers, he gestured towards the files and  told me these were the instruments that had secured the re-election of the Keating  government in the previous year.    

 The activities of the National Media and Liaison Service (known acronymically as  ‘Animals’) aroused considerable disquiet among other inhabitants of the jungle. Yet 

 eavesdropping on the opposition is only one part of the repertoire of the political  predator. Far more public resources are used to gauge public opinion and far more to  influence it. Pollsters identify the hot-button issues, party strategists and media  advisers work out how best to press them into favourable operation. The black arts of  wedge politics, push-polling and spinning are but vogue terms for a long-established  tendency in representative systems of government whereby persuasion shades into  dissimulation. Hence the recurrent suspicion of the politician as a person who flatters  to deceive; gives an undertaking during an election and then abandons it once elected.  The competition for office seems almost to create a Gresham’s law whereby the false  drives out the true.    

 This estrangement from the political process, the mistrust if not outright hostility to  politicians, the disregard for our institutions of government, provides the title of my  address. Three hundred years ago a small nation was under pressure to give up its  independence for union with a larger neighbour. The union was extremely unpopular  for the smaller nation, Scotland, had fought repeatedly to preserve its own  government, laws, religion and customs. There were protests, demonstrations and 

 riots against its incorporation into the United Kingdom. Many of the 247 members of  the Scottish parliament needed armed protection, for there was clear evidence of  bribery and corruption that brought them, early in 1707, to pass a fateful Act of Union  and vote themselves out of existence. One of their fiercest critics was the nationalist  and radical democrat poet, Robert Burns, with whom the assertion that Scotland had  been ‘bought and sold for English gold’ is now associated, though the air ‘A Parcel o’  Rogues in a Nation’ dates back earlier to the actual parliamentary betrayal. I use it 

 here to indicate the longstanding nature of the disaffection with politics and  politicians.    

 

 ***   

 In the same year that I was taken into the command centre of the Animals, the  journalist Paul Kelly warned that ‘Whereas people previously believed in at least  some political leaders, today there is cynicism, mistrust or disgust with the political  leaders and the political system itself’. In the same year Graham Richardson, a Labor  powerbroker, published his political memoirs under the title Whatever It Takes, and  that phrase became a byword for unscrupulous politics. Richo boasted of his  ruthlessness, his deal-making, his accumulation of power.    

 These forms of behaviour breed antipathy to politicians and estrangement from  politics. Echoing Paul Kelly, Michelle Grattan wrote in 1999 of a ‘growing distrust of  and disillusionment with governments and governance’; she detected a ‘crisis of  cynicism’. Social commentators such as Hugh Mackay suggest that the politicians of  both major parties have lost touch with the concerns of ordinary Australians, and that  the gulf between the people and their representatives has grown so wide as to threaten  the legitimacy of our political institutions. A number of political commentators,  meanwhile, argued that the major parties have sacrificed policy for pragmatism, and  that their convergence deprives voters of clear alternatives so that they no longer  attach significance to elections.    

 I take these examples from the work of Murray Goot, a professor of politics at  Macquarie University, who specialises in the measurement of public opinion. Goot is  sceptical of the alarmist interpretation of political disengagement, and he has  assembled a mass of data that casts doubt upon it. He draws on surveys, some going  back fifty years but mostly more recent; there are difficulties in matching some of  them but the picture that emerges is striking.    

 There is little evidence of a decline of interest in politics.  On the contrary, a survey  conducted over the past twenty years suggests remarkable consistency with around a  third of respondents reporting a good deal of interest and nearly half reporting some  interest. Earlier surveys indicate that more Australians were uninterested then than 

 now. Interest in election campaigns has not declined. The proportion of respondents  who indicated they would have voted even if voting were not compulsory has  increased, to 86 per cent in 1999.    

 Nor do the surveys support the claim that Australians have become indifferent to the  major parties. On the contrary, surveys between 1984 and 1996 show that respondents  consistently put Labor left of centre, the Coalition parties right of centre and the  difference they perceive between them has not shrunk. A more longitudinal survey,  incidentally, suggests that perception of differences between the parties was high in  the late 1940s, lower in the 1960s and 1970s, but high again by the 1990s. I shall  return to the implications of this finding.    

 However, there is some evidence of a decline in trust. Over the past 25 years a  Morgan Poll has asked respondents to rate the honesty and ethical standards of  politicians, and those answering ‘high’ or ‘very high’ declined from a low 17 percent  for federal members of parliament in 1976 to just 10 percent in the most recent  survey. We might note that bank managers and lawyers have slipped further over the  same period, albeit from a much higher base, and conclude that we seem to be dealing  with a more general decline in confidence in our public institutions as well as the  professions associated with them. One feature of the evidence here is that belief in the  honesty and public purpose of parliamentarians has varied significantly over the  period, as has confidence in government.   

 Murray Goot makes a number of suggestions of how we might interpret these  findings. One of the most suggestive, to my mind, is that the evidence sits across a  fundamental divide in the role of government over the past half century. The  governments of Curtin and Chifley harnessed national purpose to the tasks of war  sacrifice, and then to the project of post-war reconstruction. The Commonwealth  assumed an unprecedented degree of control of the economy during the 1940s to  provide planning, growth and full employment. It expanded the manufacturing sector,  reconstructed rural industries, initiated the ambitious immigration progam, took new  initiatives in education, health and social welfare. While the Menzies government that  came to power in 1949 placed greater emphasis on the private sector, its continued  emphasis on migration and national development ensured the continuity of economic  management, and the reach of government scarcely contracted.    

 It was only with the OPEC oil crisis of the 1970s, the onset of stagflation and the  disruption of the world economy that this expansive period of national government  ended. Between the last year of Whitlam’s government and the early years of the 

 Hawke government, Australia searched for a response and eventually settled on the  neoliberal policies of deregulation, corporatisation, privatisation and user pays, with a  consequent diminution of government, contraction of public provision and loss of  security. With this transformation, politics became much harder: governments could  no longer rely on the fiscal windfall yielded by steady growth to augment public  provision, nor could they use the older regulatory devices to ameliorate the social  effects of rapid economic change, for they had dismantled these controls. Rising  expectations as well as the resentments of those whose expectations are not met has  created a more volatile political climate in which the techniques of political  presentation, discussed earlier, became more important and more sophisticated. The  decline in trust revealed in public opinion surveys suggests that these techniques  worked their purpose at some cost to the cumulative credibility of those who employ  them.    

 Commentators who look back on some ‘golden age’ when our representatives met  expectations do so with a selective nostalgia. Their point of reference, as baby-boomers, is to the age of our youthful idealism; but Murray Goot reminds us of a  Morgan Poll conducted in the mid-1960s before the voting age was lowered to  eighteen — no less than two-thirds of we prospective voters did not want it. He also  suggests that the absence of similar polling prior to the Second World War leaves us  with unreliable basis of comparison. The earliest attitudinal indices begin in the 1940s  so that we can measure some of the changes in the way Australians regard their  system of representative government over the past fifty years. But that system of  government goes back one hundred and fifty years. Were the 1940s a high-point or a  low? What was the level of trust in politicians in the pre-modern past?   

 ***   

 The question is not easily answered. We have some fine studies of the colonial  parliaments and those who served in them. The recent centenary of federation  increased our knowledge of the origins and purpose of the Commonwealth. Political  parties and their leaders are served by an extensive literature, as is the judiciary and  the administrative branch of government. There is a growing interest, also, in the  ideologies, language and symbols that operated upon Australian democracy. These  historical investigations provide some useful insights, though for the most part they  are concerned with the operation of government rather the expectations of the  governed. Given the ambiguity of Australian attitudes to their elected representatives,  it is surprising that we do not have a more substantial study of the subject.    

 But we don’t and in the time remaining to me I can do no more than make some  preliminary and episodic suggestions. My first begins with an exchange during a  criminal trial in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. The defendant, who was on  trial for escaping from gaol, asked the chief justice not to hear the case because he had  imposed the original harsh sentence and might have ‘prejudicial feelings’ against him.  The judge misheard the defendant and asked’ Why should I have political feelings  against you? Are you a member of parliament?’ ‘No, replied the defendant, ‘not yet’.    

 The shared joke indicated the low standing of the parliament less than a decade after it  had come into existence, and is an important strand of John Hirst’s account of The  Strange Birth of Liberal Democracy, where it is reported. The Australian colonists 

 had agitated for the privileges of self-government with considerable zeal. Having been  granted their own elected parliaments, they rapidly extended the franchise, only to  recoil from the results. The voters seemed impervious to the lamentable standards of  the men they put into parliament. Ministries rose and fell as temporary combinations  of members advanced their own interests while championing those of their 

 constituents. Patronage and corruption were endemic as the doctrine of responsible  government was turned into a licence for jobbery. The competition for office seemed  to the high-minded Victorian liberal George Higinbotham ‘to deprive sane men of  reason, to make men of honour utterly regardless for the time of the obligation of  truth, and to strip the gentleman of his proper qualities of reserve and honour’.    

 The disillusionment with democracy was rapid and formative. We see its effects  during the movement to establish the Commonwealth, when the popular federal  movement insisted that the cause had to be taken out of the hands of the politicians  and restored to the people. Yet this call to the people was made by politicians who  sponsored the popular movement for federation. The politicians, having impugned  their own calling, called forth a voice that could restore its legitimacy: they reinstated  the people as a disembodied presence capable of an altruism that they themselves  could not achieve.    

 We see the same sentiments again in the populist campaign launched immediately  after federation to reduce the expense of the State governments, cut the public service,  make parliaments smaller. This Kyabram movement sought representatives ‘who had  no political past to answer for’, proclaiming ‘they did not require old politicians, but 

 able businessmen who would give a straight-out vote’.    

 The same impulse reappeared between the wars in regional movements to free the  countryside from the incubus of unresponsive governments. ‘The party machines in  Australia appear to have harvested nothing for many years but weeds’, said the leader  of the campaign to separate the Riverina from New South Wales. The secession  movement in Western Australia drew on similar resentments.    

 They were shared by the conservatives who mobilised during the crisis of the  Depression. ‘The inaptness of the machinery of political democracy to the economic  management of our society is now … universally conceded’, stated a leading  constitutional lawyer who chaired Melbourne meetings of the All For Australia  League. Its founders aimed to ‘clean up politics’ by replacing the old politicians with  men of probity. ‘We hate all the parties’, proclaimed the originator of the Citizens  League of South Australia. Similarities with the short-lived effort to promote ‘Joh for  PM, as well as with the grievances that fed Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Movement  will be evident.   

 The antagonism to politics and politicians is a vein running through Australian  political history and one that invites further exploration. It seems to surface  episodically at moments of social distress and national strain. It produces short-lived  campaigns to clean up politics, fiercely antagonistic to the politicians who are blamed  for the shortcomings of representative democracy, with an energy that is then 

 absorbed back into the political parties whose shortcomings generated the discontent.    

 Yet if we return to the initial disillusionment with this system of representative  democracy, it is the absence of parties that is surely crucial. Colonial politics was  characterised by the operation of loose and unstable alliances of members who  trafficked support for a ministry in return for rewards. In the absence of parties there  was no effective link between the electors and their representative, no way of ensuring  that the member would represent their interests. It was the creation of the Labor Party  during the great depression of the 1890s that provided such a mechanism: a process  whereby the party members selected the candidate, who in turn provided a pledge to  uphold policies decided by the party conference and was bound by the discipline of  the parliamentary caucus.     

 The rapid success of the Labor Party in the early years of the twentieth century forced  its opponents to form their own party with a modified version of the same  organisational methods. The two party-system provided for a clear electoral choice  between alternative governments, which in turn were able to implement their policies  by a secure control of the parliament.    

 This outcome brings us back full circle to Gordon Reid’s diagnosis of the failure of  parliament and the malaise of democratic politics. Like him, I am sufficiently a realist  to see these arrangements as the product of our own values and expectations as we  express them through our participation in the political process. Like him, I do not  think there is much to be gained by recourse to codification of conventions in law,  though I do believe there is opportunity to reform some of the abuses that rob the  Commonwealth parliament of its representative and accountable functions. If I were  philosopher king, I would declare those who work for ministers and members  ineligible for election to parliament, for this habit of parliament reproducing itself  from the cadre ranks of the parties makes it seriously unrepresentative. Given a 

 second chance to play Mikado, I would prohibit the habit of staff members issuing  statements on behalf of a minister in response to a public concern, for this habit of  anonymous and gratuitous reply is an abuse of government.  

 

 These are fairly recent abuses and the burden of my address has been that the  discontent with our political system is by no means new, that it has been recurrent  over the one hundred and fifty years of self-government in this country. If I differ  from Gordon Reid, it is seeing this phenomenon as one inherent in the process of  political representation rather than in the blending of the democratic federalism with  the monarchical component in the Westminster system.    

 In the end, however, I share Gordon Reid’s respect for the principles of representative  democracy as well as his concerns for its welfare. If the ultimate guarantor of its  effectiveness is our expectations, then informed discussion of the way that the  Commonwealth Parliament operates is a necessary contribution to its improvement.  No-one did more to uphold the representative and accountable expectations against  those who would turn the Parliament into a parcel o’ rogues, and I am grateful for this  opportunity to continue the argument that he initiated.  

 

