---
title: "SIEV-X people smuggler must be charged."
date: "2002-12-30"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211251612
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/91986%22
---

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Leader of the Australian Democrats 

 30 December 2002 MEDIA ALERT       02/628             

 

 

 SIEV-X people smuggler must be charged  The people smuggler alleged to have been responsible for the deaths of hundreds of asylum seekers  must not be allowed to go free, the Australian Democrats said today. 

 Abu Quassey is due to be released on 1 January 2003 from a Jakarta prison where he is serving time for  immigration offences. Quassey admits organising the doomed SIEV X voyage that killed 353 people  including 146 women and 142 children on 19 October 2001. 

  “The Australian Government must increase its pressure on Indonesia to charge Abu Quassey with  mass manslaughter, or allow his extradition,” said Senator Andrew Bartlett, Leader of the Australian  Democrats. 

 “If Abu Quassey is released on 1 January 2003, he will remain out of reach of Australian legal  authorities. 

 “There is a danger Quassey will walk, not because anyone doubts his guilt, but because of jurisdiction  technicalities,” Senator Bartlett said. 

 The Australian Federal Police have issued warrants for Quassey’s arrest in relation to people smuggling  which carry penalties of up to twenty years imprisonment but because people smuggling is not a crime  in Indonesia, he still cannot be extradited.  The Australian Government's maintains that it is unclear  whether SIEV X sank in international or in Indonesian territorial waters. 

 “The issue is also controversial as there are allegations Indonesian policemen assisted the forced  embarkation of the overloaded SIEV X,” Senator Bartlett said. 

 In December, Senator Bartlett questioned the Justice Minister, Senator Ellison, about Australia's  intentions to bring Abu Quassey to justice. The Senate also passed a Democrat motion calling on the  Governments of Australia and Indonesia to seek to have Abu Quassey brought to justice. 

 “During the inquiry on a Certain Maritime Incident we heard evidence regarding the central role played  by Abu Quassey in organising people smuggling operations in Indonesia, and particularly the SIEV X,”  said Senator Bartlett. 

  “Not only should Quassey be charged for what he has done, he could be key to breaking down people  smuggling operations. 

  “If Quassey is allowed to walk free there is nothing to stop him, again, taking asylum seekers’ savings,  forcing them onto an unseaworthy vessel and sending them to their deaths.” 

 

 To contact Senator Bartlett for interview - 0418 743 789 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au 

