---
title: "Democrats' response to Australia's overseas aid report."
date: "2002-09-24"
creators:
  - "Ridgeway, Aden"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of RIDGEWAY, SEN ADEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211248029
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DNH76%22
---

 Senator Aden Ridgeway  Deputy Leader of the Australian Democrats Overseas Aid Spokesperson September 24 2002              MEDIA RELEASE                                    02/464

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 Democrats’ Response to Australia’s Overseas Aid Report

 The Australian Democrats today expressed concern that Australia’s aid budget is the lowest it has been in 30 years at only 0.25% of GDP.

 Responding to the eleventh annual statement on Australian aid, Investing in Growth, Stability and Prosperity, which was tabled by the Government in the Parliament today, the Democrats also noted the shift in focus of Australian overseas aid policy to economic growth and good governance as the drivers of development and poverty reduction.

 “The examples cited by the Government today of countries who have succeeded as a result in part of  aid  programs  include  China,  Vietnam,  Korea  and  Chile,”  said  Democrats’  Overseas  Aid Spokesperson, Senator Aden Ridgeway.

 “Some were open to trade, others established strong protectionist measures to foster their fledgling industries but few have a human rights record that can stand up to international scrutiny.

 “There is little mention in this document of the important role that human rights and the rule of law have to play in achieving sustainable development and the reduction of poverty and suffering,” said Senator Ridgeway.

 Senator Ridgeway also emphasised the lack of consistency in Australia’s approach to Overseas Aid across  portfolio  areas  -  particularly  in  relation  to  immigration  policy  and  the  so-called  Pacific Solution.

 “The huge increase in aid to Nauru by 195% last year was virtually a bribe to take asylum seekers off Australia’s hands,” said Senator Ridgeway.

 “The Democrats fail to see how this fits in with any goal of promoting sustainable development or good governance.

 “Australia still fails to meet a United Nations quota of 0.7% of GNP for International Aid programs.

 “This is a central tenet of Democrats’ policy and once again we call on the Government to deliver a major increase in Australia’s overseas aid commitments.

 “This  is  essential  given  Australia’s  commitment  to  achieving  the  UN  Millennium  Development goals  which  require  the  international  community to  increase  global  aid  by $70  billion  dollars  per year until 2015,” concluded Senator Ridgeway.

 Contact: Liz Willis 0417 410 506

