---
title: "Minister launches new English language teaching resource."
date: "2002-08-23"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211246833
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/01976%22
---

 MINISTER LAUNCHES NEW ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHING RESOURCE

 A unique new teaching resource for use in the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) curriculum - an Online Assessment Task Bank - was today launched by the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave.

 Mr Hardgrave said the product was further proof the Federal Government was investing in people who come to Australia and the return on this investment was a strong economy and a stronger society.

 Mr Hardgrave was at the Gold Coast Institute of TAFE to launch the task bank, which is the product of several years’ trialing by AMEP teachers, students and researchers under the auspices of the special projects research program conducted by the AMEP Research Centre.

 Describing the task bank as another in the “long line” of innovative resources developed for use in the AMEP curriculum, Mr Hardgrave said:

 “The Online Assessment Task Bank is another demonstration of the AMEP’s leadership in the English as a Second Language (ESL) field.”

 “It is a dynamic tool, specially developed for AMEP teachers, which will enable them to draw from a continually updated collection of reliable assessment tasks to test students’ acquisition of language competencies.”

 “For students, it will enable a fairer, more objective and more meaningful assessment of their work against the Certificates in Spoken and Written English (CSWE) curriculum.”

 Speaking to an audience of teachers, industry and community representatives, Minister Hardgrave noted the Australian Government’s world leadership in the provision of  language and settlement programs.

 “The learning of English must be one of the first priorities for new migrants to become fully contributing members of Australian society.”

 “The Federal Government has a comprehensive English language program for new  migrants with up to 510 hours of free English tuition for those needing assistance. Up to an additional 100 hours is provided for refugees and humanitarian entrants,” Mr Hardgrave said.

 Since its establishment in 1948, the AMEP has helped more than 1.6 million migrants and refugees settle successfully in Australia.

 In 2001-02 the AMEP provided tuition to over 33,000 new arrivals from 100 language backgrounds at a cost of $96 million. The Gold Coast Institute of TAFE’s ‘share’ of this clientele represents 457 clients from 39 language backgrounds.

 23 August 2002

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

