---
title: "Bill of Rights needed for Ruddock wrongs."
date: "2002-06-04"
creators:
  - "Greig, Brian"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of GREIG, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239313
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NDP66%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Brian Greig Australian Democrats Law and Justice spokesperson

 4 June 2002 MEDIA RELEASE                           02/286

 Bill of Rights needed for Ruddock wrongs

 The  Howard  Government  has  again  illustrated  its  contempt  for  the  Judiciary  by  ignoring  the  basic principles of the Separation of Powers.

 Democrats  Law  and  Justice  spokesperson,  Senator  Brian  Greig,  says  despite  claims  of  being misinterpreted, which has become increasingly common amongst Howard and his Ministers, Minister Ruddock's attack on the Federal Court is completely out of line.  He reiterated Democrats’ calls for an Australian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

 “As a party to proceedings before the Court, public statements by a Minister that might bring political pressure on the Court in reaching its decisions are totally unacceptable,” Senator Greig said.

 “The  Courts  must  have  the  power  to  test  and  challenge  our  laws  in  relation  to  asylum  seekers  and refugees, by examining our international human rights obligations and treaty commitments.

 “This  role  must  be  a  guaranteed  protection  for  citizens  and  prospective  citizens,  and  free  from  the political and ideological interference of Government.

 Senator  Greig  says  giving  the  decision  making  power  on  human  rights  to  politicians  and  not  judges would  leave  citizens  vulnerable  to  the  whims  of  the  government  of  the  day,  rather  than  protected  by universally sanctioned human rights laws administered by the courts.

 “If the Minister wants to control how the Federal Court exercises its powers he should quit Parliament and run for a position on the Bench,” Senator Greig said.

 “Minister Ruddock is already doing his best to undermine the rule of law by removing the ability of the Courts to act as a check on the Government's actions in relation to refugee matters.

 “The time has  come for the enactment  of a statute which  protects  a broader range of civil  rights  and responsibilities.   We need our own domestic remedies in the form of a Bill of Rights.

 Following  extensive  consultation,  the  Democrats  last  year  introduced  a  statutory  bill  of  rights.   The Democrats’ Bill implements the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, giving effect to Australia’s international human rights obligations.

 Contacts:  Senator Brian Greig, 08) 9228 3133 or Di Graham on 0417 177 523

