---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop: parliamentary procedure reform; Caucus meeting; support for the Commonwealth to run detention centres; Carmen Lawrence;\nSenate inquiry into detention centres."
date: "2002-02-11"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234085
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9YV56%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 11TH FEBRUARY 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Parliamentary procedure reform; Caucus meeting; support for the                  Commonwealth to run detention centres; Carmen Lawrence;                 Senate inquiry into detention centres

 CREAN: Welcome back.  I am looking forward to the challenge.  I want ours to be a constructive Opposition.  I have already put forward proposals to improve the standards in the Parliament.  I was pleased yesterday to see the Prime Minister indicate a preparedness to talk around those issues, let’s now see if he’s genuine about it.  I think that we need to lift the standards, change some of the Standing Orders but significantly to get a truly independent Speaker.  The Prime Minister in 1996 was advocating an independent Speaker.  I am now saying it - here’s the opportunity to get one. This will be an important test for the Prime Minister and the Opposition cooperating to improve the standards.

 JOURNALIST: Harry Quick says he is getting ready for a fiery Caucus meeting today.  Do you think you can keep the divisions under control?

 CREAN: I don’t mind fiery meetings, it is the outcomes that are important and I think where issues are controversial it’s important that they be debated fully and frankly.  It’s not the fieriness of the meeting that I am about, what I am looking forward to is a constructive outcome.  And we will be discussing today a number of proposals to advance this debate.  I have already called for the release of the kids and the mothers from the detention centres.  We will be putting forward some further proposals today but we won’t be finalising everything today.  We will also be talking about process because there are some issues that still need to be worked through.  The party members need to be involved in those processes.  They’ll have the opportunity to constructively participate.

 JOURNALIST: What sort of proposals would you working through on the asylum seekers issue?

 2

 CREAN: Well, for example today I’ll be putting forward proposals that seek to return the running of the centres to the Commonwealth.  The tenders are up at the moment.  We believe the APS, Australian Protective Services, should be running the detention facilities.  Another, for example, is the mothballing of Woomera.  But we will be talking around a number of issues today, but it is not just the issues and finalisation on some but it’s the process, the continuing process that’s important.

 JOURNALIST: …a compromise position that would satisfy the likes of Carmen Lawrence so that she could in fact go out tomorrow to that rally and give the Labor Party’s line and mean it?

 CREAN: Well, obviously today is an important time for the Labor Party.  It’s the first opportunity the full Caucus has had to discuss this issue and I expect that to be an important part of us developing our position.  Now if people are part of that process they’ve got an obligation to report its outcomes.  That’s all I have said.  That’s consistent…

 JOURNALIST: And support its outcomes?

 CREAN: Obviously support its outcomes.  When you are part of a Caucus decision then you are bound by those Caucus outcomes.  So that I don’t think is the issue with anyone.  I have never heard Carmen or anyone argue that they won’t be supporting Party positions.  I’d signalled some weeks ago that we needed to change our policy.  I’d also signalled some of the earlier changes we were going to make.  Today is the basis upon which we can consider changes to that policy and if we embrace them, then all members are required to support them.

 JOURNALIST: You said last week that some people, besides children, shouldn’t necessarily be kept in detention and that you were looking at some sort of release program.  Can you give us any idea what those might be?

 CREAN: Well, we have said that they should be modelled on the successful trials that have already been conducted around Woomera where it wasn’t just the children but it was the mothers of children that were out in community housing.

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think the Commonwealth would do a better job running, say Woomera, than the ACM?

 CREAN: Well I think that you are in a position in which ownership and therefore policy can reflect more effectively through that outcome.  We believe that it should be returned to Commonwealth, being run by the Commonwealth, we believe it will a more successful running of the detention facilities.

 JOURNALIST: Even if it is more expensive?

 3

 CREAN: Well this was the argument used previously, the reason why it had to be privatised.  And, of course, that was before the ‘Pacific Solution’ which itself has been a very costly exercise.  The Government has admitted the costs have blown out but they just won’t tell us by how much. My argument is this: that if we now know that there is a very expensive set of options let’s look at more effectively spending that money.  Let’s re-look at the questions that weren’t able to be looked at before because cost was raised as an issue.  Now if the Government won’t tell us the true cost of the ‘Pacific Solution’ then the Parliament will establish it and that’s what the inquiry processes of the Parliament will be used to do.

 JOURNALIST: Will Labor push for the Senate inquiry to go to PNG to speak to those in PNG?

 CREAN: The question of how a Senate conducts its inquiry is for the Senate itself.  What we believe is that there should be an inquiry into the ‘kids overboard’ incident and there should be an inquiry into the costs.  What Labor will be pursuing is inquiries to get that up.  It’s up to the Senate as to how it conducts it business and who it calls.

 Ends.

