---
title: "Afghan safe haven option now vital."
date: "2002-04-09"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235963
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZLA66%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 AFGHAN SAFE HAVEN OPTION NOW VITAL

 Minister Ruddock must honour his promise and commence discussions with Labor on the establishment of an appropriate safe haven option for Afghan asylum seekers in the wake of reports that just seven of the Afghan asylum seekers on Nauru are to be granted refugee status.

 A genuine safe haven option would be a humane response to the ongoing uncertainty in Afghanistan as well as economically far more efficient than the wastage of the ‘Pacific Solution’.

 I wrote to the Minister today regarding reports that only seven of the Afghan asylum seekers on Nauru are to be granted refugee status.  Notwithstanding that those who have been rejected can be re-interviewed, the low acceptance rate of these asylum seekers shows the urgent need for the Government to find a real solution in relation to these people.

 It is clear that any asylum seeker whose claims are not found to be genuine will need to return.  Some may choose to voluntarily return and Labor supports such persons receiving repatriation assistance from the Government.  Indeed, the Minister is now recommending to Cabinet Labor’s suggestion that such cash bonuses be available to other ethnic groups.

 However, it seems likely that many asylum seekers from Afghanistan will not agree to return voluntarily.  UNHCR is advocating that there be no forcible returns to Afghanistan at this stage given the country is still not stable, de-mining is still in progress and basic infrastructure is still being rebuilt. It appears from media reports today that the Minister has accepted this advice from UNHCR.

 Given the reality that large numbers of Afghan asylum seekers will need to be returned but cannot be returned now, a proper time limited safe haven arrangement is clearly the best solution and the best way to advance this is for Minister Ruddock to honour the promise he made to Labor in a letter to me on March 14 2002.

 I also called upon the Minister to immediately finalise the resettlement arrangements of those asylum seekers who have been found to be genuine refugees.  There is a moral imperative to ensure that such people are quickly and appropriately resettled and not forced to languish for a further period in detention.  The fact that the Howard Government may have no other option than to resettle them in Australia makes a mockery of the much-vaunted ‘Pacific Solution’.

 Minister Ruddock must now come clean on the costs of the detention of those asylum seekers whose claims have been rejected.  The Minister needs to answer the following questions: - how long will the reassessment of their cases take? If they fail the refugee test again how long will it take to send them home” How much will it cost? And, most importantly, where will people be detained pending their removal?  Realistically, it appears the only option open to the Government is the one it campaigned relentlessly against last year - bringing them to the Australian mainland until they can be removed. Once again this makes a mockery of the ‘Pacific Solution’ and the promises of the Prime Minister that none of these asylum seekers would ever set foot on Australian soil.

 For further information contact: Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637 or Jamie Snashall, Adviser, on (02) 6277 4349 or 0408 419 699    [9 Apr 2002]

