---
title: "Equity and Australian development: lessons from the first century."
date: "2002-04-04"
creators:
  - "Garnaut, Ross"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Egalitarianism"
  - "Tax credits"
  - "Economic conditions"
  - "History, 1901-1999"
  - "Statistics"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Exports"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235689
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9KA66%22
---

 06-2743 F

 EQUITY AND AUSTRALIAN DEVELOPMENT: LESSONS FROM THE FIRST CENTURY

 r

 Ross Garnaut Professor of Economics

 Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies The Australian National University

 Paper presented at The Melbourne Institute and The Australian Conference, Towards Opportunity and Prosperity, 202 Economic and Social Outlook Conference, Melbourne, 4-5 April, 2002.

 (References to be added in a final version of the paper, available from Ross.Garnaut@anu.edu.au )

 EQUITY AND AUSTRALIAN DEVELOPMENT: LESSONS FROM

 THE FIRST CENTURY*

 1. Equity and National Development

 In the early years of its Federation, a century ago, Australian

 society was discussed amongst the world's people who read and write and talk

 about ideas, above all for its high material standards of living, its near-universal

 democratic franchise, its high wage levels, and its utilisation of an unusually

 wide range of government business enterprises and interventions in the

 economy. Australians themselves defined what was special about their country

 first of all in terms of high standards of living and rights and dignity of

 ordinary citizens. The white Australian majority almost invariably excluded

 from the egalitarian objective people of Aboriginal, Asian and Pacific Island

 descent (these being the limits of contact for all but tiny numbers). Women

 were included in some male definitions of the egalitarian objective (the right to

 vote, a couple of decades before Britain or the United States), but not others

 (participating in employment at the high Australian wage). The egalitarian

 character of the polity was strengthened further in the 1920s by the adoption of

 compulsory voting.

 I am grateful to Professor Graeme Snooks for leading me to some of the data, to Sherry Kong, Jong-Soon Kang and Miki Matsui for assistance in preparing charts and tables, and to Hilda Heidemanns for assistance in preparing the text. Some of the labour market material is drawn from work that I am undertaking

 with Rana Ganguly and Jong-Soon Kang.

 2

 White Australians' confidence in and enjoyment of these characteristics of their

 country were qualified by occasional realisation or fear that they

 were vulnerable to large outside forces that were beyond the control of a

 country with a tiny population (three and three quarter million at Federation, or

 about as many people as in Queensland now) occupying a large land mass on

 the edge of the teeming populations of Asia. Australians mostly thought of

 themselves as a British people, challenged from time to time by the imperial

 ambitions in the Southwest Pacific of the enemies of Britain in continental

 Europe, by the rising power of Japan, and in unspecified ways by the people

 who did not share Australian standards of living or culture or democratic

 organisation in China, Southeast Asia and India. Disrespect for Britain with its

 traditions of non-democratic privilege, and recurrent anxiety that Britain would

 trade Australia's hopes for its own imperial interests, were tempered by

 acceptance that Britain was for the foreseeable future the insurance against the

 great external dangers. Australia needed more people and a bigger economy to

 hold its material and political assets, and this, together with a sense that

 growing communities could enjoy higher standards of many kinds of public

 consumption that were highly valued, made national development a

 comfortable adjunct of the constrained egalitarian objective.

 At the time of Federation, the Australian self-definition in terms of a high and

 democratically distributed material standards of living and commitment to

 national development was greatly affected by the recent experience of a great

 financial crisis. The Depression of the 1890s was the Australian version of the

 crisis that came upon the rapidly growing economies of Southeast Asia in the

 late twentieth century. The Depression was seen as having come to Australia

 from world markets for goods and capital, challenging and for many people

 temporarily defeating the high material standard of living. By the early

 twentieth century, these forces from the global economy were amongst the

 elements against which Australian possessions needed protection. This recent

 experience helped to shape the young Australian Federation's development of

 the instruments through which it would pursue its goals of national

 development with a high and (amongst adult white males) egalitarian

 distribution of income. It tipped the balance in favour of a national policy of

 trade protection and rigid regulation of minimum wages by occupation for

 adult white males. It sharpened the pressures towards definition of a White

 Australia in terms that went beyond the general racial prejudice that was a

 strong influence on immigration policy in other countries of recent white

 settlement in North America and across the Tasman in New Zealand. (South

 Africa made a different racially prejudiced choice, in favour of the comforts

 that could be obtained from an abundance of non-white unskilled labour).

 Australian egalitarianism, and acceptance of use of the power of the state to

 pursue economic objectives, was eventually influential in many aspects of

 national life. The egalitarian and regulatory instinct affected the levels of wages

 across States, the allocation of public goods and services of many kinds, and

 rates of economic development amongst regions. An industry or a region that

 was damaged by one of the primary egalitarian policies (for example, tariff

 protection or national wage regulation) could appeal to a national sense of

 fairness for compensation. Hence tariff protection to compensate once-competitive manufacturing industry for protection of other industries;

 "protection all round " to compensate rural industries for manufacturing

 protection; and fiscal compensation to the smaller States to compensate for the

 costs of protection to manufacturing industry in the large cities.

 The attempt to use the power of the State to insulate the domestic standard of

 living, and to promote the ambition for national development, in the face

 of external dangers, was taken progressively further through the first third of

 the twentieth century. It came under some domestic challenge in the late

 nineteen twenties, as disappointment grew at the limited progress in national

 development. There was a larger trickle of southern (not-quite-white) European

 labour in the late 1920s; some questioning of the tradition (emerging from the

 4

 Harvester Judgement of 1907) that family welfare was promoted best by high

 adult male wages rather than family payments; a review of the costs of

 protection in the celebrated "Brigden Report" (which concluded that some

 protection was helpful to national development at the high Australian wage but

 that it had been taken too far); and the Bruce Government's fateful attempt to

 abolish the Commonwealth Arbitration Court. These challenges were swamped

 by the extreme problems of the Great Depression, seen then and after as having

 international origins. The questioning from an internationalist or analytical

 economic perspective ceased, and the average level of tariff protection was

 taken to its greatest height by the Scullin Government in 1931. Efforts were

 made to maintain the real wage levels that had been entrenched by regulation

 from the time of the Harvester Judgement. Violent community and responsive

 electoral reactions stopped the experiments with higher levels of non-British,

 European immigration, although there were occasional acts of humanity in

 relation to refugees.

 The Great Depression therefore ended one line of questioning of the

 established Australian approach to maintaining high egalitarian standards of

 living and national development. However, the extreme social distress of the

 time, and the security crisis that followed, led to pragmatic moderation of

 policy in many areas, within the broad approaches first adopted in the early

 twentieth century.

 The moderation overlapped with the final intensification of Australian

 regulatory isolationism. The Scullin Government's "Premier's Plan" applied

 conventional economic wisdom in a way that gave more than lip-service to the

 Australian sense of distributive justice. Nominal wage cuts and more

 importantly the Lyons' Government's devaluation of the Australian against the

 British pound were important among the reasons why Australia's path out of

 Depression was more rapid than that of other deeply affected democracies.

 Devaluation provided a context for some small reductions in protection (Chart

 5

 1). Family payments introduced during the late 1930s began the loosening of

 the connection between wages and the welfare of families.

 Beyond policy decision, the crushing economic and social pressures of the

 Great Depression weakened the occupational segregation by gender that had

 supported wage discrimination under the Harvester Judgement. Women's

 employment (at about 40% of the male wage) extended into previously male

 domains, and rose considerably while male employment declined. The labour

 market story of the Great Depression is so far from Australians'

 conventional understanding of their labour history that it is seldom told. The

 same Harvester Judgement pattern of wage regulation that made the Great

 Depression particularly severe in Australia, caused unemployment to be

 overwhelmingly a male phenomenon. For women, it began the walk towards

 labour market equity that was only partially reversed before the Second World

 War created opportunities for its extension (Chart 3).

 The softening of the early regulatory isolationism was extended in the

 immediate post-war period by the elaboration of the early "welfare state", and

 by a long period of wage moderation in the context of the new welfare state,

 supported politically by and rendering feasible the Government's

 unequivocal commitment to full employment. This was an early and less

 formal version of the 1980s "Accord", when labour's acceptance of wage

 moderation in the national interest helped to reconcile centralised wage

 determination with strong employment growth and reasonably strong growth in

 economic output. In turn, full employment joined the over-riding imperative of

 population growth in supporting acceptance of large-scale European

 immigration from outside the British Isles.

 By the mid-1960s all elements of the original Australian regulatory

 isolationism were under intellectual and political challenge.

 The final third of the twentieth century, the years from 1966, began with

 halting steps towards reform of the old Australian system. The various strands

 of policy reform coalesced into coherent movement towards greater

 international orientation and acceptance of a larger role for markets in

 economic activity after 1983.

 The history of the period after 1983 was and is seen by some as a

 comprehensive retreat from the values and policies through which Australians

 in the early Federation had primarily defined their nationality. There was

 certainly a retreat from the policies of the early Federation. White Australia had

 given way by the 1980s to large-scale, racially non-discriminatory

 immigration. Prime Minister Hawke's Economic Statement of March 1991

 announced the reduction of tariff protection to below the low levels in place at

 the beginning of the century. Considerable flexibility in wage determination

 was introduced under the Labor Governments and extended by the Howard

 Coalition after 1996. In wages policy, however, the shift did not extend to

 "safety net" minimum wages, which after a period of moderation within the

 Accord rose more rapidly in real terms in the last 5 years of the century

 than over any comparably long period since the original implementation of the

 Harvester Judgement approach, excepting only the years of the Whitlam Labor

 Government in the mid-1970s.

 There was no retreat in the period of internationally-oriented reform from the

 early Australian commitments to equitable distribution. The Australian

 compulsory-voting democracy required market-oriented reform to be

 taken forward within wider policies that acknowledged traditional Australian

 concern for equitable distribution. The considerable expansion of access to

 upper high school and tertiary education in the 1980s and early 1990s, the re-introduction in slightly modified form of the Whitlam Government's

 Medicare and a series of income taxation changes that generated benefits to

 wage-earners were important to the Labor Government's capacity to win the

 7

 acquiescence of the trade union movement and wider community in wage

 restraint and internationally-oriented reform of industry policy. There were

 large additional social security payments to low-income families with children

 in the late 1980s, and further increases in these and other social security

 payments under the Coalition government late in the century.

 On the old goal of population growth as an element of national development,

 the signs in the 1990s and since have been more equivocal. Levels of

 migration since the 1990-91 recession have been lower than in the 1980s, and

 there has been more open challenge to cultural and racial tolerance and

 diversity. The Premier of New South Wales, Bob Carr, has emerged as the first

 major Australian political figure to favour stagnant or declining population, in

 his case on environmental grounds. These issues have not yet played

 themselves out in the political market place.

 2. A Good End to a Fairly Good Century: National Development

 How well did Australia perform on its hopes for national development through

 the three periods with distinctly different approaches to regulatory policy in the

 twentieth century?

 Population grew strongly through the century, more than in any of the countries

 that are now rich (see Chart 4 for comparison with the United States). In the

 later decades of the century, Australia, with the United States and Canada, was

 one of a small number of developed countries that still had significant

 population growth in an era when fertility was well below replacement levels.

 In the first third of the century, when the system of regulatory isolationism was

 being installed and taken to its greatest extent, output per person grew more

 slowly in Australia (and the United Kingdom) than in any other of the countries

 that are now rich. Australia was a poor to middling performer through the

 second trimester of more moderate application of the policies of the young

 8

 Federation. Australia's performance relative to other developed countries was

 strong through the third trimester of internationally-oriented reform, rising to

 top place in the decade after the 1990-91 recession (see Charts 5 and 6 for

 comparisons with the United States). Interestingly, despite higher Australian

 GDP growth in the last decade of the century, employment growth was

 stronger in the United States (Chart 7).

 Relatively low growth in output per person through the first two trimesters

 removed the superiority of the standard of living in which Australians had

 taken pride early in the twentieth century. This slide down the world league

 table was one of the spurs to radical policy change. Australia's average output

 began to rise relative to all rich countries in the third trimester when

 comparison is based on domestic purchasing power, but only against some by

 other measures.

 The most common measure of average output for comparison across countries

 is GDP per capita as revealed in the national accounts, converted into a

 common currency at exchange rates in the year under consideration. This

 measure is relevant to assessment of relative international purchasing power,

 and to some extent locational decisions by people whose financial or human

 capital gives them choice on country of residence. By this measure, Australia

 continued to lose ground relative to the United States even in the 1990s.

 The explanation of the divergence between the two measures is the large

 depreciation of the Australian real exchange rate relative to the United States

 dollar over the last decade. Australian currency was weak relative to the

 United States dollar through the twentieth century (Chart 8). For the most part,

 the weak currency was matched by higher Australian inflation, so that there

 was a much smaller fall in the real exchange rate. A large part of the century's

 fall in the real exchange rate was concentrated in the last decade.

 0

 What is the cause of the long-term nominal and the less pronounced real

 depreciation of the Australian dollar? Does it matter, and is it likely to

 continue?

 For the most part, the nominal depreciation has been associated with high

 inflation. My own guess is that the ultimate cause of the long-term inflationary

 bias in Australia has been the combination of inflexibility in wages and to a

 lesser extent other prices in combination with volatile terms of trade in an

 economy more reliant than other developed countries on exports of primary

 commodities. In the 1990s, broad support for Central Bank independence

 around low inflation targets, greater price and structural flexibility in the

 economy and more diverse exports weakened the long-term tendency towards

 relatively high inflation and therefore nominal exchange rate depreciation.

 High inflation damages real economic performance if it goes beyond moderate

 limits, and the monetary caution that is necessary to stay within those limits is

 costly to output through the period of contraction.

 The real depreciation of recent years may be partly explained in terms of an

 unsustainable strengthening of the United States dollar. While the strong dollar

 lasts, Americans, like Japanese in the late 1980s, have access to exceptionally

 high international purchasing power. One consequence is an enhanced capacity

 to buy Australian business assets, which has generated unease in the Australian

 business community and to some extent in the wider society. Even if there is a

 substantial 'bubble' in the current value of the United States dollar (and no-one

 can know for sure except as history), it is likely that an element of twentieth

 century and probably of post-1990 real depreciation would remain after the

 bubble bursts. Over the first two trimesters of the twentieth century, the decline

 in relative output per person and wages in Australia contributed to the real

 depreciation. Over the century as a whole, the long-term decline in terms of

 trade (export relative to import prices) was a significant cause. Over the past

 one and a half decades, real depreciation has reflected as well the removal of

 10

 the tendency for protection and exchange controls artificially to raise domestic

 relative to international prices. Each of these factors had run its course by the

 beginnings of the twenty first century, making it more likely that the long-term

 real depreciation would also be coming to an end.

 The comparisons with the United States in this paper are a tough test, since the

 U.S. was a relatively strong performer through the century, and had one of its

 strongest decades in the 1990s. Comparisons with other countries that are now

 developed demonstrate more strongly Australia's relative underperformance on

 output per head in the first (although less so against Britain) and second

 trimesters, and its relatively strong performance in the third trimester and

 especially in the I990s.

 Factors other than the suitability of policy for growth affected relative

 economic performance. The high intensity of external trade with slowly

 growing Britain through the first and to a lesser extent the second trimester was

 a drag on Australian performance through these periods, and the increasing and

 high intensity of trade with rapidly growing East Asia in the third trimester

 favoured Australian growth (Chart 9). But an element of the strong orientation

 of trade towards the United Kingdom in the first two thirds of the century

 reflected discriminatory policy. The preferential trade area with the British

 Empire intensified in the 1930s, and discriminated against other Asian

 economic partners, most notably Japan. Its dampening effects on trade beyond

 the British Empire must be marked against the policies of the time. The greater

 orientation towards East Asia later in the century partly reflected the removal

 of tariff and exchange control discrimination, as well as public trade diplomacy

 to open markets in East Asia, and private investment in building productive

 trading relationships in Australia's neighbourhood.

 It might be argued that the strong concentration of Australian exports in farm

 and mining products, subject to declining prices relative to other goods and

 11

 services throughout the twentieth century, was a smaller disadvantage after the

 late twentieth century diversification of exports (Chart 10). This argument

 would ignore the extent to which the rapid growth of manufactured and

 services exports from the mid-1980s was caused by the greater international

 orientation of policy, including the reduction of the real exchange rate

 following the dismantling of exchange controls and protection.

 One significant influence on the comparisons of economic performance over

 the first trimester was the decimation of Australian youth and the build-up of

 foreign debt in the First World War. Much is made of the effect of destruction

 in Britain during the Second World War on post-war British economic

 performance. The proportionate Australian loss through death and injury

 (overwhelmingly prime-age males in the awkward language of labour

 economics) in the First World War, was much greater than that of the British in

 the Second World War.

 3. A Fairly Good End to A Fairly Good Century: Equity

 The Australian concern for "equity", and pragmatic acceptance of a large role

 for the State in its pursuit, was the focus of much international interest in the

 country at the beginnings of the Federation. The important place of equitable

 distribution in national goals had origins in the scarcity of labour, high average

 incomes and the early democracy that went with them, as well as in distinctive

 features of the early Australian economic structure. It has survived the

 twentieth century. No important policy change is feasible if it violates broadly

 supported conceptions of equity, whichever of the major political parties

 exercises executive power. The concern for it may be less central to national

 objectives in Australia than in a number of European democracies. But it

 remains much more important in Australia than in the principal comparator in

 this paper, the United States.

 12

 There have been changes over time in the categories of people amongst which

 the Australian polity has sought equitable distribution. Closer inspection

 reveals an unusual focus on horizontal (similar treatment of people in similar

 positions in the society), rather than on "vertical" equity (pursued by measures

 that raise the incomes of people with lower incomes and wealth relative to

 those with higher incomes and wealth). The priority of horizontal equity has

 been modified over a century of democratic practice in Australia, but continues

 to be uncritically accepted in many areas.

 Thus the original focus of the Harvester Judgement wages system was on

 equitable treatment of employed, adult, white males. The Arbitration system

 went on to develop an elaborate and rigid set of relativities across skills and

 industries: if a Grade 2 sawmiller received X% of the wage of a Grade I train

 driver in one decade, X could only be different in much later decades if the

 Court accepted after long argument that changes in the relative skill and other

 content of the jobs provided good reason for it.

 Over the twentieth century, mainly in the later decades, the focus on horizontal

 equity across the employed was extended at least nominally, and over time

 increasingly in reality, to all Australians. This required extension of the

 centralised wages system to women, and to Aborigines and other non-Europeans. By the late 1970s all employed Australians had been brought

 within the Arbitration system's conception of horizontal equity. The breaking

 down of the gender and racial segregation in the labour market which had been

 a necessary support for wage discrimination began earlier (at least for gender,

 under economic pressures in the Great Depression as discussed above) but is

 taking longer to complete.

 The pursuit of horizontal equity amongst the employed reduced focus on other

 measures to raise the economic welfare of families. It also delayed

 development in Australia of the welfare state behind the high-income

 13

 democracies of Europe. Through the first half of the twentieth century, an

 employed adult male received a wage that was supposed to meet the costs of

 supporting a wife and (variously in different formulations) two or three

 children, and an employed woman with children was supposed to make do with

 what was necessary to support a single woman. The family income supplement

 and its successors from the late 1980s greatly expanded recognition of the

 different circumstances of families with children. The later developments were

 the most important reason why the real living standards of the poorest 20 per

 cent of families rose in Australia, when they were falling in other developed

 countries through the global structural changes of the late 1980s and 1990s.

 A second implication of the focus on horizontal equity through most of the

 twentieth century was to downplay the effect of unemployment. There were

 exceptions, in the policies for recovery from the Great Depression embodied

 in the Premiers' Plan and the early years of the Lyons Government, the full

 employment policies of the post-war Chifley and Menzies Governments, and

 the period of the Accord under the Hawke Government (the early progress on

 which was broken by mismanagement of monetary policy leading to the 1990-91 recession). The exceptions required and received in varying degrees

 cooperation of organised employed workers in wage restraint, in the context

 (again in varying degrees) of other policies directed at vertical equity.

 One consequence of the extension of "wage equity" to young people, women

 and Aborigines was to increase the importance of unemployment amongst

 these groups. In the first half of the twentieth century, unemployment

 was substantially higher amongst adult, white men than other Australians.

 Through the final two decades of the century, unemployment was much higher

 amongst young people and Aborigines than other Australians, and higher for

 adult women than for adult men. The shift in the burden of unemployment

 would have been greater without the weakening of gender and racial

 segregation in the labour market.

 14

 The concern for horizontal more than vertical equity is part of the explanation

 for the exceptional unimportance of taxation of wealth (as distinct from

 income) in Australia, relative to other developed countries, including the

 United States and Japan in the Asia Pacific region. The abolition of gift and

 probate taxes in the 1970s and 1980s passed with little comment about its

 effects on equitable distribution, just at the time when the reduction in average

 family size and increases in average life-time accumulation of wealth were

 beginning to make differential inheritances a much more important source of

 future inequality in income as well as wealth. Until 1985, Australia was one of

 a small number of developed countries (with the United States amongst the

 large majority) that had no capital gains tax. The severity of the Australian

 capital gains tax was reduced (and the opportunities for avoidance of income

 tax by many people on high incomes simultaneously enhanced) in 2000 with

 little Parliamentary and community comment.

 The policies of "protection-all-round" owed a great deal to the Australian

 concern for horizontal equity. Tariff protection for manufacturing industries

 and fiscal subsidies of various kinds had a large and inequitable effect on the

 vertical distribution of income, but were broadly accepted as being fair to the

 extent that they seemed to be applied equitably across producers of various

 goods.

 The priority of horizontal equity can also be seen at work in the distribution of

 taxes raised by the Commonwealth Government and distributed amongst the

 States to correct the imbalance between the respective revenue-raising

 capacities and expenditure responsibilities of the two sovereign levels of

 Government within the Australian Federation (Garnaut and Fitzgerald, 2001,

 2002). Recent research by the National Centre for Social and Economic

 Modelling (NATSEM) for the Review of Commonwealth-State Funding has

 shown that the equalisation payments do not lower the gini coefficient of the

 15

 overall Australian distribution of income after Government expenditure is

 taken into account, or raise the average incomes after fiscal interventions of the

 poorest two deciles of the population

 This is another example of exceptionally strong Australian commitment to

 equity, but to its horizontal rather than its vertical dimension. In the case of

 Commonwealth grants to the States, the element of horizontal fiscal

 equalisation increased greatly through the twentieth century, and reached its

 greatest extent and was on an upward trajectory at the end of the period.

 Interestingly, Harding's work for the Review of Commonwealth-State Funding

 (Harding et al, 2002) reveals that the Commonwealth's fiscal intervention

 affecting directly the vertical distribution of income amongst Australians

 through the income taxation and social security systems, has larger effects in

 redistributing purchasing power amongst the citizens of the States than

 Horizontal Fiscal Equalisation in the distribution of grants to State

 Governments.

 How has Australia performed over the twentieth century, in relation to the

 polity's concern for equity and the de facto priority of horizontal equity?

 It is inherently difficult to separate the effects on the distribution of income of

 underlying change in economic, demographic and social structures, from the

 effects of policy interventions. Australia's early twentieth century comparative

 advantage in natural resource-based industries was less conducive to equitable

 distribution of incomes through market processes, independently of

 Government intervention, than the more diverse distribution of comparative

 advantage that emerged with population growth and the global decline in the

 relative economic importance of natural resources. The latter decline, however,

 created severe adjustment problems for the old rural communities and

 provincial towns in which broadacre farming provided the main economic

 16

 base, especially with the corruption of world trade in farm products that

 intensified from the mid-1980s. The greater technological sophistication of

 economic activity in the late twentieth century, and the entry of large

 developing countries into the world economy as suppliers of labour-intensive

 manufactured goods, increased the market value of highly educated relative to

 unskilled labour in all of the developed countries. The improvements in

 transport and communications extended nationally and internationally the

 markets for individual enterprises, and raised the economically efficient scale

 of production in many (although not all) goods and services. This increased the

 rents of superior performance or good fortune: for Chief Executive Officers;

 the stars of sport, cinema, media, theatre, literature and invention; and the

 people with the skills to contribute to development of global businesses. The

 social change that led to higher proportions of children being brought up by

 single parents has been a source of increased poverty, in the absence of

 intervention by Government.

 That said, a few generalisations can be made about the contribution of policy to

 trends in income distribution in Australia over the past century.

 The old Australian labour market segregation was greatly damaging to vertical

 equity until late in the century. The rigid wage regulation, through its effect on

 unemployment, has been damaging for longer. The removal of formal

 wage discrimination changed the age, colour and gender of unemployment, with

 the increase in employment amongst women being ameliorated somewhat by the

 end of occupational segregation.

 The performance on employment and unemployment is the big weakness in

 Australian policy performance related to equity through the twentieth century.

 The comparison with the United States is highly unfavourable, and became

 even more so with further divergence in approaches to social security and

 minimum wages from the 1970s. In 1970 the ratio of total employment to

 17

 numbers of residents above 15-16 years was 57.4 per cent in the United States

 and 59.7 per cent in Australia. By 2000, the ratio in the United States had risen

 strongly by 64.5 per cent, to well above the Australian ratio 59.9 per cent

 (Chart 12). The social dimension of contemporary unemployment is

 understood better when attention is given to the growing importance of "jobless

 families" and to the high proportion of children now being born into "jobless

 families" (McLure, 2000/ Dawkins, 2001). The correction of this weakness

 would make a major contribution to equitable distribution. Because it would

 be associated with much more complete utilisation of economic resources, it

 would contribute to economic growth as well.

 The gradual emergence of social security arrangements based on the

 circumstances of individuals and families has made a major contribution to

 vertical equity, with the personal income tax playing a significant supporting

 role. The contribution continued to increase late in the century with the

 adjustments at the time of the introduction of the Howard Government's new

 tax system in 2000. The large extension of the social security system in the

 1980s took the form of tightly means-tested benefits, which exacerbated

 disincentives to labour force participation. The correction of associated

 problems was commenced but not taken far with the introduction of the new

 tax system.

 Interstate and inter-regional inequality has been less important in Australia than

 in other geographically large and many small countries. This owes most to the

 geographic mobility of the Australian population, itself supported by high

 levels of immigration. Despite the mobility of the population, the slowest-growing States in population and economic activity (first of all Tasmania) have

 grown substantially more rapidly, absolutely and relative to the national totals,

 than the slower-growing States in the United States and Canada. Interestingly,

 the rate of growth of non-metropolitan regions was much stronger late in the

 18

 twentieth century, absolutely, and relative to the capital cities, than in earlier

 periods of regulatory isolationism (Chart 12).

 4. Contemporary Challenges, Old and New

 What are the challenges facing Australia in seeking to maintain through the

 twenty first century, the relatively strong economic performance of the late

 twentieth century? What are the additional challenges associated with

 achieving this result while pursuing policies that advance old Australian

 commitments to distributional equity?

 It is necessary to examine the relevance of old goals as a basis for assessing the

 prospects of making progress towards them. The experience of Australia's first

 century suggests that, in the absence of a large and unlikely change in political

 culture, the two questions are really one, since growth-promoting policies that

 violate community perceptions of distributional equity are not feasible in this

 compulsory-voting democratic polity.

 On the relevance of old goals, variations on the themes that originally drove

 Australian commitment to national development remain important.

 Commitment to the goal of national development is now qualified by concern for

 the link between population growth and environmental degradation, especially in

 the surrounds of Australia's politically influential largest city. The environmental

 concern about population growth is tempered by analysis that suggests that the

 nature of the link can be changed by wise policy, and that it is more likely to be

 changed in an economically successful community. To the extent that Sydney is

 different, the national debate will be affected by Sydney's success or failure in

 dealing with the problems of congestion. The balance of the debate will be

 affected as well by the policies that affect old and immigrant Australians'

 locational choices.

 19

 The technological change that has reduced the costs of transport and

 communications and driven the phenomenon described as "globalisation" has,

 on balance, increased the economic penalty of small scale at least in economies

 that are separated from the world's main centres of economic activity. There

 has been no diminution in the importance in consumption of non-traded goods

 and services in which small scale is a disadvantage. The foreign policy and

 defence realities that shaped positive Australian attitudes to growth in

 population and economic activity in the early years of the Federation and again

 in the period after the Second World War push in the same direction now as in

 the twentieth century. Today the old fears of invasion have little basis, but

 challenges to Australian sovereignty can arise in different ways from failures of

 political stability and development in Australia's immediate neighbourhood.

 Now, as a century ago, some Australians pin their hopes for protection of their

 country's sovereignty on alliance with the world's greatest military power.

 Now, more than a century ago, there should be informed recognition of the

 limits to protection through alliance, and of the contribution that independent

 Australian strength can make to the reliability of preferred alliances.

 Most Australians, now as a century ago, live in communities that value the

 expansion of amenities and opportunities associated with increasing

 population. There is unhappiness in communities in which population growth

 ceases, as in Tasmania at the end of the twentieth century and in many smaller

 communities over longer periods.

 There is a contemporary debate on the goal of national development that has

 not yet been worked through politically. It seems to me that only a

 comprehensive failure of leadership and management affecting provision of

 services in the great city of Sydney would cause the differences to be resolved

 in ways that did not support national population growth at least at something

 like the current level of about one and a quarter per cent per annum. This rate

 P

 is lower than the average for the twentieth century, (Chart 12), but would be

 still the highest of the developed countries.

 There is no sign of diminished commitment to the goal of rising levels of

 output per person and the associated increase in living standards.

 On the old goal of distributional equity, the twentieth century experience

 suggests that analysis and political debate and conflict can vary the extent of

 community attachment to particular instruments of policy, and the range of

 Australians for and amongst which Australians seek equitable

 outcomes. Over the century, there was an increasing tendency to emphasise

 vertical equity amongst all Australians, rather than on horizontal equity

 amongst sub-groups of the community. The extension of politically influential

 concern for equity amongst white males to other Australians was the most

 important example of this tendency. There is a possibility that there will be

 further broadening of the reach of Australian concern for equity, for example

 with higher priority being given to the interests of the unemployed. What is

 unlikely is a general downgrading of concern for distributional equity. There is

 a danger that the changing demographic structure, working through electoral

 politics, will come to privilege income support and services for the aged, in the

 way that policy at other times privileged other sub-groups of the Australian

 community.

 Successful reform of policies and institutions to raise economic performance in

 Australia have invariably been accompanied by other policies that appeal to

 concern for distributional justice. Effective measures to promote distributional

 equity make large demands on the country's fiscal resources. Economic growth

 is therefore a necessary underpinning of progress towards distributional equity.

 For these reasons, it remains likely that Australia will have all of productivity-raising economic reform, progress towards greater distributional equity and

 strong economic growth, or none of them. The centrality of expansion of

 21

 employment and reduction of unemployment to the vertical equity that has

 been rising in priority may make progress in reducing unemployment a

 condition for continued economic reform and economic growth.

 Global technological, demographic and economic developments have

 important implications for Australia's prospects for national development and

 distributional equity, in both positive and negative directions. The

 technological change that has driven "globalisation", has raised the stakes of

 success in national economic development. The gap between good and poor

 outcomes is greater in the modern international economy. Poor national

 performance now carries a greater risk of cumulative decline, with small,

 internationally isolated and less successful economies risking the loss of skilled

 and young people and capital in other forms.

 Technological change has also widened the dispersion in the distribution of

 personal incomes from the market, in the absence of Government intervention.

 It has made it more difficult to limit inter-personal income inequalities. In this

 sense, technological change has also raised the stakes of economic success for

 individuals.

 Demographic change and in particular the decline in fertility has increased the

 difficulty of maintaining high rates of economic growth in Australia as in other

 high-income countries. At the same time, low fertility and low rates of growth

 of work-age population in themselves have eased the problems of providing

 employment for young people, amongst which unemployment has been highest

 in recent decades. The ageing associated with low fertility in all high-income

 countries has introduced fiscal problems and reduced capacity for innovation

 and structural change. It has been one more factor tending to increase the stakes

 around success in national economic development, since the problems of

 ageing can be moderated by some forms of immigration. A large gap has

 emerged between economic performance of countries of immigration and other

 22

 developed economies, and is likely to widen through the twenty first century.

 Australia's experience in the second half of the twentieth century gives it a

 large advantage at present, but this may be challenged as others seek the

 economic advantages of immigration. Recent policy change to facilitate greater

 immigration of skilled people in Germany is likely to be emulated elsewhere.

 The interaction of strong economic growth in many including the most

 populous developing countries (most dramatically China, but also

 India) with demographic change will, if it is sustained, gradually diminish the

 extreme disadvantages of unskilled labour in the global economy that have

 emerged in recent decades. Global population growth is decelerating more

 rapidly than anticipated even a few years ago. The entry of the major

 developing countries into the global economy and the economic success with

 which that has been associated has been a short-term challenge but over time

 will become more benign in relation to the distribution of income in developed

 countries.

 Rapid economic growth in East Asia contributed much to Australian economic

 development during the period of internationally-oriented reform in the late

 twentieth century. It has been common in Australia to see the East Asian

 financial crisis of 1997-8 as a watershed, with slower East Asian growth after

 generating fewer opportunities for Australia. A closer look reveals no general

 loss of Asian growth momentum at the time of and following the crisis. The

 stagnation of Japan is neither new nor unanticipated (Garnaut, 1989), under the

 influence of one of the world's largest declines in fertility. The continued rapid

 expansion of the Chinese economy through the financial crisis and now

 through the United States "tech-wreck" and global recession of 2001 has

 reinforced confidence in its sustainability. The resilience of market-oriented

 reform in India through these shocks in the Asia Pacific economies reflects the

 strength of the new growth trends that emerged through the 1990s. Southeast

 Asia did move to a lower growth trajectory with the financial crisis, but since

 23

 that set-back has still been sustaining growth at average rates above the average

 for developing countries, and above such good performers amongst developed

 countries as the United States. The centre of gravity of global economic

 activity has continued to move towards Australia since the East Asian crisis,

 albeit at a more measured pace. Australia's location alongside the dynamism of

 the Asian economies will continue to be an asset in Australian national

 development, at least through the first several decades of the twenty first

 century.

 Most challenging for continued national development with equity in Australia

 will be the inter-related factors that make it more difficult to attract and to hold

 young people with economically valuable skills. Here the challenge comes

 from two sides, and responses on one side can complicate defence on the other.

 On one side is the dependence of support for internationally-oriented reform,

 and for reasonably high levels of migration in the interests of national

 development, on equity in domestic distribution. National development

 therefore depends on high employment and income security of Australians who

 are poorly endowed with economically valuable skills. On the other side is the

 challenge to attract and retain people with economically valuable skills, at a

 time when technological and economic change has been tending to widen the

 dispersion in the distribution of market outcomes. One important detail of this

 challenge is that Australian marginal tax rates on professional and managerial

 incomes are high compared with most of the countries with which Australia is

 competing in the market for skilled labour. Concern for national development

 alone would argue for acceptance of much wider after-tax income differentials.

 Unless achieved within a broader framework for achieving equitable

 distribution including high employment, this outcome could weaken support

 for internationally-oriented policies, and defeat national development from

 another direction.

 24

 S. Prioritising Equity in an Internationally -Oriented Economy

 National development and equitable distribution remain the primary goals of

 Australian economic policy, despite the large changes in the way in which

 "equity" is perceived, and some equivocation on population growth. Unlike

 the proverbial Irishman seeking directions to Dublin, Australia's starting point

 in the early twenty first century is in many ways favourable, after almost two

 decades of internationally-oriented reform.

 Australia, with its standard of living well above that of the rest world, had

 wider margins for error when it set out on its national journey a century ago.

 Australia fully utilised its margin for error through the twentieth century, but

 reacted to deterioration in its relative position amongst high-income countries

 in time to keep alive old ambitions for national development with equitable

 distribution. In this, it was unlike other countries of recent European settlement

 in the southern hemisphere, including Argentina, South Africa and (to a less

 remarkable extent) New Zealand, which had also seemed to be well-placed

 early in the twentieth century.

 The great challenge in the period ahead will be to make Australia an attractive

 place to live, build careers and develop businesses for large numbers of

 talented and well-educated young people, while meeting old Australian

 concerns for equity

 Progress on the agenda for reform to promote national development would on

 the whole be favourable to equitable distribution. Strong economic growth,

 above all from increased productivity, can provide the fiscal capacity that is

 necessary for expansion of the social security, health and education that are

 most important to raising the welfare of Australians who receive low incomes

 in the market place. The concentration on economically valuable skills in the

 25

 immigration programmes improves the prospects of relatively disadvantaged

 Australians.

 There are, however, elements of a reform programme to raise total output and

 incomes that would challenge both perceptions and realities of distributional

 equity. The fiscal resources applied to the pursuit of equitable distribution

 compete directly with the resources required to keep marginal tax rates

 competitive for the people with the education and skills which Australia

 requires to hold and attract for reasons of national development. The fiscal

 resources required to meet the aspirations of increasingly politically influential

 older people conflict with the requirements of educating and retaining the

 young. They conflict as well with the demands of social security and tax

 reform to reduce marginal effective tax rates and provide income security for

 poorer Australians in the process of moving to high levels of employment and

 low unemployment. High Commonwealth funding for fiscally weaker states

 competes for fiscal resources with improvement of public infrastructure in the

 great cities, in which congestion has generated resistance to growth, and in

 expanding provincial cities everywhere.

 Here, too, there are important lessons from the twentieth century experience.

 At a time of high stakes in national economic development success, and low

 margins for error, community aspirations for equitable distribution in Australia

 can be advanced only through having clear priorities amongst possible

 measures that might be taken in the name of equity.

 That will require focus on vertical equity. Intervention that chums the relative

 standing of people in the middle of the distribution often has similar economic

 costs to changes that focus on raising living standards of the poorest people.

 26

 We learned from the relationship between wage rigidity and unemployment in

 the twentieth century that fiscal payments for families is more erffective in

 alleviating poverty than high legal minimum wages.

 We learned as well that social security payments targeted tightly on people on

 low incomes create problems through the effects of high effective marginal tax

 rates on incentives for employment. We have to be much more clever in

 designing social security arrangements in ways that maintain incentives to

 employment to the greatest extent possible. A form of negative income tax,

 with lump sum payments to members of the labour force, would reconcile most

 effectively income security of low-income people with economic incentives to

 full employment. It happens that such a system could also address problems of

 child care (for its own sake and as an incentive to fertility) and inter-regional

 equity. The negative income tax is fiscally demanding, and its introduction

 would need to be phased in over six to ten years of relatively strong growth.

 In the meantime, the Five Economists' tax credit can generate much of the

 gains, at low fiscal cost, while being consistent with later movements towards a

 negative income tax.

 The greatly improved economic performance of Australia through the period of

 internationally-oriented reform provides the basis for an optimistic view of

 Australia's twenty first century prospects.

 It is prudent, however, to conclude by drawing attention to two potential

 developments, either of which could weaken this favourable outlook.

 One dangerous development in an area over which Australia has been able to

 exercise some influence in the past, is the recent weakening of the international

 trading system. Australia, as a small and geographically isolated economy, still

 with farm products playing significant roles in exports and domestic income

 distribution, would be damaged exceptionally by retreat from the late twentieth

 27

 century tendency towards open, non-discriminatory world trade. The global

 multilateral trading system has been strengthened in recent times by the entry

 of China and Taiwan into the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the launch

 of a new round of multilateral negotiations at the WTO Ministerial meeting in

 Doha. Despite this good progress in the multilateral system, there is currently

 much excited consideration of a large number of small-group free trade areas

 that, were they to become realities, would seriously damage the multilateral

 system that is so valuable for Australia. If it is not obvious from analysis, the

 danger to Australia should be apparent from the experience with preferential

 trade during the 1930s. Australia's participation on discussions of

 discriminatory free trade, and its contemplation of partially free trade with

 some trading partners, is inconsistent with the spirit, if also the capacity for

 enforcement, of WTO rules. Australia is not the main cause of the current

 dangers to itself in the international trading system, but is contributing to the

 risks.

 The second caution relates to the ambivalence about racial diversity that has

 become more prominent in Australian public discussion in recent years. If it

 grew to the extent that it seriously influenced immigration policy, it would

 undermine the great asset for national development that Australia currently

 shares with the United States and Canada: the capacity to continue to retain

 structural flexibility and growth in an era of low fertility in the high-income

 countries.

 28

 Average nominal manufacturing protection (stylised)

 (tariff plus tariff equivalents of quantitative mechandises)

 ri 45

 ,2 40

 c  35 R E 30

 a 25 c---- 20

 15

 y 10

 5

 6  0

 ar

 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

 Source:

 Social Democracy in Ausiralia'sAsianFurure, Ross Gamaut, 2001

 Trade Intensity, 4 countries

 60

 50

 40

 N

 30

 U,

 20

 r=

 10

 0 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

 Source: Australian Data: Australian Historical Statistics, 1987, ReservefonkofAea raffa Bulletin, Feb.2002. EconomicStulintiss 1900-1933, 1987. Jolernalional Hislorical StalialicaAfrica. Asia and Oceania 175 0-1993, B.R. Mitchell, 1998.

 British Data: BritfshHislorical Slatislicr, B.R.Mitcbell,1988. Economic Siafislics 1900-1983,1987. Japanese Data: Research and Statistics, Customs Division, Tax Hunan, Ministry of Finance of Japan, 1955, Economic Statistics L900-1983,1987. A Short Economic History of Modern Japan, 1962. The Gr . h of the National Ecunumy of Japan and USSR, 1963. lnlematiooal Hirrorfcal Slarisrics Afri ca, Asia and Oceania 1750

 .

 1993. B.R. Mitchell, 1998.

 US Dana: Ecancarie Srarisiies 1900-1981,1987. international Hisl arir 1 SraruriarThe Americas 1750-1988, BR. Mitchell, 1993.

 AUS

 _JPN

 ' UK

 -----USA

 Australian Employment as a Ratio of Population over 15 Years,

 by Gender

 C

 80.0%a

 a 0 a Q 60.0/

 C

 6 

 40.0/ a E

 20.0'/

 0

 0.0%

 1921 1933 1947

 Source: Cesus ofPopulatian and Housing, ABS, various issues.

 AUS & USA Population Growth 1900-2001

 1.75si  1  7^, r

 1

 . 1.40% 4 J - 17 ,_ lB AUS

 1.20% *' 

 0 USA

 1.31 - -

 1.00%'^

 d.80%' r! :. ax^^.'x:06%y

 K

 1

 0.60 /D _ ,...

 t:,

 0.40%

 0:20%

 0.00% ..  

 1900-1933 1933-1966 1966-2001 1991-2001

 nn.nn.m^de( 1J.r.6.S

 Ixrrmarinmal Hlrm!Irnf5rw4rh+-7fr4,..,k JY3O.)0.YM.&A. A(,HAI1, 1941. wrml^JTko F rly WijfW Th Trn ldrrmrwy-A.t0.1y1^L sFU)? O. th ,AUmNIV I ]6F.14UO,Gneme0.6matr^190a

 AUS & USA Real GDP G rowth 1900-2001

 5.00%

 4.62, 3.57 ;n`

 3.r 5 0

 4.00%.r'~

 2.00% 30

 DU

 J J

 2 00% 1  `1'.0010  ^ 'S'1900-1933 1933-1966 1966-2001 1991-2001Source: Phases. of Capitalist Development, Angus Maddison, 1982.DataStream, Advanced Economic DatabaseInternational Historical Statistics -- The Americas 1750 . 1988, B.R. Mitchell, 1993.portrait of The Family Within The Total Economy A Study in Long Run Dynamics,Australia 1788-1990, Graeme D. Snooks, 1994 AUS & USA Real GDP per Capita Growth 1900-2001

 3.50%-3.00%

 ------

 /o-= 3.26%

 ----------.^

 f

 2.50%

 1;:50

 C A US

 1.00% a46

 pUSA

 0.00/4 1900-1933 1933-1966 1966-2001 1991-2001

 Source: Phases of Capitalist Development, Angus Maddison, 1982.

 DafaStream, Advanced Economic Database International Historical Statistics  The Americas 1750-1988, B.R. Mitchell, 1993. Portrait of The Family Within The Total Economy A Study in Long Run Dynamics,_ Australia 1788-1990, Graemc D. Snooks, 1994

 Norminal and Real Exchange Rate Indices ($US1$AU)

 140

 120

 100

 80

 60

 40

 20

 0 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

 Source: World Development Indicator 2001, World Hank. International Financial Statistics 2001, IMF. http:lhttp lfwww.abs.guv.aulausstats, ABS. Awraliaa Hisfaricut S1atrsfics, 1987. Eronamic Slalislics 1900-1983, 1987.

 DER Index

 - - RER Index

 Destination of Australian Exports, various years, per cent

 100%

 80%

 60%

 40%

 20%

 0%

 1901 1933 1965 1971 1981 1991 2001

 n Japan 13 Developing East Asia  D Others M USA 1 Current European Union

 Sources: International Economic Databank, ANU; Australian Historical Statistics, 1987

 Composition of Domestic Exports, per cent

 100% -

 3Y 4 G%

 0

 as /fl ^ r

 r

 ?I8A 5 _

 29.29

 60%

 H

 ^' iE : 8120%111 rL1 1901 1933 1965 1971 1981 1991 2801M Rural Goods Ea Minerals O Manufacturing a ServicesSources: International Economic Databank, ANU;International Trade in Goods and Services. ABS, various issues

 80.0%

 60.0%

 40.0%

 20.0%

 0.0%

 Ratios of Employment to Population over 15 -16 years

 1970 2000

  Australia Males  Australia Females 0 US Males n US Females

 Sources: Australia and US Census Statistics, carious issues.

 Australian Population Growth Rates by region

 4.0%

 3.0%

 2.0%

 1.0%

 0.0%

 1901-60 1960-80 1980-2000

 Source: Cesus ofPonularion and Housinx, ABS, various issues.

