---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview, Charters Towers, Queensland: Shadow Cabinet, Charters Towers, Queensland: parliamentary reform; economic management; Four Corners program on asylum seekers; ageing population costs; superannuation; Irukandji death; School of the Air."
date: "2002-04-16"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236153
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ODC66%22
---

  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - SHADOW CABINET, CHARTERS   TOWERS, QUEENSLAND - 16TH APRIL 2002. 

  E & OE - PROOF ONLY 

  Subjects: Parliamentary reform, Economic management,   Four Corners program on asylum seekers, Ageing   Population costs, superannuation, Irukandji death,   School of the Air 

  JOURNALIST: (Inaudible). 

  CREAN: Well, we want to see what the Government is actually   proposing because we have not heard from the Prime Minister. But we   believe the Parliamentary process needs to be modernised. I have already   put forward suggestions to the Prime Minister. We are still awaiting a 

  response. What we want to see is whether he is prepared to consider fixed   terms because I think that as part of the modernisation process the real issue   is fixed terms in Parliament. 

  So we will be proposing some discussions with the Prime Minister around that   principle and we will see if he responds in a positive way. 

  JOURNALIST: ..a on how you are looking at the idea of (inaudible). 

  CREAN: Well we have never proposed that and I haven’t seen   what the Prime Minister is actually saying but if his purpose is to break down   accountability and reduce powers and the role of the Senate, then that is not   something I have ever proposed or supported. But let’s see what he is 

  actually proposing. I mean it’s about time this Prime Minister spelled out his   agenda. We know he hasn’t got a third term agenda and even on this narrow   issue of reform of the Parliament he is still not being clear. 

  JOURNALIST: There is a story about the Finance Department spending   $150M on changing banking practices which turns out to be - to make no   difference at all. Is this another Finance Department bungle? 

  CREAN: 

  Look, if this Government is supposed to be such great   economic managers, how do they keep losing people’s money? Peter Costello   has already lost $5 billion at the roulette wheel, now he is losing it to the   banks. The banks must be laughing all the way. Peter Costello can’t take a   trick. Losing money at the casino, now losing it to the banks. The Auditor-   General has clearly said this is a bungle and it has cost the Australian   taxpayers money. 

  JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, are you prepared to make any comment about   the Four Corners report on the asylum seekers and the allegations made   against the Government in that program? 

  CREAN: Well I think that the allegations against the Government   are very serious. The Government has to explain fully its role in the exercise   and clear the names of the Defence Force personnel. What it also highlights   is the way in which Defence Forces has been politicised in this whole tawdry   exercise. Now if the Government doesn’t explain fully, we have the capacity 

  in the Senate Inquiry to seek the answers. 

  JOURNALIST: Now, any decisions made on, say the Tampa issue, come   directly from the Prime Minister. Do you think that you should be involved in   those sort of issues. 

  CREAN: I’m not too sure of the point of the question . . . 

  JOURNALIST: Well in making decisions around that issue, our political   guys in Canberra want to know if you think that you should be involved in   making those decisions. 

  CREAN: I think that in the making of decisions in the national 

  security interest, border protection and steps taken associated with it, there is   a requirement for the Opposition Leader to be fully briefed about the   intelligence information upon which the Government claims to rely. The   problem that we have got is that it increasingly appears as though the 

  Government was prepared to misuse the information it had obtained. It has   also been demonstrated that the Government was prepared to have   information that involved spying on Australian citizens used in this exercise. 

  So I think it is terribly important that the Opposition Leader be fully informed   about the intelligence information so that we can make judgments of our   own, not based on what the Government tells us - because we know that the   Government has misused, deceived and lied about the information it has   obtained, particularly in relation to the Tampa incident. 

  JOURNALIST: Just with regard to that Four Corners report and what   you have heard, what allegations disturb you most? 

  2 

  CREAN: 

  I have not seen the full report. I was meeting last night   with Townsville enterprise learning important things about this area and   important aspects of infrastructure etc. I have still got to read the full   transcript and look at the tape. But from what I have heard the allegations 

  require the Government to explain itself fully, to clear the Defence Forces and   if the Government doesn’t explain fully we have the capacity, through the   Senate Inquiry to seek the answers. 

  JOURNALIST: To what extent has the Navy and the Army used the   whole boat people issue, tarnished its reputation . . . . . 

  CREAN: It’s the role that the Government has sought to use them   in that is really the point of criticism because what they have done is to   effectively drag the Defence Forces in to a political debate. The Defence   Forces should never be in political debate. The Defence Forces should serve   the Government of the day, whoever happens to be involved but they 

  shouldn’t be used to play politics and what this exercise surrounding the   Tampa and the so-called sinking of vessels is involved - is the Government   politicising the Defence Forces. That is not good for them. It is totally   inappropriate for a nation of Australia’s standing. 

  JOURNALIST: Moving on to another issue. The Government’s   prediction - a 40 year prediction of an ageing population is going to cripple   Budgets. Have you any idea how you would curb how much an ageing   population is going to cost the Government? 

  CREAN: Well, not only that. We are the only ones that have ever 

  come up with a solution. It’s called superannuation and the only time   superannuation was ever advanced in this country was under a Labor   Government. The Howard Government promised to keep the co-payment   going when it was elected in 1996 and they scrapped it in the first Budget.   They also made significant cuts to health and aged care in that same budget 

  and now they are telling us we have got a problem - What’s new? This just   sounds to be more softening up by Peter Costello for more budget cuts. It   sounds like code for budget cuts to me but let’s wait and see. 

  JOURNALIST:   from?   What would you do. Where would you pull the money 

  CREAN: I am saying that you need an approach over the long 

  term and the development of superannuation was such an approach. We   have been calling on the Government to join with us for some years now in   developing a bipartisan approach to the ageing of our population and the   costs associated with it. We have said to the Government we need a 

  bipartisan approach on the extension of superannuation. All John Howard   ever sought to do was to sensationalise and misrepresent and distort our   position in that regard. If the Government is serious about addressing this   issue it needs to come up with solutions, not scare tactics. 

  3 

  JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, you are talking about regional communities a 

  lot and obviously their significance and all parties are recognising that at the   moment. What sorts of things, are you taking out of those communities at   the moment to back your policies. 

  CREAN: The importance of working in partnership with regions, I   think the regions and their leadership best understand the needs and agendas   for themselves. What they have to do is to understand how to develop those   agendas and advance them with all levels of Government. I believe the most   constructive thing that Government can do these days is work in partnerships   together and with those regional communities so that all levels of   Government are working together to address them, that they are not buck- 

  passing, they are not blaming each other and saying it’s your responsibility -   but it’s a shared responsibility. I think that the solution in terms of regional   advancement is all levels of Government responding positively through their   programs and resources collectively and addressing the issues of 

  infrastructure, both social and economic. 

  JOURNALIST: On this latest Irukandji death, do you have anything to   say about that? Do you think that there is a dire need for more research   funding for something like that? 

  CREAN: Obviously the research has to be done and that research   has to be funded by all levels of Government contributing. We are seeing the   circumstances in which Councils are prepared to get behind it, the State and   Federal Governments need to do it as well. It’s not just an issue affecting 

  North Qld and Far North Qld, it affects the whole of the nation because the   tourism destinations that people come to here result in economic benefits to   the whole of the nation. 

  I would like to see the Federal Government getting behind a shared   commitment to the research effort. I urge them to do so. This is one of   those things where the solution does require whole of governments   collectively addressing the problem. 

  JOURNALIST: Do you think it’s sad that it had to come to a fatality   before they take notice? 

  CREAN: Yes it is but this incident, as I understand it, is only the 

  second of its type. In those circumstances, of course, if there has been no   problem in the past how do you protect or take steps against it? So whilst it   is tragic 

  I think that it’s out of the tragedy that we have to learn the lesson   and I note that his partner was urging the governments to really address the   research into this problem and to try and find a lasting solution. Now I think   that that is something that we collectively need to respond to and the Federal 

  Government in particular should be prepared to participate. 

  4 

  JOURNALIST: 

  Mr Crean, just quickly, did you enjoy your chat on School   of the Air this morning? 

  CREAN: Yes, I thought it was fantastic. They were great 

  questions. What impressed me was the extent of knowledge they had about   a whole range of issues and I was quite adept at pressing that pedal and   mastering the technology. So whilst I was on the School of the Air, I was   being schooled myself. I met one of the participants later. He happened to   be down from his station, he had to I think travel 3 % hours on a very bumpy   road he told me but it was terrific to see his enthusiasm. I think the real   issue here, and I had not been aware of this until now, was that the problem   is that the School for Distance Education stops at Year Ten. Now I think all   students have the right to study up to Year Twelve - they should have - and   I think it is one of those issues that we need to be really turning our minds to   by way of policy response. 

  JOURNALIST:   this?   Does that mean that you are going to actively work on 

  CREAN: It is something that I have taken away from here. It’s 

  something that immediately struck me and I think it’s something that we   should clearly have a look at. I think it is very important that they be given   the opportunity. I have actually had an involvement on Schools of the Air   before, in Alice Springs and the Kimberleys, so I think participating in them   and in particular talking, not just with the students, but with the teachers, the 

  people responsible for the preparation and the discipline associated with the   curriculum - they do a fantastic job - and I think that there is a network   there that clearly is performing a great community function. What we have to   do is to make sure that the opportunity that the kids want and are justified in   getting, is delivered to them. 

  Ends 

