---
title: "The 'Pacific solution' unravels."
date: "2002-07-31"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245856
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Z5376%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 31 July 2002

 THE ‘PACIFIC SOLUTION’ UNRAVELS

 Minister Ruddock must now come clean on the total cost, and future of his farcical “Pacific Solution” following his admission yesterday that 42 refugees have been secretly brought to Australia from Manus Island.

 The vast majority of asylum seekers on both Manus Island and Nauru have now received primary decisions, with very few awaiting an assessment.  Most remaining on these islands are either awaiting resettlement following a positive assessment or have requested a review of their case after a negative primary decision.  In any case recent statements by President Rene Harris of Nauru indicate that the Government is fast approaching the time when all asylum seekers must be taken off Nauru.

 The Government has already been caught out misleading the Australian people when the Prime Minister and Minister Ruddock declared last year that these asylum seekers would never come to Australia.  Australians now have the right to honest answers to the following questions:

  ! How many genuine refugees are going to be resettled in Australia and when will this happen? It is obscene that persons who have been found to be genuine refugees who fled persecution are required to wait in off-shore detention facilities while the Minister dithers.

  ! What is going to happen to those found not to be genuine refugees? Labor supports repatriation assistance for those who wish to return to Afghanistan voluntarily. But what does the Minister intend to do for those who do not accept voluntary returns?

  It is time the Howard Government ended this fiasco, told Australians the truth about its future and how many asylum seekers will end up in Australia.

  The Government should work with Labor to find a lasting comprehensive solution to the asylum seeker issue - a solution that is tough on border security and compassionate.

  For further information contact: Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637 Jamie Snashall, Adviser, on (02) 6277 4349 or 0408 419 699

