---
title: "Work for the Dole on important migration records."
date: "2002-05-24"
creators:
  - "Brough, Mal"
  - "Kemp, Rod"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211238552
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RZQ66%22
---

 THE HON MAL BROUGH MP

 MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT SERVICES

  

 Joint Media Release

 05502

 Work For The Dole On Important Migration Records

 Valuable migration records will be protected and made more accessible with the commencement in Perth of a new National Archives of Australia and Work for the Dole initiative.

 Announcing the project, the Minister for Employment Services, Mal Brough, and the Minister for the Arts and Sport, Senator Rod Kemp, highlighted the aim of the project - to give the Australian public, individuals and community groups, greater access to migration records.

 "To date Work for the Dole participants across Australia have helped local communities to gain a wide array of much needed local facilities and assistance. This project will enable participants to make a lasting contribution to the national good - it is truly a project of national significance," Mr Brough said, while visiting Perth today.

 The National Archives of Australia keeps records on migrants and refugees who arrived after World War II. The records include naturalisation, accommodation and employment information.

 "The National Archives also holds a full collection of passenger lists from 1924, along with many earlier records dating back to 1852. The details are part of Australia’s story, and reveal much about who we are and where we came from," Senator Kemp said.

 Sixteen jobseekers in Perth are the first to take part in these activities, having recently started cataloguing and recording historical records of people moving to Australia. Another group will follow in Melbourne shortly.

 "Unemployed people will be able to learn new computer skills in a realistic work situation while contributing strongly to safeguarding Australia’s past. Much of the information in these records is currently inaccessible and without the assistance of Work for the Dole participants, would be difficult for researchers to find and use," Mr Brough said.

 Senator Kemp noted that once processed, the records would be available to the thousands of Australians keen to trace their family backgrounds on the Internet and through contact with the National Archives of Australia.

  

 For further information contact:

 Greg Jackson 0419 713 246 (Minister Brough’s office)

 Richard Wise  03 9650 7274 (Senator Kemp’s office)                                                                          24/05/2002

  

