---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop: private health insurance premiums; Carmen Lawrence."
date: "2002-02-07"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234051
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VCV56%22
---

 Stephen Smith MP Member for Perth Shadow Minister for Health and Ageing

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, THURSDAY, 7th FEBRUARY 2002

 Subjects: Private health insurance premiums; Carmen Lawrence

 SMITH: Well, today on Health Minister Kay Patterson’s first outing on ABC radio we see the Government’s hypocrisy and dishonesty exposed.  In the run up to the last election the Government said there would be downward pressure on private health insurance premiums.  The Government boasted about the fact that there had been no health insurance premium increases in 2001.  They were boasting about the fact that there would be no increases. What do we see now?  We now see in the face of applications for 13 per cent and 15 per cent increases Health Minister Patterson saying there will be increases.  Families under pressure are about to be slugged.

 We also see the Government’s hypocrisy and dishonesty exposed in the Herald Sun today with Medibank Private officers confirming that in the course of 2001 they approached the Government for an increase and were told to shelve it for the election.

 So what a difference an election makes.  Families under pressure led down the garden path by this Government in the course of an election campaign and an election year and now they are about to be slugged.  So on Health Minister Kay Patterson’s first outing she exposes the Government’s hypocrisy and exposes the Government’s dishonesty leading Australians families, who are under financial pressure, down the garden path and softening them up for big slugs so far as private health insurance premiums are concerned.

 JOURNALIST: Would Labor support any-sized increase at all?

 SMITH: Well I have made it clear that you have got to consider each of the applications on their merits, but Labor wasn’t going around saying that there were no increases in 2001 and boasting about it.  Labor wasn’t going around being hypocritical and dishonest to families under pressure, leading them down the garden path in an election knowing that they have told Australia’s largest private health insurer, Medibank Private, to shelve an

 2

 application for increase in the course of an election year.  So whilst these can be considered individually on their merits, as I have made clear in recent weeks, in the face of 13 per cent applications and 15 per cent applications we see the Government’s dishonesty and hypocrisy exposed.

 JOURNALIST: What about Senator Patterson’s suggestion of a defacto means test by excluding extras, for example, 30 per cent rebate?

 SMITH: All of our policies, as you know, are under review other than the full privatisation of Telstra.  On the rebate itself I have said since I became Shadow Health Minister, that, whilst when the rebate was introduced you could regard it as a health measure, it’s now very much a measure which goes to the living standards and the family budgets of Australian families. And I think that is the great difficulty in making major change to the rebate that it is now very much pocketed by Australian families under financial pressure.

 I did see Senator Patterson saying that she was keeping the rebate under review - well all of our policies are under review other than the full privatisation of Telstra and various options have been and, will no doubt, be presented to us in the course of our review which will range from keeping the rebate in its entirety, abolishing the rebate and making modest or minor changes to it.  I’m sure you will be happy to wait for the outcome of our review in that respect.  But I think the guiding light substantively is that this measure is now regarded by very many Australian families, particularly those under financial pressure, as being a family budget issue rather than a health measure.

 JOURNALIST: So, Labor would consider quarantining the rebate simply to basic cover?

 SMITH: Well we have made it clear, Jim, that all of our policies are up for review and those suggestions will no doubt be put to us in the course of that review and we’ll consider those as we will consider suggestions that the rebate be retained in its entirety or abolished.  But the point I’ve made consistently is this: you have got to now regard the rebate as very much a measure which goes to the family budgets of Australian families under financial pressure and that’s the context or the prism in which I view it.

 JOURNALIST: Your colleague Carmen Lawrence will be speaking at a rally of refugees here at Parliament next week.  Is that appropriate for a Labor frontbencher to be speaking at rally like that?

 SMITH: Well, I am not aware of the details of that.  What Carmen does is essentially a matter for her.

 Ends.

