---
title: "The 'Pacific solution' farce: another 5% of the truth revealed."
date: "2002-10-02"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211248355
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9UJ76%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 THE ‘PACIFIC SOLUTION’ FARCE: ANOTHER 5% OF THE TRUTH REVEALED

 The latest announcement by the Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs that another 49 people from the so-called ‘Pacific Solution’ have arrived in Australia once again highlights the costly and farcical nature of this policy leaves a number of questions unanswered:

 49 people arrived from Manus Island in Sydney and will be resettled in NSW, Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia.  Refugees who have arrived in Australia for permanent settlement under the ‘Pacific Solution’ now total 200.  Approvals for asylum seekers on both Manus Island and Nauru now total 701.  Therefore, 28 per cent of those approved so far have been brought to Australia for resettlement with the Government refusing to tell the truth about its plans for further arrivals.

 Last year, the Prime Minister, Minister Ruddock and Minister Downer repeatedly promised the Australian people that the so-called Pacific Solution would be a real solution and pledged that these asylum seekers would never come to Australia.

 Yesterday’s announcement again proves that it is an unsustainable fiasco with Australia still retaining responsibility for the asylum seekers involved.

 After spending over $500 million all the Government has achieved is to delay the arrival of these asylum seekers from 2001 to 2002.

 Minister, come clean - how many asylum seekers will end up in Australia?  The Minister continues to hide behind departmental media releases and leaves it to departmental spokespeople to admit that “the resettlement of further refugees from the offshore processing centres is under consideration.”  So, despite pledges that they would not come to Australia, the Government is sneaking small groups of refugees into the country bit by bit.

 The Government should work with Labor to find a lasting comprehensive solution to the asylum seeker issue - a solution that is both tough on border security and compassionate.

 2 October 2002

 For further information contact: Laurie Ferguson on 0418 601 716 Jamie Snashall on 0407 438 746

