---
title: "Minister launches booklet on Australia's commitment to refugees."
date: "2002-10-09"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211248546
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BZL76%22
---

 MINISTER LAUNCHES BOOKLET ON AUSTRALIA’S COMMITMENT TO REFUGEES

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today launched the 2002 edition of the booklet Refugee and Humanitarian Issues: Australia’s response, which outlines Australia’s active and cooperative approach to the management of humanitarian crises and the orderly movement of people in humanitarian need.

 The booklet was launched during Austcare Refugee Week, an annual event to raise public awareness  of  refugees  and  other  people  of  concern.   This  year,  Austcare  Refugee  Week runs from 7 to 13 October.

 “The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates there are almost 20 million refugees and other people of humanitarian concern in the world today.

 “While we can realistically hope to assist only a fraction of the 20 million, our contribution - in the forms of aid, diplomatic efforts, resettlement and asylum - is significant.

 “We are working with countries of origin and countries of first asylum to reduce outflows by addressing some of the problems at source.  We are working with the international community and countries of transit to disrupt irregular people movements and thwart the efforts of people smugglers.

 “In fact, the Federal Government through Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock participated last week in UNHCR’s executive committee as part of our ongoing commitment to these international processes.

 “A key element of our overall strategy to help those most in need is our orderly humanitarian settlement program.  It is a central means by which Australia as a nation can assist those most in need to rebuild their lives and to continue the process of building a strong, compassionate nation.”

 Mr Hardgrave said Australia had some of the most comprehensive and generous programs in the world to assist humanitarian entrants who were permanent residents become fully participating members of the community.

 Successful settlement services, a key objective of Australia’s Humanitarian Program, include accommodation and community support, an Adult Migrant English Program and Translating and Interpreting Services.

 While in Adelaide today, Mr Hardgrave discussed ways of improving settlement services for migrants and humanitarian entrants with Adelaide community representatives.

 He is conducting consultations in each State and Territory as part of the Review of Settlement Services to Migrants and Humanitarian Entrants, which was announced on 6 August 2002.

 Mr Hardgrave said it was important to ensure services were delivered effectively to assist new arrivals in Australia to participate fully in the Australian community.

 The booklet Refugee and Humanitarian Issues: Australia’s response will be on the website: www.immi.gov.au under ‘What’s New’ or from DIMIA.

 9 OCTOBER 2002 MEDIA CONTACT:  AMANDA LYNCH on 0419 123 862

