---
title: "Ruddock must go: Democrats."
date: "2002-01-20"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232776
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9QR56%22
---

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Leader of the Australian Democrats

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Immigration Spokesperson

 20 January 2002                     MEDIA RELEASE                                  02/013

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 Ruddock must go: Democrats Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja, today called for the resignation of Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock over his continuing inability to properly manage Australia’s immigration detention centres.  

 “Any Prison Minister who had this level of ongoing disruption in their jails would have been sacked long ago,” said Senator Stott Despoja.  

 “The widespread protests and hunger strikes at Woomera are the latest in a long line of escapes, riots, protests and hunger strikes.  In addition there have been many allegations of mistreatment and abuse of detainees, inability to properly access legal assistance, studies showing widespread and serious psychiatric illness and 6 deaths in immigration detention in just over 12 months.  

 “Australia’s detention centres have also repeatedly been found to breach basic human rights standards.  

 “This farce has cost taxpayers millions of dollars, Australia its international reputation as a supporter and advocate of human rights, and resulted in immense misery and suffering for thousands of people who have not even been charged with an offence, let alone convicted of any crime,” said Senator Stott Despoja.  

 Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett said, “The Democrats call again for the immediate adoption of an alternative model, such as that used more successfully in many parts of Europe, where the majority of asylum seekers are allowed out in the community while their claims are assessed.

 “At the very least, unaccompanied children held at detention centres should be relocated.  

 “The Democrats also call for quicker processing of claims, including those of Afghani asylum seekers. Previous suggestions by the Minister that we should wait to see how things develop in Afghanistan before finalising claims are unacceptable.  People should not be kept imprisoned one day longer than is necessary.  

 “To suggest persecution in Afghanistan is going to stop overnight is absurd, as the Minister would know.  It demonstrates once again the Government’s continuing attempts to mislead the Australian people,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “If Minister Ruddock cannot manage Australia’s detention centres in a more compassionate and responsible manner then he should resign and let the Prime Minister find someone who can,” concluded Senator Stott Despoja. 

 For inquires:  Serena Rogers on 0419 833 571 or Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

