---
title: "Another raid on illegal workers highlights lack of government strategy."
date: "2002-09-09"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211247432
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D6D76%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 ANOTHER RAID ON ILLEGAL WORKERS HIGHLIGHTS LACK OF GOVERNMENT STRATEGY

 This morning’s raid by Immigration Department officers on a tiling company at Baulkham Hills in Sydney netted six Koreans suspected of working illegally in Australia.

 The raid would have been even more fruitful had the Department possessed the authority to stop suspected illegal workers using their mobile phones to ring and warn their countrymen not to enter the company’s premises.  Two men attempted to escape; one was recaptured, and NSW Police are searching for the second man.

 While I applaud the raid carried out this morning, it simply highlights the lack of a systematic strategy from the Department and the Minister when it comes to people in Australia working illegally.  The company in question - De Lorenzo Ceramics - admitted to the Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) more than six months ago that it knew its sub-contractors were employing people illegally.  The CFMEU relayed this information to both the Department and the Cole Royal Commission into the building and construction industry.  Yet no action was taken until the union indicated it would seek to have the matter raised in Parliament next week.

 The case also highlights the Department’s total lack of power in this area.  They are not able to stop employers using illegal labour - all they can do is take the easy way out and deport those in Australia working illegally.  This only addresses the symptoms not the causes of the problem - the imposition of sanctions on those bosses caught out employing people illegally and preventing Australians getting a job in the industry.  Currently, the Department can refer the employer to the State Department of Industrial Relations and that’s it.

 It’s about time the Minister applied the same zeal to employers exploiting illegal foreign workers as he does to unauthorised boat arrivals.  Australian workers deserve a Minister who takes real action to protect their wages and conditions from being undermined by illegal foreign labour.

 9 September 2002

 For further information contact: Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637 Jamie Snashall, Adviser, on (02) 6277 4349 or 0408 419 699

