---
title: "Larrakeyah Barracks Darwin: transcript of doorstop: Coast Guard, Iraq, modernisation, Senator Robert Hill, LNG project, asylum seekers."
date: "2002-08-12"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211246433
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LG576%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - LARRAKEYAH BARRACKS DARWIN - 12 AUGUST 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Coast Guard, Iraq, Modernisation, Senator Robert Hill, LNG Project, Asylum Seekers

 CREAN: We have been out for a couple of hours today.  It was a great experience, we saw the Navy intercept a suspected fishing vessel and organise a boarding party for it, we also saw it rescue a man overboard.  I think the Navy is doing a great job in terms of patrolling our northern borders, but how much better would its task be if it also had a purpose built coast guard supporting it?  No one is talking about taking resources away from the Navy, what we are talking about is supplementing them.  Putting a cop on the beat, enforcement capacity, leaving the Navy to do its core activities, defending Australia.  Doing what it does best.  I am still committed to the development of a coast guard as part of our border protection strategy, it’s not only for the purposes of people smugglers but also drug runners, gun runners, protecting our fisheries, protecting the country in quarantine circumstances.  So, I am committed to pursuing the development of a coast guard, but I have been delighted to see and continue to support the role the Navy plays in defending our borders.

 JOURNALIST: Is Stephen Martin resigning today?

 CREAN: I will comment about that later, I haven’t heard that.

 JOURNALIST:  The Prime Minister has made some comments today saying you have got your facts wrong, the Wheat Board has got its facts wrong.  What’s your response?

 CREAN: Everyone is wrong except the Prime Minister.  I mean the truth is we have lost wheat sales to Iraq because Alexander Downer has talked up the problem ahead of the U.S. and it’s cost Australia.  Now the Grains Council have criticised that action, I’ve criticised it, it wasn’t necessary. No one can question my commitment to this country.  But in doing that we

 have got to have cool heads about what’s in our interests.  We have got to be part of an international effort to get the weapons inspectors back into Iraq and that’s where the efforts have got to be directed.  And I point out to the Prime Minister that we supported the United Nations coalition led effort into Iraq last time in 1991 and did not lose wheat sales to Iraq.  $820 million of Australian wheat sales have now been lost as a result of Alexander Downer’s inappropriate statements, it’s about time the Prime Minister stopped lecturing us, I’ve got a commitment to Australia, what he should be doing is disciplining Alexander Downer.

 JOURNALIST: Senator Hill says that giving into Iraqi threats on wheat would be like allowing them to bribe us not to go in and attack.

 CREAN: No one is expecting them to give into Iraqi threats, no matter what those threats are.  Australia should never give into threats. Australia should stand proud and we should be supportive of international efforts to rid the world of a threat of weapons of mass destruction.  That’s why the U.N. effort needs to be supported, that’s what I support, that is in Australia’s interests.  But done properly it doesn’t mean that we have to suffer on the trade front.  We proved that in 1991, we are suffering now, what’s the difference? Alexander Downer is Foreign Minister now, that’s the difference and he has cost Australia, and the Prime Minister ought to be man enough and own up to it.  I’ll join with the Prime Minister and support any effort to get the U.N. weapons inspectors back into Iraq, but we shouldn’t be putting Australian grain growers at risk through ill appropriate statements from the Foreign Minister.

 JOURNALIST: The Government says that they are not being Rambo; do you think they are being a little bit of Rambo on this?

 CREAN: Everyone thinks they are being Rambo.  Everyone knows Alexander is being Rambo, even his own Parliamentary colleagues are leaking against him, saying that what he said was inappropriate.  Now just because the Labor Party tells the truth isn’t reason for John Howard to be in denial. He ought to be man enough to admit what everyone else knows, Alexander Downer’s statements have cost us they didn’t need to, let’s get back to a cool headed approach, that’s what I will join the Prime Minister with, cool headed approach, get the weapons inspectors back in, lets get the world freer, more secure and not threatened by weapons of mass destruction.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think they are between a rock and a hard place here?  They don’t give out information, they are accused of not being fair to the Australian public, they give out information and they are attacked for it. They are saying they are simply bringing Australians into their confidence.

 CREAN: No they are not.  Because they weren’t giving out any information.  All Alexander Downer was doing was talking up the problem, what he should have been talking about was a solution.  I want a solution,

 not a problem.  He has given us a problem. I’m committed to working to a solution.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean you have made reforming the Labor Party a test of your leadership.  Will you resign if those reforms don’t get through and passed?

 CREAN: I intend for the reforms to get through.

 JOURNALIST: But what if they don’t?

 CREAN: Look, I think this is fascinating, what if they do?  You know this is the point, if they do get through and I am committed to getting them through, I’m convinced they will get through.  Just imagine how much better off this country will be because it will have a leader that is not only prepared to reform his own party but prepared to show there is a different way of doing politics in this country.  One that is more open with the Australian public, one that is more honest with them and one that treats them as equals.  Now that is a set of values I think Australians want and the reason I want to reform the party is because I want to instil those values in it because that’s how I want to lead the country.

 JOURNALIST: But you are not prepared to stake your leadership on it?

 CREAN: You know what I am staking the leadership on?  Getting these reforms through the National Conference in October and I’m looking for all the support in that.  I urge Party members to get behind these reforms, let’s get endorsement for them because they are the right way forward and I am confident that over the next few weeks that support will develop.

 JOURNALIST: And the process in Darwin, what are you doing in Darwin to sort of promote that reform process?

 CREAN: We had a Party policy forum to which all members were invited, in Alice Springs and Darwin yesterday.  We have got a community forum invited everyone, every group in the community to a function tonight to hear from them issues that are of concern to them.  It’s part of this inclusion approach, it’s opening up and saying we want a partnership with you.  We want to develop the agendas and issues that matter to you.  We want to be champions for your community, not just standing as the Labor Party at the next election.  We want to represent you, we want you to be part of that, we want you to take ownership in it, that’s what we are up here for, developing that agenda.  And of course today, we have also been looking at the role of the Navy and how we can better assist it in protecting our borders. The solution for that, I’m firmly convinced is a U.S. style coast guard to support it.  Working together patrolling our borders, that’s good policy, that’s good for the country, that’s real border protection, not just the Pacific Solution.

 JOURNALIST: Are you expecting some complaints from your female colleagues in the Shadow Cabinet tomorrow when it meets about the decision on women’s representation within the Party?

 CREAN: Look, I think that everyone who has read the recommendation understands that the commitment is there to move forward in terms of increased women’s representation, I said on the day that the report was released and I have repeated it since, I’m committed to getting more women into the Federal Parliament, but there are different views as to the best way to achieve it.  Not everyone agrees that lifting the quota is the best means for achieving it.  Now I am interested in getting the best means, I want the results, I don’t want just talk about quotas, I want the results and that’s what I’m committed to achieving.

 JOURNALIST: Have you have spoken about Clare Martin; I mean have you used her fitting that bill?

 CREAN: Absolutely, I think, well Clare Martin of course has fitted that bill.  If what she is trying to suggest that she might be coming to Federal Parliament, oh no, don’t take that out of the question, but Clare has fitted that bill and she is a great asset, not just for the Labor Party but for the nation, she is leading the Territory in a decisive way and I think people like her change of style and her approach. She’s the consequence of a Labor Party committing to get more women in.  We made that commitment in 1994 and in that time we’ve doubled the number of women in Australian parliaments representing the Labor Party.  In the same time the Liberal Party has gone backwards.  You tell me who has got the better commitment to getting women into Australian parliaments.

 JOURNALIST: Have you discussed the issue of quotas with Clare Martin at all?

 CREAN: I’ll be speaking with Clare tonight, I will be speaking about lots of things, no doubt the most important thing we will be talking about is gas.

 JOURNALIST: What will you talk about specifically about gas?

 CREAN: Well I think that obviously the question of gas in this country is terribly important.  We have just seen the significance of the big LNG project.  I might say in relation that LNG project, it’s a great example of both sides of politics working together with industry, a partnership to secure the national interest.  No one person should claim credit for that.  It was a joint effort, it was a partnership and it’s what I want to do more of.  But in relation to gas and Darwin, I think that there is a very important set of considerations to take here as to whether that which is available should be exported or whether it should be brought on shore to give greater energy

 resourcefulness to the country.  I think the great pity is that that decision is being considered in a vacuum, what we should have is a national energy policy.  We need to know what is in the national interest, it is about time we had a national energy policy and the Labor Party will be developing one.

 JOURNALIST: What is your position as far as Greater Sunrise is concerned, what would be best for Australia?

 CREAN: No we are having discussions whilst we are here in relation to that, I think it is important to consider all of the circumstances but it would be much better to consider it in the context of a national energy policy.  Now the Government talked about the need for it, it still hasn’t produced one, It’s been in office for six and a half years, what’s it been doing?  And here we have the Prime Minister applauding the L and G gas decision, but where’s his plan to further boost and further make Australia self sufficient and able to compete with the rest of the world, not just for exports but in terms of energy provision in this country.

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of Senator Hill being here today, launching his one helicopter at Christmas Island?  Yeah what do you make of that, is it a bit of a sabotage?

 CREAN: I wouldn’t call it sabotage; I’m delighted that he is because he knows that we have set the agenda.  It’s interesting that only one Cabinet Minister has come here for the Howard Government, I have brought my whole Shadow Cabinet.  It is also interesting that we planned this visit over a week and a half ago and had to go through Senator Hill’s office to get permission, doesn’t that sound a bit surprising that a couple of days ago he said he said he would be here, not only on the same day but just ahead of us and then told us that we would have to take the boat out a bit earlier so we wouldn’t clash with his press conference, who is following who?  This is the Labor Party leading Senator Hill following.  Well I am delighted, I congratulate him for the small initiatives that he has announced today, but just imagine how much better our borders would be protected if we had a coast guard, that’s what he should get behind, that’s what he should be supporting.  That’s what Labor supports and if elected that’s what we will implement.

 JOURNALIST: What about your reactions to the comments today about targeting tourist visas of over-stayers?

 CREAN: I must confess I haven’t seen that report, I will have to get some advice on that.

 JOURNALIST: Discussion paper from the Department of Immigration saying that people from high risk countries may have to submit significant details, like bank accounts and employment details before they come to Australia.

 CREAN: Well I think that sounds like a sensible step forward.  I think that we shouldn’t kid ourselves that the only threat of illegal entry to this country is by people coming across the water.  There are many thousands that can come into this country by buying an airline ticket and drifting into the community.  You never hear the Government talking about them.  So if in fact that suggestion has been put forward as you describe it, I think that makes a lot of sense.

 JOURNALIST: Something like half the people in detention at the moment are actually that some of these people that have come in on flights…is that right?

 CREAN: Again, I’m not too sure of the statistics but if you look at the reports there are many people in the community who can’t be detected, who shouldn’t be here but the Government’s paying no attention to them.

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister will be asking the PNG new Prime Minister to accept more asylum seekers while he is over there.  What’s your position on that.

 CREAN: Well the Prime Minister should stop pursuing a failed solution.  This is not a Pacific Solution that he has been pursuing , it’s a political solution.  I think that we need a lasting solution.   And rather than having other countries take the problem for which we pay a huge price, I think we should be looking for greater deterrents, more agreements with our northern neighbours about stopping the boat smugglers, stopping the boats before they leave the country and having a cop on the beat, the coast guard control our waters.  But the Pacific Solution has been a costly failure for this Government, let’s look at utilising those resources, far more effectively to getting a lasting solution. I’m committed to working with the Prime Minister to achieve such an objective.

 Ends.

