---
title: "Manuka Oval, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: asylum seekers; Governor General; cricket match."
date: "2002-03-08"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234822
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9J266%22
---

 www.pm.gov.au

 8 March 2002

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON JOHN HOWARD DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, MANUKA OVAL, CANBERRA

 Subjects: asylum seekers; Governor General;  cricket match.

 E&OE…………………………………………………………………………………………..

 JOURNALIST:

 Mr Howard are going to be blackmailed by the asylum seekers at Woomera?

 PRIME MINISTER:

 Well you choose to use the word "blackmail", I haven’t used it. Our position is that the policy remains in place and the policy is not going to alter and it’s the only policy that we can effectively have to control the flow of immigrants to this country. We will process people as speedily as we can but we can’t avoid a decision as a nation, we either have the policy of mandatory detention in humane conditions, and I would assert the conditions are humane, there’s proper food, clothing, in the circumstances proper shelter, medical attention, educational support for children. We can’t do more than that if you have mandatory detention and mandatory detention was introduced by Labor and continued by the Coalition, and although they bob and weave and take cheap shots Labor still supports mandatory detention. So we don’t intend to alter that policy and people should understand that.

 JOURNALIST:

 Is the Governor General in the same position as Geoff Clarke?

 PRIME MINISTER:

 Look I’m not going to start drawing comparisons between people. In relation to the Governor General you know my position. The Governor General has not been accused of any personal wrongdoing, he’s not been accused of any crime.  At worst like you and me he’s been guilty of errors of judgment.  And I remain rock solid in my belief that on the information now

 PRIME MINISTER

 2

 available to me there are no reasons to recommend his removal and you know my position on that.

 JOURNALIST:

 Are you confident of a win today?

 PRIME MINISTER:

 I hope we have more success than we did last year but I think it’s a good day for bringing Australians together.  The purpose of this is to help give encouragement to young indigenous cricketers and in the process expose to greater public gaze some of young cricketers in Australia generally and I think it will be played in a warm and positive spirit and I’m delighted that we can have it.

 Thank you.

 [ends]

