---
title: "Labor divided and very confused."
date: "2002-02-07"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234060
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YGV56%22
---

 Media Release SENATOR THE HON. ERIC ABETZ Special Minister of State

 Liberal Senator for Tasmania

  

 A34/02 7 February 2002

 LABOR DIVIDED AND VERY CONFUSED The extent of the Labor Party’s confusion over the issue of illegal arrivals became strikingly obvious yesterday when one Labor heavyweight emailed party MPs on the issue.

 John Robertson, Secretary of the Labor Council of NSW and a member of Labor for Refugees, sent a personalised email urging Labor MPs in Australian parliaments to sign a prepared statement. By way of introduction Mr Robertson wrote:

 Given the current debate about refugee policy I urge Labor Members of Parliament to support the following statement that has been prepared by Labor for Refugees. Please inform my office on refugees@labor.org.au if you support this statement.

 We will keep your support confidential until such time as we get a critical mass of supporters. We will also inform Members personally prior to any proposed release of names.

 Mr Robertson’s commitment to confidentiality was somewhat undermined, however, by his decision to include Liberal Senator and Special Minister of State, Eric Abetz, on his mailing list.

 "Labor is in disarray," Senator Abetz observed. "Mr Robertson’s carelessness in sending this personalised email to me is symptomatic of their confusion - and less than rigorous research skills.

 "But more importantly, Labor is hopelessly divided on the issue of illegal arrivals. Just two weeks ago, Labor frontbencher Mark Latham said the Labor for Refugees campaign was ‘a betrayal’, and that the group was turning ‘a blind eye to illegal migration’ and people smugglers.

 "Given Mr Crean’s recent commitment to retain mandatory detention, will he sign this statement? Is this an attempt by Labor for Refugees to undermine Mr Crean’s leadership? Will Labor’s spokesperson on this issue, Julia Gillard, sign this statement?

 "Above all, this statement is definitive evidence that a significant proportion of Labor MPs are completely out of step with public opinion on the issue of illegal arrivals," Senator Abetz said.

 Media inquiries:  Michael Barrett 02 6277 7600 or 0419 276 490

