---
title: "Government must fully answer 4 Corners accusations."
date: "2002-04-16"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236141
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FRC66%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE

 Senator Chris Evans Labor Senator for Western Australia Shadow Minister for Defence

 16 April 2002

 GOVERNMENT MUST FULLY ANSWER 4 CORNERS ACCUSATIONS

 The Minister for Defence should issue a full and public explanation on the allegations aired on Four Corners last night concerning the treatment of asylum seekers, Shadow Minister for Defence, Senator Chris Evans said today.

 “The allegation that excessive force was used by Australian Defence Force personnel in handling asylum seekers is a serious one and deserves an immediate response,” Senator Evans said.

 Already a spokesperson for the Defence Minister has told ABC radio that capsicum spray was not used, while Maritime Commander Rear-Admiral Smith, during the A Certain Maritime Incident inquiry, on April 11, confirmed that capsicum spray had been used on at least one occasion.

 “Senator Hill has to be honest about this and provide a full public explanation.

 “If the most recent claims on 4 Corners are false, then the ADF deserves to have its name cleared of the allegations.

 “If the claims are true then they clearly warrant investigation.

 “I am concerned that the Navy has, yet again, been dragged into a political debate by this Government as part of its politicisation of the Defence Force.”

 ABC’S AM THIS MORNING:  “Senator Hill's spokeswoman says capsicum spray was issued but the Minister has preliminary advice that it wasn't used. She says further checks are being done to confirm that.”

 REAR ADMIRAL SMITH, APRIL 11: “The TSE sailors have batons and they are trained in the use of that sort of thing. The only people trained to use non-lethal weapons such as capsicum spray are the soldiers, and they carry that. It was necessary to use that on very few occasions. There was certainly one incident that I can recall but I will have to check it.”

 For comment: Chris Evans 0419 983 593 Tim Friedrich 0438 983 908

