---
title: "Children must be released."
date: "2002-05-21"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211238385
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CQL66%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P. Shadow Minister for Population & Immigration

 MEDIA RELEASE

 CHILDREN MUST BE RELEASED

 Today's "Damaging Kids" report from the Catholic Commission for Justice Development and Peace is a powerful argument for the Howard Government to adopt Labor’s policy of releasing all children from Australian immigration detention centres.

 The "Damaging Kids" report documents for the first time the extremely high rates of self-harm in Australia's detention centres.  The Commission's Freedom of Information request has revealed 264 incidents in just eight months.

 The Commission's research also documents the terrible psychological impact on children of witnessing these events, with one child saying:

 I said that I would kill myself because I saw people before me try to hang themselves…

 And another:

 I saw a small child hitting his head against the fence because he was so upset -- he had been there for 10 months and was asking for his father…

 It is now four months since Labor leader Simon Crean called on Australia Day for all children to be released from behind the razor wire of Australia's immigration detention centres.

 Yet despite a trial at Woomera demonstrating the success of more humane arrangements for children, the Howard Government continues to lock up children.

 It is a matter of grave concern that not one single Liberal or National MP disagrees with defenceless children being held behind razor wire and forced to witness terrifying acts of self-harm.

 This report must be a wake-up call for all Coalition MPs to start pushing for change to protect these children in our care.  Labor will continue to push for our policies already announced, and with our policy review, for a more compassionate approach to policy regarding asylum seekers.

 For further information contact: Julia Gillard on 0417 361 637 Jamie Snashall, Adviser, on (02) 6277 4349 or 0408 419 699

