---
title: "Andren calls for smart card for asylum seekers."
date: "2002-01-25"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233776
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AAT56%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare

 M e d i

 a

 R e l e a

 s e

 25 January 2002

 Andren Calls For Smart Card For Asylum Seekers  

 Independent Member for Calare Peter Andren has called on Immigration Minister Phillip Ruddock to urgently investigate the introduction of a smart card for asylum seekers.  

 “Such a card could be allocated a certain amount of social security credit and would enable people to live as close to normal in supportive communities or families while their claims are being processed.  

 “The current detention centre option is not only causing massive social and psychological problems for the inmates, but is costing $100 a day per person. By comparison the unemployed welfare payment is $364 a fortnight for singles and $328 for partners.  

 “The UK has recently decided to establish a national network of induction, accommodation and removal centres to ensure swifter processing and tracking of claims.  

 “This separates the genuine from the non-genuine asylum seekers, and provides accommodation in centres that allow for full board, education and health facilities.  

 “An ID smart card will be issued to all new asylum seekers in the UK from the start of this year, while the appeals system will have increased capacity to handle 6000 cases a month.  

 “A special fast-track centre at Oakington in England can process straightforward asylum claims in about seven days. Why does it take up to 2 years for processing in Australia?  

 “Australia has several thousand asylum seekers in detention, yet until recently has granted refugee status to about 90% of them. Surely the vast majority of these people can be humanely located in the community with safety and dignity under a smart card system.  

 “The longer Australia detains asylum seekers in desert camps and prison-like conditions, the more traumatised and desperate will detainees become, and the more rapidly will Australia’s reputation as a fair-go country continue to diminish.  

 “The calm and considered comments of former chairman of the Council for Multicultural Australia and Migration Advisory Panel, Neville Roach, should be carefully examined by the Government.

 “John Howard may have won the short-term political points on this policy, but as I said in August during the so-called Tampa debate, whoever won an election on such policies would hold a poisoned chalice,” Mr Andren said.

 For more information: 02 63 326 229

