---
title: "Government's detention policy 'world's worst practice'"
date: "2002-08-01"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245866
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HC376%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 01 August 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/374

 Government’s detention policy ‘World’s Worst Practice’ The Australian Democrats have branded Australia’s asylum seeker detention policy as ‘world’s worst practice’ following the latest damning report from the United Nations’ Special Human Rights envoy.

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Democrats’ spokesperson for immigration, says this Report concludes what was already widely known - that Australia’s practices are blatantly inhumane and clearly breach fundamental human rights principles and laws.

 Senator Bartlett has just returned from 3 weeks in Indonesia and Europe examining asylum seeker processing and detention facilities.

 “Australia’s practices of detention are without comparison anywhere in Europe or in Indonesia.  Whilst there are a few examples of limited, temporary detention in very specific circumstances, nothing comes close to Australia’s extremist, uncompromising, inflexible and inhumane approach.  There is still widespread disbelief throughout Europe at Australia’s insistence on jailing children for years at a time and deliberately keeping families separated.

 “It is no wonder that International Human Rights organisations have been so critical of Australia in this area.  It is beyond dispute that no other democratic nation comes close to us in terms of the level of our abuse and mistreatment of children.

 “It is imperative that Australia abandons its cruel and inhumane detention and asylum seeker policies and practices immediately,” Senator Bartlett said.

 “It is also time for the Labor Party to finally recognise that its ongoing support for mandatory detention in any form is completely unacceptable and must be discarded now.

 “The Democrats have campaigned strongly in the Senate to bring this issue to a head and welcome the Greens’ commitment to do likewise.

 “The detention of children must end immediately,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “The Howard Government has engineered a calculated and manipulative propaganda campaign against asylum seekers that has led Australia to seriously violate a number of important human rights conventions which our nation has previously upheld as a way of promoting democratic values to the rest of the world.

 “Clearly it is not in the best interests of Australia for our nation to be shown to be working against internationally recognised treaties and conventions established to maintain and promote human rights and justice globally,” concluded Senator Bartlett. For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

