---
title: "New Deputy Principal Member and Senior Members appointed to the Refugee Review Tribunal."
date: "2002-12-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211251488
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q4B86%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

 New Deputy Principal Member and Senior Members Appointed to  the Refugee Review Tribunal

 MPS 115/2002 

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today announced the appointment of  Mr John Blount as the new Deputy Principal Member and Mr Bruce MacCarthy and Mr Giles Short as new Senior Members  of the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT).

 The appointment of the Deputy Principal Member follows a nation-wide recruitment procedure involving a rigorous  assessment and interview process.

 "Mr Blount has been a full time member of the RRT since the Tribunal's commencement in July 1993, and has demonstrated  excellent leadership and management skills in the provision of high quality merits review decisions. He has previously had a  distinguished career with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade," Mr Ruddock said.

 The two new Senior Members of the RRT are both current members of the Tribunal and will fill existing vacancies.

 "Mr MacCarthy is presently a part time member of the RRT, and has had many years experience in administrative law with  various Commonwealth Government departments."

 "Mr Short has also been a full time member of the RRT since July 1997, and holds outstanding legal credentials," the Minister  said.

 The RRT is responsible for providing independent merits review of decisions to refuse or cancel protection visas made by the  Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs.

 The new appointments will take the membership of the RRT to a total of 67 members - 41 full-time members (1 principal  member, 1 deputy principal member, 4 senior members and 35 members) and 26 part-time members.

 20 December 2002

