---
title: "Downer dodges Tokyo conference on aid for Afghanistan."
date: "2002-01-21"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232790
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PQR56%22
---

 KEVIN RUDD M.P. Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 MEDIA RELEASE

 DOWNER DODGES TOKYO CONFERENCE ON AID FOR AFGHANISTAN

 The Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kevin Rudd, has condemned Foreign Minister Downer’s decision not to attend today’s high-level international conference in Tokyo on the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

 “Mr  Downer’s  decision  not  to  attend  the  Tokyo  Conference  is  deplorable”,  Mr  Rudd said.

 “This meeting of some sixty countries is chaired by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, and is attended by United States Secretary of State Colin Powell, British Cabinet Minister Clare  Short,  European  Union  External  Affairs  Commissioner  Chris  Patten,  and numerous other ministers and high-level representatives.”

 “For Australia to be represented by a mere Parliamentary Secretary sends precisely the wrong  signal  about  Australia’s  support  for  humanitarian  relief  efforts  and  long-term reconstruction in Afghanistan.”

 “At a time when UN agencies are warning that as many as 700,000 Afghanis are at risk from  starvation  and  exposure  in  the  Afghan  winter,  the  Howard  Government  has demonstrated no sense of urgency in allocating the full $23.3 million they committed to aid  for  Afghanistan  last  October.   $10  million  of  aid  for  Afghanistan  has  remained unallocated more than three months after its announcement.”

 “The  reconstruction  of  Afghanistan  is  vital  for  efforts  to  secure  the  safe  repatriation  of millions of Afghani refugees, yet Alexander Downer can’t be bothered to turn up at the key  international  conference  designed  to  coordinate  international  assistance  for Afghanistan.”

 “This is another utterly inadequate performance from a foreign minister unworthy of his office.”

 Ends Monday, 21 January 2002

 For further information contact: Greg Tonks (Brisbane) 0418 796 931 Philip Dorling (Canberra) 0418 861 602

