---
title: "Ruddock fails: the Prime Minister must dismiss him now."
date: "2002-07-19"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245502
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MB076%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 19 July 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/368

 Ruddock fails: the Prime Minister must dismiss him now The Australian Democrats have called for the immediate dismissal of the Minister for Immigration Philip Ruddock, following the latest allegations of mismanagement in Australian detention centres.  

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson, says enough is enough.  

 “We call on the Prime Minister to demand that his Immigration Minister account for his actions. No other Federal Government Minister would have been left for so long failing, and in such a spectacular way.”  

 “The Children Overboard incident alone should have been enough for heads to roll, and yet we see no action from the Howard Government. There has been no attempt to discipline anyone over the deliberate misleading of the Australian people.  

 “Not to mention the constant allegations of children being abused by their parents, which have proven false, but were deliberately, used to sway public opinion.”  

 Senator Bartlett says the repeated reports and investigations of the treatment of detainees by ACM staff have failed to see any changes structurally or culturally in the day-to-day running of centres.  

 “We have seen constant riots within detention centres, escaping asylum seekers and tragic attempts at suicide by all age groups within the centre including very young children  

 “Top this off there has been the poignant attempt by children to seek asylum in the British Embassy, and the news that a two-year-old child was left with a fractured leg for three days in a detention centre. There is no doubt that the Minister is failing miserably in his duty of care.” Senator Bartlett said.  

 “Yesterday reminded us all of the stark reality faced by asylum seekers. We have one family split in half for over eighteen months. The father declared a refugee while the remaining family failed in their claim.  

 “Now Minister Ruddock conveniently reveals that the father was lying and that his visa should be revoked.  

 “It’s interesting that ‘evidence’ disputing his claim only came to light on the day his children drew international attention to their appalling and inhumane situation,” said Senator Bartlett.  

 “This Minister has been able to find a convenient excuse for every political situation he finds himself in. Australians should be demanding his resignation; they deserve better representation than this.

 “Ruddock’s legacy will damage individual asylum seekers, Australians and our international reputation for a long time to come,” concluded Senator Bartlett.  

 For further information contact: Brenda Kemp, Media Adviser to Senator Bartlett, on 0411 019 742 or Senator Andrew Bartlett direct on 0418 743 789 (please note he is overseas - approximately 8 hours behind AEST).

