---
title: "Asylum seeker lines."
date: "2002-02-05"
creators:
  - "Mclucas, Jan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of MCLUCAS, SEN JAN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233984
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U0066%22
---

 

 Asylum Seeker Lines Asylum Seeker Lines Asylum Seeker Lines Asylum Seeker Lines

 Tuesday 5th February 2002

 I believe that there is a lot of miss information out there about the refugee situation.

 In a large part this has been created for political reasons.  John Howard and Philip Rudduck have demonised these people for a political purpose.

 Howard and Rudduck have created a belief in the broader Australian community that refugees are criminals, and that they are costing Australia a lot of money.

 They did this deliberately last year through Howard’s whistle blowing politics linking refugees to terrorism and accusing people of throwing their children over board.

 They have continued this political strategy this year because they have already driven a wedge into the Australian community and now they want to do the same to the Labor party.

 Labor shouldn’t be afraid of this discussion or debate because if you look at the facts the current government policy isn’t working and there are better ways of processing asylum seekers.

 Opinion is starting to turn on this issue as the community learns more of the facts.

 These people are not criminals they are human beings seeking asylum from war zones and oppressive governments.

 They show resourcefulness, initiative and bravery in making the passage to this country. These are values that Australians have traditionally admired.

 Over 70% of those arriving by boat receive temporary protection visas.  Twice as many people arrive by plane and only a little over 10% of these get protection visas.  These people however aren’t sent to detention centres in

 Media Release Media Release Media Release Media Release Senator Jan McLucas Senator Jan McLucas Senator Jan McLucasSenator Jan McLucas Labor Senator for Queensland

 ENDS: Tuesday, 26 February 2002 Contact: Sen Jan McLucas: 4031 6009

 Jim Turnour: 0418 770484

 the desert and Howard and Rudduck have chosen not to demonise these people.

 It is true that the boat people are costing this country a lot of money.  The blame for this however needs to be sheeted home to the Howard government.

 Everybody knows that the pacific solution isn’t working.  It is now estimated to be costing this country $300 million.

 There are cheaper and more humane ways to deal with people who are likely to be traumatised by the country they have left or the journey they have undertaken.

 Most of these people will end up as Australian citizens contributing to this multicultural nation.  It is a shame that their first experience of Australia is an extended stay in a detention centre.

 We need to process people when they arrive but we need to do it quickly and humanely.

