---
title: "Race politics. Paper presented at the National Conference on Racism: Beyond Tolerance, Sydney Opera House, 12-13 March 2002, organised by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission."
date: "2002-03-12"
creators:
  - "Markus, Andrew"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition policy"
  - "Political skills"
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "Children overboard affair"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Aboriginal reconciliation"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Multiculturalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234952
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L0M66%22
---

 'Race politics' Andrew Markus, Monash University

 John Howard is a very successful politician - he has won three federal elections in a row, and in the game of politics in Australia few have done better than that.

 John Howard is astute.

 He has an understanding of the Australian electorate - he understands that on some issues a leader can be well ahead of public opinion. On other issues he must be in the pack. To be successful, there has to be a balance between vision - and bread and circuses.

 John Howard made a choice in the second half of the 1980s. This choice was to serve him well in the long term, but at the time it led to more than one humiliating defeat.

 He would lead in the economic realm: radical reform of the Australian economy, taxation system and industrial relations would be his legacy for future generations.

 In the realm of social values and national identity he would take his place alongside conservatives. Howard would tap into a mood in the electorate, first clearly identified and mobilised by Professor Geoffrey Blainey, a public intellectual much respected by the future prime minister - and much honoured since 1996.

 Let us briefly examine the first run - an unsuccessful trial run - for the new politics of race based nationalism. It is 1988, the aftermath of Labor electoral victory. Bob Hawke is Prime Minister, John Howard Leader of the Opposition.

 In May 1988, at the first meeting in Canberra's new Parliament House, Howard refuses to endorse a resolution which states that Aboriginal people have been dispossessed of their land.

 He refuses to accept the view that there is any aspect of past policy for which he bears responsibility. Articulating the rhetoric that is to be the hallmark of Pauline Hanson by some eight years, he declares -- 'I do not accept the doctrine of hereditary guilt. I acknowledge that, in the past, wrongs were done to Aboriginals, but they weren't done by me. They weren't done by my parents. They weren't done by my generation ... I am strongly against dividing the country between black and white. I think that is a recipe for disaster.'

 Multiculturalism is denounced as a symptom of loss of national direction: 'to me multiculturalism suggests that we can't make up our minds who we are or what we believe in'. In January 1989 he states:

 The objection I have to multiculturalism is that multiculturalism is in effect saying that it is impossible to have an Australian ethos, that it is impossible to have a common Australian culture.

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/markus.html (1 of 4) [21/05/2002 2:07:57]

 So we have to pretend that we are a federation of cultures and that we've got a bit from every part of the world. I think that is hopeless.

 A newly developed immigration and ethnic affairs policy is released. It begins with the assertion that the coalition stands for 'One Australia and welcome[s] all those who share our vision and are ready to contribute to it'. It is asserted that 'community acceptance of Australia's immigration policies has been seriously undermined' and that 'a major factor in immigration policy' needed to be 'the capacity of the Australian people to accept and absorb change'.

 By implication alleging undue influence by the so-called 'ethnic lobby', it states that it would be a 'fundamental principle' of immigration policy that only 'the democratically elected government has the right to determine both the overall and the specific composition of our migrant intake'.

 Explaining the approach to be taken in a radio interview, Howard makes clear that in future there could be fewer immigrants from specific regions. In response to questioning as to whether his policy would lead to a reduction from Asia, he states: 'It could. Because if you have less family reunion, you may have less coming from Asia. It wouldn't be an aim … but that could happen'. Later the same day he is more direct. Asked whether the rate of Asian immigration is too fast, he states:

 I am not in favour of going back to a White Australia policy. I do believe that if it is in the eyes of some in the community, it's too great, it would be in our immediate term interest and supportive of social cohesion if it were slowed down a little, so that the capacity of the community to absorb was greater.

 There is not the time here to discuss the development of policy following the 1996 electoral victory - a task which I have attempted in my book Race: John Howard and the Remaking of Australia, published last year. But let us recall four moments, one occurring after its publication but its course entirely consistent with the analysis there presented.

 [1]

 It is the 26th of May 1997. Prime Minister Howard delivers the opening address to 1000 delegates at the Reconciliation Convention in Melbourne, held to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the 1967 referendum.

 He states that that it is an 'occasion for frank speaking'. He explains that he is optimistic about the process of reconciliation because of his faith in the 'decency, tolerance, generosity and common sense of the Australian people', who 'respect the right to a 'fair go' for all irrespective of colour, background or belief'. He states that Australia is 'one of the fairest, most egalitarian and tolerant societies in the world'.

 In the face of hostile response from his audience, some of whom boo, while many others rise and turn their backs, the prime minister becomes increasingly vehement. Speaking in a booming voice he hectors the audience, stating that reconciliation will not work 'if it puts a higher value on symbolic gestures and overblown promises rather than the practical needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in areas like health, housing, education and employment'.

 Reconciliation will not work if the views of extremists prevail: the disadvantages and past injustices have to be acknowledged, but reconciliation cannot be based on a sense of guilt and shame, on calls for different laws for different racial groups, on disruption of national events and levelling of charges of racism against those who do not agree with particular points of view. It is necessary to reject 'extremist views on all sides'. His government will adopt a 'practical, on-the-ground approach' and target the 'true causes' of indigenous disadvantage through programs in health, housing, education and employment.

 He expresses his personal 'deep sorrow for those …who suffered injustices under the practices of past generations', but in facing 'the realities of the past' it is necessary to reject the view that 'Australia's history [is] …little more than a disgraceful record of imperialism, exploitation and racism'.

 To cries of 'shame' he becomes increasingly angry, thumping the lectern and pointing at Aboriginal leaders in the audience, declaring that he has spent a 'great deal of time in trying to find a just, fair and workable outcome' following the High Court's Wik ruling. His ten-point plan provides an 'equitable balance' between the respect for the principles of native title and the interest of pastoralists and others 'in securing certainty'. In 'the name of truth' he repudiates the claim that the ten-point plan takes away the rights of indigenous people. His plan is 'fair and equitable' and 'the only basis of a proper approach'.

 [2]

 It is the 10th of June 1998, three nights before the 1998 Queensland state election. The opinion polls point to a surge in support for Pauline Hanson's One Nation. Prime Minister John Howard appears on the Stan Zemanek radio show- broadcast on 35 stations in the eastern states and renowned for its pro-Hanson sympathies - to appeal to One Nation supporters to give their second preferences to the coalition.

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/markus.html (2 of 4) [21/05/2002 2:07:57]

 He seeks to convince listeners that the coalition is worthy of their respect. His government is determined to fix up the 'Native Title mess'; it will not accept one law for Aborigines and another law for farmers and miners. It has reduced immigration to a 'pretty modest level'.

 The family reunion program was 'out of control' in the past but now it has been 'very very significantly limited'. In case the listeners miss the point, the prime minister repeats: family reunion has been 'very very significantly limited'. Without referring specifically to immigration from Asia, he states: 'we have reduced the emphasis on family reunion and we are now bringing in far more people from different parts of the world who have skills and who can make a contribution'.

 A two-year waiting period has been introduced to limit immigrant access to welfare. And for the benefit of Queensland listeners, subjected to One Nation's criticism of the United Nations, he states that his government had changed the approach to international treaties that would limit national sovereignty; he was 'angry' about the treaties that governments had entered in the past.

 [3]

 It is 27-28th of May 2000, the climax of the ten-year process of reconciliation. This is to be occasion for acceptance of the 'Declaration Towards Reconciliation', of nationally broadcast public ceremonies and the People's Walk for Reconciliation across the Sydney Harbour Bridge.

 An estimated 150,000 to 250,000 walk, but the prime minister and key members of his cabinet are absent. The 'Declaration' is not accepted by Howard because of disagreement over some of its key elements. There is no national apology at the major public ceremony, held at the Opera House. Political commentators write of 'a roadblock to progress', the absence of closure, of splits where there should have been unity.

 [4]

 It is the 7th of October 2001, two days after the calling of the federal election. The government announces that asylum seekers have thrown their children into the sea in an attempt to prompt rescue by the Australian navy. In one interview Prime Minister Howard states: 'I don't want people like that in Australia. I tell you - I don't want people like that in Australia! Genuine refugees don't do that.'

 Ministers Ruddock, Reith and Downer join in the condemnation. Ruddock observes that 'I regard these practices as some of the most disturbing practices that I have come across in the time that I have been involved in public life - clearly planned and premeditated'. On October 10 Reith produces two photographs of children in the water; he also states that there is film footage, 'someone has looked at it and it is an absolute fact - children were thrown into the water'.

 The so-called border protection issue features throughout the election campaign. While Labor seeks valiantly to keep in step the government trumpets its asylum policy. At the Liberal Party launch the Prime Minister declares: 'We will decide, and nobody else, who comes to this country'.

 In the last week of the election, voters in marginal seats receive postcards from the Prime Minister reminding electors that 'we decide who comes into this country'. Liberal Party director Lynton Crosby defines the two issues before the electorate: economic management and border protection.

 What do these incidents tell us about the state of diversity in Australia today.

 Let me make three attempts to address this issue.

 [1]

 First, I will return to the alleged children-in-the sea incident.

 The press has been obsessed with the issue of whether there was deliberate deception of the Australian electorate.

 I suggest that there is another issue of possibly greater significance.

 Why has it been almost universally accepted that the throwing of children into the sea would necessarily indicate that the parents had no regard for their children - and would be unfit to be granted asylum in this country?

 Had children been thrown into the sea it could as easily have been interpreted as evidence of the love of parents, a desperate plea to a humane society not to let young lives be wasted in the no man's land of despair, the refugee camps which disfigure the Asian landscape.

 If the parents were uncaring they could have abandoned children, leaving themselves unencumbered. Would they drag children over borders, from country to country, at great expense and heightened risk, merely to provide themselves with a bargaining chip once they reached their destination in the First World?

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/markus.html (3 of 4) [21/05/2002 2:07:57]

 What does it say of Australian society that there can be blindness to this reality? What does it say that such interpretations are placed on the conduct of asylum seekers, not least by the prime minister and senior ministers of this country?

 And this in the context of the irony - which is unlikely to be lost on subsequent generations - that those in government making the allegation that parents have no regard for their children are the same ministers who bring pressure on captains of barely seaworthy craft - carrying children - to put out on the high sea, they are members of a government which incarcerates young children alongside severely traumatised and depressed adults in isolated, remote locations, in the attempt to deter future arrivals.

 [2]

 Second, let us reflect on the distance between the Australia of 1988 and of 2001. In 1988 the attempt to introduce the politics of race based nationalism was a failure; in 1989 John Howard lost the leadership of the Liberal Party, a position he was not to regain for six years, following the failure of three successors. In 2001 the same or a similar form of politics proved to be resoundingly successful.

 Fear is a potent force in politics. In recent times Labor has based electoral campaigns on fear of the GST, with spectacular success in 1993.

 The fear of outsiders, of infiltration and destruction from within, has been a theme raised on more than one occasion within the conservative side of politics.

 In the 1950s Prime Minister Menzies made much of the communist threat and by innuendo questioned the loyalty of Labor. Some of his hard men were more direct in their public accusations. Such campaigning, kicking the commie can, was parodied as a hunt for reds under beds - but it was hardly a laughing matter for those who fell victim to paranoia and suffered destruction of their livelihoods and reputations. In 1954 Menzies won an election he was expected to lose - following a dramatic turn in electoral fortunes in the context of the sensation caused by the defection of Third Secretary Petrov from the Soviet Embassy in Canberra.

 Some may think that in 2001 we witnessed a re-run of 1954 - in the guise of reffos under the beds.

 Menzies and Howard harvested fear: fear of communism, fear of armed invasion, fear of land rights, of multiculturalism, of national borders, of Muslim asylum seekers. Both prime ministers dealt with issues of fundamental importance for Australian - in a way to exploit them for political gain.

 [3]

 Now a third - and final - attempt to provide insight into the state of Australian diversity.

 Neville Roach has been widely honoured as a great Australian - a leader of industry, a worker for community understanding, advisor to many Australian governments. A much more balanced individual that those like myself, perhaps given to overstatement.

 And yet on 25 January of this year Neville Roach made the decision to resign from his posts as chairman of the Council for Multicultural Australia and chairman of the Business (Migration) Advisory Panel. Further, he courted the media in doing so, a measure of his concern for the future of the country he choose to make his own.

 Neville Roach explained that the issues that most concerned him related to asylum-seekers, family reunion, non-discriminatory immigration and Aboriginal reconciliation.

 He lamented that in areas vital for the future the government was allowing the lead to be taken by the prejudiced elements in society, and to some extent contributing to prejudice, rather than fostering toleration and understanding.

 One of the features of the present day is a willingness to close eyes. Simple, clear-cut, 'strong' solutions are unquestioningly presented as a virtue; attention to the complexity of human behaviour is seen as a luxury not be indulged.

 Thus much discussion is in terms of abstractions, divorced from informed understanding of the human condition. A recent, much acclaimed, study of the racist perspective posits that one of its key features is 'an epistemology of ignorance', 'a schedule of structured blindnesses' - a refusal to see.

 We need to recognise that the cast of mind that encourages us to turn away from the suffering of others, to demonise rather than relate to fellow human beings, has its impact not only on asylum policy; it informs approaches to a range of concerns in this diverse nation of Australia.

  

 © Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. Last updated 13 March 2002. Your comments and feedback are welcome. Email us at: webfeedback@humanrights.gov.au

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/markus.html (4 of 4) [21/05/2002 2:07:57]

