---
title: "Concluding comments: racial vilification panel. Paper presented at the National Conference on Racism: Beyond Tolerance, Sydney Opera House, 12-13 March 2002, organised by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission."
date: "2002-03-12"
creators:
  - "Jayasuriya, Laksiri"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Federal issue"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234950
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E0M66%22
---

 Concluding Comments: Racial Vilification Panel Emeritus Professor Laksiri Jayasuriya AM

 The occasion of this National Conference affords us an opportunity to reflect on how we as a nation have handled this complex topic of racism which has been a running sore in the body politic for a long time. Racial vilification, that aspect of racism we have considered this afternoon, compels us to consider the harm inflicted on individuals and society as a whole by the dehumanisation of particular groups. In attempting to secure some degree of security and protection of one's dignity, one response has been through legal protection but as we have heard, there are other ways of regulating hate speech and other expressions of racial vilification.

 Perhaps it is worth recalling that racism entered the Australian public consciousness only as recently as the early 1970s. A notable landmark document in this regard is the three volume study of Australian racism, edited by Frank Stevens, Racism: The Australian Experience. This was a major turning point in generating an increased awareness of the nature of racism and developing a scholarly understanding of racism. Regrettably, over nearly 3 decades we have made little progress. The Australian literature on racism remains scanty and fragmented, leading to a diminished understanding of racism. In this context, the Review of the RDA Act of 1995 undertaken by HREOC, though dealing with anti discrimination legislation, stadns out as an extremely valuable resource documenting critical issues relating to racism as an aspect of Australian public policy.

 In this volume Margaret Thornton and Sarah Pritchard make pointed reference to the paucity of thinking about race and racism in Australia. They make special reference to the absence of theorizing along the lines of critical race theory which has had a notable influence on thinking about race and racism in the United States and elsewhere. What Thornton and Pritchard have brought to the fore is that racism is not just a matter of 'individual prejudice in everyday practice'. It is a phenomenon deeply embedded in language and perception as 'an inseparable and ubiquitous 'feature of modern society which functions and reveals itself 'despite official rhetoric' to the contrary.

 The official rhetoric in Australia as in other western democracies stipulates that racism is officially and culturally condemned and espouses the ideological democratic values of tolerance and equality. No wonder, Heider in Austria, and Pauline Hanson do not concede that their political platforms and political agenda are racist in character. As a result of racism being officially sanctioned as socially unacceptable, what we have is a denial of racism. This denial goes along with a taboo and 'silence' on racism, and so much so that being 'politically correct' is to be un-Australian.

 This denial of racism, characteristic of the Establishment, is, I believe, one of the distinctive characteristics of Australian racism and one which has seriously impaired any efforts to deal with racism as an aspect of public policy. Clearly, the acknowledgement of racism - the willingness to put it on the political agenda and confront it honestly is a prerequisite for overcoming racism. Of course, this in itself affords no guarantee in combatting

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/jayasuriya.html (1 of 3) [21/05/2002 1:33:10]

 racism, but is certainly an important first step.

 In addition, there is an urgent need is to generate a better understanding of Australian race and racism so that we may draw on contemporary theorising such as critical race theory and other studies in developing an Australian perspective on race and racism. To this end, we may start by looking at the experience of countries such as Canada and the UK in dealing with racism. For example, the recent outburst of British Parliamentarian Norman Tebbit, praising the Home Secretary, David Plunket, for his new White Paper on Immigration, has an undeniable resonance for us in Australia. Indeed, there is much to be gained by considering the experience of British racism, and we do have many Tebbits and Plunkets in Australia! According to many commentators, Plunket's White Paper is in effect, returning Britain to an outmoded monocultural assimilationistic (recommending preferred marriage partner for new migrants love by legislation). This, it is argued, is a retrograde step putting back race relations theorising since the landmark MacPherson Report of 1999, which covered new ground in ways of confronting racism.

 Sadly, we in Australia have nothing to equal the insights and new thinking about racism which emerged from this watershed Report. The MacPherson Report deviated markedly from earlier thinking, going back to the Scarman Report which regarded race relations as a matter of interpersonal relations. Thus, when we deal with racial vilification as abuse, denigration, or threats of harm and seek legal remedies, the underlying assumption is that we are dealing with individual acts of behaviour or forms of direct discrimination. This mode of thinking about racism and combatting racism typifies what goes as individual racism, and has been characteristic of much of the Australian experience in dealing with racism. Australian race relations has tended to be seen largely as having to do with personal relations, and often as a pathological aspect of human behaviour.

 The MacPherson Report was highly significant because it went against the orthodoxy of race relations based on individual racism and broke with cultural and individual explanations of racism. Instead, MacPherson highlighted the importance of institutional racism - or racism as an indirect or systemic discrimination which arises from the structures, policies and practices of institutions - the culture of organizations such as the Police or the Judicary.

 Confronted with this recognition of institutional racism, some sought to salvage the orthodoxy of race relations theorising by endeavouring to reduce institutional racism to a matter of individual racism by reworking racism as prejudice plus power. Hence, the suggestion that what we should do in combating racism is to alter distribution of power within institutions and organizations. This has led, in some quarters to seek changes to positions of power by giving organizations greater representation of persons drawn from victimized groups. For example, we now have demands for more Aboriginal or Asian people in the police. But as one critic has rightly observed, changing the colour of the incumbent does not necessarily change the colour of the policy.

 What this suggests is that 'race' and racism, as an ideology - a way of thinking which is socially constructed - is multi faceted, dynamic, and constantly changing. Contemporary studies of racism have shown that there are many forms of racism and different expressions of racism. Hence, if there are different kinds of racism, these require different kinds of social interventions.

 This new thinking suggesting a multidimensional cultural view has been succinctly summarised in a a Special Report in the Journal, Race and Class Vol 3 (2) by pointing to 'the three faces of British racism'. These theorists argue that the taxonomy of racism should include Xeno Racism, in addition to the classic phenomenon of Individual Racism and Institutional Racism. Xeno racism comes from xenophobia understood as the 'fear of strangers' and emotionally charged as a passionate defence of 'our way of life' - a strident nationalism which breeds exclusion on various grounds. As the outstanding UK race theorist Sivanandan put it, this xeno racism is xenophobic in form but in substance it is unadulterated racism in that it reifies people, denigrates and excludes. To quote one writer, 'the asylum seeker issue has been an open wound through which racism has reinfected the body politic, combining and reinforcing other forms of popular racism such as new racism.

 The new language of discourse demonizing 'refugees' and asylum seekers as 'illegal immigrants' threatening national security has created a new dimension to racism. What is important about xeno-racism is that it is a form of state racism where the state has intervened with its full force calling on all its structures, institutions, and bureaucracy to combat the threat to the security of the state. In combatting this form of xeno-racism, we have to combat state racism, manifest in asylum laws, mandatory detention, deaths n custody and so on.

 The point I wish to make, by drawing attention to these overseas experiences and new theorising about racism to indicate just how far behind we are in thinking about racism and strategies for comabtting racism. Stated bluntly, for a variety of reasons, but primarily because of a lack of political leadership, we in Australia have not had the political will or the ability to 'engage in a national conversation about how to tackle racism' afflicting the institutions of society and all aspects of private, public popular culture. Over the last 3 decades, since the passage of RD Act in 1975, we have been complacent with a strategic denial of racism and content with symbolic policies exemplified in generating new statutes with hardly any resources or structures for the implementation of legislative measures.

 Let me conclude by commending to you an example of a public policy approach to Racism in Canada, which is worthwhile emulating. I refer to the establishment of the Canadian Race Relations Foundation in 1996, a Centre of Excellence on Race Relations. This was to be an independent structure - at arm's length from government -

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/jayasuriya.html (2 of 3) [21/05/2002 1:33:10]

 with a mandate to be a clearing house on racism, a source of knowledge and information for the public and a resource development. It is significant that this body was conceived as an important instrument of Canadian multiculturalism. The Canadian government committed initially a sum of nearly $25 million. I hope those interested will go the website of this body to get more information. (crr.ca/English).

 The recent policy of all Australian Governments stands in marked contrast to that of countries like Canada and the UK. Our stance is best described as 'doing good by doing little'. Hopefully, one outcome of this important Conference will be to generate and fortify a new awareness and consciousness that will enable us to expose the falsity and dishonesty of the distorted logic and rationale of all forms of racism - individual, institutional and xenophobic.

  

 © Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. Last updated 12 March 2002. Your comments and feedback are welcome. Email us at: webfeedback@humanrights.gov.au

 HREOC Website: Racial Discrimination - Beyond Tolerance

 http://www.humanrights.gov.au/racial_discrimination/beyond_tolerance/speeches/jayasuriya.html (3 of 3) [21/05/2002 1:33:10]

