---
title: "NSW State Conference, Sydney Town Hall: transcript of doorstop: community safety zones; asylum seekers; Telstra; affirmative action and party reform."
date: "2002-05-26"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211238578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/W6N66%22
---

 1

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP -  NSW STATE CONFERENCE, SYDNEY TOWN HALL - 26TH MAY 2002.

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Community Safety Zones;  Asylum Seekers; Telstra;  Affirmative action and party reform.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean the Crime Safety Zones, how will they work?

 CREAN: In partnership with the State and local Government. The pooling of resources, but the identifying of problem areas and all governments working to address the problem. No buck passing between the levels of government but a cooperative effort. It’s a problem for the nation, the nation needs to face up to a solution. It needs a partnership and I want to lead that partnership.

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

 CREAN: We will talk to the states about the most appropriate way in, which the resources, the additional resources are allocated. At the moment resources are stretched, we’ve got to find a more effective way. The leverage of Commonwealth funding to supplement state and local government will come up with the solution.

 JOURNALIST: So you’re talking about money?

 CREAN: Obviously it will involve additional money but it’s also the framework in terms of cracking down on crime, it’s also the confiscation associated with those involved in it and laws associated with it but in essence it’s additional resources.

 JOURNALIST: In this state do you think crime is Bob Carr’s biggest problem in March next year?

 CREAN: Look I think that crime is an increasing problem in our communities, particularly where you’ve got density associated with the population spread. I know from my own electorate it’s an increasing issue and

 2

 people are looking for solutions, they’re sick of the buck passing between the various levels of government. They want the problem solved and what I’m putting forward is a constructive solution to work with the states to achieve it.

 JOURNALIST: Does that include buck passing the State Government…

 CREAN: I think that …

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

 CREAN: No, I think, well it could, but the point is let’s end it, let’s create a positive, constructive whole of governments approach to dealing with the problem. Pool the resources better, deal with the problem, that’s what I’m about.

 JOURNALIST: Would you be prepared to overturn Labor’s policy on mandatory detention of Asylum seekers?

 CREAN: We need to retain mandatory detention. What we have to at is the circumstances under which people are held and the length of time it takes to process them. And the resolution carried yesterday at the Conference recognises that people who arrive here need to be kept in some form of detention until their status is established. I don’t know anyone who seriously argues that there shouldn’t be some form of detention. The real debate is the length of time it takes to process people, the conditions under which they’re held, who runs the facilities, these are issues that Labor is continuing to develop a policy response on and we welcome the contribution from the NSW branch to that debate.

 JOURNALIST: But the resolution was not for … mandatory checks on security and health but over turn …?

 CREAN: Well look you can have a debate about the words, but read the resolution and it says that people do need to be detained in circumstances to establish their status. That’s what mandatory detention is.

 JOURNALIST: But not their refugees status following their security…

 CREAN: Security, health…

 JOIRNALIST: …not whether or not they are refugees. While they’re waiting for their application to be processed they should be living in the community?

 CREAN: Well that goes to the question of the circumstances under which people are held subject to the initial checking and that’s what I’ve always flagged, Labor was prepared to look at as part of the policy review. But significantly we’ve put forward initiatives to get the kids out from behind

 3

 the razor wire, to return the running of the detention facilities to the Australian Protection Group so it’s accountable to the public. To mothball Woomera and relocate people in other facilities and for us to go through the important process of establishing the true cost of the ‘Pacific Solution’, which has been a wasteful exercise so that we can better deal with the problem in a lasting way.

 JOURNALIST: So mandatory detention should stay?

 CREAN: Mandatory detention needs to be retained, the resolution yesterday recognises that threshold point.

 JOURNALIST: Do you have a target for how long people are kept in detention?

 CREAN: Well this is something that we’re continuing to look at, we’re taking submissions on it, obviously need to talk to the people who are involved in the processing arrangements. This is not something we’ve determined a final position on, it’s part of the Review.

 JOURNALIST: Ron Boswell said this morning that Telstra was close to achieving service levels that would be required for the Nationals to reconsider the privatisation of Telstra. Doesn’t this increase the pressure on you to come with …

 CREAN: Well it was an interesting comment but he was also arguing that there needed to be a second report to tick off on that. Now I don’t believe people in the bush believe their problems have been solved. The problems that they’ve got from an organisation that 49% of it has been privatised. They don’t believe that the solution rests in the rest of the 51 being sold. If Ron Boswell is of the view that they’re close, I’d be interested to see him argue that within his own party forums.

 JOURNALIST: Does that increase pressure on you to come with credible alternatives …

 CREAN: Well the interesting thing about the discussion paper that was released last week is the debate is now focussing on issues other than simply selling the rest of Telstra. I’ve argued previously that the further sale of Telstra is clouding the real issues. What people want is improved access and affordable access, not just to telephones but to fast speed Internet, to communications generally. And there are regulatory issues that really need to be looked at by way of improving that access. They’re the issues that I want debated and I’m delighted they are being debated. It’s interesting that the Government itself is confused about its attack on Labor’s proposals. We’ve put up a whole gamut of issues for consideration. We’ve put them up for discussion we want serious debate. They’re the issues that need to be addressed.

 4

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

 CREAN: Well I’m delighted that people are engaging in this debate. What’s wrong with having the debate? I mean all I’m saying is this, that the issue is more than just the further sale of Telstra. I think that’s the wrong solution but what we need to look at is how we can improve access, how we can improve affordability. The initiatives the proposals that have been forward for consideration in that regard is what the Paper’s about and I want people to debate them constructively and whilst they’re debating our agenda I’m delighted with those prospects.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean you’re quite expansive about the role of unions within the Party but you didn’t mention the 50/50 proposal. Does that represent some kind of olive branch given yesterday’s heated discussion?

 CREAN: Look we still have the processes of the Party to go through before we determine our final positions and changing the relationship with the trade union movement has never been what I’ve seen as the limit to reform of the Party. What we have to do is to become more consultative, more inclusive, open up to other constituencies. We need to get to a position in which integrity is ensured in our preselection processes. Return the ownership of the Party to its members, not the factions. These are the issues that I think are important for us to discuss and all of them will be addressed and recommendations coming froward in relation to them at the appropriate time. I’ve indicated today some of the directions I want to see those reforms take and we’ll continue to progress them.

 JOURNALIST: When will this appropriate time be?

 CREAN: Well we still have to talk that through too, that’s part of the consultations, timing.

 JOURNALIST: So it could be after the State Election?

 CREAN: Well we’ll be talking it through.

 JOURNALIST: Are you still determined to get the 50/50 result at the national level, whatever happens on a state by state basis?

 CREAN: I am.

 JOURNALIST: Are you happy that the … great power now to decide, nominate women candidates …?

 CREAN: I want to have a look at the proposals that have come forward. I think that the initiatives to encourage greater participation are to

 5

 be welcomed, I haven’t had the time to digest fully the proposals that you talk of.

 JOURNALIST: NSW lower house is …. are you concerned about that?

 CREAN: Well I think that that’s the reason we introduced an affirmative action rule and in the Federal Parliamentary Party we’ve been very successful as a consequence. I’m not trying to develop a blueprint that impacts on every jurisdiction of government. I think the Party needs to modernise, my prime concern is in relation to federal candidacy and the affirmative action rule has been a very important step in ensuring greater representation of women in the Parliament, but quality women as well.

 JOURNALIST: What about compulsory unionism? Is that going to change?

 CREAN: Compulsory unionism?

 JOURNALIST: In terms of membership of the Labor Party?

 CREAN: Well the question of belonging to an appropriate union that is a matter for the Review process. I think that we should be more embracive and making it easier for people to join the Party, not making it harder for them to join the Party and membership of a union should not be a barrier. I think its commitment to the broad principles that we’re looking for.

 JOURNALIST: Did you steer away from mentioning the 50/50 today to avoid picking a fight?

 CREAN: No, I’ve never walked away from a fight in my life but the fact of the matter is the Wran Report will be debated here, it’s a report that makes recommendations in terms of 60/40 only for this Conference and clearly the issue of any changes in that regard are going to be progressed as a consequence of whatever comes out of the Hawke/Wran Review and the processes associated with it at the Federal level.

 JOURNALIST: But you’re clearly not a popular bloke around these parts on that issue?

 CREAN: (Laughs) Well I didn’t come here to be popular, I came here to reinforce the message that I want us to be positive and I want us to modernise. If we don’t modernise we won’t win and I’m absolutely committed in this leadership to modernising the Party. In discussions that I’ve had with people they like the messages that have been coming out so I’ll continue to talk to people and we’ll continue progress it.

 ENDS

