---
title: "Transcript of press conference, Melbourne: Youth Forum, Science Works: Youth Week; unemployment; drug addiction; asylum seekers; environment; tobacco industry; Middle East; parliamentary entitlements; comments by Ron Walker and Costello"
date: "2002-04-12"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236045
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2LB66%22
---

 1

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE - YOUTH FORUM, SCIENCE WORKS, MELBOURNE, 12TH APRIL 2002.

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Youth Week, unemployment, drug addiction, asylum seekers, environment, tobacco industry, Middle East, parliamentary entitlements, comments by Ron Walker and Costello.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (Youth Week: Is it meaningful?)

 CREAN: …Nicola.  I think that any time that you experience someone else’s experiences and the circumstance in which they work or live that has to be rewarding.  I think that we too often get isolated from what’s happening in the real world.  If we’re to understand, not just what the real world is, how it functions and what its aspirations, what its needs are, we are not being effective politicians.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (The Government’s approach to young people).

 CREAN: Well, I don’t think they take it seriously enough.  I don’t think that they’ve built the bridges.  They seem to think that one Youth Roundtable a year is all that it takes.  I don’t think that they’ve been creative on traineeships and I don’t think that they’ve been flexible enough in the education and training framework to respond to young people’s needs.  And I think, also, they don’t pay and give enough attention or opportunity to the ideals that young people talk about.  There are practical dimensions. There is the idiologism and I think that the refreshing thing about engaging with young people is that there is still idealism out there and we need to tap it.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (Negative images of young people in the media).

 CREAN: Well, I think the best way to counteract them is to just expose people to the positive side of youth.  I mean, there are problems out there and we do have to deal with them.  The drugs is a terrible issue and I

 2

 don’t think that this is something that can again be buck passed simply back to state governments.  I think it requires a national response.  It needs to be a toughness on those pushing the drugs but there needs to be a compassion and a concern and an understanding of people who are drug addicted.  And we need to experiment and trial every conceivable way to address those problems.  So I am in the cart for saying that we need to try everything to rid ourselves of this scourge and that involves national governments getting actively involved.  I think John Howard seems to think that the only way you deal with it is to take a tough line on the criminal side of it, the drug pushers. Well, of course that needs a tough side but it is not enough.  It’s not going to help those who are already addicted and we need to reach out better and understand how better we can do that.

 On youth unemployment I think that the big issue with youth and long-term unemployed youth is the biggest barrier they face to getting a job is if they haven’t had experience in one.  It’s a chicken and egg argument and we have just got to be much more creative about the ways in which we get them their first start.  But then the point that was made before, there has got to be follow up, so the notion of case management, of one to one dealing, an initiative that I introduced when I was Employment Minister. We need to revisit that again because it was working.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (Where to from here for Labor and young people?)

 CREAN: ….. The reason that Nicola has been elevated to the position specifically responsible for it is that it is ongoing.  We’ve taken the opportunity in Youth Week to get you here, to get you exposed to the interface that we have been exposed to, but to demonstrate that we are serious about developing an ongoing agenda.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (Woomera Detention Centre).

 CREAN: I welcome the statement by Philip Ruddock today that he is going to expand the trial that was in place at Woomera that takes young people out from behind the razor wire.  I called for it back on Australia Day... I welcome the fact that he has now caught up with it, I just hope he is serious.  I am prepared to work with the Government to develop a more compassionate policy in the way in which we deal with asylum seekers.  I think that we can be tough on border protection but compassionate at the same time.  And we are finally beginning to see the Government accept that argument.  What I call for is for them to work with us in a bipartisan way to develop a policy that is lasting, sustainable and compassionate.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (Community Release).

 CREAN: I think we have to retain a form of mandatory detention because there are issues such as health, security checks that have to be

 3

 undertaken from all people that arrive in this country in non-conventional forms.  Having said that, I believe that mandatory detention and the circumstances under which people are held and the time it takes to process them has to be reviewed and we have called on the Government to work with us again in a bipartisan way to achieve that.  But I don’t believe that there is any justification for keeping young kids behind the razor wire.  And that’s why I think that the first step has to be to get them from that side of the razor wire and I welcome the recognition finally by the Government that they see that too.

 JOURNALIST: …(inaudible)… (Smoking case).

 CREAN: The smoking, well I think this is a groundbreaking decision.  I think significant it’s recognition that corporates that do deceive, hide or cover up and the consequence of that is to lead to circumstances that impact on people’s lives, their life span, but they shouldn’t be able to get away with that deceit.  Now I think it will be very interesting to see the further consequences of this.  Unfortunately for the victim it appears from all accounts that it’s too late for her in any lasting sense.  But it’s a very important court case.  It’s a very important signal to the corporate world.  I think what it says is there needs to be greater trust and honesty in the way in which ….

 (TAPE BREAK).

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

 CREAN: No I’m talking about Labor’s way, the Australian Labor Party’s way. I think we have different issues than the UK, essentially because we are a large resource extractor and processor. We are also a very efficient energy producer, this is the point that I made before. I think it’s in our interests to have recognition of those facts in a multilateral framework, in the Kyoto Protocol. I talked before about the need for us to be addressing issues as a nation, a whole of Governments, heads of Government approach. There are wider issues where we’ve got to approach it in an international sense, where we’ve got to be better international citizens in terms of preserving the planet on which we live and making it more sustainable. I don’t see how that can be done by Governments alone, in any one country. That’s why we need an international framework, that’s why we need to sign up to Kyoto but I think that the uniqueness of Australia, its industries and its environment are issues that should be taken up, straight up in the context of Kyoto and that’s something that I would do if I had the opportunity.

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

 CREAN: No I’m not talking about ‘The Third Way’. Others are talking about ‘The Third Way’. I’m talking about Labor’s way, a modern Labor way and I think this is a sort of understanding of the issues as they affect us

 4

 but our obligations to the international environment as well. And that’s how I would approach it. I think we’ve got to adapt our own way forward, conscious of what other countries are doing and being prepared to talk through with them. But where we’ve taken the issues up in international fora and done it from a basis of informed input, we’ve always been able to punch above our weight. I’d like to see us back there punching above our weight. At the moment we’ve retreated from the ring and I think it’s shameful that we have because we’re missing out on opportunities but most importantly, we’re not contributing to the solutions that plenty of countries are calling out for. We have an obligation to do it and under me we will.

 JOURNALIST: Just back to the tobacco case. In the United States some states have legislated that any (inaudible) will go to the health system rather than to specific victims. Do you see this (inaudible) in Australia?

 CREAN: Well I think it’s worth consideration. There’s no doubt about the connection between smoking and people’s health and health risks and when we were in Government we did introduce programs that put money into research, prevention, remediation, all of those sorts of things. I think everyone will be looking at the consequences of this case and rather than jump to immediate responses I’d prefer to consider in the way I said before and speak to you at another stage about that.

 JOURNALIST: What would your attitude be towards Australia being involved in any future peace keeping efforts in the Middle East?

 CREAN: I don’t think the case has been made out for that. I think that the noises being made by President Bush and by Tony Blair are of concern. If the information exists that Iraq has got linkages to al-Quaeda, well lets see the evidence and make the judgment based on that evidence. But I don’t believe that if that evidence is, why, I believe if that evidence is deficient, we shouldn’t be rushing in.

 JOURNALIST: And what about in Israel itself?

 CREAN: Israel, I think that the, there’s a tragic set of circumstances there at the moment. I visited Israel in May of last year. I believe the framework for a solution exists. What doesn’t exist is how you get the people around the table. What’s got to happen is there’s got to be a ceasefire. The parties have to be brought back to the table to get a lasting peace. The irony is, it’s almost as if the framework and the solution is there but we don’t how to get there and it’s perverse. It’s perverse because it’s not the normal way in which one would approach these things. You start with intractability without knowing the solution but at least you’ve people talking. I hope that Colin Powell’s visit to the Middle East, his discussions today with the Israeli Prime Minister, his discussions with President Arafat, I hope the US can force the cease-fire, get the withdrawals and get people talking again for a lasting solution.

 5

 JOURNALIST: And if peacekeepers will be going there, would you see Australian getting involved?

 CREAN: It’s too early again to talk about that. I think what we want is a ceasefire. There’s no point talking about peacekeepers until you’ve got a peace to keep and in Israel at the moment in the occupied territories, there’s no peace. The great tragedy is that both of these nations want their homeland and the ability to live in it in security. Whilst there’s dispute about the territories and what the homeland is, the fundamental is, there is no security and that’s the issue that has to be addressed. That’s what I urge the parties to arrive at a solution around.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean in relation to Federal MP’s entitlement, there’s been some speculation (inaudible) $300,000 on stationary (inaudible) stuff like that. Is this over the top (inaudible)?

 CREAN: Well it’s well over the top of the Prime Minister’s newly imposed limit as I understand it. But look the only way this issue is going to be addressed properly and satisfactorily in people’s minds is the establishment of an independent auditor of Parliamentary entitlements. That’s what I’m calling for. Someone who can make the independent assessment as to what the needs of Parliamentarians are and whether people are abusing them. Now all of us have constituencies to represent.  You’ve seen the type of work that just a week of that does, there are costs associated with offices and mail and printing. This is us connecting with the community. I don’t want to take that away, I want that to be continued to be built upon, you need resources for that. You need an adequate level of resources, but let’s take it away from the politicians’ own judgment themselves, establish an independent auditor of Parliamentary entitlements and restore a bit faith in the community and trust again in our politicians that what’s being spent is being spent fairly and in accordance with entitlement.

 JOURNALIST: Ron Walker said this morning on ‘AM’ that he was happy with the way John and Janette Howard were running the country. How do you think John Howard would feel that people think his wife (inaudible) ?

 CREAN: Well I think that Ron Walker sounds like a very easy person to please. I’m not happy with the way John Howard is running the country and you know Ron Walker ought to be pleased I suppose if people could survive on his level of income, they’d be pretty happy too. But the fact of the matter is that John Howard’s got to stop governing just for the top end of town. He’s got to govern for all Australians, understand all of their needs and start getting a third term agenda. We know he’s got no third term agenda and what’s the Liberal Party Conference discussing this weekend as its only major item, from all of the accounts? Four-year terms of Parliament. Well I welcome the discussion about four-year terms but we’ve carried a resolution of that years ago and so did they, in 1996. The four-year term

 6

 argument shows that they have not got serious immediate issues to address. And whilst I welcome their response, and their positive response, hopefully, to discussing the four year terms, they’ve got to get on with governing the country. Yesterday we saw very good employment figures. I welcome it but what I want to see is the Government is now re-commit to what it said a few years ago. To a target for unemployment that has a five in front of it. And we can get unemployment down from this very solid improvement if we implement my jobs plan. The plan that calls for tax credits and the lifting of the minimum wage. Not at the cost to employers but doing it through the tax system. A plan that widens the gap between welfare and work. A plan that gives people liveability in their jobs. Now if we can work together to build off yesterday’s figures. Do it in the spirit of bipartisanship.  It’s not only good for the young people and people who are struggling on minimum wages, but I think it sends a signal of restoring that trust in our politicians again. I’d like to see that.

 JOURNALIST: …Mr Walker also (inaudible)?

 CREAN: Casino Costello? This is the bloke who said, who’s the highest taxing Treasurer in the country’s history and wants to hide the additional money he’s going to rip out of your taxes over the course of the next six years. He says that the figures that I’ve been talking are, don’t exist. Well they will exist but he wants to hide them. Now if Peter Costello is serious he’ll re-commit to his 5% target for unemployment and he’ll also work with us to implement a program for tax credits, a plan for jobs and a plan to lift the living wage of Australians. That’s what people will judge him on. Not the show pony who only ever turns up when there’s a decent figure and claims credit, but whenever something’s going wrong, it’s someone else’s fault. This is a person who’s been asleep at the wheel, on this occasion the roulette wheel, and he’s lost five billion dollars of Australian taxpayers’ money. Have a look at the budget in terms of who he’s going to make pay for those losses. We’re already seeing the budget leaks, saying it’s the disadvantaged, the unemployed, the people who require medicines who are the ones that are going to pay. No, I don’t think he deserves to be the Prime Minister of the country but if the pressure keeps on John Howard he may well be. But he’d be a good contestant to be up against next time around.

 ENDS.

