---
title: "Committee evidence highlights Australia's breaches of Refugee Convention."
date: "2002-08-06"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211246002
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SK476%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 06 August 2002    MEDIA RELEASE                          02/386

 Committee evidence highlights Australia's breaches of Refugee Convention Evidence given today to the Senate, Legal and Constitutional Committee by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees highlights how far Australia has stepped away from the aims of the Refugee Convention. In 1951 the principle of family unity was recognised and codified in the recommendations made at the Final Act of the Conference that adopted the 1951 Convention.  

 Democrats’ Spokesperson for Immigration, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the proposed migration legislation is another example of the Australian Government punishing refugees by deliberately separating families.  

 “The evidence provided by the UNHCR confirms that Australia is breaching the Refugee Convention in a number of significant ways,” Senator Bartlett said.  

 “The evidence reveals the tragic consequence of excising Australian territory from the migration zone.  

 “We are in a situation where many wives and children who attempted to travel to Australia, after their husbands have arrived here and been granted Temporary Protection Visas, have been assessed on Nauru during the past eight months.  

 “Those assessed by the UNHCR were granted derivative status which recognises their right to be reunited with their husbands. Those assessed by DIMIA have been determined not to be refugees regardless of their husband’s status in Australia.  

 “This ludicrous situation gets worse for those who cannot return to their country of origin. Australia would rather dump these women and children on to other countries than see them reunited and safe.  

 “The Australian Government’s use of mandatory detention for every man, woman and child who arrives in Australia is far more extreme than that of any other democratic nation,” Senator Bartlett said.  

 “The Howard Government’s policy of deliberately keeping families separated is without parallel in the developed world. There is no doubt that the Government has deliberately and stubbornly set up a regime that sets out to punish people.  

 “The recent case of the two Iraqi children separated from their father is a perfect example of this cruel policy at work.

 “Even those found to be refugees by the United Nations are not automatically reunited with their refugee husbands in Australia, instead they are forced to languish on Nauru, although they are legally and morally entitled to be set free.

 “The United Nations has made it very clear that it expects all signatories to the Convention to honour the concept of family … and that includes Australia,” concluded Senator Bartlett. For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

