---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: Tampa spying, mandatory detention, ALP policy framework."
date: "2002-02-12"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234127
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Z6W56%22
---

 1

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 12TH FEBRUARY 2002.

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Tampa spying, mandatory detention, ALP policy framework

 CREAN: It’s outrageous that the Government has been spying on Australians. Outrageous and un-Australian. What we need to know is how many more Australians are being spied on now and what the Prime Minister’s knowledge has been of this activity.

 JOURNALIST: Does this damage do you think public confidence in our spying agencies?

 CREAN: I think it damages public confidence in the lengths the Government will go to get up its political agenda. That’s the issue here. We know that the Government has misled the Australian people previously on its activities on the waterfront. We know that the same Minister has been deceitful in the “kids overboard”. And now he’s been using intelligence material against Australians.

 JOURNALIST: So you’re laying the blame directly at Peter Reith?

 CREAN: It’s against the Government. Peter Reith unfortunately is out of the Government now. But he’s got form on this. The real issue here is who’s being spied on now and what is the Prime Minister’s state of knowledge?

 JOURNALIST: Do you believe though that Mr Reith would’ve been the one to order this directive?

 CREAN: One could make that assumption but I think we need the information. But the story also says that this information was brought to the whole of Cabinet. The whole of Cabinet has been complicit in this. What does it say of a total Government that receives information on Australians who are being spied on and use that information spying on Australians for their own political agenda?

 2

 JOURNALIST: Is it appropriate for the Government to obtain that information if it believes it is in the national interest?

 CREAN: Well that’s a very fine line but the Government can’t use it for political purposes. The national interest is a judgement that has to be made by the Security Council. But here we’ve got the Government using it for blatant political purposes. There’s also a report about a book coming out that says the Government was planning an incident similar to Tampa for up to four months. This is form and track record by this Government in terms of its dirty tricks brigade. Peter Reith’s been involved. We want to know the extent to which the Prime Minister was aware.

 JOURNALIST: …in how far this spying has gone whether it might even relate to the situation around Woomera, around Port Hedland, around the whole refugee issue?

 CREAN: Well who know? This is the point. I mean how do we get this information? We get this information because the Government is so cocky it’s out there bragging about it. Bragging about how it fixed the last election. How it manipulated information. But what it’s done is to manipulate Australians. It’s used its defence intelligence gathering for political purpose. That’s totally inappropriate.

 JOURNALIST: The Government says it can’t comment on the DSD?

 CREAN: Oh yeah. The Government can’t comment. It can only use the information. What the Government has done is outrageous and it’s un-Australian. And all of the Cabinet has been involved. We want to know what’s continuing to happen under this approach. And what extent the Prime Minister knows of it.

 JOURNALIST: Is this the biggest scandal since perhaps the Tasmanian spy flights?

 CREAN: Well I think that it’s a scandal when Australians are being spied on for political purposes. It’s outrageous and it’s un-Australian.

 JOURNALIST: How are you going to pursue this, through just question time or are you going to push for some form of inquiry?

 CREAN: Look we’ll pursue it through as many forms as we can. The Australian public deserves to know. If they’re being used as pawns by this Government. If they’re being spied on for political purposes it’s outrageous and it’s un-Australian and we need to get to the bottom of it and we will.

 3

 JOURNALIST: It is a bit of a gift isn’t it? Given the Labor Party’s problems with you having to go into Parliament now with a less then settled refugee policy.

 CREAN: Well it’s interesting you ask about the refugee policy. I mean we have settled the direction of our approach to asylum seekers. We’ve come forward with policies. All of which have been endorsed. And also what’s been endorsed is the framework by which we go forward. What’s unsettling is now in the Liberal Party. We’ve now got the dissention in the ranks of the Liberal Party. We’ve got the critics there. Now how is it you can say ‘my party is unsettled’ when I‘ve got a couple of people opposed. When John Howard’s is supposed to be united and he’s got four at least speaking out. I mean let’s get perspective into this debate. I accept that there have been differences of opinion in my party and what I’ve done is to lead the policy change to accommodate and understand what people’s concerns are. John Howard has not moved one iota and now it turns out he’s been using tactics, spying on Australians to get information to suit their political purposes.

 JOURNALIST: Have you had any conversation with Carmen Lawrence about her address to the rally today?

 CREAN: I spoke to Carmen before yesterday’s meeting and subsequent to it. I had, very good conversation with Carmen.

 JOURNALIST: Was she happy with the framework you decided on?

 CREAN: Carmen is very happy with the framework and the decision taken by the Caucus.

 JOURNALIST: Is she going to speak against mandatory detention today do you know?

 CREAN: Carmen will be speaking in accordance with the decision the Party has taken yesterday. She was part of it, she agrees with it. Why shouldn’t she speak about it and I encourage her to do so.

 JOURNALIST: So it’s your understanding that she supports mandatory detention?

 CREAN: Carmen supports mandatory detention in the initial stages to establish security, health checks, those sorts of things. She also accepts there are circumstances for mandatory detention where people who have been assessed, but are considered at risk or a threat to the community, should be detained. He argument like many others goes to the duration, it goes to the time taken with processing and she also argues for different forms of detention to be pursued, such as community release. Now that’s a debate the Party is prepared to embrace. I’ve certainly indicated weeks ago that I’m prepared to embrace it. Let’s get on with it. Let’s not try and create the differences. We got a united position yesterday and we’ll move forward from it.

 4

 I’ve got to go and read a lesson at the local church service today. So you’ll excuse me because the church service won’t wait for me and I’m sure it won’t wait for you. Thanks very much.

 ENDS.

