---
title: "Democrats demand Royal Commission."
date: "2002-04-24"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236382
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2EE66%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja Leader of the Australian Democrats

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson

 24 April 2002     MEDIA RELEASE                          02/194

 Democrats demand Royal Commission The Australian Democrats are demanding that the Federal Government establish a Royal Commission or independent judicial inquiry into the management and conditions of Australia’s detention centres as a matter of urgency.

 Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja and Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, say the reports of mistreatment made by experienced health professionals who have worked in the centres and the leaked video footage from the Curtin Detention Centre clearly show that something is very wrong with our detention regime.

 “The type of treatment asylum seekers receive within the detention centres is a direct consequence of the Australian Government’s inhumane and inflexible asylum seeker policy,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “The treatment which detainees allegedly receive from some guards would not be tolerated in any Australian prison.  It is a scandal the Government is desperately trying to keep covered up,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

 “Certainly the leaked video shows the level of disregard and intolerance asylum seekers face on a daily basis and for an indefinite period of time. It further illustrates the level of distrust felt by those supposedly responsible for their detention,” said Senator Stott Despoja.

 “We owe it to all asylum seekers and refugees, those that have endured the process and those that are currently experiencing it, to establish a Royal Commission into their incarceration, the conditions under which they are detained, and the actions and behaviour of ACM staff,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Mandatory detention of asylum seekers is inhumane. The consequences of Australia subscribing to it are obvious by the images contained in the video footage for everyone to see - both here and overseas. But the costs to Australia have not yet begun to be felt.

 “Long-term detention of children, lack of certainty for frightened families, and the growing trauma and suffering of all asylum seekers are having a devastating psychological impact - one which is likely to spill over into the community when those detained are released into the community,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “It took a Royal Commission, many years back, to address chronic problems in New South Wales jails and to uncover the disgraceful behaviour that was occurring. The same must be done to deal with the never-ending stream of incidents and allegations occurring in our detention centres today.

 “Unless the Government has something to hide, they should act immediately to establish a proper independent investigation,” concluded Senator Bartlett. For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

