---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview, Melbourne: death of the Queen Mother; refugee protests at Woomera."
date: "2002-03-31"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235570
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9J866%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - MELBOURNE, VICTORIA, 31 MARCH 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects:  Death of the Queen Mother; refugee protests at Woomera 

 CREAN: I think it’s a very sad day.  She was a woman of great courage and of great grace.  She obviously will be a huge loss to the Queen. And it is a double tragedy, of course, for the Queen having lost her sister and her mother and all in the year that she is celebrating her Jubilee.  So my condolences go particularly to her but to the whole of the Royal Family.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Queen Mother was well regarded in Australia?

 CREAN:  I think she was enormously well regarded.  She was the continuity for the Royal Family in Australia.  She was a person whose life spanned our history as a Federation and she was here for the opening of the first Parliament in Canberra, the first Parliament House building in Canberra. But she was continuity for that whole period.

 JOURNALIST: Did you ever meet her?

 CREAN:  No I never met the Queen Mother.

 JOURNALIST: Will you be sending the Opposition’s condolences?

 CREAN:  I convey my deepest condolences, not just for myself and Carole, but for the whole of the Opposition.   I am sure that all of us respected the role and admired the role that she played over such a long period of time.  A woman of great courage and a woman of great grace.

 JOURNALIST: What do you think was the key to her incredible popularity?

 CREAN:  Well, because I think she was accessible.  She was always available, she was a people’s person.  She was always very friendly,

 2

 she made the extra effort.  And I think she had a great understanding of people, she related to them.  I think that was what endeared her so much to, not only the public here, but the public all around the world.

 JOURNALIST: On to other issues.  What is your take on what is happening at Woomera at the moment?

 CREAN: Well I don’t believe the protesters are serving their cause or that of those inside to the best effect with the breaking down of the facilities and the breaking out of the people inside.   I think all Australians accept the need for us to be tough on borders and to ensure that people who enter the country illegally are detained appropriately for the appropriate checks.  Now I do believe that we need to look at the question of the conditions of mandatory detention and the time it takes to process them.  But we support mandatory detention and we believe that the conditions and the time need a review but this is something that we have said we are prepared to work with the Government on.  To date, we haven’t had a preparedness on the part of the Government to work with us to achieve that.

 JOURNALIST: Philip Ruddock says that he has announced that there will be an extra 1,600 places to immigrants and that this is a result of the success of the Government’s anti-boatpeople policy.  Would you endorse that?

 CREAN: …  I mean, if you have to build additional facilities you can hardly claim that the ‘Pacific Solution’ has been a success.  They have now had to change the law because by the end of this month or early next month we are going to have to be taking people here from Nauru and Manus Island.  People that John Howard said would never set foot in this country. But I believe that Woomera should be mothballed.  There are facilities in existing detention centres for people detained at Woomera to be appropriately housed and importantly the young kids should be got out from detention.  And if they require their mothers to be with them the mothers should be allowed as well.

 JOURNALIST: In supporting the continuation of mandatory detention are you confident that you are in line with the views of most people in the Labor Party?

 CREAN: I don’t know any one who seriously argues in the Labor Party that there should be no form of mandatory detention.  The argument, and it’s a wider argument in the community, are the conditions under which people are held whilst in mandatory detention and the duration it takes to process them.  But everyone accepts that people who arrive without papers, without security checks, without health checks need to be held in detention so that those checks can be undertaken.  And obviously the Labor Party continues to say that mandatory detention is appropriate for those circumstances.

 3

 JOURNALIST: There is another rally for refugees today, this time out at Maribyrnong, this time by the Jewish community.  Would you dismiss these growing numbers of protests as just a simple minority?    

 CREAN: No I don’t dismiss them.  I think there are genuinely held concerns about the way in which people are held and the length of time that they are held.  But they are concerns that have to be addressed in an orderly way.  We have said, in the Labor Party, we are prepared to review the policies and try and push the Government on that.  But I don’t believe that illegal actions help the cause.  I think that we have got to process it sensibly. I think that we have got to take stock on the failure on the ‘Pacific Solution’. We have got to try and get to the bottom of what it cost, because we know it cost a lot more than the Government let on but they just won’t tell us the figure.  All of these factors have got to be properly and sensibly considered and it’s in that context that we are prepared to undertake the review.  We won’t be rushing to judgement but we will be giving it appropriate consideration.

 JOURNALIST: So do you understand the frustrations that has obviously sparked these protests at Woomera?   

 CREAN: Well I understand the frustration but it doesn’t condone the type of protest.  I do not believe it helps arrive at a solution, a sensible considered solution if it’s surrounded by circumstances of inappropriate action.  I just don’t believe it helps.  And I would urge those to, those people protesting, to be part of the sensible pressure on the Government to get it to change its policy.  I believe that the policy does need to be reviewed, the Government has signalled a preparedness to look at the question of the Afghanis who can’t immediately be returned home.  I think that’s an important start for the consideration, it ‘s something that the Government said they are prepared to talk with us about.  We will wait and see where those conversations lead.

 TAPE BREAK

 Ends.

