---
title: "Canberra: transcript of doorstop: resignation of Carmen Lawrence from Shadow\nCabinet."
date: "2002-12-05"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211250905
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XE286%22
---

 1

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - CANBERRA, THURSDAY 5 DECEMBER 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Resignation of Carmen Lawrence from Shadow Cabinet

 CREAN: I’m obviously disappointed with the decision that Carmen has chosen to take today but, in the circumstances of her not being able to accept the decision of the Shadow Cabinet, she had no other choice than to do what she did today.

 That being said, it is important to reiterate that this issue in relation to asylum seekers has been a very difficult one for the party to resolve.  And we have not rushed into it.  There have been exhaustive consultations and discussions. Everyone has been aware of the issues within the party as to where the points of difference were.  The argument that these were issues that were only finalised this week isn’t reflective of the process that has gone on now for over twelve months.  It was always recognised that this was an issue that needed to be resolved by the end of the year.  And that’s what the Caucus has done today.

 The decision of the Shadow Cabinet, the decision of the Caucus, involved lengthy consultations.  I was prepared to give the extra time for its consideration.  It is the correct policy for the party.  It is a policy that takes us in the right direction.  It is a policy which is significantly different from that of the Government, and it’s a policy that does go to core Labor values - Labor values that say, on the one hand, we have to protect our citizens and make them secure within this nation.  The policy does that and it does it in a Labor way.

 The other core value is that we believe that these issues in relation to asylum seekers cannot be resolved here in Australia alone.  It needs an international context and it argues very much to advance that international context. Indeed, the question in relation to Christmas Island provides the basis for a pilot program through the UNHCR.  And for those who believe in the international context and the importance of it, there, too, they can see the value of that decision.

 2

 And, of course, the other value that’s important and essential in this policy is that we do the decent thing by people who do come here has asylum seekers - that they are treated humanely.  They haven’t been under this Government, and this policy advances their interests.

 And whilst Carmen can’t accept the policy today, the Labor Party has determined it.  And, just as she can’t remain in the Shadow Cabinet because she can’t accept the decision of the Shadow Cabinet, the Caucus has determined the policy that we will take forward to the next election.

 JOURNALIST: But the problem’s much, much deeper than that. Dr Lawrence has comprehensively trashed the way in which the Labor Party operates.

 CREAN: I’m disappointed with the decision that she took today and I fundamentally disagree with her analysis of the direction the party’s headed.

 JOURNALIST: She said this is too conservative, a pale imitation of the Government, though.

 CREAN: As I say, I - I mean, I can remember not so long ago when we had the Special Rules Conference, and there I was being accused of being a captive of the Left.  Now, people can’t have it both ways.  You can’t sort of repeat one line out of that Conference and then come along here and repeat another one simply because an individual asserts it.  Your job is to analyse the decisions and the policy direction that I’ve taken this party forward on.  On asylum seekers, I actually advanced the interests of a more humane treatment of the kids behind the razor wire, on January 26th this year.  And I’ve continued to push the party in the direction of a more humane approach.  I’ve also advanced significant areas of difference with the Government.  I can enumerate them if you want them.  But all I ask you to do - and it is a genuine plea in terms of this Press Gallery - analyse the policy, analyse the direction.  Make your own assessments about the decisions we come out with.  Don’t just react to the last individual that’s given you an interview.

 JOURNALIST: But that was one of her criticisms as well: that the policy requires too much analysis; that it’s not clear to voters what you’re on about.

 CREAN: The policy that we will be taking forward will be clear, it will be concise.  I mean, it’s not hard to understand when you say we will introduce Paid Maternity Leave, that that’s a simple policy, surely.  It’s not hard to, when we say we’re going to restore bulk-billing, that’s not a hard policy to understand what Labor is committed to.  I make the point, have a look at the initiative.  I’ll have something to say about this next Tuesday when I speak at the Press Club. I hope you all come down there.  And I hope that you take great interest in the initiatives that I will report that we have taken over the

 3

 past twelve months, because I think it is significant and I think that analysis should be properly done - not just reaction on a day-to-day basis of what individuals say.

 JOURNALIST: Is this a blow to your leadership?

 CREAN: No it is not. I will be leading the party to the next election and if you want to keep asking the questions I will keep repeating the answer. I am committed to lead the party.  I have led it to the policy decision today, a decision that the Caucus has endorsed.  And the fact that an individual has disagreed - and her resignation from the Shadow Cabinet, but not from the party, is a reflection of Carmen’s inability to accept the Cabinet solidarity principle - something that she had signed up to and knows as former Premier is essential to the Westminster system of government.

 JOURNALIST: Has she forgotten her friends considering Labor’s support throughout her difficult years?

 CREAN: No, she hasn’t forgotten her friends. And Labor did stick by her through thick and thin, through difficult years. She is sticking by Labor, but she is choosing to do it in a different way.

 JOURNALIST: Has she harmed Labor?

 CREAN: No, she hasn’t harmed Labor.  Labor will always be strengthened by its view and its commitment to developing the policy, consulting and finalising.  That is what we did today, and the Caucus as a whole - whilst there still are differences of opinion as to where the policy should have ended up - accepted, overwhelmingly, the process. They were happy with the timetable that was set down and they accept the decision.

 JOURNALIST: You’ve still got some problems, though Mr Crean, because there were a number of Caucus members in her Press Conference, some of whom at the end of it stood up and applauded her.

 CREAN: Well, this comes to the question I was asked before. Of course, she has got friends in the party and one would expect them to stand by her.  But as I understand it there were people who are her friends who disagree fundamentally with her analysis. That doesn’t make them less her friends.  And you would probably know that, Phillip, you would have some friends, and you would stick your …

 JOURNALIST: Does she have more friends than you?

 CREAN: I have got lots of friends.

 4

 JOURNALIST: Is there a place for her in the Caucus if she continues to speak out against this policy, against your policy on Iraq and possibly your policy on the Health Rebate, as she intends to?

 CREAN: She is entitled to express her views on all of those issues. And so is every member of the Caucus. I mean, that is what we are, we are a democratic party. But in the end, we have to make decisions.  You have to have a process that gets to some finality, some conclusion.  And that is what today was about, and that is what the Party will go out and promote.

 JOURNALIST: Would you have required Carmen to at least go to the outer Ministry, Simon, if she hadn’t indicated she was going to stand down?

 CREAN: No, because she didn’t oppose the decision.

 JOURNALIST: She abstained from it.

 CREAN: She abstained from it. She didn’t oppose the decision today in the Caucus.  And I think that it is important that even she acknowledges that the policy that we have adopted is an important advance.  She just believes it should go further.  Well, I disagree with her and so does the majority of the Caucus.  And that’s what becomes the decision of the Party. Now, everyone has to accept it.  Individuals can have their views but, in the end, the process determines the mechanism for finalising, and that is what we did today.

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the revolt could widen, though?

 CREAN: No, because the process was honest, it was open, it was constructive, and the overwhelming majority of people believe that to be the case. And I have been through circumstances before in this Party where we have had difficult debates. And I know that in the end the Party accepts the decision. The Rules Conference was a recent example of that - on a different scale. But we have had those debates, we will have them in the future. And I am confident about the process, I am a believer in it. And I am an inclusive person. And that is why I will go out of my way to give people more time to consider, more time to debate, more time to argue. And we have bent over backwards in terms of giving people that opportunity.

 This has been a debate going on in the Party now for twelve months. Don’t anyone think that this was an issue that was rammed through, it wasn’t. This was an issue well considered, well consulted. And go and talk to Julia about the people that she spoke within the community. She has been out there doing hundreds of forums.  There has been enormous input into this.  And the views of all sorts of people have been taken into account.  In the end, the Parliamentary Party - the people who are elected to represent their constituencies for the Labor Party in this Parliament - have to make a decision on their behalf, and they have. And they will promote it.

 5

 JOURNALIST: Did you think you could keep Dr Lawrence? Did you try hard to persuade her to stay in?

 CREAN: I did but, you see, in the end, Michelle - and I had a long conversation with her, not just today - I have had a number of conversations with her over the course of her coming to this final decision.  I am well aware of where she comes from with these issues.  And, in the end, it is the question as to whether on this issue you can accept the collective discipline and fight another day on the other issues within the Cabinet, or whether this is so overwhelming that you are not prepared to do it.

 In the end she came down on that balance, on that decision. I tried to convince her to think the other way, but it’s her call. I mean, people know what they are doing.  These are not knee-jerk responses.  These are well considered, but it is not as if there hasn’t been an attempt to get her to consider the different perspective, the wider perspective.  In the end, she didn’t.

 I think that she considers it a great relief. When I saw her walk into that Press Conference, it’s the happiest I have seen her in some time. And it, therefore obviously, is a huge weight off her shoulders and something that she wasn’t prepared to - that she wanted lifted, that she didn’t want to continue to have to deal with.

 (ends)

