---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview: asylum seekers; Afghan refugees; Prime Minister's overseas trip; government defence spending report; trade; Gold Pass."
date: "2002-01-30"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233846
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FMT56%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 30TH JANUARY 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects:  Asylum seekers; Afghan refugees; Prime Minister’s overseas trip; Government Defence spending report; trade; Gold Pass

 CREAN: I welcome the Government’s softening of its hardline decision in relation to the refugees.  In particular the preparedness on the part of Minister Ruddock to do what I called for last Saturday and get the kids out from behind the razor wire.  Mr Ruddock has admitted that the trial associated with accompanied children and their mothers around Woomera has been a success.  What we want is that trial now implemented as policy. If it’s worked it should become policy.  But this trial did not deal with accompanied children and clearly there has to be a mechanism to getting them out into foster accommodation as well as extending the policy beyond Woomera to attach to the other detention centres.  I believe that the Government and its softening of position has responded sensibly to date in the last 24 hours.  Let’s hope that they are prepared to go further.

 And one other area that they should embrace is the streaming within the detention facilities themselves.  The separating from those who are peaceful, those who are the troublemakers.  I don’t believe it’s appropriate that everyone be cast in the same mould and this has been a tendency of Minister Ruddock to talk only about the blackmail.  What about the people who have been cooperating?  Why shouldn’t they be given facilities and detention separate from those within the centre who are the troublemakers themselves? In any other detention facility the troublemakers are separated from those who are prepared to do the right thing.  This was a recommendation from a joint parliamentary committee last year - the Government still has not responded to it.  I am calling on the Government to implement this dimension of policy changes as well.

 JOURNALIST: What makes you so sure that there has been a softening? What in what Mr Ruddock has said makes you think that there has?

 2

 CREAN: I think the language has changed and that is terribly important.  What we want now is the action to change.  He has admitted that the trial, which he hadn’t talked of until I mentioned it yesterday, has been a success.  If it has been a success adopt it as policy.

 JOURNALIST: Has that trial been completed though?

 CREAN: It completes, as I understand it, on the 7th or 9th of February.

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the advisory group that the Woomera Detention Centre should be mothballed?

 CREAN: Well, I haven’t seen the full detail of what they’ve said in relation to Woomera.  I am seeking that information.  But if the independent advisory group recommends a phase down of it then I think that’s a recommendation that has to be taken seriously.

 JOURNALIST: Do you share Mr Mark Latham’s concerns that Labor risks being too soft on this issue in a way that could damage you out in the electorate, particularly in outer suburban and metro areas?

 CREAN: My concern is to come up with decent policy.  Policy that is tough on border protection but compassionate at the same time.  I believe that we can do both.  We haven’t seen both sides of this argument addressed by the Government.  I think we’re starting to see some softening in the Government’s stance on the compassion front, if you like.  I welcome it and I would urge more of an approach down that direction.

 JOURNALIST: How far can Labor go in being compassionate?

 CREAN: Well, that remains to be seen but from the Labor Party’s point of view we will continue to press the Government on this.  I’ve put forward constructive proposals for change in the policy.  I commenced that last Saturday and I have continued to put forward proposals since then and I have announced further today.  I’m prepared to work with the Government to implement these policy changes - I want constructive outcomes.

 JOURNALIST: Should the Government accept Hamid Karzai’s request to accept more Afghan refugees?

 CREAN: Well, it was interesting that Hamid Karzai’s suggestion was also qualified by the fact that not all of them could be taken back immediately.  Now I believe the Prime Minister has a golden opportunity in his meeting with the interim President of Afghanistan whilst he is in New York. Here we have an opportunity to address the problem at source with one of the key countries in question.  In the way that I have called for the Government to reach agreement with Indonesia and to get a framework with

 3

 the United Nations, he must do the same with the new administration in Afghanistan.  Don’t botch this opportunity Prime Minister.  We need to address the problem at source to make it a lasting solution.  Here’s an opportunity to get off on the right foot.

 JOURNALIST: Is this as far as Labor tends to go on asylum seekers releasing women and children and screening at detention centres or are we going to see more on the compassionate side of the policy and, for example, close detention centres or abolish mandatory detention?

 CREAN: I’ve indicated a number of changes in the treatment of people in detention centres.  One is getting the kids out from behind the razor wire, going further than the trial that the Government has been undertaking. Addressing the issues so far as unaccompanied children are concerned. Streaming within the detention centres so that the troublemakers are separated from the people who are prepared to do the right thing.  I am continuing to look at these issues to consider options.  I am prepared to sit down with the Government and work these through but I believe that we need to get off to an important start with the treatment of children.

 JOURNALIST: Are you under pressure from others within Labor, like Mark Latham, who are holding similar positions about Labor taking a dangerous stance here?

 CREAN: Look, let’s understand this: the Labor Party has put forward proposals that are constructive solutions - that’s what I am about.  I am prepared to lead in relation to those constructive solutions, the key issue is to focus on getting the Government to change because they make the decisions.  We will continue to agitate for changes that get that balance right that I talked of before - tough on border protection but compassionate.

 JOURNALIST: You seem to have trouble bringing all the Party with you, don’t you?  I mean we all saw Mr Gallop in Western Australia supporting a tougher line on detention…?

 CREAN: I think we all support a tough line on protecting our borders.  My argument is we can do that but at the same time be compassionate.  To look at sensible ways by which people are prevented from getting here in the first place, that’s dealing with the problem at source. That’s those agreements that I talked about.  Of having a coastguard so that we’ve got a cop on the beat.  Of having expeditious processing arrangement so that there aren’t endless opportunities for appeal.  One of the propositions that I have put forward is that we establish a special branch of the Federal Magistry to deal as a one-stop shop appeal process.  Now these are all constructive proposals put forward in the interests of getting a lasting solution.  At the same time we have to recognise that people can get through the gate, they can get through the cop on the beat and if they get here they’re entitled to basic human dignities.

 4

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, there is an opinion piece written today by a former staffer of Duncan Kerr who says that Labor first of all considered this policy of releasing children before the election campaign.  Why didn’t you embrace it then and secondly, she also says that she was repeatedly told, well we have got to be tough now but Labor will do it differently in government.  Can you understand her being told that?

 CREAN: I am certain that Labor in government would have done things differently than the Government, that I have no question about at all.

 JOURNALIST: She was suggesting that she was told that you would be changing your policies if you won.

 CREAN: I am only interested in where we go from here.  I think we’ve got to understand that the current policy is not working.  The current policy is also terribly costly as evidenced by reports today that show that there will be a huge blow-out in theses costs.  As I understand it the Treasurer has admitted today the cost will be more than they budgeted for. Now he has got to come clean and tell us how much more because he also said during the last election, as did the Prime Minister, that this was all paid for - it was all within the Budget.  I think what we are seeing today is the start of the first broken promise of the new Howard Government.

 JOURNALIST: …the reports are widely inaccurate…the costs could be anything like the $1.8 billion reported today.

 CREAN: Then he has to fess up and tell us how much the figure is.  If he says that they are widely outrageous tell us how much more because he has admitted it is more than they budgeted for.  What we want to know is where that is going to be paid from?

 JOURNALIST: Is it Labor’s belief that the Government should maintain its commitment to the extra white paper spending as well as make sure that the kids in Vietnam, sorry, in Afghanistan and elsewhere are given enough resources to keep our commitment going?

 CREAN: We were supportive of the Government commitment in terms of Timor and in terms of our effort to combat terrorism.  We asked the Government what the additional costs would be and were assured that it would all be met from the existing Budget allocations.  What I want to know is can all of those additional costs still be met within the existing allocations? The Treasurer today has suggested they can’t.  We want to know how much more and how the cost is going to be met - they have to fess up.

 JOURNALIST: Given you have supported the campaign against terrorism and large elements of border protection spending would you also

 5

 support in the Senate Budget cuts necessary to pay for them if they were necessary?

 CREAN: Well, I think that what we will be doing in the Senate if the Government doesn’t come clean on the true costs is using the Senate Estimates process to establish precisely what the cost is.  You can’t have a sensible debate about what needs to be supported unless you know the true cost.  What is the Government hiding?  Clearly the Treasurer knows how much it’s costing but he won’t tell the Australian people.  He’s hiding that issue from the Australian people and they deserve better.  They deserve to know and then we can have an informed debate about the consequences of that.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, a word on trade.  In your view is the Prime Minister and Mr Vaile doing enough in the US?  Are they tough enough in their negotiations, particularly on steel?

 CREAN: Well, they haven’t been doing enough to date.  Whether they do enough whilst they’re there remains to be seen.  The Prime Minister has a lot on his plate in his meeting whilst he is over there - I just hope he is addressing each of those issues.  We will make the judgement when we see the outcome.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, can voters assume that the Labor Party will support mandatory detention right through this Parliamentary term?

 CREAN: Well, I have said before that all of our policies are subject to review.  In the current circumstances I haven’t seen the compelling argument yet to end mandatory detention.  However, I have said that I will be guided by recommendations that come from the independent committee that has been set up.  It is an eminent body, it has had the opportunity to investigate and study the concerns associated with detention centres and I think if you establish those bodies you’ve got to take serious consideration of what their recommendations might be.  Let’s wait and see what they recommend in that regard.  As far as I am aware they have made no such recommendation in that direction but they have made recommendations that can be acted on now and that is what I am urging the Government pick up on.

 JOURNALIST: So would you say that you have got an open mind on mandatory detention of asylum seekers?

 CREAN: I have nothing further to add to what I have just said.

 JOURNALIST: On the subject of releasing children it seems that the children who are getting consideration at this stage are those who’ve threatened self-harm.  Doesn’t that seem to mean that if you make trouble you get out?

 6

 CREAN: I don’t believe they are the people that are getting special consideration.  I think that we have got to face up to the fact that barbed wire, razor wire is no environment for young children to be brought up in regardless of any of the circumstances.  I think it’s just a basic humanitarian thing.  And what I have called for is getting the kids out from behind the razor wire.  Now there are different categories of kids, that is true, but I think that we have to address this from the perspective of what sort of lasting consequences are going to remain with those kids.  They need an education, they need care.  They need better than the treatment that some of them seem to be getting.  The best way for that is outside from behind the razor wire.

 JOURNALIST: Just in relation to the Government’s claim that intelligence reports suggest that people smugglers are in disarray and that the policy is working, it’s acting as a deterrent and no boats have landed. What’s your view?  Do you believe that the policy is working?

 CREAN: We will have to wait and see.  I think many people have commented upon the fact that the reason, significant reason, why there are fewer boats coming, indeed some not at all, is because of the monsoon season.  Obviously that can’t be discounted and needs to be properly factored in before people make allegations that the policy itself is working.  The current policy is not sustainable.  I don’t believe the Pacific Solution is a solution.  What I am saying is that we need a lasting solution.  I have laid out the framework against which that lasting solution can be developed and I am prepared to cooperate with the Government in implementing it.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, you talked about Mr Howard’s meeting with Hamid Karzai.  Should the two men discuss the conditions under which, or a timetable for getting Afghan asylum seekers in Australia back home?

 CREAN: I don’t limit anything that they discuss I simply urge that the meeting takes place and takes place constructively between the two nations to get toward a lasting solution.  Dealing with the problem at source that, of course, is going to involve a lot of detail as to people that are here and processing of people that may subsequently seek to come here.  Let’s have all of those issues properly dealt with between the two of them.

 JOURNALIST: Would you want a firm commitment from Mr Howard on how many Afghan refugees he may be prepared to accept?

 CREAN: I don’t think you can start by saying this is the number.  I think we have got to recognise the dimension of the problem.  We have got to recognise that we are not the only country that needs to address it.  We have particular problems here because of those that have arrived but by the same token if they are not genuine refugees then they should be sent home. But we need to have the processes in place for determining expeditiously

 7

 whether they are genuine or not but we need to address the problem at source.  That’s the opportunity that presents itself in the meeting between the two.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, would you support some restrictions on Gold Pass or Life Passes for some MPs?  Do you think that MPs that left Parliament 30 years ago that some people can’t remember the names of should still be travelling around Australia at taxpayers expense?

 CREAN: I think if there are any loopholes through which people are getting entitlements, that they’re not deserving of, they should be closed.

 JOURNALIST: But they are, I mean, quite within their rights to get these benefits at the moment?  I mean, do you think that Dr Wooldridge and Mr Reith should be travelling around at taxpayers expense well after their term of servants of that State has ended?

 CREAN: Well again, if there are loopholes by which these people have got entitlements that they’re not otherwise entitled to they should be closed.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, the Prime Minister suggested … that now the Taliban have been defeated that Afghan refugees or asylum seekers can safely go home.  Is that …?

 CREAN: Sorry, who said that?

 JOURNALIST: This is the Prime Minister, John Howard, in New York.

 CREAN: Yes, well, I thought the report that I saw had him saying that in response to what the interim President of Afghanistan had to say.  My understanding of what the President had to say was qualified by the fact that whilst things were returning to normal and that he would, as I understand it, welcome the people back they could not take them all back immediately.  So there is a timing dimension that the Prime Minister has, it would appear, conveniently ignored.  These are issues that clearly can be worked through if he’s prepared to get into that detail in his discussions and he should.

 JOURNALIST: The amount that Australia has actually contributed to Afghanistan, to the relief effort in Afghanistan, is very small compared with what we have spent trying to keep refugees out of the country.  Are we contributing enough to the Afghan relief effort?

 CREAN: Well, I’m not sure, Mike, what the amount is that we have contributed on either front.  That’s what the Government is hiding from us.  I think the sooner they outline how much this sorry episode has cost us on all counts so that we can make a judgement as to whether the money has been sensibly spent or not the better.  We need an informed debate, we need

 8

 a lasting solution, we need a policy framework but we need to understand what the cost implications of the current solution is because I think that might change a lot of people’s minds as to whether or not it is worth it.

 Ends.

