---
title: "Welfare reform: acts speak louder than words."
date: "2002-12-12"
creators:
  - "Cherry, John"
  - "Greig, Brian"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of CHERRY, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211251155
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1I486%22
---

 Senator John Cherry                        Senator Brian Greig 

  Employment spokesperson                Family & Community Services spokesperson  Australian Democrats 

 December 12, 2002            MEDIA RELEASE 02/610 

 

 Welfare reform: Acts speak louder than words    The Howard Government’s welfare acts speak louder than the words in its Discussion Paper  today in showing a callous disregard for the circumstances of social security beneficiaries,  according to the Australian Democrats. 

 Democrats’ Employment spokesperson Senator John Cherry and Family and Community  Services spokesperson Senator Brian Greig said the Government’s social security bills in the  Senate attacking sole parents, mature aged workers and refugees revealed more about the  Government’s welfare priorities than its welfare paper. 

 “The Senate is considering the Government’s plan to require sole parents with teenage children to  be forced to look for work regardless of their family circumstances,” Senator Cherry said. 

 “And, the bill abolishing Mature Aged Allowance, effectively forcing mature aged workers to  look for jobs they know they will probably never get, shows how serious the Government is  about taking into account the ‘particular circumstance’ of beneficiaries. 

 “The Government’s blanket refusal to consider amendments to the social security breaching  regime, despite the report by the Independent Panel headed by Professor Pearce and a scathing  review by the Commonwealth Ombudsman, shows that the Government places Budget savings  well ahead of fairness and equity,” Senator Cherry said. 

 “Fining a person thousands of dollars out of their income support which is already below the  poverty line does not help them get a job, and extending this to sole parents will mean children go  without food. 

 “The Democrats will continue to push for a social security system that does take into account the  special needs of families, the mature aged, the disabled, the sick and refugees,” Senator Cherry  said. 

 Senator Greig says the Senate tonight is considering a second bill which will impose breaching  and ‘fines’ on temporary protection visa holders regardless of their skills, language difficulties,  mental traumas or family circumstances. 

 “This bill is harsh and unfair and will be trenchantly opposed by the Democrats,” Senator Greig  said. 

 “Reform is supposed to be about improving the system, not making it more unfair. The  Australian Democrats have long campaigned for a simplified social security payment system, as  recommended by the McClure Welfare Reform Committee two years ago.  

 “If the Government was serious about simplifying social security payments it would focus on  assisting Australians overcome the disadvantage and barriers which prevent them getting a job,  and not on finding means to penalise them because of those barriers. 

 “It does not make sense for the Government to propose a single payment, at the same time as it is  pushing laws to extend financial breaching to sole parents, older Australians and refugees,”  Senator Greig concluded. 

 For further information: Senator Cherry 0408 752 750 or Senator Greig 0417 177 523 

 

