---
title: "Democrats demand: Do not deport East Timor families living in Australia."
date: "2002-11-19"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211250227
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SBX76%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Leader of the Australian Democrats Spokesperson for Immigration

 19th November 2002   MEDIA RELEASE      02/551              

 Democrats demand: Do not deport East Timor families living in Australia The Australian Democrats, Labor and the cross benches have successfully passed a motion in the Senate calling on the Government to grant permanent residency on humanitarian grounds to East Timorese refugees who have been settled in Australia for many years.

 Leader of the Australian Democrats and Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said married couples could be separated and children born in Australia will be deported to East Timor unless the Minister for Immigration, Philip Ruddock, acts.

 Over 1500 asylum seekers from East Timor have had the processing of their refugee claims put on hold for many years. Many of these applicants were and still are, suffering the effects of torture and trauma, having endured persecution and suffering before leaving East Timor.

 “Many of these people have lived here for up to ten years and have formed close links with the Australian community,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Many are now in the terrible position of moving their families to a country where they no longer have a home. Many have married Australian citizens. Others include elderly people facing an uncertain future and children who have never left Australia and speak little or no Indonesian, Portugese or Tetun. 

 “The Minister should grant these people permanent residency in Australia on humanitarian grounds by means of a special visa.

 “The Australian Government put their applications on hold, waiting years before processing.  Now they have received letters telling them they have 28 days to leave the country.

 “The Australian Democrats are appalled at the length of time processing has taken,” he said.

 “The Democrats have been assured that all these cases will be assessed individually and that those who wish to apply for Ministerial discretion will be assessed on a case-by-case basis. The Democrats will continue monitoring the processes and advocating for those involved.

 “This situation has been created by a combination of the Government’s reluctance to accept its obligations under international law and by the removal of a humanitarian visa category for onshore applications. Applicants are now forced to take a costly and timely path through the system and then seek Ministerial intervention.

 “The Democrats are pleased that the Government has indicated asylum seekers will remain eligible for the Asylum Seekers Assistance Scheme whilst the Refugee Review Tribunal hears their appeal,” concluded Senator Bartlett.

 The Australian Catholic Bishops' Conference, Caritas Australia and the Australian Catholic Social Justice Council have also renewed calls to grant residency to the East Timorese asylum seekers.

 To arrange interview with Senator Andrew Bartlett call Daele Healy on 0409 3000 47 On November 12 2002 the Leader of the Australian Democrats Senator Andrew Bartlett asked a series of questions without notice. The questions and answers are attached.  

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, Leader of the Australian Democrats Questions without notice, 12 November 2002

  Q: Can the Minister explain the extraordinarily long period of time- up to 10 years in some cases - that it has taken the immigration department to determine the claims for asylum for well over 1,500 East Timorese asylum seekers?

 A: Decision making on Protection visa applications lodged by East Timorese asylum seekers had been delayed for several years because of litigation over nationality issues and more recently due to the need to ensure that the situation in East Timor was clear enough and our information sufficiently sound to enable the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and Indigenous Affairs (DIMIA) to finalise these cases reliably.

  Q: Can the Minister inform the Senate how many claims from East Timorese have now been rejected and when the decision on the remainder will be made?

 A: As at 12 November 2002, 235 cases, covering 564 people, have been decided. All decisions so far have been refusals. Further decisions will follow in the coming months. The precise timing of decisions will depend on the details of individual applications.

 Q: Is it the case that those people who exercise their right to appeal these decisions to the review tribunal will be plunged into poverty as a consequence, reliant solely on charity to survive for months, if not years to come?

 A: No. East Timorese applicants who seek merits review will continue to be able to access asylum seeker assistance support and continue any access to work rights and Medicare rights until their application is finally decided.

  Q: I note the Ministers comments that these cases are being assessed using standard criteria. Does the Minister acknowledge that these are not standard cases?

 A: No. East Timorese Protection Visa applicants are claiming the need for refugee protection. The tests applied for the grant of a visa are set out in the Migration Act and are binding on decision makers and must be met by all applicants. East Timorese applicants are being treated fairly and equitably, as are all protection visa applicants. DIMIA has, however taken comprehensive steps to ensure that East Timorese applicants have been notified of the processes to be followed in the processing of their cases and have been given a thorough opportunity to advance any new claims or information they wish to have considered.

 Q: Can the Minister indicate how many people who have married Australian citizens in this period and have been knocked back or about to be knocked back will be forced to return home? How many children have been born in Australia whilst their parents are waiting processing?

 A: Statistics on these questions are not readily available and in any event data on new dependants and Australian citizen spouses depends on the applicants notifying DIMIA of these matters. As decision makers work through this case load these issues will be explored in detail on case by case basis and more reliable information on these matters will emerge.

