---
title: "Speech to the Young Liberals in Melbourne."
date: "2002-01-07"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Skilled migration"
  - "Population policy"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232617
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MBR56%22
---

 Transcript CONFERENCE

 07/01/2002

 MR RUDDOCK'S SPEECH TO THE YOUNG LIBERALS IN MELBOURNE

 INTERVIEW: PHILIP RUDDOCK, MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND IMMIGRATION

 PHILIP RUDDOCK: Well thank you very much Ben.  And first, if I can take this opportunity  to  congratulate  Grant  on  his  election  as  Federal  President  of  the  Young Liberal  Movement  and  the  Secretary  of  my  own  conference,  Tony  Chappell,  on  his election as your Vice President.

 I  was  just  remarking  to  Grant  a  moment  ago  that  I  had  the  great  privilege,  in 1974, of organising a Melbourne National Young Liberal Convention.  I had the rather, I  suppose,  inauspicious  start  of  having  to  contain  the  enthusiasm  of  some  of  my colleagues who thought that the Convention was really for parliamentarians rather than young liberals.  And I've always been wary of coming along on occasions like this and simply  seeking  an  endorsement  from  what  I  hope  is  always  a  critical  audience,  in relation to government policy.

 I  haven't,  today,  come  along  with  a  prepared  text,  as  you've  probably  noticed.

 I'm always  wary about  prepared  texts,  a  bit  like  the  Prime  Minister.   I  think  Andrew Peacock was one who said that, very early in the piece, he went along with a prepared text and it was quite copious and it was for his endorsement as Member for Kooyong.

 And the young candidate took it off to Sir Robert Menzies, to ask him what he thought of  it.   And  Sir  Robert  said,  well,  he  thought  it  was  quite  a  good  speech.   But  he suggested  that  he  cut  it  in  half  and  throw  one  half  away  and  it  really  didn't  matter which half.

 It reminded me, and I never used to actually source this one, but I understand it may have  related  to  Malcolm Fraser.   But  Malcolm always  liked  a  prepared  text  and would read it very dutifully.   And when, it is said, that Alan Jones was about to leave

 him, they went through and prepared a very lengthy speech for that occasion.  And they went  through  the  points  that  were  about  to  be  made  and  apparently  Malcolm  went dutifully down the first page and then turned over to the second page and found only one line and it said 'you're on your own now'.

 But it reminded me of the person who thought so much of the prepared texts he brought it along and, after he'd been speaking for an hour, he commented to his speech writer later that he'd really only asked for a speech of 20 minutes, he said 'but sir, that's all I did prepare for you, you read all three copies.'

 Now I did think long and hard about what I might say to you today because you have  three  motions  on  your  agenda,  one  relating  to  population  questions,  another relating to asylum-seekers and the way in which issues in the humanitarian area might be addressed.  And finally, I think, a resolution in relation to what are euphemistically described as character issues, and the way in which they might be addressed.

 They deal  with,  essentially,  fairly discrete  elements  of  an  area  of  public  policy which  is  quite  complex  and  in  which  each  of  the  issues  are  very  much  interrelated.

 And  I  thought  what  I  might  do  today  is  spend  a  few  moments  trying  to  put  into perspective some of the issues relating to immigration and multicultural affairs.

 And I think it is very important to start by recognising that, aside from our first Australians, Indigenous Australians, most of us can only trace our roots back some 200 years.   So  unless  you  have  Indigenous  family  members  in  your  tree,  your  forebears have really been here for a relatively short period of time, unless you yourself were a migrant.

 Twenty-five  per  cent  of  Australians  today  are  overseas  born.   And  something like 40-45 per cent of people are either overseas born or have one parent overseas born.

 In other words, immigration has been about nation building.  And you can trace the  development  of  Australia,  modern  Australia,  to  those  early  settlers,  the  waves  of migration  surrounding,  particularly,  the  gold  rushes,  the  economic  migration  of  early this century and the post-war migration, including a very significant refugee stream.

 And each migration wave is quite distinctive and it's important to understand the distinctive  nature  of  it  because,  if  you  don't,  you  fail  to  recognise  that  immigration policies and programs do change from time to time.  They change because of economic circumstances, they change because of security issues, they change because of people's perceptions about what Australia might offer.

 And it's very important, I think, to have an understanding that immigration has reflected our needs at particular points in time.

 If you go back to the turn of the century when Australia had one of the highest standards of living in the world.  It was, as a result, very much of extracted products, like gold, that you see this grand city of Melbourne, with its wide boulevards and fine buildings.

 If  you  look  at  the  later  periods,  when  we  were  more  dependent  upon  products like wool and wheat, we had periods of prosperity and people often came and migrated and  went  onto  the  land.   I  look  at  my  own  family,  and  my  wife's  family,  and  their experiences  with  migration.   And  early settlement  in  fairly remote  parts  of  Australia, hewing out and clearing land for cultivation or for animal husbandry.

 And we were very prosperous when we were riding, as it was said, on the sheep's back.  But of course that changed, as synthetic products were found that replaced wool.

 When  you  had  the  green  revolution  in  parts  of  Asia,  where  countries  became  self-sufficient and no longer needed our wheat.

 And our economy changed, it shifted, and we then started to see people moving off  from  rural  areas  into  cities,  and  Australia  moved  into  a  period  of  very  heavy mining.

 And  while  we  were  doing  this  we  were  able  to  shelter  behind  very  significant tariff barriers.  And we were able to build up industries in which people with relatively low  levels  of  skill  were  able  to  work  in  factories,  undertaking  repetitive  tasks  where they didn't even really need English to be able to participate fully in the workplace.

 Now  I  say  all  that  because  we  were  able  to  run  a  policy  which,  I  think,  was seriously flawed in one respect, it was racially discriminatory.  But we took people with low  levels  of  skill,  very  often  off  farms  and  so  on  in  parts  of  Greece  and  Italy  and places like Turkey, where people were accepted as being almost white, and people out of  the  Middle  East  as  we  found  it  increasingly  more  difficult  to  get  people  out  of western and central Europe.

 But  of  course,  today,  we  live  in  a  very  different  situation.   We  are  in  a  global economy.   We  cannot  operate  subsidised  industries  which  employ  large  numbers  of people in repetitive tasks when they have little in the way of skills, and certainly lack English language competence.

 And  of  course  we're  in  a  different  security environment  in  which  it's  not  just  a question of numbers, populate or perish.  We're in a situation where people are having their families later and, when they are having families, there are more likely to be fewer children in those family environments.

 And we're seeing Australians living longer and healthier lives.  And we're seeing in  Australia,  as  you're  seeing  in  parts  of  Europe  and  in  Japan  and  in  developed countries generally, lower reproductive rates as they are called.

 And Australia's reproductive rate at the moment is 1.75 per fertile couple.  And that's  still  very  much  higher  than  places  like  Ireland  and  Italy  and  Spain  and  Japan, where  you're  talking  about  numbers  between  1.1  and  1.2  and  three  and  four.   And inevitably what that will mean, in countries like Europe and Japan and Singapore and Australia,  is  that  our  natural  population  growth  is  going  to  fall  into  decline.   In Australia, it will reach that point in about 30 years' time.  There's a bit of weigh there, people live longer and so they're around with us more.  The fact that you're having less children  produced  doesn't  immediately  impact  upon  the  size  of  your  community,  but inevitably it will.

 And Australia is a country that traditionally has had a significant contribution by migration, we've been one of four countries in the world that has settled people through migration, that has a significant proportion of its population overseas born, and we will continue  to  see  a  declining  population  growth,  to  a  point  of  population  stability,  in

 around  about  50  years  time  if  we  continue  with  migration  programs  of  about  their present size.

 That  means  our  population  will  grow  to  around  about  24-25  million  in  around about 30-40 years time and then be stable.  Now people say to me we need to have a population policy.

 Population policies are usually argued by two groups of people, those who think there are too many people already in Australia and believe that if you have a population policy you can justify the Australian Democrat and One Nation approach.  I might say the  Australian  Democrats  recently  moved  away  from  it,  and  saw  the  resignation  of some of their prominent members when they did, of net zero migration.

 What that essentially means is you don't replace the people who leave, you only replace  the  people  who  leave  Australia  permanently.   But  you  add  no  more  to  it,  net zero, and that would inevitably see Australia's population fall into decline.  In about 50 or sixty years time we'd have probably been around about 14 million and we would go into inevitable decline and probably be writing a national suicide note.

 The  other  group  of  people  who  want  to  see  a  population  policy  are  those  who think  that  there  are  too  few  people  in  Australia.   Those  who  argue  that  you  should continue to take anybody, until you have something of the order of 50 million people in Australia.

 And  some  would  argue  that  you  should  have  a  policy  of  a  net  one  per  cent growth,  and  the  composition  in  relation  to  migration  doesn't  really  matter.   All  that matters is numbers.

 Now  I  think  that  that  latter  approach  is  also  one  that  would  be  disastrous  for Australia because it can only be achieved by bringing in people, in large measure, who will  have  low  levels  of  skill,  who  won't  be  able  to  be  employed,  who  will  be  highly welfare dependent and will be relying upon those who happen to be in the workforce to be producing sufficient income to be able to support them.

 Now  I  don't  think  either  the  high  level  or  the  low  level  approaches  are appropriate.  I think a balanced program of the sorts of numbers that we've been able to achieve,  which  benefits  Australia  in  economic  terms,  is  the  most  desirable  approach.

 And I can tell you, from the demographic work that's been done, where we will end up.

 With a stable population of around about 24-25 million.

 I don't need a population policy to tell me that.  All you need to do is to study the demographics and understand the implications of them.  The test is for those who think we should have less people, or those who think we should have more people, to go out and  argue  that  that's  what  they  want  and  not  to  mouth  a  clichÃ©  that  we  need  a population policy to tell us what we might need.

 Now,  having  said  that  to  you,  I  wanted  to  talk  to  you  for  a  moment  about immigration programs.  The immigration program that we have is extraordinarily well structured.  It's regarded by most of those countries around the world that are thinking about  migration,  and  those  that  run  migration  programs,  as  being  one  of  the  most sophisticated and one of the most finely tuned immigration programs available in the world.

 And what we've sought to do is to structure it in a way which serves a number of purposes and I'm talking now primarily about permanent migration.

 First  of  all,  it's  designed  to  meet  our  skill  needs  and  requirements.   A  most interesting aspect of Australia today, and there've been some reports in the newspapers of it,  is that, notwithstanding what might be written in international newspapers from time  to  time,  what  might  be  said  by the  NGOs  or  what  might  be  mouthed  by people who  have  some  doubts  about  the  directions  that  we  might  be  taking,  in  relation  to migration, people want to come and settle in Australia.  And there is enormous interest in settlement in Australia.

 The  interest  is  of  such  an  order  that  we  cannot  take  all  of  those  people  who would  like  to  come.   I  mean,  we  talk  about  expressions  of  interest  amongst  many [indistinct] people.  And we have to make some choices.  Now I can tell you that the most highly sought after migrants are the ones that we are succeeding in attracting to Australia, but they're the same people that other developed countries want.

 I can tell you in Germany today, as they think about having a migration program, they're  not  there  saying  'gee,  what  we  need  are  non-German  speaking,  non-English speaking  unskilled  migrants.'   That's  not  what  they're  saying.   And  that's  not  what they're saying in Ireland.  And it's not what they're saying in Italy.  And, I have to say, it's not what they're saying in New Zealand or the United States or Canada.

 What  they're  saying  is  we  need  people  who  have  skills  that  are  immediately employable,  that  means  you  need  to  have  English  language  competency,  if  you're talking about Australia, and it means you have to have skills that are recognised.  And you have to be young enough to be able to be in the workplace long enough to pay the taxes that will ultimately be needed to pay for the benefits that you receive.

 I mean it's all fairly obvious, when you say it, but that group of people are highly sought after.  And we have fine-tuned our skilled migration program that I think, at the moment, it  represents  about  54-55  per  cent  of  program numbers.  And  we are  seeing very considerable growth in the pipeline of applicants.

 And  there  are  two  reasons  for  it.   One  is  because  we  are  flexible  enough  to change criteria to continue to attract people.  One of the points that I make is that we allow people who are here on a temporary basis, and who are appropriately skilled, to be able to apply on shore.  If you want to do that in the United States of America, you can't apply on shore, you have to leave and try and come back.

 We've also moved very rapidly to expand the number of people who are studying in Australia and obtaining their qualifications in Australia.  And what that means is that you've  got  a  growing  pool  of  people,  with  qualifications  that  are  recognised,  who've had  to  study  in  English  and  therefore  their  English  competency  is  without  doubt.

 They're  students  and  they're  generally  young  and  it  means  they  meet  our  selection criteria.

 And  that  pool  of  people  is  growing  and,  at  the  moment,  we're  getting  5,000 applicants a month.  And it means we have a pipeline of applicants that will more than meet our skilled migration needs and requirements.  We won't be, as they have been in New Zealand and Canada where they lament they have not been able to get sufficient numbers of skilled migrants, and to fill the places that they've actually made available.

 And when I talk about balance you need to recognise that there are certain social objectives you also have to achieve.  And that is if you find your life's partner and you know,  as  young  people  you  would  know,  you  are  more  highly  mobile,  you  are  more likely to have travelled, and will travel and perhaps study or work abroad in the future.

 And  in  all  likelihood  you  will  meet  people  and  it  may  well  be  that  you  will  want  to bring your life's partner back to live with you in Australia.

 And a significant proportion of the people who come and settle in Australia are those  who  are  in  those  circumstances.   Others  are  dependant  children,  some  are  last remaining  relatives,  some  are  people  in  areas  where  there  are  some  compassionate reasons why you need to accommodate their aspirations for family reunion.  It tends to be  very  close  family  that  are  accommodated  and  we  try  to  keep  the  family  reunion component  at  around  about  half,  or  less,  of  the  total  program.   It  doesn't  mean  that people don't come as skilled migrants, as family.  Some do.  But in the main they're not tested for skills and a significant proportion are going to be people who will not have available  to  them employment  opportunities  and  are  highly likely to  be  supported  by the rest of the community.

 Now  finally,  we  run  what  is  known  as  a  refugee  and  humanitarian  program.   I want to focus on that for a few moments because we are one of nine countries in the world that has actually run a refugee and humanitarian program for resettlement.  We have  been  largely, largely, free  of  movement  across  our  borders  of  people  who  come from  a  country  where  persecution  is  practised  and  who  need  to  make  a  first  asylum claim within Australia, largely devoid of that.  Doesn't mean to say it couldn't happen, from Indonesia or Papua New Guinea.  But, in the main, people who arrive in Australia and  make  asylum  claims,  for  instance,  are  people  making  what  we  call  secondary movements.  People who are leaving situations of safety and security, in order to make a lifestyle choice about where they would rather be, as a refugee, rather than a situation of safety and security.

 Nobody who travels from Indonesia is being persecuted in Indonesia when they seek to arrive in Australia.  I simply make that point.  Doesn't mean to say that people do not come to Australia as country of first asylum.  I think we've had about a hundred or  so  people  who  have  made  such  claims,  and  they  are  the  people  who  sail  directly from Sri Lanka and, I think, the 30 or so people who came from Vietnam in the last 12 months.

 But  in  the  main, people  who've  sought  to  come to  Australia, and  make  asylum claims,  do  not  come  from a  situation  of  persecution.   They  come  from a  situation  of safety and security.  They may not be able to go back to their country of origin but they are making a lifestyle choice.

 Now I can't say that I blame them for that.  I mean the situations that they may have been in may well have been, initially, quite terrible.  And I can't say that if you're in Indonesia and there are no social security benefits paid and you're not going to get access to welfare housing and you won't get access to education and a whole range of other opportunities, that you wouldn't want to make a lifestyle choice.  I'd rather be a refugee in Australia than Indonesia.

 But the question is, when a country like Australia runs the second largest refugee resettlement  program  in  the  world  which  is  targeted  to  those  people  who  have  the greatest need for help and assistance.  In other words those people who have fled their country of origin, been found to be a refugee and, in the place where they have fled, might still have a sufficiently high profile to be at risk.

 You might be a woman with children and no male partner to help support them and protect them.  And may be in some very vulnerable situations in some of the most deplorable refugee camp situations in the world, no prospect of going home.  They are the people that we have traditionally tried to assist through, as I say, the second largest per capita refugee resettlement program in the world.

 Now  we  can't  take  every  refugee.   There  are  twenty-one  and  a  half  million refugees and people of concern in the world.  What we're seeing, here in Australia, are people who when they make asylum claims are free enough to travel, have the money to  engage  a  smuggler,  they  may  have  had  very,  very  unfortunate  experiences  before they  travel.   But  none  of  them,  in  the  main,  are  leaving  situations  in  which  they  are immediately  at  risk  in  order  to  get  to  Australia.   What  they  are  seeking  is  to  take  a lifestyle  decision  and  inevitably,  because  the  number  of  places  we  have  are  not unlimited,  we  can't  take  12  million  people.   That's  the  number  of  people  who  are refugees in the world.

 At some point you have to make a decision as to who you will take and who you won't.   And  if  there  are  some  people  that  you  say  don't  have  priority  and  they  come

 regardless,  they  are  taking  a  place  from  somebody  who  is  more  worthy,  in  terms  of their  needs  and  requirements.   There  is  a  queue.   It  may  not  be  a  queue  which  will deliver a place to everybody who would like it.  But it is a queue to which people can properly submit their claims and have them examined and have them weighted against others.

 Now I want to put that point to you because we are a compassionate society.  We have  programs  which  are  designed  to  help  people  settle  in  Australia,  and  to  settle successfully.  We give support to people who are refugees and we do so generously.

 And one of the reasons that we have people who want to come to Australia rather than settle anywhere else is because our generosity becomes one of the pull factors in itself.

 Now  I  want  Australia  to  remain  as  a  generous  country,  in  relation  to  settling refugees.   I  want  Australia  to  be  a  hospitable  host  to  people  from  as  wide  a  cross-section of the world community so that we can demonstrate that people, regardless of their background, their religion, their social class, whatever, can live together side by side and function as a community.

 I am very proud, as an Australian, of what we have been able to do and achieve.

 But  it  is  within  a  structured  program  that  is  within  our  interests,  as  Australians  to maintain, that we have been able to achieve these ends.

 The  support  that  the  Australian  community  gives  to  migration,  and  to  new settlers, comes because people know that there is a framework of law which underpins a successful migration program.

 And of course, what we're seeing at the moment are challenges to our capacity to be  able  to  deliver  a  program  which  is  beneficial  to  Australia,  that  reflects  our compassion and concern for refugees and accommodates people's genuine aspirations to family reunion.

 And the challenge for me, as a Minister, has always been to get the balance right in relation to those matters.  And I think we do have the balance right.  I think it's been demonstrated by the public support that's been achieved.

 This  is  not  a  program  that  is  xenophobic.   It  is  a  program  which  is  absolutely non-discriminatory  in  all  its  facets.   It  is  not  an  ungenerous  program  because  we  do seek to take the most vulnerable of refugees.

 One  of  the  aspects  that  I  lament  at  the  moment  is  some  people  endeavour  to make  heroes  of  those  people  who  leave  situations  of  safety  and  security  to  come  to Australia.  And who seek to demonise our system for its desire to have that structure about  which  I  speak  is  that,  what  we  are  seeing  now,  is  the  support  that  is  normally available to the most vulnerable of refugees is being attacked while support is garnered for those people who have sought to come to Australia as unauthorised border arrivals.

 And  when  you  see  the  stories  that  are  written  to  try  and  make  heroes  of  those who have made those journeys and an effort is put into developing additional support and  assistance  for  them,  we're  seeing  a  falling  away  of  community  support  for  the refugee  resettlement  programs.   We  don't  see  the  same  number  of  groups  of  people within  the  community  offering  to  host  and  settle  those  who  come  through  the  front door and whose needs, on any objective test, and whose experiences on any objective test, would've been far greater than those who have been free enough to travel and had the money to engage smugglers.

 Ladies and gentlemen I hope those comments may have put into perspective, for you, the way I which we run our immigration program.  I hope that they fill you with a sense of pride, as Australians, about what we've been able to achieve.  And I hope you will continue to lend support to them.

 Thank you very much.

 COMPERE: I'll call on the incoming Queensland Young Liberal President, Nick Park, to give a vote of thanks to Minister Ruddock for a sterling speech.

 The  Minister's  offered  to  take  some  questions,  so  we'll  hold  the  thanks  for  a second,  quite  generously.   Mr  McIver  [phonetic]  I  think  you  took  the  lead  there  in terms of getting your hand up quickly.  Scott McIver, South Australia.

 QUESTION: Minister  Ruddock,  an  interesting  point  that  you  made  to  me  today which  I  have  a  little  query  about,  is  that  the  vast  majority  of  our  asylum  seekers [inaudible] security.  [inaudible]?

 PHILIP RUDDOCK: Well we've been very pro-active in relation to these matters, but look, the fact is you've only got nine countries that actually resettle people, and if Australia were to lose its 12,000 places because 12,000 people made asylum claims and got  up,  it  would  very  significantly  diminish  the  capacity  of  the  UNHCR  to  help  the most vulnerable.

 The nine countries - just to give you an idea - are the United States of America who  take  in  absolute  terms  the  largest  number,  but  in  per  capita  terms  it's  probably about half ours.  I think the President of the United States said this year's figure would be 70,000 - and they've got a population, what, 15 times ours.

 Now if our program … the next largest program is that of Canada, and I think it takes  about  14,000.   And  in  per  capita  terms  it's  larger  than  ours  only  because  our absolute  numbers  have  been  reduced  by  onshore  asylum  claims,  and  therefore  we're dealing  with  a  figure  of  around  about  7,000  this  year  that  we've  had  available  for resettlement.  Which is a bit less than half of Canada's, and Canada has about double our population.  So we're still fairly close to Canada.

 The  next  largest  are  Norway,  Sweden,  that  take  about  1,500,  then  you  get  to Denmark that takes around about 500, New Zealand takes about 500,  and then you get to the derisory figures of I think, you know, the Dutch take about 40 and so … Britain and  Germany  and  France  -  most  European  countries  -  do  not  have  resettlement programs.   All  they  deal  with  are  asylum  issues.   And  essentially  it's  because  they cannot manage the flows.

 And as I say to my counterparts in Europe, you know, unless you're able to start managing  your  borders,  you  know  we're  going  to  have  a  situation  in  which  the  most

 deprived will continue to languish, and we have to have an international system that is capable of managing them.

 Now we try to work through organisations like the UNHCR and so on, but the UNHCR  says  look  'our  responsibility  is  to  deal  with  refugees,  it's  not  to  deal  with illegal immigration, so you find our who the refugees are and we'll help you work out how they should be settled and dealt with, but don't ask us to do anything about illegal immigration'.

 And I say to the international body, look unless you can deal with the illegal, the illegal  immigration,  then  ultimately  you  will  have  no  capacity  to  help  those  who  are refugees  because  all  of  the  places  will  be  taken  by  people  who  are  looking  for migration applicants.

 Now  we've  been  very  pro-active  in  running  the  debate  on  those  questions international,  but  we've  also  been  pro-active  dealing  with  the  issues  bilaterally  and multilaterally.

 The conference we're holding with Indonesia jointly in February is designed to bring  together  countries  within  this  region  and  to  focus  on  these  sorts  of  questions, look at problems of a country like Australia - which is a country of destination - to look at the problems that a country like Indonesia faces - which is a country of transit - and to look at the issues that are faced in countries like Iran and Pakistan - which have been hosts to large numbers of people who've been displaced over a long period of time.

 And we want to ensure that that international protection system is able to work effectively, and we're going to be very active in relation to taking up those issues in a constructive way and to get outcomes.

 QUESTION: [inaudible] in regards to you mentioned the queue for refugees, it's common  knowledge  through  [inaudible]  list  the  success  rate  for  refugees  to  seek asylum  in  Australia  of  when  they  are  processed  offshore  or  onshore  there's  a  great difference to the success rate, with the … with being … your application being viewed on  Australian  soil,  the  success  rate's  a  lot  higher,  obviously  that's  the  reason  why people want to make Australia their destination.

 What area do you think that we might need to look at with the Australian legal system to reduce, through the likelihood of appeal, the refugees who are processed on our own shores?

 PHILIP RUDDOCK: Well let me just say you're right in that there is this disparity, and it doesn't help the international protection system when you've got two systems of law  in  relation  to  dealing  with  asylum  issues  -  the  international  system  in  which  the body - the UNHCR - undertakes the task with some rigour - and I say they do - because at the end of the day they know they've got a budget of about a little less than a billion dollars  US  to  look  after  23  and  a  half  …  no  20,  21  and  a  half  million  refugees  and asylum seekers and people of concern.

 And if they don't use rigour, if they just keep adding more and more people to their  lists,  and  they  haven't  got  the  resources  to  properly  provide  for  them,  it's  not terribly helpful.

 Now what happens here in Australia where the rule of law operates, and where people  are  given  the  opportunity to  be  able  to  challenge  decisions  you  get  individual judges  who  have  got  particular  perspectives  of  their  own  that  they bring  to  bear, and where you get judge-made law giving you a refugee convention - what I call the Jurus [phonetic]  Prudential  Model,  the  Australian  model  -  and  you  do  end  up  with  people who get refugee claims up in Australia who would not have got them up if they were being considered by the UNHCR.

 Now  what  have  we  sought  to  do  about  that?   Well  before  the  election  and  the Labor Party recognised that they were in some difficulty if they didn't support our Bills.

 They gave support to a bill, bringing the interpretation of the Convention in line with the UNHCR handbook.

 In  other  words  the  Iranian  gentleman  who  got  his  claim up  because  he  was  an engineer who couldn't get a job with the government - but could get jobs in the private sector - but he couldn't get a job with the government he said because of his religion, was found here to be persecuted, because he couldn't get the job of his choice.

 Now nobody else anywhere else in the world would have got a claim up on that basis, but they did in Australia.

 And  look  it  is  true,  that  if  you  were  in  Indonesia  and  you  had  the  prospect  of having  your  claims  considered  by  the  UNHCR,  and  you  were  going  to  have  to  wait your place for resettlement, Australia becomes fairly beguiling if you think well look if I get to Australia I've got an 80 per cent or an 85 per cent chance of being found to be a refugee, rather than a 40 per cent chance or a 30 per cent chance, and I'm already there and being supported, I'm not waiting around.  And yet why wouldn't you say, jeez it's better to get on a boat.

 Now one of the other aspects of it, you know, lest you think that I'm in some way again demonising people - which I'm often accused of doing - who get their claims up and  then  people  say  'these  people  have  been  found  to  be  refugees  under  the  most rigorous system'.

 When  the  UNHCR  found  out  of  the  two  or  three  thousand  people  that  they'd examined in Indonesia about 500 to be refugees and they went to resettlement countries - ie Canada and the United States of America - and said would you take some of these people in your resettlement programs.  You know this is a live process that is going on right now.

 Both  Canada  and  the  United  States  are  looking  at  the  people  who  have  been found  to  be  refugees  in  Indonesia  and  they  are  saying  they  are  not  priority  cases  for resettlement.  They're saying there are people who have far greater need than this group of people in Indonesia, to be resettled, and I think that tells a story.

 It means when you've got countries that have to make an objective decision as to priorities,  resettlement  places  are  being  very hard  to  find.   Now some advocates  who are  out  there  say  'well  that's  why  Australia  ought  to  pick  it  up,  it's  happening  in  our area'.  But in fact what it means is, at the end of the day, everyone we pick up is one less person in a far more vulnerable circumstance that is able to be accommodated.

 And so I do argue that there needs to be … if you're going to be fair, there needs to be rigour.  You need to have systems that operate comparatively so people don't get

 a,  an  advantage  by  being  able  to  [inaudible]  shop  as  Chief  Buthelezi  described  it  in Geneva last month.

 QUESTION: Minister  I  was  just  hoping  to  ask  you  about  time  restraints  on successful  applications,  due  to  the  election  and  that  there  has  been  controversy  over [inaudible]  take  several  years  to  be  processed  through  [inaudible]  humanitarian program.  I just wondered if ...

 PHILIP  RUDDOCK: Well  I  mean  if  there  are  …  there  are  two  issues  where questions  of  delay  are  raised.   Firstly,  offshore  -  if  you're  talking  about  resettlement places - look if Australia was going to resettle everybody, 12 million people have been found to be refugees, and you have places for them, nobody would have to wait.  But we don't have those places.

 And  it  means  some  people  are  going  to  be  disappointed  and  some  people  are going to have to wait, and the timetable for giving people an answer can be sped up.

 But all it means is you tell people no earlier, and that's not necessarily what they want to hear.

 I mean in the special humanitarian program we've had people who would rather wait  in  the  queue  with  some  expectation  that  they'll  be  resettled  than  to  get  a  no answer.   You  know,  we  will  give  people  a  no  answer,  and  then  they  put  in  another application the next day.

 Now the other issue that's raised is about onshore claims.  One of the key factors, one of the things that the smugglers advertise, is that people get quick decisions.  Now yes it is a fact that some people are in detention for long periods of time.

 I  went  through  a  list  the  other  day  of  those  people  who  have  been  held  in detention for three years or more.  You would think from what you read that that must be  a  very  long  list.   I  tell  you,  it's  a  very  short  list.   But  there  were  several characteristics.  The first was in relation to criminal deportations - that is people who'd been convicted of serious criminal offences in Australia, and who were being deported.

 And  there  are  people  where  sometimes  we  have  to  detain  them,  after  they've completed  a  jail  sentence,  for  periods  of  time  while  we  seek  their  cooperation  in identifying  themselves  to  their  government  and  getting  permission  to  get  them home.

 And there are a number of people like that, and they'll be moved, I think, fairly quickly in the next year or so because the largest group were amongst Vietnamese where there is now an agreement with the Vietnamese Government about how they'll be identified and at what pace and so on in order to ensure they get home.

 The  second  group  are  people  who  are  using  the  appeals  systems  that  are available,  who  have  been  found  not  to  be  a  refugee,  found  not  to  be  a  refugee  -  that decision's been taken - but they don't accept the answer, and they continue to appeal.

 And they'll go to the courts and even when they run out of courts they then go off to the international  bodies  claiming  that  they're  going  to  be  tortured  or  whatever  if  they're sent home.

 And you know, we had one gentleman - and I was roundly, roundly criticised in relation to this case - and it went to the UN and the UN said to me you know, oh this man  ought  to  be  accommodated  in  Australia,  and  I  said  alright  thank  you  for  the advice, after three years or so, we'll have another look at him.

 And we went back over the case again, and we found this man had made certain claims as a Somali, that he had been the subject of persecution, torture in Somalia, and this  time  we  made  some  inquiries  in  some  other  countries  in  Europe  -  Italy  and  the United Kingdom, as I recall - and we found at the very time that he was claiming that he  was  being  tortured  in  Somalia,  he  was  making  asylum claims  in  Italy  and  Britain which had been rejected.

 And  yet  every  well  meaning  group  that  heard  what  he  had  to  say,  it  was  so plausible, they'd accepted at face value what he had to say - including the UN.  I have to say, the gentleman has now gone home.  He ran out of options.

 And  then  we have  the  group  of  people  -  and  I  say you  know we've  got  a  little over  a  dozen  or  so  people  who  have  been  held  for  three  years  or  more  -  criminal deportees, people who are using the system who have been found not to be refugees, and  those  who  have  been  found  not  to  be  refugees  and  who  need  to  go  home  where they deliberately frustrate any effort to properly identify them to their country of origin,

 and where we're still in discussions with those countries about clearly identifying who they are and where they were born and to enable the documentation to have them travel be obtained.

 But  it's  a  very small  number  of  people, and  the  point  I  wanted  to  make  is, this idea that there is a large pool of people held in detention for very long periods of time is in fact flawed.  If people are honest with us and they bring their documentation with them - in other words they don't throw it away in order to make it more difficult to send them  home  if  they're  found  not  to  be  refugees  -  if  they  bring  their  documents  with them, and bear in mind nobody has travelled into Indonesia without a document.

 They've  all  needed  a  document  to  get  their  -  may  be  a  forged  document,  not saying it can't be forged - but they've had a document.  But when they come here they have no document.  But if, if they've come with documents we can give them a decision usually in about four or five weeks.

 If they come without documents, 90 per cent of people are processed within 14 to  15  weeks  of  arrival  and  given  an  answer.   Now  it  may  be  a  yes  answer,  but  also maybe a no answer, in which case people will continue to be detained.

 But in 90 per cent of cases they get an answer within 14 to 15 weeks, and that's something you don't hear very often.

 The  people  about  whom the  complaints  are  being  made, where  suggestions  are made  that  people  are  in  detention  for  long  periods  of  time  and  are  suffering psychological damage and so on, arise in relation to those who have been found not to be  refugees  and  are  essentially using  the  appeals  systems  available,  or  are  frustrating arrangements to have them successfully removed.

 QUESTION: Minister  in  situations  where  applications  to  [inaudible]  have  been rejected,  what's  the  process  in  returning  them  to  their  homeland  or  to  some  other nation?

 PHILIP  RUDDOCK: Well  the  process  in  relation  to  any  country  is  to  obtain appropriate documentation which countries are obliged to give to their own nationals

 and to return them home.  And we're doing that every day in one form or another.  Most of it is on commercial airlines.  Sometimes it's because we have to charter planes and take groups of people back to their country of origin.

 But it's a process that we have to deal with on a case by case basis.  We've got designated officers who are working through with Consular officials here in Australia from  different  countries,  to  identify  people  where  they  don't  have  documents.

 Sometimes  people  apply for  those  documents  and  make  the  arrangements  themselves and do so in a voluntary way, and sometimes they don't.

 Sometimes the situation is more easily fixed with some countries than it is with others, and that's part of the challenge that we face in dealing with these issues.

 But when you look at how few people have been held for in excess of three years in a detention environment, you can see that we are reasonably successful in working these issues through in most cases.

 QUESTION: [inaudible]  Tampa  boat  issue  [inaudible]  and  one  example  is interpreting the Magna Carta's [inaudible], and there any steps that you can take in the future to avoid perhaps a [inaudible] separation of powers and leaving the Government to do their job [inaudible]?

 PHILIP  RUDDOCK: [laughs]   Look  I  sometimes  talk  about  the  High  Court  of Parliament  and  I  do  so  to  make  a  point.   We  believe  in  the  separation  of  powers doctrine,  and  yes  there  are  circumstances  in  which  the  law  may  need  clarification  in which  we  expect  that  judges  will  do  their  work,  but  we  don't  expect  that  they  will deliberately  and  creatively  try  to  supplant  the  will  of  parliament  by  creatively interpreting  conventions  to  oust  the  view  of  the  duly  elected  representatives  of  the people of Australia.

 And  in  terms  of  what  happened  with  Tampa,  let  me  just  for  the  purposes  of clarification,  because  I  think  some  people  have  tended  to  forget  what  happened  in relation  to  Tampa.   You  this,  this  was  a  situation  again  tragically  where  there  was  a group of people on a boat intending to come to Australia whose lives are at risk, and the law of the sea is such that people should be rescued.

 And  the  law  of  the  sea  is  that  when  the  vessel  is  tasked,  to  rescue  the  people involved.  It would take them usually to the nearest port, in the direction in which they were going, and in this case the people were rescued in the Indonesia air sea and rescue zone.  The captain was in touch with Indonesian authorities and it was agreed that the people  would  be  taken  to  the  port  city of  Marak  -  a  major  port  in  Indonesia  -  which could  receive  a  container  vessel,  and  that  was  the  direction  in  which  the  vessel  was going.  It was going to Singapore.

 And in the middle of the night, the vessel was put under duress, the captain was put  under  duress  he  tells  us,  by  five  people  who  said  'we  want  you  to  take  us  to Australia,  we  don't  want  to  go  to  Indonesia  thank  you  very  much.   Thank  you  for rescuing us, but we don't want to go to Indonesia.  We were, you know, we'd paid the smugglers to take us to Australia and now we want you to do it'.

 And  he  said  'well  look  I  don't  think  that's  a  good  idea',  and  they  said  'well  if you're  not  prepared  to  do  that,  we'll  start  jumping  overboard'.   And  he  said  'oh  you wouldn't want to do that, I better do what you've said'.

 Well,  you  know,  in  those  circumstances  we  said,  look  duress  should  not  be rewarded.  It only encourages more people to behave in that way.

 Now the issue that arose in relation to Tampa was that the Government said look there  is  a  right,  the  statute's  set  out  the  way  in  which  you  should  come  to  Australia, how you deal with asylum issues and the like.  We do not intend to allow this vessel to land.  Governments have a sovereign right to determine who can come and who can't come, and we asserted that, and our view was upheld by the full court of the Federal Court.

 What was disappointing to us was that initially one judge took the view that the Magna Carta may have given people some rights that we thought had been overtaken by not only our law, but also the Government's sovereign right to defend our borders.

 Now we will continue to press the view about the sovereign right of Australia and the sovereign right of other countries to determine who shall and shall not be able to come and settle permanently.

 If you don't have that capacity to be able to make those decisions, then it simply means that anyone who wants to come would simply say well look it doesn't matter that there  are  rules,  we're  coming.   And  no  government  would  be  able  to  survive  an onslaught  of  large  numbers  of  people  who  were  determined  to  flout  your  right  to determine who is going to settle permanently or not.

 QUESTION: You've  spoken  a  fair  bit  about  the  pull  factors  that  make  refugees want  to  come  to  Australia  [inaudible]  developed  western  countries.   What  is  it  that Australia and perhaps other developed countries can do to [inaudible] some of the push factors in moving people out of … [inaudible] refugees, people who are [inaudible] in places like Iran and Pakistan [inaudible]?

 PHILIP  RUDDOCK: Well  I  think  the  important  thing  is  not  to  forget  those countries that are faced with very significant outflows.

 Can  I  just  share  with  you  some  figures  about  solving  refugee  crises.   When  I became Minister there were 27 million refugees and people of concern.  Today, as you heard me say the figure, it's 21 and a half million.

 Now why are they numbers down?  It's not because, you know, something of the order  of  five  and  a  half  million  people  were  resettled  in  Australia  in  that  time,  or  in other  resettlement  countries.   It's  because  people  were  able  to  go  home  in  safety and dignity  to  start  rebuilding  their  lives  in  East  Timor,  in  Kosovo,  in  Rwanda,  and  the most  successful  solutions  to  refugee  crises  are  when  the  international  community  is able to move in as it did in Kosovo, as we'll undoubtedly do in Afghanistan, as it's done in East Timor, as it did in Rwanda.

 People don't go back to live in a developed situation like you would experience in Australia, but they go back and start rebuilding their lives in circumstances of safety and  security.   And  that  support  for  that  international  protection  system  needs  to  be there, and if you look at what will happen - I can tell you after Afghanistan, if Iran and Pakistan  lose  the  nearly  four  million  people  who've  been  within  their  borders  to  an Afghanistan  that  is  being  restored  -  it  will  have  a  very  significant  impact  on  refugee numbers around the world.

 Now  what  does  that  say  to  me?   What  that  says  to  me  is  that  you  need  very significant international resources to obtain that outcome.  Where are you going to get those  resources?   Ultimately from taxpayers  in  countries  like  Australia.  Now we are one  of  the  larger  contributors  to  the  UNHCR  budget.   We  are  one  of  the  larger contributors  to  special  appeals,  yet  we  are  spending  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars dealing with asylum claims.

 If  we  didn't  have  to  deal  with  asylum  claims,  we  would  free  up  enormous amounts of money to reduce our own potential deficits and still have money left over to give to the UN.

 Do you know that at the moment there are something like half a million asylum seekers  in  the  world,  who  under  developed  systems  of  the  sort  that  we  have  in Australia,  are  requiring,  are  requiring  developed  countries  to  spend  something  of  the order  of  $10  billion  US  assessing  those  half  a  million  claims,  when  the  UNHCR  is looking after 21 and a half million refugees and people of concern with less than one billion dollars.

 Now  you  may  have  seen  me  say  in  Geneva,  I  think  those  figures  are  obscene.

 That we have developed a system which is designed to chew up enormous amounts of money and resources to find out amongst half a million people who are the 50,000 real refugees.

 While countries like Iran and Pakistan were left with budgets being reduced by the  UNHCR  each  year  as  they  channelled  money  into  what  was,  in  nice  terms,  the European refugee crises in Kosovo.

 COMPERE: I think we'll make this the final question.

 QUESTION: I've  got  a  question  for  the  Minister  regarding  Woomera  and  the riots, and what would you see as probably the best solution in ignoring the Opposition in Parliament, if you could just do what you wanted to do, what would be the solution to remedy that?

 PHILIP RUDDOCK: Look I think the important point is to, is to understand what is happening, and an important point about our detention facilities is that notwithstanding the  characterisation  occasionally  that  they're  jails,  is  that  they  are  largely  open institutions with inside.  I mean they do not permit movement outside of the detention centres except in specific circumstances for medical treatment, sometimes for students to  go  to  schools,  and  sometimes  as  we've  had  with  the  Woomera  experiment  with families where they're able to live in the township.

 But  you  know  there  are  no  cells  in  the  detention  centre.   There's  no  prison regime.   They're  not  closed  centres.   People  are  able  to  come  and  go  and  visit,  but they're not open in the sense that we allow people's privacy to be unduly interfered with either.

 Now I've explained to you that you are in a, an environment in which you have mixed  populations.   Now  I'm  told  mixed  populations  are  easier  to  manage  than segregating people out - so you put all the toughies together and all those who are more likely to be compliant are separated away - that's what I'm told.  But we'll have another look at that.

 A  Parliamentary  Committee  suggested  we  should  take  all  the  rejected  asylum seekers and put them all in one place.

 I mean the group of people who inevitably become the focus of effort to put us under  duress, to  influence  decisions  that  have  been  not  to  their  liking, are  those  who are rejected.

 One of the ones that was written up again, I think in the newspaper today in the United States, was the case of some young, some youths who were - I have to say two years ago - lip sewing in Curtin, in the centre in, outside of Derby in Western Australia.

 Now  the  children  who  were  doing  that  were  in  fact  youths,  they  weren't,  you know, they were 16 and 17 year olds, and their father is a person who is at the moment held in a jail in Perth because he was in fact one of the people smugglers.  He'd been involved in our assertion, I mean the matter's still being considered, but the evidence

 we believe we have shows that he was part of the taking money and organising people onto boats in Indonesia before he came to Australia with his family.

 And it was his family, you know, and I think that, and certainly the suggestions that have been made to me by my officers is that you know, it was under his and his wife's encouragement that the children or the youths were involved in this lip sewing, because it was something that you know is alien to us.  I mean we wouldn't be involved in  it,  and  so  it's  designed  to  influence  us  to  say  oh  look  this  is  all  getting  too  hard.

 Perhaps we just better let these people go, and we won't face these problems.

 Well, you know, in my view, the more you say to people in this environment that we are prepared to compromise our decisions because of behavioural issues, the more people will misbehave.  It's not easy, I don't like having to sort of be the person who's standing  there  saying, hey look  hold  the  line, but  if  you  don't, then  other  people  will say, look we didn't get the result we wanted, maybe what we've got to do is that and a bit more, with all of the difficulties that that would occasion.

 And at the end of the day, if you think the management of your borders and the running of programs with efficacy is important, you have to be prepared to take some of those sorts of decisions, as difficult as they are.

 END

