---
title: "[Why welcoming migrants and refugees should be Australia's highest priority]: address at Monash University Leading Ideas Forum, March 19, 2002"
date: "2002-03-19"
creators:
  - "Roach, Neville"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Population policy"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Gains from immigration"
  - "Federal issue"
  - "Population size"
  - "Why welcoming migrants and refugees should be Australia's highest priority"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235177
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5Z566%22
---

  

    

    

    

    

    

    

      

      

      

      

      

      

  

    


   Monash Alumni   >    Alumni Events   >    Leading Ideas

  

  Neville Roach address at Monash 
  University Leading Ideas Forum, March 19, 2002:

  

  I acknowledge 
  the Wurundjiri nation, the original owners of the land on which we are 
  gathered. The title of today's talk is all about migrants and refugees 
  and I do plan to stick to my subject. However, when we discuss migration 
  issues, it is esssential that we never forget the enormous and continuing 
  suffering and loss that modern migration has inflicted on Australia's 
  original population. No matter what population, immigration and settlement 
  policies we develop, and whether they relate to the Australian-born 
  or the migrant, and whether the latter enter Australia under the skilled, 
  family or humanitarian streams or as Asylum seekers, they must all have 
  as their moral foundation genuine and lasting Reconciliation. When I 
  refer to Reconciliation, I include both symbolic and practical Reconciliation, 
  including an agreement between the collective Indigenous and non-Indigenous 
  communities. Such an agreement will give moral legitimacy to the Australian 
  nation and a sound basis on which to seek and accept future migrants 
  and visitors, knowing that at last, all of us who are migrants or of 
  migrant descent, have finally acknowledged the unique position of the 
  First Australians and received their blessings and welcome to what was 
  their country. It would be absurd for us to proclaim that welcoming 
  migrants and refugees should be Australia's highest priority, before 
  we make sure that the majority of us, the non-Indigenous Australians, 
  are welcome ourselves, albeit retrospectively.

  

  Perhaps 
  now is a good time for me to make a disclaimer and apologise to those 
  who have come here in anticipation of discussing Australia's highest 
  priority. As I have already said, Reconciliation is a higher priority, 
  probably our highest, because it concerns the birth of the Australian 
  nation, and goes to our very heart, or more correctly, our very soul. 
  To use the Christian analogy, what we have done and what we have failed 
  to do to our Indigenous brothers and sisters, remains our Original Sin.

  

   

  

  I also 
  do not want to suggest that welcoming migrants and refugees is a higher 
  priority than looking after the interests of those who are already here. 
  Charity, after all, must begin at home. I would certainly give priority 
  to the education, health and employment needs of current Australian 
  citizens and permanent residents - perhaps education most of all, 
  because investment in education is the surest way to produce good health, 
  employment and other social outcomes .

  

   

  

  But fortunately, 
  migrants and refugees do not come at a cost to the rest of us, but actually 
  enrich us all in many ways. The reason for choosing the extreme term 
  'highest priority' for today's address was partly a marketing hype to 
  persuade all of you to turn up, but mainly because it is critical that 
  we return as fast as possible to a positive view of all migrants and 
  refugees, whether or not they are in the queues our orderly minds and 
  programs would like them to be. In the minds of many and probably most 
  Australians today, migrants and refugees represent a problem, and the 
  asylum seekers a national crisis. And yet, it was not so long ago that 
  our collective view was that this country had been built by the continuous 
  arrival of newcomers, and those already here, excepting of course Indigenous 
  inhabitants, were always the better for their arrival. If we can return 
  to a welcoming mind-set, we will once again celebrate their coming instead 
  of needlessly worrying about them.

  

   

  

  While 
  it is probable that most of you are already positive about immigration, 
  I would like to discuss its benefits as well as some of its perceived 
  disadvantages.

  

  At the 
  most basic level, we cannot do without migration because otherwise our 
  population would already be in serious decline, which in due course, 
  would become irreversible. Our fertility rate is now below replacement 
  level. Raising it through baby-friendly policies is worth trying but 
  unlikely to have much more than a marginal effect. We are following 
  a trend throughout the developed world which has reached the point where 
  former migrant sources like Japan and several European countries, are 
  now forced to consider immigration and settlement programmes. We are 
  indeed the 'lucky country' because, for us, immigration and settlement 
  have always been core business, something we are very experienced and 
  good at.

  

   

  

  While 
  we need immigration to avert population decline, we need to acknowledge 
  that the earlier rationale for a much larger immigration intake, "populate 
  or perish", is probably no longer an imperative in either strategic 
  or economic terms. In today's world, security does not depend significantly 
  on having a large population to defend our shores. Technology can make 
  up for a relative shortage of people and we can rely on our defence 
  alliances to help us in case of any overwhelming threat. From the perspective 
  of the economy, migration is unlikely to have a huge and lasting impact 
  on our major challenge, the relatively small size of our domestic market. 
  The answer to the problem of market size must be found elsewhere, especially 
  through exports to regional and global markets. Migration will also 
  not have a major impact on the ageing of the population, especially 
  if we increase the intake of parents. After all, even young migrants 
  eventually grow old. And ageing will not be as serious a problem as 
  is sometimes made out, because older people are becoming fitter and, 
  given the opportunity, will remain productive for much longer.

  

  So some 
  of the more simplistic arguments in favour of migrants and refugees 
  are unlikely to pass scrutiny. However, while migration is no longer 
  a panacea for our strategic and economic challenges, most analysts agree 
  that, on balance, the impact of a net inflow of migrants is beneficial. 
  In particular, it would be hard today to find too many economists who 
  would say that migrants take more jobs than they help create, and studies 
  commissioned by the Department of Immigration consistently show that, 
  overall, our current migration programme adds to our per capita income 
  and makes a significant positive contribution to the Federal budget.

  

  While 
  numbers are important, and I believe that a somewhat larger intake would 
  be good for us, the value that migrants add to Australia is more qualitative 
  than merely a matter of how many come here. Because they are driven 
  to make a better life for themselves and their children, all migrants 
  make our community collectively more hard working and entrepreneurial. 
  But refugees, especially asylum seekers, because of the hardship they 
  have experienced and the courage they have needed to survive and just 
  get here, are likely to have the most impact.

  

   

  

  A strong 
  migration programme also gives us continuous access to much-needed skills. 
  Given the speed and unpredictable way in which technology and globalisation 
  change skill requirements, we are fortunate that we have a great capacity 
  to attract and employ skilled people from around the world on a permanent 
  or temporary basis. It is also important to recognise the role migrants 
  play in providing essential services in less skilled jobs that Australians 
  born here, for whatever reason, no longer want to do. The most visible 
  example of this is the taxi industry, which almost all Anglo-Celtic 
  Australian drivers have abandoned.

  

  However, 
  by far the greatest way in which migration enriches us today is by making 
  us a more diverse society. Non-discriminatory immigration continuously 
  adds to our diversity, and does so almost automatically, because it 
  means people from almost every corner of the world can come here, but 
  economic push factors attract more from the developing world, rather 
  than from Britain and Ireland, the origin of the majority of Australians. 
  The benefits of diversity are now generally recognised and referred 
  to as Productive Diversity. I must acknowledge my bias. Having come 
  to the White Australia of 1961, and then witnessing first-hand its evolution 
  into the Multicultural Australia of 2002, I know from personal experience 
  that diversity has made Australia, both socially and culturally, a much 
  more exciting country to live in, and an infinitely better place to 
  eat in! But while the food, song, and dance bit is the most obvious 
  and enjoyable outcome of our diversity, the economic benefits are even 
  greater. Multicultural and multilingual skills and cross cultural competence 
  help us to develop new products and services, access new markets and 
  connect to international networks. Our fastest growing service industries, 
  the education of overseas students and tourism, could not have been 
  so successful were it not for the fact that, thanks to the diversity 
  of our own population, we were already comfortable engaging with culturally 
  different people. White Australia may have been awarded the 1956 Olympics, 
  but could never have won the 2000 games, and only Multicultural Australia 
  could have run them and welcomed the whole world so naturally and so 
  brilliantly.

  

  Most importantly 
  though, diversity unleashes innovation and creativity, the primary drivers 
  of income and wealth creation in the Information Age, as the recent 
  experience of America and Japan so conclusively demonstrates.

  

  While 
  Japan's monoculture underpinned the disciplines of total quality management 
  and continuous improvement, giving Japan economic supremacy in the manufacturing 
  economy of the Industrial Age, leadership in the knowledge economy of 
  the Information Age has been seized by America, where diversity has 
  unleashed unlimited creativity. The great lesson of the recent performance 
  of Japan and America is that, as shown by the more successful American 
  companies, diversity does not need to be divisive, the benefits of teamwork 
  can be achieved by a diverse workforce through leadership and training, 
  but a nation without diversity cannot easily generate creativity, which 
  is often the unexpected result of people daring to be different. When 
  it comes to diversity, thanks to our migrants and refugees, Australia 
  is fortunately very much like America, and the exact opposite of Japan.

  

  Given 
  my conviction that our diversity makes us the lucky country, you can 
  imagine my surprise when I read yesterday's papers to find headlines 
  like, "Fears of cultural rift as Sydney's migrant magnet works 
  overtime" and "Where the suburbs meet Orient excess".

  

  The articles 
  report the research undertaken by Professor Bob Birrell of Monash University, 
  ironically the same University that has organised this lecture. It's 
  good to see Monash encouraging the diversity of ideas and opinions! 
  Dr. Birrell is quoted as saying, "Sydney and Melbourne now constitute 
  the multicultural heartland. The rest of Australia, with the exception 
  of Perth, show a relative absence of ethnic diversity". My immediate 
  reaction was, "Wow. We now have research that proves the strong 
  link between diversity and economic success. Multicultural Sydney, Melbourne 
  and Perth are booming, in sharp contrast to the regions, referred to 
  in one of the articles as ,"the strongholds of Anglo-culture". 
  Clearly the imperative is to dramatically increase the cultural diversity 
  of the regions. But no, the good Professor goes on to say, "Sydney 
  and Melbourne contain the generators and transmitters of the multicultural 
  and cosmopolitan ideas which are so influential in intelligentia circles. 
  Rearguard resistance to these images is largely based in regional Australia". 
  So it is Sydney and Melbourne that have a problem - generating ideas 
  that are influential in intelligentia circles, which I presume do not 
  include Australia's leading demographer. All I can say Professor is 
  you should join the rearguard resistance and seek asylum in Hobart! 
  Only joking, Bob!

  

  Unfortunately 
  it is no laughing matter that the newspaper comment accompanying the 
  reports opportunistically infers from the research that the concentration 
  of immigrants is, "creating new varieties of community tension 
  and resentment …. intensified by an antagonism towards some of the 
  cultural practices of Muslims evident before September 11…..another 
  reason why the attitude towards asylum seekers is far less sympathetic 
  in (Sydney's) West." The ethnic labelling of everything bad continues. 
  You would think that we were a perfect society before all these 'others' 
  came here, except yesterday's papers also carried an article that outlaw 
  bikie gangs, which I imagine would be mainly white, pose the biggest 
  criminal threat the nation has known.

  

  Despite 
  Professor Birrell's research, and to some extent because of it, I remain 
  a very strong advocate of diversity. But, if we truly believe in Productive 
  Diversity, we must make a special effort to sustain and replenish our 
  diversity assets. In other words, we need to take specific actions to 
  develop a sustainable multicultural society. As long as we remain a 
  country that welcomes migrants and refugees, they will continuously 
  refresh our multicultural community.

  

  The higher 
  net migration target announced last year is therefore good news, although 
  I personally believe that we could sustain an even larger number. In 
  my view, a net 120,000 would be a lot better than the current level 
  of 85,000. But going from 75,000 to 85,000 is still a very positive 
  step and should be warmly welcomed. This raises the other vexed question 
  regarding migration and that is its size and how big a population should

  

  Australia 
  have. In yesterday's paper Bob Carr attacked those who advocate higher 
  migration by pointing out all the problems that will befall Australia 
  in general and Sydney in particular if we decided to increase our population 
  to 50 million. He implies that everyone who wants an increase in migration 
  wants this extreme figure. This is not very helpful. One could just 
  as easily say that everyone who wants less migration, Mr. Carr included, 
  would like our population to decline to the 12 million that one of his 
  environmental guru friends suggests is what Australia's fragile environment 
  can sustain. Or we could say that he supports the target of the Australians 
  against further immigration. The reality is that most people who believe 
  we should have a higher population think in terms of the current projection 
  of 25 million or a moderately higher figure of 30 to 35 million. Mr. 
  Carr himself doesn't indicate any preferred figure, although his great 
  concern regarding Sydney already bursting at the seams would suggest 
  that he might want a lowering of the immigration programme, perhaps 
  even to a level that only averted population decline. The point I am 
  trying to make is that it is not helpful to criticise other people's 
  targets, especially unfairly exaggerated ones, without proposing alternative 
  scenarios, which can then be subjected to scrutiny based on rigorous 
  research.

  

  To be 
  fair to Mr. Carr, he does say, "Yes, we may need a nationally agreed 
  population policy". This is not a view shared by Philip Ruddock. 
  Returning to the subject of migration in general, what we clearly need 
  is a formal population policy. In a recent article (SMH February 11), 
  he says, "the Government does not need a population

  

  policy 
  to tell it what Australia's population future will be". He then 
  proceeds to make what sounds remarkably like a claim of a successful 
  population policy . "We already have an informed and clear vision 
  of Australia's population future, based on a thorough understanding 
  of, and research into, the underlying demographic trends." He also 
  insists that, "the onus is on those who advocate a significantly 
  larger or smaller future population to put forward sound arguments and 
  strategies for achieving their population futures, having regard to 
  the implications for Australia's economic, social, environmental and 
  humanitarian objectives." So, they should have a comprehensive 
  population policy too! And he talks of information that, "is vital 
  to the planning of our economy and caring for our environment". 
  Planning is important for our economy and environment, but not for our 
  most valuable assets, our people!

  

  Clearly, 
  what we see here is another semantic problem similar to those the Government 
  has had with other terms, like sorry, ownership and anti-racism, preferring 
  instead regret, custodianship and harmony. Why a Government that is 
  so critical of the language constraints they see as imposed by 'political 
  correctness', should themselves be uncomfortable with perfectly appropriate 
  and accurate terms, would be an amusing question, were the issues trivialised 
  by this word game not of great importance to the future of our nation.

  

  Every 
  country must have a population policy because planning for everything 
  else - the economy, health, aged care, employment, education, transportation, 
  housing, the environment, sport, entertainment and the arts - starts 
  with the number and characteristics of our people, their age, gender 
  ratio, fertility, life expectancy, skills, cultural heritage, lifestyle, 
  whether born here or overseas, where they live and so on. And, of course, 
  whether they care to admit it or not, all Governments, including the 
  one currently in power, have a population policy, even if only by default. 
  Surely it is better not to leave things to chance or serendipity, but 
  to be pro-active and plan for the best overall outcomes for Australians 
  present and future. Of course, once a Government becomes more explicit 
  about its objectives, its performance can be measured against them. 
  Perhaps this is the real reason for the reluctance to enunciate a population 
  policy! This seems borne out by what the Minister said in another article 
  recently, that "no democratic government would allow itself to 
  be hogtied by a population target or a formal population program". 
  No business would get away with such an approach to human resources!

  

  Fortunately, 
  Victorian Premier, Steve Bracks, had a different view from Philip Ruddock 
  and organised the recent very successful Population Summit for February 
  25. This created a great opportunity to move the whole debate forward 
  constructively without degenerating. This does not mean a unanimous 
  view emerged or should have, but that all viewpoints were given a fair 
  hearing and full consideration.

  

  The Summit's 
  most valuable and enduring outcome will I hope be the development of 
  a holistic population policy and plan, one that takes into account the 
  numerous implications of each particular setting - for example, the 
  effect of various levels of population on the environment; the impact 
  of skilled migrants on the employment, education and development of 
  Australian residents; the total cost and benefit to our economy of the 
  complete migrant family unit, including the skilled migrant, spouse, 
  parents and children, as compared to Australian-born families; and the 
  positive and negative impact of our immigration policies including the 
  current asylum seeker regime, on the image that potential overseas students, 
  tourists and business partners have of us. The answers to such questions, 
  based on rigorous and objective research, should ensure a clear, sound 
  and rational assessment of many issues concerning the Australian community, 
  and significantly counteract the FUD ( fear, uncertainty and doubt) 
  factor that causes so much unproductive and unnecessary anxiety.

  

  But, while 
  numbers matter, the composition of our immigration intake is also extremely 
  important and is sometimes overlooked by many in the pro-migration lobby, 
  especially business, who focus largely on the skilled stream. We need 
  to understand that the family stream, in fact, makes a greater contribution 
  to diversity than the skilled stream. The criteria for skilled immigrants 
  are defined by us. As we prefer people whom we feel we need and whom 
  we think will fit in, we tend to favour those who, by skill or culture, 
  are more like us.

  

  With the 
  family stream, on the other hand, we have no say in the choice of parents, 
  spouses or children, so they are likely to be more diverse than the 
  principal skilled migrants. Moreover, when it comes to sustaining cultural 
  diversity, the strongest influence comes from parents. It is parents 
  who are most familiar with culture, language, history and tradition. 
  And it is parents, in fact grandparents, who are most able to hand down 
  their heritage to the young, especially to their grandchildren who were 
  born here or who came at any early age before they could absorb the 
  culture of their origin. In my opinion, if we took into account the 
  added value that family members contribute to the social, cultural and 
  economic wellbeing of their families and the community, then we would 
  not find it difficult to justify a rebalancing of our annual intake, 
  correcting the drastic reduction of the family stream relative to the 
  skilled stream. This would also help remove the current absurd, unfair 
  and discriminatory limit of 500 places that are allocated to parents 
  each year. With 20,000 in the queue, and probably as many or more discouraged 
  from joining a queue that will take them 40 or more years to reach the 
  front of, this is one of the most counterproductive and inhumane aspects 
  of current migration policy. The solution being canvassed by then Government 
  to increase the parent numbers would be hilarious if it weren't so tragic. 
  It is proposed to give those parents special entry, whose children agree 
  to pay $25,000 for medical care and post a $10,000 bond as a guarantee 
  of support for each parent. Can you believe that this Government, with 
  its strident condemnation of queue-jumpers, is seriously suggesting 
  that parents can jump the queue if their children can come up with the 
  money?!

  

  Which 
  brings me to the other component of our immigration programme that benefits 
  our society, namely the humanitarian stream, whose annual target is 
  12,000, far lower than it has been at many times in the past, even though 
  the number of refugees around the world is a record 29 million. Our 
  absolute preference, as we all know, is to only accept refugees who 
  are in the queue. The absurdity of this concept is obvious. People fleeing 
  their homes in fear for their lives are not too keen to get into a queue. 
  And before someone suggests that they should join one in the first country 
  in which they find safety, I should point out that, if the nearly 3 
  million Afghanis in Pakistan formed a queue, most of them would end 
  up in the Arabian Sea!

  

  The most 
  beguiling argument against asylum seekers jumping the queue is that 
  it is unfair to the others waiting in line. After all the objective 
  of a humanitarian programme should be to take the most deserving, those 
  most in need. Of course we do nothing of the kind. We don't ask the 
  United Nations, whose queues we say we service, which refugees most 
  desperately need a new home. We decide which queues we will apply resources 
  to, not the ones that have been there the longest. If a queue of white 
  Zimbabwean farmers formed a queue in South Africa tomorrow, would we 
  ask them to wait until all the Iraqis who have been waiting since the 
  Gulf War or earlier have been looked after? And we do not use exclusively 
  humanitarian criteria to select the ones most in need of help. In fact, 
  we consider skills and health, preferring those likely to cost least 
  and contribute most to our economy. If we really wanted to choose the 
  most deserving, we would fill our quota many times over with the orphaned 
  and maimed. So, we should stop the sanctimonious hypocracy which suggests 
  that it is our Aussie fair-go values that are most offended by the asylum 
  seekers.

  

  Sadly, 
  of course, when it comes to asylum seekers, we seem incapable of seeing 
  anything positive. The debate on Asylum Seekers has degenerated into 
  the adversarial rhetoric that characterises our politics and our sport, 
  where it is always us and them, we win they lose, and vice versa. But 
  this is not Australia versus the Asylum Seekers, as in Coalition versus 
  Labor, or Collingwood versus Carlton, where one side must lose for the 
  other to win. In relation to the Asylum Seekers, both they and we have 
  become losers, with seemingly no way out of the current malaise. And 
  yet, it would not take very much to move from despair to hope, with 
  both Asylum Seekers and Australia emerging as winners.

  

  There 
  can be no doubt that current policy is hurting us all. The Asylum Seekers 
  have already lost or given up everything they had in their country of 
  origin, endured enormous trauma and tragedy to get here, and our now 
  suffering even more - either in detention centres, or as the most disadvantaged 
  battlers in the Australian community, where they struggle to survive 
  under their Temporary Protection Visas, which deny them even the most 
  basic settlement services they need to find a job. No winners among 
  them!

  

  But, what 
  about the rest of us, the Australian nation and community ? What are 
  we winning ? Some would say the battle to protect our borders. But can 
  anyone seriously suggest that a few thousand Asylum Seekers a year are 
  a threat comparable to an invading foreign power that the term 'border 
  protection' implies ? And this a country that in the past 60 years has 
  accepted millions of migrants and refugees, including huge numbers of 
  boat people from Indo-China and 40,000 overseas Chinese students that 
  we decided to classify as refugees even before they asked for asylum!

  

  Moreover, 
  if we were genuinely concerned about border protection, we would be 
  endlessly checking and even body searching the millions of others who 
  stream into Australia, including skilled migrants, business visitors, 
  tourists and students, who come in with approved visas - a much easier 
  and safer, and therefore more likely, method of entry for potential 
  terrorists, criminals and drug smugglers, than risking everything on 
  the mercies of people smugglers, leaky boats and the high seas.

  

  If we 
  are winning anything at all, it is a very minor battle indeed and our 
  'victory' comes at an enormous price, both in Australia and overseas. 
  We now have a community that is more divided than it has been since 
  the Vietnam war or the Dismissal. We have lost our faith in our political 
  leaders, senior public servants and even those at the top of our Defence 
  forces. There is serious disagreement and tension within and between 
  the Public Service and the Defence Establishment - something that 
  poses a very grave risk if our borders are ever genuinely in need of 
  protection.

  

  As a community, 
  we do not know who is telling the truth any more. In fact, the majority 
  of Australians now believe that they have been lied to, or, at the very 
  least, that several people at the highest levels of public office, have 
  deliberately avoided discovering or communicating the truth. And prejudice, 
  and even overt racism, have reared their ugly heads, seriously threatening 
  the community harmony that underpins Australian Multiculturalism.

  

  We are 
  also losers because the Asylum Seeker issue has become so dominant that 
  it must be reducing the time and focus that other pressing responsibilities 
  are receiving. How could our leaders give anything but cursory attention 
  to such matters of national urgency as education, health, defence, aged 
  care or indigenous affairs., when they are faced with non-stop and relentless 
  questioning and cross-questioning by the Parliament, the media and the 
  wider community ?

  

  And the 
  damage goes further. The cost of border protection, detention centres 
  and the Pacific Solution are all soaring to the extent that the next 
  Federal budget is threatened, and several other portfolios will have 
  to bear the brunt. The Pacific Solution is also making us beholden to 
  some very dubious regimes in our neighbourhood, encouraging them to 
  breach there own constitutions for monetary gain, and driving other 
  foreign policy change at the cost of significant principle.

  

  And finally, 
  whether we like it or not, our image overseas is taking an enormous 
  battering, severely damaging our reputation as a welcoming multicultural 
  society, hard-won by our non-discriminatory immigration policy, Australian 
  Multiculturalism and the Olympic Games. This is hurting business and 
  making Australia less attractive as a migration destination of choice, 
  allowing our competitors to denigrate us as people who still exhibit 
  racial, ethnic or religious prejudice. How could we ever hope to become 
  insiders in the Asian region, when we are so fearful of people of Middle 
  Eastern appearance or of the Islamic faith ?

  

  Fortunately, 
  it doesn't have to end this way. We can still cut our losses and set 
  out on the path to recovery. Pursuing a win-win resolution of the Asylum 
  Seeker issue is, in my view, not just the most practical approach, it 
  is the only one with any hope of success. But we must change direction 
  urgently. Otherwise, the fallout of current policy could do irreparable 
  damage to both the Asylum Seekers and the Australian community. The 
  loss of integrity, trust and goodwill could become so ingrained in us 
  as to permanently destroy the faith we have in each other and in our 
  leaders. Intolerance, if allowed to develop for much longer, will become 
  so entrenched that serious racial or ethnic violence could erupt, something 
  we have been mercifully spared from so far. Internationally, the White 
  Australia tag will once again be applied to us, and shaking it off will 
  become almost impossible.

  

  While 
  a change of policy to one that is more accepting and supportive will 
  clearly benefit the Asylum Seekers, how will it make Australia a winner 
  ? The obvious first answer is that we will stop losing. Provided that 
  the change is achieved by political consensus and is accompanied by 
  strong leadership, all the damage we have suffered so far will soon 
  stop and the healing process will begin. The Australian community will 
  respond as positively as it has eventually always done to leadership-driven 
  social policy change - as the widespread acceptance of the abandonment 
  of the White Australia policy, the successful 1967 referendum which 
  recognised Indigenous Australians, and the settlement of the Indo-Chinese 
  boat people, so conclusively attest.

  

  Best of 
  all, refugees and Asylum seekers make great Australians. European refugees 
  breached the wall of insular British/Irish Australia after World War 
  Two. I doubt that we were too particular about queues then. And the 
  Indo-Chinese refugees, especially the 'boat people', finally laid White 
  Australia to rest. Australia coped with all these arrivals in the past 
  in numbers that make the present Asylum Seeker so-called flood seem 
  a trickle. In the process, we have been enormously enriched, by their 
  collective and individual contribution. Two outstanding Australians 
  that for me exemplify this, are Frank Lowy AC, head of the Westfield 
  Empire, and Quang Luu, Head of Radio at SBS, a Vietnamese boat person, 
  who was one of only three recognised on Australia Day as an Australian 
  Achiever.

  

  So we 
  have nothing to lose and everything to gain by changing our current 
  asylum seeker policy. Can we do it? Of course we can. We have made much 
  bigger policy changes before. Whether with the White Australia policy, 
  the Vietnam war, or Native Title, we have learnt to walk away from untenable 
  positions, no matter how deeply entrenched. And Australia has always 
  been the better for it. Of course it will require great magnanimity 
  and statesmanship, not only on the part of the Government, but also 
  of the Opposition, the media and the community. We will all need to 
  desist from any further negative rhetoric and stop adopting a position 
  of righteousness, acknowledging that none of us can be certain how we 
  might have acted if we had been in the other's shoes, including the 
  Government's.

  

  All this 
  might seem like an impossible dream, but one we must pursue nonetheless 
  for our sakes and for the sake of our children and grandchildren. In 
  the end, the pragmatism and decency of the Australian people will prevail 
  and we will say of current policy and its tragic consequences, "enough 
  is enough".

  

  Change 
  will come when our leaders realise that the present approach is no longer 
  politically sustainable. Clearly, this will be more difficult for the 
  Government, whose policy stance was so successful at the polls, to accept. 
  However, if personal experience and anecdotal evidence are any indication, 
  there is growing discomfort in coalition ranks that could eventually 
  prompt a less extreme approach.

  

  The Opposition 
  of course has the greater incentive and opportunity to change. Echoing 
  the Government's policy has been a disaster for them. They cannot expect 
  to seize leadership if they continue to march to the Government's drum. 
  Encouragingly, Simon Crean has signalled a few changes already and the 
  Labor Party is engaged in a full-scale debate. A decisive policy shift 
  has to be their best option. If there is anyone here who has the ear 
  of the Opposition, please encourage them not to finalise their policy 
  until they are ready to distance themselves totally from their election 
  strategy, once again giving the electorate a genuine choice.

  

  I realise 
  that I have said a lot about the value of migrants and refugees, but 
  nothing about how we should go about welcoming them. I believe welcoming 
  them is indeed a very high priority because it makes both the new arrivals 
  and the receiving community feel positive about their special relationship. 
  This is particularly important for regional and rural Australia, the 
  areas most in need of migrants to reverse declining population and address 
  severe skill shortages. Migration to rural and regional Australia also 
  avoids the infrastructure and environmental pressures that migration 
  to cities, particularly Sydney. Yet, we are told, rural and regional 
  Australia is the most negative about refugees and migrants. I am not 
  convinced about this, but even if it were true, the answer lies in communities 
  sponsoring migrants that they believe will make a positive difference, 
  welcoming them when they arrive and helping them to settle into and 
  become part of the community. This process will inevitably give Australian 
  mateship a chance to replace fear and prejudice against the amorphous 
  and anonymous 'other'. The approach I propose is not pie in the sky. 
  It worked extremely well in the 50's and 60's under the name of the 
  Good Neighbour policy. And it shows welcome signs of working again in 
  the form of an amazing new volunteer initiative called 'Rural Australians 
  for Refugees', where some 40 or so groups around Australia have formed 
  to urge a change in Government policy and to offer support to asylum 
  seekers. Another wonderful example is the economic transformation of 
  the rural town of Young, where some 80 or more Afghani asylum seekers 
  on temporary protection visas have transformed the economy of the town 
  by providing desperately needed labour to increase the productive capacity 
  of local industry and the consumer demand to boost the retail and service 
  sectors. The community desperately wants their new neighbours to stay 
  and has made strong representations to the Government to eliminate the 
  uncertainty of their temporary protection visas and grant them permanent 
  residence, although so far without success. But the community's needs 
  are so great and their case so compelling, they will not give up easily 
  and their political clout must inevitably cause the Government to find 
  a face-saving solution. It is hard to conceive an outcome where the 
  asylum seekers are forced to abandon the town that wants them to stay 
  knowing they will never overstay their welcome. The experience of Young 
  also gives the lie to the view that regional Australia is fighting a 
  rearguard resistance to multiculturalism and that migrants of non-English 
  speaking background will not go to regional Australia. It does show 
  that people of different cultures will go to a small town if they can 
  do it as a group, providing each other the cultural support they need.

  

  The story 
  of Young is a good hopeful note on which to conclude. Clearly we will 
  need many more Youngs before we can convince our political leaders to 
  accept the inevitability of change. Meanwhile, all of us must show leadership 
  and press for that change. Meetings like this one, with a politically 
  non-adversarial style, can be a start. Hopefully, we an follow up with 
  a process of ongoing discussion, research and negotiation, always encouraging 
  the free expression of all views, including those supportive of current 
  policy. It is only by giving all opinions a fair hearing that we can 
  develop a set of proposals that address legitimate concerns, one we 
  will have a chance of persuading our political leaders to adopt and 
  the Australian community to accept. We will all be winners then! 

  

    
   Alumni Home      
  Monash University ABN 12 377 614 012    
  Copyright © 1994-2001 Monash University - Last Date Modified: 20 March 
  2002 -    Caution   -    Privacy     
    


                    

  

