---
title: "Reintegration package extended to non-Afghans."
date: "2002-05-30"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239139
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UZP66%22
---

  

  

 News Room

 Reintegration Package Extended to non-Afghans MPS 42/2002

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, today confirmed that reintegration assistance has been extended to include non-Afghan people currently accommodated on Manus Island (Papua New Guinea) and Nauru.

 The Minister said that the Government has offered the same financial assistance to non-Afghans as has been offered to Afghan nationals.

 "Those on Manus and Nauru have been offered the assistance to support the return to their countries of origin or third countries to which they have permission to enter," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The Australian Government is fulfilling its commitment to reducing the numbers of people held at Nauru and Manus Island by extending the offer to these asylum seekers.

 "The package includes cash assistance of $AUD2000 per individual adult or child or up to $AUD10,000 of a family unit comprising husband, wife and dependent children."

 The package applies to asylum seekers already on Manus Island or Nauru and not to any subsequent arrivals.

 "It is only available to those asylum seekers who have been found not be refugees, or who are still waiting for a decision on their applications for protection," Mr Ruddock said.

 "The International Organization for Migration (IOM) will distribute the cash assistance to returning asylum seekers after their departure," Mr Ruddock said.

 Eligible asylum seekers will have 28 days in which to accept the offer after being formally notified, or after being informed their claims have been rejected. Those who do not take up the offer in that time will lose the opportunity to accept the assistance.

 Those who accepted the assistance would remain in their current location while departure arrangements are made.

 30 May 2002

 Media Release Index

  

