---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: update on protests at Woomera and Villawood\ndetention centres."
date: "2002-03-30"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235566
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YP866%22
---

  

 Transcripts

 Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres.

 Doorstop Interview, 30 March 2002

 Philip Ruddock: Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for being here. The events yesterday at Woomera have been very disturbing. A number of advocacy groups made reference, particularly on Thursday, to their concern that if there were significant demonstrations at Woomera over the weekend they were likely to have quite adverse implications for the detainees and I think their fears have proven to be very accurate.

 The events yesterday which involved a very significant trespass on Commonwealth property by a large number of people, the breaching of fencing, an approach to the detention centre, breaching the security of the detention centre, incitement of detainees to inappropriate behaviour inside, facilitating the escape of what we believe now has been 41 detainees, the handing of very substantial implements, in the form of bolt cutters and others, to detainees through the fence.

 I mean, none of these are incidents that can be taken likely. They were clearly premeditated, they were designed to create havoc within the detention centre and the results are there to be seen.

 A number of detention officers have been injured. I think 17 were injured last evening. A number of detainees were injured. Some of the injuries were inflicted by rock throwing, others by the deliberate use of a razor blade to inflict injuries on detention staff. In addition, there have been police injuries.

 I think behaviour of that sort is inexcusable and I think it is very important that people focus on the detention population that we are dealing with at the moment. Because there have been no onshore arrivals from Indonesia by boat for now nearly five months, most of the people who have been detained are what we call long term detainees. People who have bona fide asylum claims have been dealt with very quickly. Large numbers of people have been released on temporary protection visas.

 The bulk of the detention population in Australia today are not refugees. Let me just repeat that. The bulk of the detention population in Australia today are not refugees. They are, in the main, people who have, if they've put claims forward, exhausted every form of review and appeal and are being held for removal. Eight hundred of the 1,600 detainees in Australia today are being held for removal, in other words, they have no claims before the Department, no claims before any court. All that has to be done is to be able to implement arrangements to get them home.

 The bulk of the rest of the detainee population, if they have had claims, have had them dealt with and are the subject of determinations that they are not refugees but they are still pursuing appeals and if people are

 Transcript: Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres 

 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/transcripts/transcripts02/woomprotest_300302.htm (1 of 6) [03/04/2002 1:24:14]

 sufficiently concerned about helping refugees, there ought to be a focus not on detainee populations but upon those people who are resettled in Australia under orderly refugee resettlement programmes.

 What we've seen in recent years is that the number of people helping refugees when they first come to Australia, through those programmes, have been falling. I asked for the figures today and I'm told we have something like 70-odd community support groups for refugees with something of the order of 500 or 600 members and if people were really focused on giving assistance to refugees they would focus upon those people who are refugees and have been clearly established to be refugees, who cannot go home and are unsafe where they are.

 And I very much regret that there is not only the very significant resources that have to be put into ensuring that the detention regime remains intact but also significant use of resources in determining who are refugees and who are not, amongst people who have been free to travel from situations of safety and security to reach Australia in order to put their claims. And if there was ever a moral issue that ought to be the subject of people's genuine concern, it is the diversion of resources from people who are refugees and established to be refugees, who have an urgent need for our help and assistance and whose claims are often not heard over and above those who have challenged us by coming here without authority and irregularly.

 I'll just conclude my remarks by saying that because we've had no boats from Indonesia now for almost five months, and the numbers of people being determined to have protection requirements are down, as a result, we have been in a position to increase the numbers of people who are to be resettled from offshore and that's because places that might have otherwise been used for onshore arrivals haven't been required.

 Question: Can you give us an update on how many detainees are still at large?

 Philip Ruddock: Last night it was necessary to undertake a head count. The conduct of that head count was complicated because the internal fences have been broken down in the detention centre by the rioting that occurred last night and some detainees have deliberately obscured their identity or made it difficult for clear identification within the detention centre but our best estimate is that there was something of the order of 41 people who absconded. I think all but about eight have been located, at this time. But there is some fluidity about those figures.

 There was one other issue. I'm told that something of the order of 15 or 16 returned of their own volition, and that should be said. They brought with them some of the - which had been given to them by protesters - some of the badges and numbers of police and protection officers that had been ripped off their clothing and I think there was one detainee who was placed in a taxi that had been summonsed from Port Augusta and protesters had apparently put a detainee in the boot of the taxi and covered him with a blanket. He was located at one of the roadblocks.

 Question: Do you think the way the police and ACM staff managed the protest were appropriate?

 Philip Ruddock: Chris Ellison will have something to say about the policing arrangements. I understand that additional South Australian police have been deployed today along with additional Australian Protective Services officers and I understand eight or so Australian federal police are there undertaking the investigations in relation to the laying of charges in relation to those people who did escape and also those who aided and abetted the escapes.

 Now, in relation to the operational issues, look, who am I to say that the professional judgment formed by police as to when it was appropriate to intervene was right or wrong? It would have been obviously preferable if, for operational reasons, they had seen fit to intervene earlier when the first breaches of the fencing occurred. That may well have kept protesters away from the fences and enabled detention officers to fulfil their duties properly in the detention centre environment but, look, we have to work together in relation to these matters and inquiries as to whether it should have been done in another way or not are

 Transcript: Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres 

 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/transcripts/transcripts02/woomprotest_300302.htm (2 of 6) [03/04/2002 1:24:14]

 best left until we've completed all of the operations, I think.

 Question: Several groups are planning a protest at Villawood tomorrow. Are you concerned that there might be a similar incident there and what are New South Wales police doing to ensure that that area is secure?

 Philip Ruddock: Let me say, there have been protests at Villawood before and there's certainly been a high degree of cooperation between the New South Wales police, Protective Services and also Australian Correctional Management and I would hope that the way in which these matters have been managed before would be what we would see now.

 Let me just say, if people are focusing on Villawood in the belief that they are drawing attention to the plight of refugees, let it be clearly understood that at Villawood we are primarily dealing with people who have breached visa conditions, who have worked in the community when they had no authority to do so, have overstayed visas and are being held for removal. That's what Villawood's purpose is.

 Very rarely do we have asylum-seekers at all at Villawood and those that we have had there are people who were brought there for management reasons rather than because they were apprehended in the Sydney region. And again, we're dealing with, even amongst those who may have made asylum claims while they are Villawood, we are dealing with a very small percentage of the population, most of whom's claims have been dealt with and been found not to be refugees.

 Every case I have seen that has been raised by advocates involving Villawood, where people are working to get individuals out of Villawood and into the community, involve people who have made claims for refugee status and those claims have been determined, found wanting, in most of the cases the people are still be held for removal and in the other cases they may be contesting the matters. We are not dealing with a refugee population at Villawood.

 Question: There's talk about allowing more refugees in and the number I read is somewhere near 1,600. That doesn't seem to be a very large number. Do you think that's going to solve the problem?

 Philip Ruddock: Sixteen hundred doesn't solve the problem of 12 million and one of the realities that needs to be focused on is that the costs of resettling people are very much greater than the costs of providing amenity and services to people in situations where their residences are and I think it costs us something of the order of $30 million per thousand to resettle refugees in Australia, on the forward estimates, and $30 million would effectively double the amount of money that we give to the UNHCR for its regular budget.

 So you can see that when you look at the world refugee problem in a considered way, the places that are for resettlement have, of necessity, to be for those people who are in the most vulnerable situations, those who cannot go home and have no prospect of going home and those who are immediately vulnerable where they are. And they're the sorts of people we would normally try to bring through the gate in an orderly way.

 And asylum claims could be from people who have never been assessed and if you look at the worldwide situation I think there are something like half a million asylum-seekers of whom about 50,000 during the course of the year would be recognised to be refugees. Asylum-seekers, in the main, on proper scrutiny, turn out not to be refugees. In the main they turn out to be people looking for migration outcomes that cannot be obtained through regular programmes and it's where people decide they're going to breach borders and force themselves on communities.

 Question: Just getting back to those who are still at large, how long will it be until you do know for sure if it's eight or more than eight?

 Transcript: Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres 

 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/transcripts/transcripts02/woomprotest_300302.htm (3 of 6) [03/04/2002 1:24:14]

   Philip Ruddock: Obviously, in relation to these matters there are efforts to count the detained population and do it accurately. They were compromised because of the mixing of the populations that would normally be separated in the detention centre for management purposes and the figure that I was given is our best estimate at this stage and when we've got further information I'll have to let you know.

 Question: Shouldn't it just be a case of, OK, we normally have 900, 860 left therefore 40- -Philip Ruddock: Look, you can't have a parade. I can tell you, the figure is 350 or thereabouts. OK? It's not a matter of lining everybody up and going down the line. A detention centre is not operated on that

 basis. It is operated on the basis that people have to have a humane treatment and that means that what you have to do is identify each of the detainees and to ensure they're present and that means you have to go into each of the various compounds, find out where they are, properly identify them and make the roll call.

 That does take time and when people are not cooperating, and after you've had incidents of this sort the level of cooperation falls, it's not as easy to do as you might think.

 Question: What sort of changes are you planning to make to the three year temporary protection visas?

 Philip Ruddock: The changes that were made to the three year temporary protection visas were legislated last year with a very particular purpose and that was to ensure that if people were coming to Australia without authority, were processed from offshore processing centres, were processed from countries in transit or processed from a situation of first asylum, the results would be very different and our intention, very deliberate intention, was to give the least advantageous outcome to those who seek to enter Australia without authority and to give the most advantageous outcome to those people who are processed from a situation of first asylum.

 So somebody who is processed, say, from Afghanistan or from Pakistan or Iran into Australia would get a permanent entry visa because the resettlement is judged to be urgent and in priority to others. If somebody is processed from Indonesia, the processing will only give them a five year temporary protection permit. Thereafter, they might be able to apply for a permanent entry outcome. If they come to Australia or one of our territories or are processed in one of the offshore processing centres, Nauru of Manus Island, they can only get a three year temporary protection visa and that will be for life. In other words, at any time, when they're found no longer to need protection they can be returned home.

 Question: You're not planning any more changes?

 Philip Ruddock: I can't say there won't be changes from time to time. The only issues that are at all germane in relation to the ongoing management of particular cases relates to matters of family composition, potentially different outcomes depending upon whether people were processed from further afield or whether they've come unlawfully. At some time we may look at some of those issues but the overall purpose of having a graduated set of entitlements, depending upon how you came, is not something that will be unwound.

 Question: I believe that a 24-year-old woman from the Villawood detention centre is in hospital with post-natal depression. Will she be allowed any alternative arrangements out of the ordinary for perhaps her long term recovery?

 Philip Ruddock: The situation is this. If there is advice in relation to individuals that require specific treatment to ensure that people's lives are not at risk and to ensure that they're treated humanely and appropriately, that will happen. The only advice that we'd had in relation to the lady at Villawood was from people who were saying, "Release her and her family." And under the law that cannot happen.

 But if the professional advice at any time is that for her safety and security, that she ought to be treated in

 Transcript: Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres 

 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/transcripts/transcripts02/woomprotest_300302.htm (4 of 6) [03/04/2002 1:24:14]

 another way and separated from her family, in other words, if that is what is in the best interests of her or her children, those steps are taken but you can't have people whose purpose in life is to unwind mandatory detention and who are offering advice, gratuitous advice in relation to these matters, essentially supplanting the proper decisions in relation to what should happen in management terms.

 It is not unusual for people who require psychiatric treatment, people who require medical treatment, for that treatment to be undertaken outside of the detention environment and it is not inappropriate for children who need care, particularly if parents aren't properly looking after their children, to be, with proper advice, separated in order to ensure that their best interests are looked after.

 The other issue in relation to this lady is that, again, we are not dealing with an asylum-seeker, we are dealing with somebody who is being held for removal. The second point is that she declined, and we are told she was mentally competent to decline, she declined treatment for conditions which were eminently treatable within the detention environment and it was only when those conditions deteriorated because of her refusal to undertake treatment, that she was evacuated to a hospital where appropriate care could be offered.

 Question: The escapees from Woomera that have been recaptured, will they face any punishment or will their refugee status come into consideration because of their attempt to escape?

 Philip Ruddock: Let me just say that it is an offence under our law to escape from lawful custody and so the next question is, do you have evidence of an offence? If you do a decision is taken as to whether people will be prosecuted. If the prosecution is successful there may well be sanctions applied and that can be, depending upon the severity of the incidents, quite significant. But we would wait until all those processes are undertaken before we make any judgment.

 If people commit a serious offence under our law and that involves jail sentences, that can lead to protection claims being vitiated. We have no requirement under our law to give protection to people who commit serious criminal offences and that's part of the reality.

 The only other matter, I would say, is, as I observed earlier, I understand a number of people returned voluntarily. I would expect that cooperation of that sort would be taken into account in any consideration as to either severity of sentence if prosecuted or perhaps even in relation to prosecution but these are issues that will dealt with by the relevant authorities and all of these matters are considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions before the prosecutions are launched.

 Question: Do we know if any of the people who did escape have legitimate asylum claims or are they all people waiting to go home?

 Philip Ruddock: I can't say because, at this stage, we don't know precisely all of the identities. We've given you a broad indication of what we believe is the situation with 41 people thought to have decamped and all but eight of them having been recaptured but in relation to the circumstances of each one, I'll get that information in time. But if you look at the population of Woomera, it's very similar to the population in our other detention centres where a significant proportion of the detainees are being held for removal. The bulk of the balance have been rejected, considered and rejected as refugees, and are either appealing the decisions before the tribunals or the courts and there is a relatively small number of the population who have not had final decisions.

 Bear in mind, these people came on boats, I think the last boats, more than five months ago and we process most claims within 14 weeks so most of these people would have had decisions advised to them and those where we haven't been able to advise decisions are generally because we've not been able to get either security or character clearances from competent authorities and those matters have to be dealt with before any matters can be finalised involving any detainees.

 Transcript: Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres 

 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/transcripts/transcripts02/woomprotest_300302.htm (5 of 6) [03/04/2002 1:24:14]

 All right? Thank you.

 Philip Ruddock: - -jail sentences in Australia.

 Question: Do you think that they're a reward?

 Philip Ruddock: A reward? If you think that going home is something that is significantly less desirable than serving a penalty in jail, your view is very different to mine. A jail sentence is a jail sentence is a jail sentence. People who commit serious criminal offences and serve time in jail are disadvantaged not only in the possibility of returning to Australia, but they're also disadvantaged in any possible request they may have later to go to any other country because those character issues are taken into account.

 Question: With the protesters, how many people have been arrested or are likely to be?

 Philip Ruddock: I thought the figure was 15 [inaudible] with aiding and abetting.

 Question: We've heard reports there was one child escaped or there were children among those who-Philip Ruddock: I haven't heard that but the question of children is often difficult to determine because you're talking about people who are under 18 amongst youths. There could be somebody who is under 18

 but the advice Steve has had is that there were no minors. -Question: It was mentioned in The Sydney Morning Herald  today- -Philip Ruddock: Was it?

 Question: Have you seen this article?

 Philip Ruddock: No, I haven't read Nick's article. What does it say?

 Question: This is the bit I was referring to here. In terms of changes to the permit. So are you thinking about that? Replacing them with a permanent protection visa?

 Philip Ruddock: No.

 Question: Not thinking about that at all?

 Philip Ruddock: Not at all. The only issue I will be looking at is if you end up with somebody who is here on a temporary protection visa and a spouse came in on a boat, he had a temporary protection visa because they were visaed from, say, Indonesia, would you try and align them? I mean, I haven't got any of those sorts of answers yet but that's because the questions haven't been easy. You can't be churlish about those sorts of issues. I'm not about unwinding the broad thrust that we've taken because ultimately [inaudible] it's designed to stop people coming.

 Index of Transcripts

  

 Transcript: Update on Protests at Woomera and Villawood Detention Centres 

 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/transcripts/transcripts02/woomprotest_300302.htm (6 of 6) [03/04/2002 1:24:14]

