---
title: "Settlement funds to target migrants."
date: "2002-02-05"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233969
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2UU56%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H10/2002 - 5 February 2002

  

 Settlement Funds to Target Migrants

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today announced $8.2m in grants to assist migrants, refugees and humanitarian program entrants to settle successfully in Australia, under the Community Settlement Services Scheme (CSSS).

 "Settlement programs contribute enormously to the successful adjustment of those whether by choice or refuge who seek to make Australia their home, and assist them in becoming full and active participants in Australia's democratic society.

 "I intend to give priority to projects which deliver services to recent arrivals whose communities in Australia are small and emerging; and to projects that cater for refugee and humanitarian entrants who require additional assistance after exiting services available under the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy."

 "In our pre-election policy statement, the Government made a commitment to continuing to develop the CSSS rural and regional network recognising the unique needs of migrants, refugee and humanitarian entrants in regional areas," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "I therefore encourage high-quality grant applications from non-profit community organisations in rural and regional areas that will address pressing settlement needs in those areas."

 "The Government recognises the importance of maintaining funding for the CSSS which is designed to strengthen and build the capacity within the community to meet the settlement needs of recently arrived migrants and refugees," Mr Hardgrave said.

 The CSSS is intended to respond to gaps in mainstream service provision. It supports the provision of direct services such as information and referral services and community participation in planning and delivery of services.

 Funding priority will be given to projects which: - Facilitate client access to mainstream services, - Develop settlement planning and service delivery networks that engage mainstream service providers to deliver culturally appropriate services, and - Aim to be self-sustaining beyond the period of the grant.

 Successful applications will extend and complement the existing network of services available to refugees, humanitarian entrants and migrants permanently in Australia.

 Organisations wishing to apply are encouraged to complete the application form on DIMIA's web site.

 A word format electronic application form on diskette is also available, and hardcopy applications will also be accepted.

 The web-based electronic application form is easy and simple to complete and provides immediate access to all applicant information via the Internet. It is absolutely secure, as applicants receive a unique log-on and password and all information is encrypted.

 Advertisements inviting applications for funds will appear nationwide in newspapers on 9 February 2002. Applications close on 22 March 2002.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 6277 7890 or 0419 123862

 Minister's Media Release Index   All Ministerial Media Releases

