---
title: "International responses to islamist extremism: remarks by the President of the International Crisis Group to the National Institute for Research Advancement (NIRA) Colloquium, Tokyo, 23 January 2002"
date: "2002-01-23"
creators:
  - "Evans, Gareth"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Islamic fundamentalism"
  - "Counter terrorist measures"
  - "Iraq"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "United States"
  - "Social conditions"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211232977
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IL966%22
---

  

  INTERNATIONAL RESPONSES TO ISLAMIST EXTREMISM

  

   

  

  Remarks by Gareth Evans, President of International Crisis Group, 
to National Institute for Research Advancement (NIRA) Colloquium, Tokyo, 
23 January 2002

  

   

  

   

  

   

  

  The international policy challenge that the US 
has been set by 911 is fantastically difficult and complex, and so far 
it has been handled extremely well indeed. State, the Pentagon and the 
White House have got their act together, never an easy thing to do,  
articulated sound and measured objectives, and effectively advanced 
them

  

   

  

  But every day is a new day, and with things in 
Afghanistan generally falling into place, backburner issues like what 
to do about Iraq will very quickly come to the frontburner, and the 
potential for policy missteps remains very high.

  

   

  

  It may help to clarify the issues to distinguish 
five separate objectives which, in ICG’s judgement at least, have 
to be simultaneously pursued if the response to  911, and the potential 
horrors awaiting us in the future, is to be adequate, and the tightrope 
between over-reaction (in the sense of counter-productive action) and 
under-reaction is to be walked - and if short term objectives are 
not to work against longer term ones.

  

   

  

  (1) Strengthening   Internal   Security

  

   

  

  The first objective, or necessary 
element of any response, is overwhelmingly internal in character, and 
to that extent I won’t dwell on it here.

  

   

  

  Apart from the practical 
questions, there are  obviously big issues of principle involved 
, with which the country is juste beginning to wrestle: how much liberty 
can you sacrifice in the name of security without losing the very identity 
and character of the nation that the attackers have set out to destroy?

  

   

  

  The internal response cannot 
be wholly insulated from the external: some kinds of internal responses 
do have a real capacity to resonate beyond the country in a way that 
can either help or hinder the larger cause. It is crucial in this context 
that policymakers remember, as to their credit they overwhelmingly have 
done so far, that this is a war against deeds, not beliefs; and that 
there are huge downside risks, in terms of winning the sustained cooperation 
of other countries, in engaging in any form of negative religious or 
racial profiling. 

  

   

  

  As an Australian, whose country 
was justly seen as a pariah among the third world until the late 1960s 
when we finally abandoned our appallingly discriminatory “White Australia” 
immigration policy, I am acutely sensitive to just how much damage can 
be done to a country’s reputation, credibility and effectiveness, 
by this kind of insensitivity

  

   

  

   

  

   

  

   

  

  (2) Bringing the Perpetrators 
to Justice

  

   

  

  There can be no doubt about 
America’s moral and legal right to take immediate action - including, 
as necessary, robust military action - against the perpetrators of 
the 11 September crimes, and those who aid and abet, or harbour and 
shelter them. In international law, the self-defence provision in Article 
51 of the UN Charter is itself sufficient justification.

  

   

  

  What is crucial, however, 
is that there be a continuing acknowledgement of the constraints which 
must apply in taking such action - not just as a matter of law and 
morality but of hard-headed national self interest. There are four constraints, 
in particular, that America’s friends and allies, and a great many 
voices in this country, have been properly emphasising over and again 
as necessary to ensure the effectiveness both of the short-term action 
against the perpetrators of 11 September, and the long-term fight against 
further such acts.

  

   

  

  First, there has to be a 
strong evidentiary foundation for any action: if you act without that, 
the support of friends and allies will fall away, and - even more 
importantly - the possibility of creating a generally cooperative 
international enforcement front against terrorism in the future

  

   

  

  : this condition was pretty 
well satisfied in Afghanistan - but new issues will arise with Iraq, 
Yemen, Somalia,

  

  Phillipines, Indonesia

  

   

  

  Secondly, the killing and 
maiming of the innocent has to be avoided at almost all costs: if that 
happens, you just create a whole new generation of people fearing and 
hating the West and everything it stands for, a new breeding ground 
for a whole new generation of fanatics.

  

   

  

  Thirdly, you have to follow 
through punitive action in principled way. There is a real issue here 
about the way in which the U.S. is refusing to acknowledge those it 
captured as ‘prisoners if war’, as they clearly seem to be under 
international law, and the way theyt are being treated at Guantanamo 
bay. Further questions will arise about the courts or tribunals under 
which they are tried - all of them adding further weight to the argument 
for the international community establishing,  and the U.S. supporting, 
an international criminal court. 

  

   

  

  Fourthly, you have to make 
commitment to rebuilding countries in question, and  not make the 
mistake of Afghanistan last time round - walking away when the  
immediate problem was resolved. To its credit US and interntional community 
- with Japan playing an excellent leadership role - have clearly 
recognised that.

  

   

  

  The Challenge of Iraq 

  

   

  

  With Afghanistan on the way 
to resolution, pressure will obviously build for action against Iraq, 
and there is obviously a lively debate going on within US Administration 
right now about just that. 

  

   

  

  There is no question that 
Iraq poses a huge problem, above all in its undoubted WMD capacity and 
its demonstrated willingness in the past to use it. It may or may not 
have had a hand in 911, and the later anthrax attacks, but as yet there 
is no compelling evidence.

  

   

  

  Some action is going to be 
necessary on the WMD front - with the need to establish a new inspection 
regime there being absolutely compelling - but the question is what 
and when, and whether the military option makes any sense. On this front 
there are some obvious caveats:

  

   

  

  q       However much Iraq is detested by its Arab neighbours 
and Iran - it still has an extraordinary capacity to win support if 
it can paint itself as oppressed, as we have seen in the playing out 
of the sanctions issue.

  

   

  

  q       The evidence of responsibility for past attacks 
or planned future attacks would need to be very strong.

  

   

  

  q       It cannot be assumed that any military victory 
would be easily won, result in the collapse of the Saddam regime and 
anyone likely to be as bad, and be sustainable: there will be a repeat 
of the dilemma of 1991 - what does the dog do when it catches the 
car?

  

   

  

  q       The views of Turkey - which has suffered grievously 
(to the est tune of some $30 billion dollars economically since the 
Gulf War, with its subsequent trade embargoes) - would have to be 
taken closely into account. In particular the often favoured military/political 
approach of a three way split of Iraq into Shiite south/ Sunni middle 
and Kurdish north is seen by Turkey as a nightmare scenario - reviving 
all its worst anxieties about separatist Kurdistan sentiment within 
its own territory.

  

   

  

  (3) Building Front Line Defences 
against Future Attacks

  

   

  

  The first line of international 
defence - moving beyond internal security - must be in the countries 
of origin of the terrorists themselves. The CIA, FBI and US military 
can never be as good as the Taliban, should it have chosen to be, or 
Saudi Arabia or Sudan before them, in dealing with Osama bin Laden; 
Mossad and the Israeli Defence Force - as tough and competent as they 
may - can never be as effective as the Palestinian Authority in cracking 
down on the fanatics of Hamas and other extremist groups; neither the 
Indians or anyone else could possibly be as good as the Pakistani government 
and military in curbing, if it chose to do, the terrorist fanaticism 
that continues to tear apart Kashmir.

  

   

  

  To strengthen these international 
defences you have to build the   capacity   and above all the   will   for these countries and authorities to act, both 
internally and in close cooperation with the wider international community. 
Intelligence has to be supplied, financial supply lines broken, logistic 
support offered and common strategies systematically pursued over time. 

  

   

  

  Building capacity means in 
the first instance building basic physical capacity. In Afghanistan, 
an absolutely critical part of the process is the rebuilding of the 
country from zero, or zero minus - in terms of establishing security, 
creating effective governance, managing immediate humanitarian assistance, 
rebuilding economic and social  infrastructure and establishing 
viable economy. That process is off to an excellent start with the donors’ 
conference here in Japan this week, but nightmarish problems ahead, 
not least in ensuring that donors meet their present and future commitments, 
and that aid delivery is effectively coordinated - for example, as 
ICG recommends, through World Bank trust funds. 

  

   

  

  Building the will means essentially 
building political support, but it important that this not be bought 
at too high a price. ICG has been much emphasising this negative constraint 
in the context of the Central Asian republics, and in particular Uzbekistan: 
whatever the short-term benefits, in terms of active cooperation, that 
might be seen to follow from doing so, it is not wise to uncritically 
embrace regimes whose principles and methods are alien to the very values 
we are trying to protect.. Some of the tough-minded leaders of the former 
Soviet republics of Central Asia have cracked down heavily on moderate 
Islamic movements and political opposition generally, and are only too 
keen to have the support of the West in continuing to do so: but in 
the process they have produced a whole new movement becoming more and 
more genuinely Islamist extremist in reaction, and the danger is that 
that movement will become stronger still.

  

   

  

  Political support is impossible, 
whatever the will, without the capacity to deliver that support. If 
we want, as we must, strong local action against terrorism, we have 
to go all out to create environments in the countries in question in 
which there is more community support for cracking down on terrorism, 
and in which insecure governments will feel more confident in doing 
so. And that in turn means that it is important to adopt, as at least 
part of the repertoire of responses to terror, ‘root cause’ strategies, 
designed to address the problem at source - addressing the policy 
issues that we know generate grievance, and the social and economic 
conditions that we know generate despair.

  

   

  

  (4) Addressing the Conflicts 
and Policy Issues that Generate Grievance

  

   

  

  So far as the motives for 
terrorist action are concerned, it is obvious that no simplistic connection 
can be drawn between political grievance redress and terrorist threat 
reduction. Clearly not all terrorist violence is based on this kind 
of grievance, and the Israel-Palestinian conflict in particular must 
not be seen as the root of all Islamist extremism: indeed the World 
Trade Centre and Pentagon attacks clearly being planned at a time when 
optimism about the Israel-Palestinian peace process was at its height. 
Tom Friedman and others beating hard on the ‘Don’t blame America’ 
drum are at pains to emphasise these points, and they are right.

  

   

  

  But equally there can be 
no doubt that backward steps in this and other peace processes do inflame 
sentiment in the streets, and make it that much harder for governments 
in these regions to crack down on domestically generated terrorism, 
and especially for them to cooperate with the West in all the ways that 
are crucially necessary. To begin to drain the swamp in which terrorism 
breeds - or to cut out the roots of the tree, or to break some of 
the inter-nodal network connections, whichever metaphor you prefer - 
I believe that there has to be a major effort made to address some of 
the avoidable sources of grievance: the unresolved conflicts and policy 
issues that help create the environment in which terrorism can grow 
and flourish. There just has to be a renewed commitment and focus on 
the kind of conditions that help to create individuals able to believe 
that killing thousands of civilians is not only acceptable, but heroic. 
To do this is not to ‘reward’ terrorist behaviour: it’s to answer 
it.

  

   

  

  Maybe my judgment here is 
a little affected by my role as head of the International Crisis Group, 
an organisation dedicated to preventing and containing deadly conflict 
. But our strong belief is that the task of fighting terrorism cannot 
be separated from the task of preventing, containing and ending conflict. 
All too often the places that generate terrorism - along with drug 
trafficking, and health pandemics, and refugee outflows, and international 
environmental disasters - are shattered societies where grievance, 
greed, repression, poverty and prejudice have, in various combinations, 
fed violence, utter despair and extremism. Think not only of the Middle 
East and Central Asia, but of Northern Ireland, the Sudan, Colombia, 
the Caucasus. In none of these conflicts, or a dozen others, has the 
conflict stayed local.

  

   

  

  (5) Addressing Underlying 
Social, Economic and Cultural Issues that Generate Grievance

  

   

  

  Any comprehensive response 
to terrorism has to, finally, address the reality that not all the festering 
grievances that breed it have a rational, or semi-rational, foundation 
in unresolved or badly-resolved conflicts, or other policy issues of 
this kind. Clearly a significant part of the story is a blind hatred 
of modernity, of the impact of globalisation and the greater interaction 
and interdependence countries, and the new cultural currents associated 
with that (in particular those relating to greater freedom and opportunity 
for women) - which are all undermining, particularly in the way they 
are being embraced by young people, old family and social and economic 
and governmental values and institutions.

  

   

  

  The unhappy reality is that 
the US is the natural international target of this kind of resentment. 
It is a magnet for the hatred of those who feel themselves deprived. 
This country’s role in the global economy, its perceived political 
influence - and above all its perceived cultural influence everywhere 
- mean that trouble is bound to follow it, through whatever walls 
its citizens may be tempted to build around themselves.

  

   

  

  This is the hardest of all 
the underlying causes to address, not least because the phenomenon of 
globalisation and everything that goes with it is so obviously irreversible, 
and because the cultural dimensions of it - the freedom and opportunity 
associated with modernisation and global interaction - are so obviously 
attractive to so many people.

  

   

  

  But even though there are 
no easy answers, part of the response must be to try to gradually diminish 
the envy and sense of both absolute and comparative economic disadvantage 
that are significant parts of the problem - to make a sustained effort 
to improve social conditions, reduce disparities of wealth, create more 
and more economic opportunity, and above all to create more and more 
educational opportunity. We know that, in Pakistan in particular, religious 
parties and groups - including those inclined to extremism - are 
attracting more and more support by offering, through the mosques and 
associated madrassas, low cost education which millions of poor families 
simply cannot obtain for their children in any other way. Part of the 
enterprise here must also be to encourage, by all available means, the 
expression of moderate Islamic voices.

  

   

  

  There is a need to respond 
to social and economic deprivation with thoughtful and generous development 
assistance proposals, and the US has an enormous capacity to do so, 
even in economically stressful times, when one remembers that US foreign 
aid is now down to an all time low, and an internationally rather embarrassing, 
0.11 per cent of GDP. This is not again, a matter of good works appropriate 
for the good times when we have less to worry about internally. It’s 
a matter of the hard headed pursuit of national interest. As with addressing 
political grievances, it’s all part of the process of draining the 
swamps in which grievance and despair breed.

  

   

  

  It’s just no coincidence 
that the countries from which most terror appears to have sprung have 
been those with collapsed or faltering economies, in which either most 
people have no wealth at all, or where there are very great disparities 
of wealth, and where the population at large feels left out, with no 
sense at all of being beneficiaries of the great wealth-generating bonanza 
of globalisation.

  

   

  

  Again one must not be too 
simplistic about any of this. There is no iron law that wealth or education 
will diminish fanaticism or hatred of the West - Osama bin Laden is 
himself living proof of that - but there is every reason to believe 
it must help, as must efforts both internal and external to improve 
the quality, and responsiveness to its people, of national governance.

  

   

  

  Trying to help a create a 
better policy response to these dilemmas is all that any of us in the 
policy community can do - whether as government insiders, or as academic 
or think-tank or NGO outsiders, or somewhere in the world in between.

  

   

  

   

  

