---
title: "Australians and giving: a global comparison. Speech given to Fundraising Institute, Australia Ltd, Melbourne, 10 July 2002"
date: "2002-07-10"
creators:
  - "Levine, MicheleRoy Morgan Research"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Opinion poll data"
  - "Nongovernment welfare sector"
  - "Philanthropy"
  - "Statistics"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245244
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DLDA6%22
---

  Roy Morgan Research Pty. Ltd. 

  Quality Systcm Certified to AS/NZS IS0 9001  A R N 91 007 092 944 

  Ref [x:\admin\exective\Itrtnl\presentn\fia australians and giving rcc.doc; 1 I I 

  isi 

  Australians are wary about charity - both here and overseas. More than two-thirds of  Australians (68%) believe charity money does not get to the people who need it and only 10  percent agree with an increase in Government foreign aid. 

  The latest Roy Morgan International research shows that a majority of Australians (57%)  believe it is the Government’s duty to support those who can’t find work. This compares with  48% in the UK, 46% in NZ and only 25% in the USA. 

  t, ~ o v ~ r n ~ @ n t ’ §  duty to su ort those who can’t find  x 

  57% 

  Australia USA UK NZ 

  However, only one-in-four Australians (24%) believe a percentage of everyone’s income  should go to charities. 

  41 1 Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, G.P.O. Box 2282U, Melbournc, Victoria 3001, Australia  Tel: (03) 9629 6888 Fax: (03) 9629 1250 (03) 9224 5387 Email: melbourne@roymorgan.com  Website: www.roymorgan.com 

  Qfi’ces ulso in: Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, Pcrth, Canberra, London, Auckland and USA 

  This is related to income, with as many as 1-in-3 Australians with income of $80,000 or more  supporting the notion of a percentage of income going to charity. 

  By comparison 24% of Americans and 17% of people in the UK and New Zealand believe a  percentage of everyone’s income should go to charities. 

  A percent of everyone’s income should  o to charities 

  24% 24% 

  Australia USA UK NZ 

  Interestingly the relationship with income is most marked in the US with support ranging  from less than 20% among Americans in lower income groups and more than 40% among  those in higher income groups. 

  In any discussion about charity or giving, the conversation invariably turns to a comparison  between Australia and America. But did you know . . . 

  More Americans watch Australian Rules Football than do Australians.’ 

  Almost 8 million Americans (7,880,000) watch Australian Rules Football at least  occasionally on television. This means Australian Rules Football is viewed by more  Americans than Australians (5,328,000). More Democrats than Republicans watch Australian  Rules, and yes, they are more likely to drink Foster’s. 

  Some things are the same the world over  - the trick is to know which ones. 

  ’ Roy Morgan Research International Press Releases, Article No. 4 “Formula 1 More Popular In Australia Than  USA” http:llwww.royinor~an.com/international/prcssrcleas~s/2001/article4.html 

  2 

  But seriously, why is Bill Gates one of the wealthiest and arguably the most powerful man in  the world when Professor Carl Wood and Professor Alan Trounson, who created life (Invitro  Fertilisation), are for the most part unknown Australian scientists; and Fred Hollows, who  restored sight to so many, a hero only in relatively narrow circles? 

  The answer has nothing to do with the often quoted Australian excuse of the tyranny of  distance, or with excessive minimum wages in this country, or with taxation, immigration, or  any of the other usually cited excuses. 

  The answer has more to do with Australia’s poor performance in marketing and  commercialisation, communications and public relations. This is rooted partly in  a lack of  vision, and partly a lack of confidence to have a vision, articulate it, and then single-mindedly  focus on achieving it. 

  And why does America give more than Australia? While it is interesting to consider taxation  issues, the role of Government (or lack of such a role), the larger number of very wealthy  Americans than Australians, and the American tradition of philanthropy, finally these things  are history - and they are history of another country. 

  I want to talk to you today about Australia, Australia now and into the future, and how  Australians see charity and giving. 

  So first Australia, we can and should have vision in this country. This was once the richest  country on earth; while it is acknowledged that it is still a wonderful place to live, we’ve been  slipping down the comparative earnings and standard of living tables for decades. Our  productivity in many areas is about half that of the USA, and our unemployment remains too  high. Regardless of what our government statistics tell us, real unemployment is over  In the USA 46% of the population aged 14 and over are employed full time, this compares 

  with 39% in Australia. We are under-funded for our ageing population’s retirement - and we  are seeing beggars on our streets. 

  Some argue that this situation has arisen ultimately because of increasing competition from  developing economies. But this argument is not as persuasive as it initially appears. It is  ultimately made on a zero-sum premise - that if country X increases its production of  whatever, then country Y’s production must decrease. If we think about it, however, it  becomes blindingly obvious that there are billions of people in this world who want more  consumer goods, more travel, more education - more everything. 

  2Roy Morgan Research Paper by Gary Morgan and Michele Levine, “Only Real Leadership Or A Crisis Can  Save The L-NP Coalition”, May 2001 http:llwww.roymor~an.co1n/papers/200 1 I2001MY 1 .html 

  3 

  This is what globalisation is all about. What does all this mean for Australia? What does it  mean for Australian charity and giving? 

  What will working in Australia be like in the global future?  What will the companies look like?  Where will we be in the global food chain.?  Will we be at all? 

  +S 

  +S 

  At Roy Morgan Research these questions are part of our life. 

  For sixty years, with over 4 million interviews, more than 10,000 focussed discussion groups  and in-depth interviews, Roy Morgan Research has been studying Australia. 

  In 1951 when asked whether “women should be able to wear shorts in the street when not at  holiday resorts” 49% of Australians approved, 47% were opposed. The question tells as  much as the answer about society in 195 1. 

  In September 1956 Australia’s favourite Saturday evening leisure pursuits were: radio (26%);  movies (19%); reading  (17%); visiting (14%); cards (8%) and dancing (5%). The issues were  about appropriate wear, appropriate behaviour, radio listening and movies, and early women’s  issues. 

  Today some issues are the same, but some have moved on. Australians are facing an  increasingly complex social environment that is changing both the level of demand for its  products and services, and the climate of support for those products and services, and is  changing the balance of power between different groups in society. The most significant 

  changes include: 

  force: More women entering the workforce earlier, for longer periods  of time and for greater number of hours per week directing pressure towards investment in  child care, 24-hour support services, leisure facilities, flexible working conditions and  equality of outcomes in employment. Women are emerging as integrative, situational leaders 

  and are having much more effective power in community decisions. 

  e~nition of the fa ily: Women are making 

  choices to marry or not, to have children or not, and when. 

  e of beauty: At a time when women supposedly have more freedom than  ever before - many are still prisoners in their own bodies. We have seen this result in an  increasing requirement for information, discussions about diet, surgery, health, natural  remedies and human genetics mapping. 

  4 

  co : The young in all societies have increasingly linked into global 

  forms of communication. This has increased the gap between the older, dominant decision-  makers and the younger, impatient workforce. 

  a~io~~alisa~ion: Internationalisation of fashion, food preferences and leisure pursuits,  has forced a greater diversity of products and services, and a shift to transnational franchise  relationships in retail provision. 

  ~ n f o r ~ a t i o n  ~ e ~ a n ~ s :  The demand for better and quicker information access to supply  insights based upon more global, more integrated, more relevant, more reliable and more  timely sources of comprehensible data is framing a total shift in the use of intellectual  property. 

  ~ s ~ r a l i a  is le ageing: 

  8 A u $ t ~ a l i ~  is ~ i d d ~ e  ageing: 1-in-10 Australians are over the age of 65 years. The 24s 

  and under will have shrunk from 4-in-IO to 2%-in-10 by the year 2030. By 2020 the aged  will be the “post-war baby boomers”. 

  le: The middle-ageing nation will value time almost above  all. Those in their middle ages will have substantial amounts of discretionary money but  will not have substantial amounts of time - they will trade one for the other. 

  u a ~ ~ t y :  They will want quality in everything from TV to bank service. 

  8 Security: There will be more concern for security - investments become less risky and 

  savings become more important. Personal comfort will be placed as a priority. 

  : Their focus will be longevity and to prolong youth. They will spend more on  health both for prevention and cure. Nutrition consciousness will grow. There will be  less drastic dieting and more concern for healthy eating. There will be a growing market  for “splurge” food, There will be more attention to labels, freshness, ingredients. There 

  will be greater call for natural foods and an insatiable appetite for convenience. 

  dle class is s ~ r i n ~ i n g ,  and migrating toward income extremes, and it will  continue to do so for the foreseeable future. The former mass market that was located in the  centre is shrinking. 

  is~uption, a~ienatio 

  disruption arising from long-term unemployment will lead to more social alienation. If there 

  5 

  is a second generation of permanent unemployment then alienation can become complete.  Los Angeles riot phenomena - this was symptomatic of alienation and frustration of a large  group of permanently unemployed, unskilled workers. The soccer riots in the north of  England provide the same message. 

  We have also seen massive political and social turmoil and human suffering in Kosovo, East  Timor, Afghanistan and the Middle East. We are now grappling with the difficult issue of 

  how we deal with refugees in our own country. 

  ~ ~ i v a ~ i s a ~ ~ o n :  The blurring between public and private accountability and  privatisationkorporatisation as well as having ethical and equity considerations raise other  issues, ie, marketing, evaluation of cost benefit and value for money for products and services  that were previously commodities. 

  Telecommuting 

  The home of the future  - big screen, high definition TV, videophones, shopping and  banking from home, interactive educational programs, distance learning. 

  Smart cards - Microchips capable of carrying pages of typed information, on a plastic  card, ie, passport details, documents, financial transactions, medical history details, etc. 

  Telecommunications and inter-organisational networks for data sharing. Information  increasingly flows across national boundaries. 

  Smart highways will offer intelligent traffic control, by warning drivers via car computers  andlor using flexible roadside signage. 

  The impact of “virtual reality”  as a sensing technology - the use of computer graphics to 

  stimulate convincingly real or fantasy environments eg remote surgery. 

  ave seen an increasing market an customer focus: 

  With a general increase in mistrust in organisations and products, people in Australia are  becoming more isolated, regionalised, more fragmented, more individualistic, more  demanding, more informed, more stressed, more discriminating. In a nutshell, harder to get. 

  So what does all this mean for those whose aim is to encourage Australians to give  generously? 

  6 

  Successful companies identify their customers’ values and what they believe in. If our aim is  to have Australians give more, then I believe we need to do the same. We need to understand  Australians and the choices they make, and their view of the world. 

  If we want to know how Australians feel or think about anything, the best way to find out is  to ask them. That’s what we do. 

  Anyone here who has seen the weekly Roy Morgan Survey Questionnaire will likely say “I  would never do it”, “I wouldn’t waste my time answering all those questions”. So why are  we still in business? 

  The answer is simple. Generally people aren’t listened to. Few people have an opportunity to  give their views to a captive listener for an uninterrupted half an hour. And that’s a really  important point! 

  So what have Australians told us about giving? 

  As mentioned earlier, Australians are wary about charity. According to a study on world  issues and charities from Roy Morgan Single Source, 68 percent of Australians, aged 14 and  over, agreed with the statement: 

  “The trouble with giving to charity is that the money doesn’t get to people who need it.“  Only 14 percent disagreed. 

  More Australians agreed (38%) than disagreed (36%).with the statement: 

  “There’s nothing I can do to help people who can’t work out how to help thenzselves“ 

  The study also found the majority of Australians (75%) agreed :  “Some Third World countries will always be poor because of war and corr~ption.~’ 

  World issues 

  b 

  x 

  0 I 

  L 

  QJ  a 

  75% 

  S o m e  third world countries always poor due lo  warlcorruption 

  0 

  0 1  I 

  ui ‘N 

  9 need 11 68% 

  Money from charily doesn t get to people who 

  61 % 

  Charily organisations make long-lerm differences 

  to evsryday lives of world’s poorest 

  I can’t help people who can’t help themselves 

  I 

  7 

  And when it comes to raising living standards among the world's poorest people:  e 47% of Australians were of the view that everyday people can help to raise living 

  standards;  32% believe they can't do much, there will always be poor people; 

  18% believed individuals can't do anything - it's up to Governments. 

  aising the living sta~dards amongst: the world's  a 

  poorest people 

  47% 

  Everyday people can help to  raise living standards 

  Can't do much, there'll  always be poor people 32% 

  Individuals can't do anything ~~~~~  ~~~~~~~: ~~~~~ ' 8 %  . it's up to governments  Can't say [I 3% 

  In terms of giving money to charities for overseas aid :  e 33% see this as providing short term benefits for a few local communities; 

  27% believe it provides long term benefits for a few local communities;  22% believe it doesn't help much at all;  Only 15% see long-term benefits for a whole country. 

  k 

  a Giving money to charities for overseas aid 

  33% 

  Provides short-term bsnefils for  a few locai communities 

  27% 

  Provides long-term benefits for 

  a few local communities 

  Doesnt help much al all 22% 

  15% 

  Provides long-term benefits for  a whole country 

  8 

  When it comes to responsibility for helping the world’s poorest people, Australians are  divided:  36% believe that they have a responsibility to do what they can;  30% did not believe it was their responsibility but still felt that they should make regular 

  contributions; 

  29% believe their duty to help only extends as far as our shores, choosing the response  “My responsibility is just to other Australians“. 

  e 

  the world’s poorest people 

  36% 

  I have a rssponsibilityto do what I 

  can 

  30% 

  Not my responsibility but I should  make regular contributions 

  29% 

  My responsibility I S  just to other  Australians 

  When asked what can we do to help the very poor people around the world:  0 One-in-two Australians chose the option “To help provide tools and training to help 

  people find solutions to their problems”; 

  24% chose “helping children with vaccinations and education”;  13 % said “give when most needed during war or natural disaster”; and  10 % said our “Federal Government should give more in-foreign aid”. 

  h 

  x 

  O  h 

  h 

  9,  a 

  0 

  u 

  c 

  ’N  Q 

  Ways to help very poor people around the world 

  Help children with vaccinationsleducation 24% 

  13% Give when most needed during warlnatural disaster 

  Our government  to give more in foreign aid 10% 

  9 

  But let’s look a bit deeper. I’m reminded of the aftermath of the Queensland election some  years ago in which Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party was recognised as a growing force,  there was much talk of “listenin 

  Somehow we are given the impression that the people that have to be listened to are a  somewhat amorphous “mass” out there - people who are unlike “us”, but otherwise relatively  indistinguishable from each other. 

  The reality is of course quite different. There are all sorts of people, in different  circumstances, with different backgrounds, beliefs and values. They have very different ways  of viewing the world, and everything that goes on in the world. 

  While it is relatively easy to listen, if we really want to understand and make sense of what  they say, and be able to communicate back, we need to see the world from their perspective. 

  Every one of us looks at the world through particular “windows” or mindsets, to help us make  choices about our lives. We choose what we will do when we get up for the day, what we  will wear, how and where we will travel, who we will talk to and what we hope to achieve by  the end of the day. 

  Roy Morgan Research, in conjunction with Colin Benjamin of The Horizons Network, have  developed a powerful values-based psychological instrument to understand the choices people  make  - in particular to provide a framework with which to understand people who are p& just  like us (see attachment). 

  Our insight into these Roy Morgan Values Segments draws on analysis of the Roy Morgan  Single Source database which includes detailed personal interviews with close to a million  people across Australia over almost two decades 

  Your handout today (see attached) is a map - a map with which to understand different people  and ways oE thinking. For instance if we consider the concept of technology: 

  For the older “Basic Needs” segment, the concept of technology means medical  technology, health monitoring and maintenance, security systems, and person-to-person  contact. This is not surprising. From the Roy Morgan Political Issues Survey2, health and  hospital issues are for these people second in importance only to issues about social  welfare and the aged. 

  For the young carefree “Look At Me” segment, technology means entertainment, sound  systems, leisure, and on-line games. 

  Source: Bulletin Morgan Poll Finding No. 3073 April 1998 

  10 

  For the disenfranchised “A Fairer Deal” segment technology means robotics, and fear of  technology taking over jobs and controlling our lives. 

  If we consider the issue of politics for the two up-market segments: 

  For the “Visible Achievement” segment, business is key, Government is too slow for the  real world. 

  0 For the “Socially Aware” segment, too much power is concentrated in the hands of large 

  companies, global politics are of relevance. 

  The Values - Life Domain Map in all its richness enables us to listen carefully, and to  communicate with people, even those who are different from us, about today’s and  tomorrow’s issues in a way which resonates with their values. 

  So how do these different people see charities, and giving, and their responsibility? 

  For the older “ eeds” segment there is a fairly strong sense of resignation, a higher  than average view that “You can’t do much , there’ll always be poor”. With little overseas or  international perspective, these older Australians don’t have strong opinions about how  overseas aid can be best applied, although they do see the need to help in times of war and  disaster, when people’s basic needs have been threatened. They tend to believe that their  responsibility is at home, and rely strongly on the Government to provide. 

  For the “A fairer deal” segment, there is a similar sense of resignation, or lack of optimism  that anything much can be done. In line with their collectivist views, these people tend to see  the Government being responsible. This segment has the highest expectation that the 

  “Government should support those who can’tfind work”. An interesting twist is their stated  view that they “can’t help people who can’t work out how to help themselves”. Although this  segment has a fairly local perspective, and little international perspective, children did seem to  strike a chord. There was above average support for helping poorer nations by providing  vaccinations and education for children. 

  For the family focused segments - the younger ‘“Conventional family life”, and the older  “Traditional family life” responses were very much middle Australia. 

  The two youngest segments “Look at me” and ‘6Young o~timism” were similar in their  optimism, believing for instance that charities and overseas aid can make a long term  difference. They also shared an absence of what may be called an “at home” focus. Neither  saw their responsibility as focused on Australia, rather than other countries where the need  might be greater. The two differed in their sense of responsibility, with “Young optimism”  feeling more responsibility, and “Look at me” seeing a greater role for the Government. 

  11 

  The “Real conservatism” segment, showed similar patterns of resignation, and focus on “at  home” as the first two segments (“Basic needs”, and “A fairer deal”). However, the “Real  conservatism” people were even more negative about the possible advantages of charity, and  more critical of charities getting money to those who need it. At the same time, they were  less supportive of Government taking a larger role. 

  “’Something better” as a segment displayed similar responses to the previous segment.  However, given their views on life in general, and their focus on self-improvement and  social/financial progress, this is interpreted as more a lack of concern for the plight of others,  rather than the pessimistic resignation which characterises the “Real conservatism”. 

  The two affluent segments “’Socially aware9’ and “Visible ac~ie~ement” have most ability to  give, so it’s fortunate that they also see themselves as having a role to play, and able to make  a difference. These are most likely to believe that everyday people can help to raise living  standards in the world’s poorest countries. The “Socially aware” segment is by far the most  willing to voice a sense of personal responsibility, and to believe the Government should do  more. It is important to realise that for the Socially aware, the desire for the Government to  do more is not shifting responsibility to someone else’s shoulders. These people realise the  Government paying means all Australians pay. 

  This has been a turbulent couple of years  - not only for Australia where we had the added 

  GST-induced turbulence, Tampa crisis, the “children overboard affair” as it’s being called, the  collapse of HIH and Ansett - but indeed for the world - September 11 has shaken our view of  ourselves. The rise and fall of the dot.com is part of our living memory and experience, and  now Enron, Worldcom and Zerox. Many industries and countries have seen their  fundamental way of operating, and their reason for being in business, called into question.  Many countries are in deep financial trouble; the world itself including the USA is arguably  on the brink of recession. 

  The world, or at least the developed world, has entered a new era. This new era  is one which 

  will be defined by globalisation, technology and communication, elimination of traditional  boundaries, and a strategic focus on the global market place. 

  But finally, people are people, and the choices they make will stem from their values. People  will continue to choose between spending money on sending their children to private schools,  going on holiday, renovating or upgrading their house, buying clothes, shoes, or cars. They  will make choices about doing something for society, or for their family, or for themselves.  They will choose their relationships with brands, organisations, communities and people. 

  12 

  In order to encourage philanthropy, charity and giving, it is essential to understand those  values to tap into them, and create opportunities to give, that resonate with those values, and  create relationships that enhance the link between the values and giving. 

  13 



  81) es ~ ~ e w ~ ~ ~ p e d  in conjunction with Coiin Benjamin of The Horizons 

  Visible Basic  Needs  A Fairer  ea1 

  Credit access  and alcohoVdrug  escapism  increase crime 

  rates at juvenile  level 

  Reduced life  satisfaction and  increased family  demands 

  lnternationalised  aspirations and  religious  orientation plus 

  expressive  action 

  Orientation to  high degrees of  turbulence “See 

  you in Sydney  for the  Olympics” 

  Commitment  to wide variety  of social  issues 

  especialiy the  environment 

  Segmentation of  lifestyles but  increased  awareness of 

  gap between  rich & poor 

  Educational  concerns for  their children 

  Feelings of  isolation and  insecurity 

  Increasing  longivity and  search for  meaning 

  Ageing/  Illness/Care 

  social 

  Technological  changes  are seen as  too much 

  too fast  and of  doubtful value 

  Global  intelligence  access and  integrated 

  orgware 

  Home  technology,  sophistication 

  Information  technology and  new generation  systems 

  Management  decisions  support systems 

  Health/leisure  integration 

  Entertainment/  ieisure systems  CAD/CAM  Systems 

  Medical  Technology Robotics 

  technology 

  I mproved  economic  situation through  tax, wage deals 

  and productivity  gains 

  Increasing  conversion of  home equity into  cash flow and 

  reinvestment in  lifestyle and  equities 

  Two income plus  households will  rise dramatically.  Consumption 

  will focus on  price and quality  leaders plus  feeling of control 

  High level of  commitment to  on-job training  and promotion 

  opportunities,  provided open to  the peer group 

  Public sector  focus on  service  delivering lead 

  to greater  devolution of  economic  activity 

  through  privatisation 

  Issue and  media related  political  concerns will 

  create shori  term  constituencies  and network 

  issues 

  Increasing  anxiety over  social security  and transfer 

  payment  changes 

  Strong shift to  incentivelrewar  d systems and  performance  recognition 

  l ncreasi ng  investment in  property and  franked dividend 

  oriented  companies 

  Career focus  and willingness  to defer  consumption for  long term benefit 

  increased self-  employment and  entrepreneurial  activity plus 

  strong export  orientation economics 

  The most rapidly  growing force for  conservatism  and social 

  control issues  with strong  pressure for  government  reguiation and  national security 

  Increasing  emergence of  single issue and  specialist 

  political  concerns that  express  personal politics 

  against party  machines 

  Corporate power  politics will be  more significant  than electoral 

  concerns.  Parliament will  decline as a  focus for  national debate 

  Reduced power  of traditional  organisations to  mobilise an  automised work 

  force 

  Taxation levels  and house  disposable  income will 

  shape the  direction of all  major parties 

  The big losers in  the ageing  debate.  Personal  freedom and 

  rights of the  individual wil!  emerge as  issues 

  Freedom and  control of big  business,  freedom lo 

  hire/fire will  produce  organisational  tensions 

  As with TFL,  these will be a  strong push for  greater political  powers and law 

  and order  sanctions 

  Increasing  power as  ageing issues  become the  prime focus of 

  the middle  income family 

  politics 

  lnfe~lecfual Property Holdings P/Lg 

  11 

  rgaff ~ a ~ ~ ~ S  s ~ g ~ ~ f f  tS (developed in conjunction with Colin Benjamin of The Horizons Network, 

  S o m e t ~ i n ~  

  Better 

  asic  Needs 

  Super-  annuation,  insurance policy  failures and 

  public health  provision and  community  safety concerns 

  Fairer  Deal 

  ~ r a ~ i t i o ~ a ~  

  Family Life 

  Safety  Peace 

  Law and Order  Decency  Self-Respect -  oriented care for 

  elderly  Lifelong  Education 

  C o n v e n t ~ o ~ a ~   Family Life 

  Greater  security of  Employment  Affordable  Health, Housing 

  and Education,  Personal Safety.  More  Entertainment 

  ea1 

  C o n s e ~ a t i s ~  

  Fear of reduction 

  Y o ~ n ~  

  Opt~mism 

  Safeguard  opportunities for  self-expression or  personal quest. 

  More emphasis  on spiritual  values.  Independence. 

  Choice in their  lives 

  Socially  ware 

  An end to  boredom and  “schooling” more  personal  freedom. Greater 

  range of “new”  and “exciting”  experiences 

  Conspicuous  consumption.  Material focus  soft on social  justice, liberal 

  isolation.  Arrogance, better  than others.  Disharmony, racial  tensions 

  Speed of change.  Working too hard.  Indifference to  social issues like 

  Aboriginality and  gender.  Multicareer  windows.  Lifestyle impact 

  of global  business.  Manage social  issues, not solve 

  True 

  multiculturalism  . Frustration  with yesterday  and today’s 

  solution.  Greater  community  rather than 

  business  orientation.  Greater equity  and anti- 

  poverty  concerns  Smart medical  solutions. 

  Ownership of  implementation  of technological  solutions. 

  Technology =  innovative  solutions and  expanded 

  creativity  supports  Tendency to  cash out. 

  Remove the  “hour glass”  structure.  Learning and 

  earning for  everyone.  Sustainable  environment  and controls 

  Too much  power in the  hands of large  business. 

  Greater  participation.  Pluralism.  Global politics. 

  Global issues  and local  service  systems  management 

  of barriers. Fear  of loss of any  control.  Maintenance of 

  social 

  stratification as  “natural order”.  Have/Have Not  conflict is 

  productive 

  Social equality.  Access  io  Education.  Control over  immigration and 

  population  expansion social 

  Person to person  contact  technologies,  health monitoring  and maintenance  technologies and 

  security systems 

  Fear of 

  technology taking  over jobs and  controlling our  lives. Access to 

  technology.  Better sports  coverage.  Technology doing 

  menial 

  workldrudgery 

  Better sound  systems.  Virtual reality.  Faster cars  Free to go. where 

  want  to go 

  Online access to  games and  infomatics 

  Business  opportunities they  represent. Global  business. 

  Privacy, security,  time.  Scepticism about  speed of intro. 

  Australia may be  left out. 

  Technology for its  own sake  has no value.  Technology 

  requires  evaluation. Only  use is to increase  comfort and 

  income. Agent of  change shouldn’t  provide the  agenda 

  Opportunity to  make money, get  ahead consumer  goods lifestyle 

  and 

  entertainment.  Improved  productivity.  Winners and  losers / Capital 

  and Labour 

  User supportive  and friendly, not  designed to trick  people. Home 

  delivered.  Minimise fuss.  Low charge. 

  Better home  appliances and  cars.  Use of 

  technology in  leisure.  Faster cheaper  transport. 

  Mastery of  technology  essential to  control their  involvement with 

  society at large  and opportunities  for earning a  living 

  “Silver hair  power”  focussing on  income security 

  and short term  community jobs  that maintain  self-respect 

  Travel 

  infrastructure.  More  entrepreneurial.  International  finance/or small.  Our people can’t 

  keep up.  Not jobs for all  Triad trade blocs 

  Family needs  focus.  System doesn’t  reward 

  bludgers.  User pays for  everything above  the basics 

  Free markets.  Survival of  the fittest.  Reduced  redistribution of 

  income. More  entrepreneurial  support 

  Asset protection  is essential for  economic  stability. 

  Protection of  personal wealth.  Fair days work for  fair days pay 

  Maintaining a  small population  to achieve  “Australian 

  Dream”  “Eat the rich”  Provide for  the aged 

  Provision of  medical services  and education.  Maintain separate 

  entity from rest  of world.  Give everyone a  say through  computer polling 

  Self-focussed.  Rewards for merit  and hard work.  The successful 

  will prosper, the  others go under.  Competence is  everything 

  Everyone  has a job  and a car.  Money for leisure. 

  No menial  jobs 

  Stable  economic  conditions.  Low prices and 

  taxation.  Greater choice in  consumables 

  Stability, minimal  change.  Reduction of  influence of 

  politicians.  Indifference to  claims for  diversity of  representatives 

  economics 

  “Grey Power”  voting block of  babyboomers  restructures the  political scene by 

  electing  networks of  minority interests 

  Politicians who  tell the truth.  Parties that  represent  conservative 

  values.  “Fear” driven  vision seeking  greater security 

  Ability to  influence local  politics and  greater freedom 

  from the  “Geriatrics”  running the  country 

  “Leave me alone  to get on with it”  “Not in my  backyard  Class differences. 

  Winners and  Losers OK.  Support for  powerful leaders 

  Valueless  Government  should be  entrusted to the  few that we can 

  influence.  Increased impact  of networking 

  Social order and  regulation to  preserve gains  and protect  territory. Strong, 

  clean, non-  interventionist  politics.  Somewhat naive. 

  Business is key  disinterested  politically.  Government is  too slow for real  world. Increasing  Asian influence in 

  all political  decisions 

  politics 

  ... 

  111 

