---
title: "Remember refugees at risk on World Refugee Day."
date: "2002-06-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211241322
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TRU66%22
---

  

  

 News Room

 Remember Refugees at Risk on World Refugee Day MPS 50/2002

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock urged Australians to use United Nations World Refugee Day to think of those refugees who languish in appalling conditions in refugee camps around the world and who still remain at risk.

 World Refugee Day was declared by a special UN General Assembly on 20 June 2001 as an expression of solidarity with Africa, which hosts most of the world's refugees.

 For many refugees in those camps, there is no prospect of going home, but their lives remain at risk and so resettlement programs such as run by Australia will be their only hope.

 With an annual program of 12,000 places, Australia is one of only nine countries that pro-actively seeks out refugees at risk and offers them sanctuary.

 More than 600,000 refugees and displaced people have been resettled in Australia since World War Two.

 In the past year, the top four countries of origin of people settled under the refugee and humanitarian program were Iran, Afghanistan, the former Yugoslavia and Sudan.

 Regional priority in the 2002-2003 Humanitarian Program will be given to Africa and the Middle East regions.

 The Australian Government is strongly committed to helping people who face serious abuses of their human rights, but we cannot let that commitment be determined by people smugglers.

 Our program cannot be determined on the basis of who has the resources or opportunity to confront us.

 Within the Humanitarian Program we will continue to give priority to people who are in the most vulnerable situations and have the greatest need for resettlement places.

 Rebuilding the lives of these people involves far more than securing permanent residence in Australia. They must be provided with support to help them become acquainted with the Australian way of life.

 Government settlement assistance programs are made available to help humanitarian entrants settle into the Australian community.

 20 June 2002

 Media Release Index

  

