---
title: "More detention centre unrest: time for Ruddock to get the children out."
date: "2002-04-20"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236315
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RJD66%22
---

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Australian Democrats Immigration Spokesperson

 20 April 2002                        MEDIA RELEASE                                     02/188

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 MORE DETENTION CENTRE UNREST - TIME FOR RUDDOCK TO GET THE CHILDREN OUT  

 

 The Australian Democrats have again called for an end to mandatory detention following further disturbances at the Curtin detention centre and revelations that guards who assaulted a 13 year old boy at Woomera last year have been reinstated in their jobs.  

 Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the incidents once again show that the management of our detention centres is out of control.  

 “Minister Ruddock must recognise that his detention regime has failed asylum seekers and failed the taxpayer,” said Senator Bartlett.  

 “Minister Ruddock is the responsible guardian for unaccompanied children in detention, such as the 13 year old Afghan boy who was assaulted, yet he seems willing to stand back and continue to allow children to be in danger, with a Centre Management which is obviously incapable of protecting their welfare.  

 “According to the report in today’s Age newspaper, the guards who assaulted the boy have been reinstated to their jobs by Australasian Correctional Management (ACM), despite earlier being sacked over the incident.  

 “It is clear that ACM is not able to properly run our detention centres and may well be contributing to the unrest that is occurring.  

 “The evidence of mismanagement and dangers to children is now overwhelming.  

 “These latest incidents come on top of the South Australian Government’s recent report into children at Woomera which clearly showed it is an unsuitable environment.  

 “Children and their families must be released from detention into community care immediately.  

 “This disgrace must end.  Minister Ruddock has a duty to the children under his care to act now,” concluded Senator Bartlett.  

 

 For further comment: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 07 3861 1041 or 0418 743 789

