---
title: "Nairn welcomes security of seventh Coalition Budget."
date: "2002-05-14"
creators:
  - "Nairn, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of NAIRN, GARY, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211237172
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9SCA6%22
---

 Gary Nairn MP  Federal Member for Eden-Monaro PO Box 232, Queanbeyan NSW 2620 Tollfree NSW 1800 041 539 Ph: (02) 6297 3952 Fax: (02) 6297 5768

 Press Release Ref: 664 Published: 14/5/2002 Title: Nairn Welcomes Security of Seventh Coalition Budget

 Federal Member for Eden-Monaro, Gary Nairn, today welcomed the seventh Budget of the  Coalition Government that will be delivering security for Australia into the future.

 “The Budget delivered by the Treasurer Peter Costello tonight will help keep Australia safe,  secure and our economy strong while delivering in full on all the Coalition’s election pledges,”  Mr Nairn said.

 “For the first time in Australian history the Budget includes an “Intergenerational Report” - which  provides to the Government and the people of Eden-Monaro a glimpse of the pressures to be  faced by Governments in forty year’s time.

 “The Budget estimates strong economic growth to continue at 3¾ per cent next year with a  Budget surplus of $2.1 billion, while unemployment is forecast to fall to 6 percent. We will have  repaid $61 billion of Labor Party debt by the end of next financial year, to one of the lowest  levels of Government debt in the industrialised world.

 “In the aftermath of September 11, greater resources are needed for the War Against Terrorism,  and the Government will greatly increase defence spending in 2002-2003 to be over $1.3 billion  higher than in 2000-2001, bringing total defence spending to $14.1 billion.

 “Defence spending is especially important, for in Eden-Monaro, there are (or will be) defence  establishments in three of its four corners, including the Defence Headquarters facility near  Queanbeyan, the Defence Service Centre in Cooma and the Multi Purpose Wharf and  Ammunitioning Facility in Eden.

 “We will spend an additional $1.3 billion over five years to upgrade security within Australia.  This new funding will create a second Australian Defence Force Tactical Assault Group, a  permanent incident response capability and double the Australian Federal Police’s Strike Team  capability.

 “Strong border protection is strongly supported by the people of Eden-Monaro, and the  Government will bolster its policy by increasing funding by $908 million over the next four years.

 “Our strong border protection is working, and there have been no unauthorised boat arrivals to  Australia since December last year.

 “Parents of small children in Eden-Monaro will receive tax relief through the Coalition’s 

 promised Baby Bonus. Available to parents of a child born on or after 1 July 2001, they can  receive up to a maximum of $2500 each year until the child turns five.

 “Aged people in Eden-Monaro will in the future require better residential and community care  services, and I am happy to say that the Coalition is delivering nationwide an additional 6,000  Community Aged Care Packages to address this demand. The Government is also boosting  funding for carers of older people and people with disabilities. The total new funding for aged  care and carers comes to $654 million over four years.

 “The Government is addressing health needs by spending an extra $80 million over four years  on doctors for outer metropolitan areas, while around $73 million will be spent over four years  establishing up to six new radiation oncology units in regional Australia.

 “From 1 July 2002, qualifying low-income earners who make personal superannuation  contributions and have annual incomes under $32,500 will benefit from the Government’s co-contribution of up to $1,000 each year. Also, self-employed people will be able to claim a full tax  deduction for up to $5,000 of superannuation contributions compared to $3,000 currently.

 “Veterans in Eden-Monaro who are 70 years old and have qualifying service will be given the  Gold Card, enabling them to access the full range of repatriation health care benefits. The  Government has also decided to index the ceiling rate for the War Widows’ Income Support  Supplement twice yearly, which will ensure payments to lower income war widows keep pace  with other pensions.

 “The Government has also decided to further encourage the apprenticeship system by  providing a subsidy to employers of $1,100 for each new apprentice attending a training course  in new and emerging areas of industry. This measure is expected to assist 25,000 new  apprentices over four years.

 “The Howard Government is committed to providing security for this nation into the future:  security in the knowledge we are not spending beyond our means, security in the knowledge  that we will be able to cope with the pressures of an aging population, and in these times of 

 international insecurity, security in the knowledge that our borders are protected.” 

 

