---
title: "Parliament House, Canberra: transcript of doorstop interview [kids overboard]"
date: "2002-02-14"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of BEAZLEY, KIM, MP"
subjects:
  - "kids overboard"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234208
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HRX56%22
---

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - KIM BEAZLEY, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 14 FEBRURARY 2002

 E& OE

 BEAZLEY: Just like old times -- and I’m not going to miss them.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, do you feel robbed in the light of these revelations about the ‘kids overboard’?

 BEAZLEY: You don’t have to lie to protect your borders.  You don’t have to lie to make a case, but you need mandatory detention for people who may have come to this country illegally so you can do proper health checks before you properly process them.

 This Government has lied on both fronts.  Before the election and since the election.  It is a government who’s legitimatacy is now destroyed.  This is not a conservative government.  A conservative government respects integrity.  A conservative government is honest with the people.  A conservative government does not exploit the military for political purposes.  This is not a conservative government - it is a political gang.  We are run by a political gang.  A gang without honour.  A gang without honesty and we know from the Governor General’s speech a gang without a plan for Australians.

 JOURNALIST: Were you angry when you sat down and read that report?

 BEAZLEY: That report is revealing of the style of this Government. Don’t think for one minute that only one Minister knew.  Take a look at the handling by Ministers of the issue when it first fell into their hands.

 They were strong on the issue - vigorous on the issue - knowing that there was political advantage in it for them.  Within two days the Ministers - all of them, not just Reith - all the Ministers were strangely quiet.  All of them. Now that suggests to me that, whatever the paper trail, the verbal indication was that that statement they so magnificently kicked off their election campaign with, the vigour with which they pursued it, was in fact based on false premises - and they knew it.

 JOURNALIST: Do you regret not asking more questions about it with hindsight?

 BEAZLEY: In an election campaign you have to get all of your issues up and out there.  And let’s make no mistake about this.  The Government wanted that issue discussed because there is a simple commonsense position, of course.  You can have a respectable view about how you protect your borders.  You don’t have to demonise those who come to your country illegally.  Some of them come with good reasons some of them don’t.  You

 2

 don’t have to make a point about their characters.  It is a pristine, ordinary routine business of government that you protect your borders normally.  The case is impeccable; nobody disagrees with it.  The question here is the integrity with which it is pursued, and the further question is: why did they feel it so necessary to demonise the refugees?  Well, they needed to demonise them for their own political purposes.  Just like they needed to use the military for their own political purposes.

 Now when you are in an election campaign -- and you argue that it can often seem hair splitting -- I mean that’s the point, you are arguing about a style as opposed to substance.  And at the same time you have got to talk to the Australian people about all of the great national issues.

 But I think one thing too, and this is what gets to me about all of this -- I’m experienced in defence matters.  I was Defence Minister for five years or so. And I assume that when a statement is made authoritively;  it’s made in a way I used to when I was Defence Minister.  Where raw intelligence and hearsay has been debriefed of the participants, the participants have been debriefed and they have all the material available to them and a report goes to the Minister.  So the document off which the minister operates in public is a document that has been fully tested by all the trained debriefers in the Department of Defence.  And, frankly, I assumed that was the sort of document that the Government had to hand.  Of course, the Government knew immediately that it was not the document that they had to hand and they just lied and misled us.  .

 JOURNALIST: …I wasn’t told.  Is that good enough?

 BEAZLEY: Well, look, fellas, the media went through this last election campaign giving the Government a big cheerio.  The people who have been misled are not only the Australian people, it’s the people who reported on that election campaign.  Do your worst.

 JOURNALIST: …cheat you out of a chance at the Lodge?

 BEAZLEY: I am not a grizzler and I am not a complainer and I move on.  But where do we move on from this?  Well we move on knowing this: this Government has got no legitimacy and this Government has got no plan. And this Government will be taken apart by the Opposition piece by piece for the next three years.  Sad thing for Australia, of course, to have a government as dishonourable as this but these things have happened before. The good thing is, in a democracy, in three years time you can deal with this gang.

 JOURNALIST: So you don’t feel deprived of the Leadership …?

 BEAZLEY: I have said enough, mate. Ends.

