---
title: "Democrats: ALP's new refugee policy still has a long way to go."
date: "2002-02-05"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211233990
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YRU56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 05 February 2002      MEDIA RELEASE                          02/043

 Democrats: ALP’s new refugee policy still has a long way to go The ALP needs to do more to address the growing religious, political, community, media and global criticisms of the Howard Government’s refugee policy, according to the Australian Democrats.

 Democrats’ Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said despite Opposition Leader, Simon Crean, flagging a change to Labor’s refugee policy aimed at balancing fairness and compassion, the ALP will continue to support mandatory detention, while seeking further restrictions on the right of claimants to appeal decisions.

 “The ALP’s so-called new compassionate refugee policy still has a long way to go to distinguish itself from the Government’s harsh, expensive and unworkable policy,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Mr Crean and the shadow Cabinet must listen to the growing number of ALP MPs and members decrying mandatory detention of asylum seekers, particularly children.

 “Under International conventions which Australia has ratified, detention of asylum seekers is only to be used as a last resort. It must be brief, absolutely necessary and only instituted after all other options have been implemented.

 “The request from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to send a special envoy to Australia to inspect conditions at the Woomera Detention Centre shows how serious the issue is. Australia must agree to this if we are to have any credibility in advocating human rights on the world stage.

 “Processing of claimants and asylum seekers should not, and need not, mean detention.

 “Reportedly, in the past two years alone, around 16 000 people who arrived in Australia with visas made claims for asylum; only 2 000 were successful. However, none of these people were forced to endure mandatory detention, instead they were issued with bridging visas while their claims were assessed.

 “Australia is unique in the world for locking up asylum seekers for indefinite periods of time. Having asylum seekers monitored, but living in the community would be cheaper for the taxpayer and a lot more compassionate and fair,” concluded Senator Bartlett. ENDS

 For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

