---
title: "Australian Democrats' anniversary celebrations: next stop - Brisbane."
date: "2002-06-14"
creators:
  - "Ridgeway, Aden"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of RIDGEWAY, SEN ADEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239673
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YBS66%22
---

 Senator Aden Ridgeway  Deputy Leader of the Australian Democrats Spokesperson on Reconciliation

 14 JUNE 2002              MEDIA RELEASE                             02/307

 http://www.democrats.org.au/

 `

 Australian Democrats’ Anniversary Celebrations: Next Stop - Brisbane

 Tonight is Brisbane’s turn for the travelling speakers series celebrating the Australian Democrats’ 25th anniversary in Australian politics.

 Ms Jackie Huggins, Deputy Director of the University of Queensland’s Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Unit and Co-chair of Reconciliation Australia, will deliver her speech, 25 Years of the Politics of Indigenous Rights, at the State Library Theatrette tonight at 6pm.

 A  widely  published  author  and  academic,  Ms  Huggins  has  had  a  lifelong  involvement  in Queensland  Aboriginal  politics  starting  with  her  mother’s  activism  leading  up  to  the  1967 referendum.

 “I  take  a  non-partisan  approach  to  politics,  but  the  record  shows  the  Australian  Democrats  have always acted on their word when it comes to Indigenous issues in the Federal Parliament,” said Ms Huggins.

 Deputy Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Aden Ridgeway, will be in Brisbane tonight to introduce Ms Huggins’ lecture.

 Senator Ridgeway said he had originally joined the Australian Democrats because of their approach to Indigenous Affairs.

 “When I joined the Democrats in 1990, they were the only political party to support national land rights, a treaty, increased support for health, housing and education and protection of cultural rights and Indigenous heritage,” said Senator Ridgeway.

 “Being  in  Queensland  tonight,  I  also  remember  the  only  other  Indigenous  politician  who  walked before  me  through  the  doors  of  the  Federal  Parliament,  Sir  Neville  Bonner,  and  his  struggle  to represent the views of Indigenous people within a major party.”

 As a part of the Democrats’ 25th anniversary, each capital city will host a speech on topics in which the Democrats have played a significant political role in the past 25 years.

 Tonight’s Brisbane speech follows on from similar events held in Melbourne, Perth and Canberra on 25 years of anti-nuclear politics, refugee politics and women in politics.

 Contact:    Liz Willis     0414 876 152

