---
title: "Melbourne High School, South Yarra, Vic: transcript of doorstop interview: Australia's bid for World Cup Soccer, Iraq, asylum seekers."
date: "2002-08-05"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245971
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/T1476%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE HIGH SCHOOL, SOUTH YARRA, VIC, 5 AUGUST 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Australia’s bid for World Cup Soccer, Iraq, asylum seekers

 JOURNALIST: Are you in favour of the World Cup bid?

 CREAN: I am and John Howard should stop playing politics with it, he should get behind the bid.  It’s a great opportunity for Australia to show itself to the rest of the world again.

 JOURNALIST: Does Soccer Australia need to clean up its own act first though?

 CREAN: All organisations, if there are difficulties within them need to clean up their act.  I’m doing it with the Labor Party.  I’m modernising the Labor Party.  Soccer Australia should do likewise.

 JOURNALIST: What do they need to do?

 CREAN: Well, that’s a matter for people more expert in the field. But if the criticisms are around, they’ve got to meet them, they’ve got to address them.  They can’t sweep them under the carpet.  But I’m sure that if the will is there, there will be a way through.

 JOURNALIST: … Labor Party …

 CREAN: I am determined to pursue the path of reform in the Labor Party.  It’s not just about reforming the way the Labor Party does business, it’s the way we deal with politics in this country.  We have to be more inclusive.  We have to listen more and act on people’s needs and respond accordingly.  That’s what reform of the Labor Party is about but it’s a much wider message for the rest of the community.

 JOURNALIST: … reform.  What’s the consequence of that?

 2

 CREAN: The internal issues will continue to bubble along.  There are people that don’t like change but I’m determined to achieve it.  I will persist in my task. I will continue to have discussions with people to bring them on board

 JOURNALIST: Are you worried it’s going to cost you your leadership?

 CREAN: Not at all.

 JOURNALIST: … aborted foetuses for stem cell …  I think, currently, there’s no law against it in Australia.  What’s your view?

 CREAN: I haven’t seen those comments, I must say.  I’d just need to take that on notice.

 JOURNALIST: Can I make the move to Iraq? It’s sort of moving along at the moment but John Howard said that it’s more probable than not that Australia will join an attack.

 CREAN: Well, I wish the Prime Minister would just have a cool head in this matter rather than a hot head.  I think that we’ve got to try and get the UN weapons inspectors back in there.  After all, the concern with Iraq is essentially about their capacity with weapons of mass destruction.  There is a UN process in place.  That needs to be exhausted and I think that there are encouraging signs, they need to be pursued, but there are encouraging signs that UN weapons inspectors may be let back in.  They should be and we should persist in that task.  I also heard someone in the Congress today saying the US understands that it has to make its case.  That’s exactly what I’ve been calling for.  If the circumstances justify it, we would support action. But we’re not going to be drummed into this on the basis of hype by the Prime Minister.  It needs proper consideration and as I’ve also said, that if this decision is as important as it is, then we would want the Parliament to debate it.  I think that’s appropriate as well.

 JOURNALIST: At what point would you expect to be consulted?

 CREAN: Well, we have been consulted.  I had the opportunity when I was in the States to talk with the Department of Defense, to talk with the CIA, to talk with military officials.  They’re not talking in the same language as John Howard is.  I’ve indicated a preparedness to consider all information put to us.   That’s an open invitation.  And I would urge that approach - not talking up the issue, but talking it through.

 JOURNALIST: Why does John Howard use the language he’s using?

 CREAN: Well, I thought that he believes that he can get some mileage politically from it and I think it’s a very dangerous game to play.  It

 3

 requires consideration, not hype.  It requires assessment of the facts, not just talking up the rhetoric.  And I would urge the Prime Minister to have, and take, proper counsel, be prepared to talk with us about it, and let’s consider this together in the interests of the nation, not just his political standing.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, the standoff among the Democrats, what’s your …?

 CREAN: Well, I see that their Leader has given Andrew Murray some more time.  I guess we just have to wait for that extra time.  Time out, time on, I don’t know what it is, but she’s aiming at a resolution and she’s in charge of the Democrats.

 JOURNALIST: If they break up, the Government seems to be winning and you will lose some support.

 CREAN: That remains to be seen.  Certainly, if there are more Independents it gives the Government more options but it gives us more options too.  I think anyone would be crazy brave to predict what the Senate would do even if there were more defections from the Democrats.

 JOURNALIST: The asylum seekers are very popular with the young people today.  Do you think John Howard and the Federal Government is reading the mood of the community wrong?

 CREAN: I think they’re reading the mood of the community wrongly, but most importantly, they’ve got the policy wrong.  The mood of the community is one for balance.  They see the country as having been tolerant of migrants and of people in difficulty, but at the same time we should have the right to choose who comes to this country and the circumstances under which they’re considered for entry into this country.  It’s the balance that John Howard hasn’t got right and I think that the ‘Pacific Solution’ has turned out to be a very costly exercise and has not achieved the results that they said it would.  The most important thing that the students were interested in was the circumstances and conditions under which people are held in detention.  I indicated to them that I support the fact that people who arrive without papers, without security checks, and the like, do need to be held in detention.  But we can speed up the time it takes to assess their claim and we can review the conditions under which people are held.  That, I believe, is the direction of the policy shift that we need to take.

 JOURNALIST: You’ve said that John Howard’s policy is wrong but you just about used the same words then that he did in the election campaign, “we decide who comes to our country and the manner in which they come”.

 CREAN: I don’t disagree with that for one moment.  Of course a country has to decide who comes here and how they come.  That’s what’s called sovereignty.  That’s the country having to ensure that it’s not an open-

 4

 door policy with all the risks that that entails.  But where I think John Howard has got it wrong is that the conditions under which people are held and the length of time it takes to process them and almost approaching it in a unilateral way, I think it needs an international solution and that, I don’t believe, they’ve persisted hard enough with.  That will be another direction of policy change that I’ll be announcing.

 ends

