---
title: "Address to ALP Southern Regional Brisbane conference: think big, Labor: it's what we do best"
date: "2002-04-07"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, INDUSTRY, TRADE AND TOURISM"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211235845
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OZ966%22
---

 1

 ADDRESS TO ALP SOUTHERN REGIONAL BRISBANE CONFERENCE

 SUNDAY 7 APRIL 2002, 9.00AM

 By Craig Emerson

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY

 Think big, Labor: it’s what we do best

 Any Australian returning from overseas will tell you this is the greatest nation on earth.  Though Australia is a great country we can be even better.  We can be more prosperous.  We can certainly be a lot fairer.

 While up to three-quarters of the population has shared in the gains from a decade of record growth in prosperity, millions of Australian families have missed out.

 Australia’s prosperity did not happen by accident, though some of it has been by good fortune.  Australia has indeed been the Lucky Country.

 But at times our luck has run out.  The nation has been in a lot of trouble before, during the Second World War and through economic crises that have threatened our capacity to chart our own destiny.

 Our luck can run out again.

 Australia ’s greatest internal threat in this, the Federal Government’s self-proclaimed Golden Age, is complacency.

 Australia as the Lucky Country came to a shuddering halt in the mid-1980s when primary commodity prices collapsed.  The folly of government policies promoting Australia as a farm, a quarry and a producer of low-value manufactures was exposed through a balance of payments crisis, though the Hawke Government had already begun implementing a program of modernising the Australian economy.

 Australia needed to change from the Lucky Country to a clever country.  From the early 1980s Labor had recognised that almost all of the differences in the wealth of nations could be traced to differences in the rate of productivity growth.

 Productivity increases can be achieved by working harder or working smarter through the development and application of new ideas.

 Australia can choose its own destiny.  The choice is between a race to the bottom by cutting labour costs on traditional primary commodity and standardised manufactured exports, or a race to the top by becoming a high-skill, high-wage knowledge society.

 Australia’s productivity growth through the second half of the 1990s has been faster than that of almost all developed countries and twice as fast as Australian productivity growth of the previous 30 years.

 2

 The Productivity Commission attributes most of the recent dramatic improvement in Australia’s productivity performance to the protection-reducing, competition-enhancing micro-economic reforms undertaken over the period when Labor took office in 1983 through the 1990s.

 Since Australia is performing well in quickly and effectively absorbing enabling technologies developed overseas, the Government seems to consider no major new policies are needed to hasten Australia’s transition to a knowledge society.  New industry minister, Ian Macfarlane, has declared:

 “Sure we’d love to do more, we’d love to spend more money … but we’ve got the balance pretty right for R & D” (Australian Financial Review, 29 January 2002, p. 7).

 If Australia relies on the present policy settings and the rapid absorption of overseas innovations, we might get lucky again.  The rate of overseas innovation might be sufficient to maintain Australian productivity growth for some time.  But the Productivity Commission cautions:

 “… part of Australia’s productivity surge appears to stem from a process of catching up to the production standards of other countries.  As these standards are approached, it is probable that the rate of growth of productivity will slow somewhat from the high rates witnessed in recent years”.

 Just as it was foolish to rely for too long on Australia being the Lucky Country, so would it be foolish for the Federal Government to wait until Australia’s luck in absorbing overseas innovations runs out.

 What a tragically wasted opportunity it would be if an Australian leader had to declare later this decade that the nation was once again in deep trouble because governments in the late 1990s and early 2000s had failed to support vital sources of productivity growth such as innovation and education.

 The Australian people deserve a good Government.  And they deserve a good Opposition.

 The Labor Opposition should discharge its obligations to the Australian people, not just as an effective Opposition but as an excellent alternative government.

 Labor Leader Simon Crean has declared that he wants the Labor Opposition to be defined not by what we oppose but by what we propose; he wants Labor to be a positive Opposition.  And isn’t that what the Australian people are crying out for: a positive, constructive Opposition that nevertheless will expose the Government’s deficiencies by holding it to account?

 There is a clear and present danger in Labor simply becoming an effective Opposition.  By taking that course, Labor can create a political equilibrium, a stable state.  Labor can oppose all of the worst excesses of a conservative Government,

 3

 blocking its harshest legislation in the Senate, saving the people from the Government they elected.

 What could be more stable than that?

 Labor faces this fundamental choice: do we want to be known as an effective Opposition that blocks the Government’s program (such as it is) or as an excellent alternative government?

 I’m in favour of becoming an excellent alternative government.

 Being an effective Opposition could land Labor in government.  The Coalition Government might fall apart or external economic conditions might cause its demise.

 By being an excellent Opposition, Labor would be well positioned to capitalise on the Government’s mistakes or misfortune.

 But we will have developed no program for government, nothing to stir the Australian spirit.

 By opposing for the sake of opposing, Labor will have let Australia down badly.

 Of course, Labor must oppose Government legislation that breaches basic principles of human decency and freedoms.  When the Government brought into the House a Border Protection Bill that legalised murder, Labor did not hesitate to vote it down on principle.

 We of the Labor Party knew we would pay a very high electoral price for our principled stand.  Our polling showed a loss of 30 seats as a vengeful electorate interpreted our opposition to the legislation as political opportunism.  How strange, now, that many in the Party and most in the media condemn Labor for having had the same position on asylum seekers as the Coalition when we knowingly and deeply prejudiced our election chances by sticking to our principles and opposing the original Border Protection Bill!

 That is now past, but I have no regrets that we of the Labor Party stuck to our principles.

 But let us be realistic about the task ahead of us.

 This Government, having succeeded spectacularly in wedging Labor on a matter of race - on a matter of principle - will not hesitate to do so again.

 Under these new rules of political engagement, where a morally unconstrained Coalition will launch assault after assault against Labor to wedge us against the wall on matters of principle, we should acknowledge this reality: in the post-War era, Labor has taken government from only two conservative Prime Ministers - Billy McMahon and Malcolm Fraser.

 4

 Billy McMahon has been universally voted as Australia’s worst post-War Prime Minister.  He was defeated by a charismatic Labor Leader in Gough Whitlam after 23 consecutive years of Coalition rule.

 Malcolm Fraser was defeated in his fourth election by a dominant and charismatic trade union leader in Bob Hawke in the midst of an economic recession.

 But Labor’s wins in 1975 and 1983 were secured not because Labor was seen as an effective Opposition but because Labor was judged to be an attractive alternative government.

 The Whitlam Program captured the imagination of the Australian people: an end to Conscription and Australia’s involvement in the Vietnam War, no-fee university education, better schools, universal health insurance cover through Medibank, sewering of the suburbs and the establishment of growth centres in regional Australia to take the pressure off our capital cities.

 So, too, did the Hawke Government have a strong agenda, based on the three R’s: reconciliation from the conservative era of pitting Australian against Australian, recovery from the economic recession of the early 1980s, and restructuring of the Australian economy away from a protected domestic market to open international markets.

 For Labor it is simply untrue that ‘oppositions don’t win elections, governments lose them’.  Labor oppositions must win elections, based on a well-developed and well-communicated agenda for government.

 Labor should be bold and adventurous - it is what we do best.  When we simply oppose the Government there is no vent for the passions that caused us to be attracted to the Labor Party in the first place.

 Labor should not be small.

 Labor must be big!

 Suggestions that we live in a post-ideological era are an admission in part that the major political parties have failed to inspire the people.

 Australians will unite behind a progressive political party and support its agenda if they believe it is principled, competent and has the nation’s best interests at heart.

 Suburban Australians will accept of a principled, economically competent and visionary ALP those individual parts of our agenda with which they might disagree - such as progressive policies on asylum seekers, Aboriginal reconciliation and an Australian republic.

 Labor’s agenda must be so breathtaking in its dimensions that it overwhelms the Coalition’s future endeavours in wedge politics.

 5

 Wedge politics works best when there is a political vacuum, when the community is apprehensive about the future, when there is no sense of vision of where the nation should be heading.  These are the ideal conditions for a conservative government to pit Australian against Australian, in the worst traditions of Toryism to demonise as threats to society particular groups in the community, whether they be asylum seekers, Muslims, Aborigines or trade unions.

 So what is an agenda so breathtaking, so exciting, so unifying?

 It must be an agenda that is truly nation building in its dimensions.

 But there is little point in embarking on a program of nation building if there is no shared view of the sort of nation we wish to become.  We would be busily assembling pieces of a meccano set with no idea of what the final structure would look like and no purpose to its construction - other than looking active.

 Now into its second century as a nation, Australia has a more confused sense of where it is heading than perhaps ever before.  Rather than coming to a shared view on where the future direction the nation should take, we have not yet settled whether there ought to be such a thing as a vision for this country.

 Under the heading of vision, the Government’s Chief Scientist has declared that Australia stands at the crossroads - it can continue to do what it has done in the past and continue to slip behind other countries or it can take a bold step and move to a knowledge society.

 Knowledge - and the innovation that translates knowledge into economic growth -have become the most important determinants of the wealth of nations, much more so than natural resources, labour and physical capital.

 Knowledge is accumulated and passed on through learning.  Australia cannot be a knowledge society without a world-class education and training system.  When almost four in 10 boys attending government schools drop out before completing high school and with our universities are being starved of funds, we are a long way off the pace being set by the leading OECD countries.

 That is not to say that Australians should become a nation of breatharians, living on intangibles alone.  Knowledge and innovation ought to be used not only in the delivery of services - they can enhance the viability of Australian manufacturing and primary industries that produce the tangible goods we use and export every day.

 Any vision of Australia’s future must extend well beyond the sort of economy Australia should become, but the economy is an important starting point.

 At least five reports relaying the views of Australian industry in the last few years have lamented the lack of a vision for the Australian economy.  This is hardly surprising, since the best of modern businesses use vision statements as a core tool of management planning.

 6

 Australia was one of the wealthiest nations on earth at the birth of its nationhood a century ago.  Now we rank well down the OECD ladder - though part of that low ranking is attributable to the low value of the Australian dollar when converted to US dollars for purposes of international comparisons.

 But the low Australian dollar is itself a product of a global verdict on our poor progress in making the transition to a knowledge economy.

 While the ‘super competitive exchange rate’ (to use Treasurer Costello’s description) has assisted Australian exporters, at the centenary of nationhood Australia is a less export-oriented economy than it was 100 years ago.

 As international prices for Australia’s traditional primary commodity exports have declined during the century of Federation, the nation has failed to produce sufficient high-value manufacturing and service exports to fully take up the slack.

 The economy part of the vision is that in the year twenty-twenty Australia is a true trading nation, a successful exporter of high-value manufactured goods and services that provide secure and rewarding jobs to those who produce them.

 Having taken this high road to high-value exports, Australia in twenty-twenty has made the transition from the Lucky Country to a clever country.

 In the year twenty-twenty Australians have recognised that a divided society is a dangerous society - that those who are excluded from the prosperity of a knowledge economy can become angry and resentful, taking what they can get, carving out their own sub-cultures, turning to violence, using illicit drugs and stealing from affluent neighbourhoods to finance their habits.

 Australians in the year twenty-twenty also acknowledge that creating scapegoats - Aboriginal people and refugees - is no way forward.  They acknowledge that Australia is a nation of immigrants and that, in the face of plummeting domestic fertility rates, future enrichment of the nation will depend on a vigorous immigration program, including a generous refugee component.

 At the same time Australians will literally be much older.  Marvellous medical advances will have lifted life expectancy towards 100.  Older Australians will have their skills in the workforce properly recognised.  So too will their unpaid work be recognised, helping to bring up grandchildren and providing voluntary services to the community.

 And Australia’s natural environment will be well appreciated.  Unsustainable land-clearing activities will have been halted, salinity will have been arrested and Australia’s booming tourism industry will be living off the environmental interest, not the capital.

 Finally, the international community will have countered terrorism in all its forms in a more just global society.

 7

 So here is one twenty-twenty vision for Australia: a nation prosperous and self-confident in the world, imbued with a deep sense of fairness, understanding and enjoying a multicultural society, where indigenous and non-indigenous cultures are reconciled, respecting older Australians as wise elders, a country of magnificent natural splendour and free of terror and oppression.

 Others will have different views on what should constitute a vision for the nation.  I encourage them to enter the debate, for it is vital to get it right.

 Still others (the Prime Minister among them) will argue there is no need for an Australian vision.  They will argue that the economy is and should be nothing more than an amalgam of individual businesses, each working to maximise profits, an invisible hand guiding the animal spirits of personal self interest to create a strong economy.

 To seek a vision for Australia is not to deny the strength and value of market forces. It is not central planning.  It is a desire to harness the power of the market, or as I said in my first parliamentary speech, to harness the rampant bull.

 Thinking big about a vision for the nation is the vital first step.  That first step then needs to be followed by a series of further steps on the journey to making the vision a reality.

 The second step is to develop a plan for the nation.

 It should be a plan not from a central planning agency but from the business world, from employee groups, from demographers and economists, from engineers and scientists, from academics and conservationists and most importantly from the community at large.

 It should be a plan based on a realistic appreciation of where market forces are taking Australia, of the evolving geographic dispersal of market forces both globally and nationally.

 Australia’s future strength globally will be as a high-skill, high-wage economy, an innovative nation that applies those innovations to its more traditional primary production and manufacturing processes as well as to service industries such as biotechnology, information and communications technology, nanotechnology and, of course, education and tourism.

 When a product of Australia becomes standardised, production facilities will tend to shift offshore in search of a larger scale of production or lower labour costs.  The imperative of Australian industry will be to innovate or perish.

 Within Australia the geographic location of industry is changing.  When I was studying at Sydney University in the mid-1970s I could see the smokestack of a lead smelter from the train to Redfern.  The smelter has long gone, but just as market forces, environmental pressures and rising land prices drove the lead smelter from inner Sydney, so new market forces will drive industries out of the Sydney basin in the coming decades.

 8

 Modern new metal smelting, refining and fabricating facilities are being established in regional centres such as Gladstone, Townsville and Newcastle.

 And with the phasing down of tariff protection that locked much of Australia’s traditional manufacturing industries into locations in Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide, new manufacturing investment is becoming more footloose.  New small and medium sized manufacturing facilities are springing up in larger regional centres.

 Yet most residents would consider the Sydney basin to be at its population capacity. Ask the residents of the Sydney basin whether they want a bigger or smaller population and the answer will be smaller.

 But ask the residents of the regional growth centres whether they want a bigger or smaller population in their local areas and the answer will invariably be bigger.

 So let’s think big.

 Let’s analyse where market forces are taking the nation both globally and in terms of geographic dispersal of emerging industries within the nation.

 That market forces are leading to a geographic dispersal of Australian industry is a good thing, for they can take the pressure off the Sydney basin.

 A growing population in regional Australia would be supported by most of us.  How can governments support this naturally evolving pattern of development?

 Businesses, residents and migrants considering locating in regional centres will have much to gain in terms of incomes and lifestyle, but also may feel they have something to lose - whether it be a loss in the quality of schools and medical services, skill shortages, or inadequate transport and communications networks and associated travelling and freight times to major capital cities and abroad.

 Here is a marvellous opportunity to converge a positive population, industry and infrastructure policy to develop a plan for Australia.

 By identifying and removing bottlenecks in social and economic infrastructure in regional centres, we can encourage a population shift from the over-crowded Sydney basin and possibly Melbourne to the dynamic centres of regional Australia.

 Governments do not need to fund all of the infrastructure.  The private sector would be keen if it knew there was a plan.  In consultation with industry, governments could identify the infrastructure requirements of the plan through what Simon Crean calls a whole-of-governments approach.

 Environmental constraints on an expanded population in these regional centres would need to be identified and addressed.

 And immigration could become an important part of boosting population and economic activity in regional centres.  Already there is a capacity in the regulated

 9

 professions (most notably in medical general practice) to offer permanent residency to professionals who agree to practice outside of the major population centres.

 Another possibility is for family reunion procedures to be revised to encourage migrants to live in regional Australia.  Family reunion could have a points component like skilled migration.  Families living in regional Australia could receive more points for applications for family reunion.

 A plan based on a positive industry, infrastructure and population policy would facilitate the transition to a high-skill, high-wage society, accelerate it and shape it in socially desirable and environmentally sensitive ways.  It would engender a sense of national purpose, of national unity that overwhelms the Government’s divisive policies and politics.

 It would give Labor supporters something big, bold and adventurous to believe in and to support.

 It would be truly nation building on a scale not seen since the Snowy Mountains project of the Chifley Labor Government.

 Let us embark on nothing less than a plan to build a modern Australia, a modern nation and a just society.

 Let’s think big!

