---
title: "Treasury Place, Melbourne: transcript of press conference: briefing on the further excision of Australian territory; asylum seekers; the government's relationship with Indonesia; free trade agreement; PM's trip to US; membership of the ICC; medical indemnity\nInsurance."
date: "2002-06-14"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239644
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EVR66%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

 TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE - TREASURY PLACE, MELBOURNE, 14TH JUNE 2002

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY

 Subjects: Briefing on the further excision of Australian Territory; asylum seekers; the Government’s relationship with Indonesia; Free Trade Agreement; PM’s trip to US; membership of the ICC; Medical Indemnity Insurance

 CREAN: As you know I’ve been calling for the briefing that we’ve had today for some time, since last Friday in fact when we first learnt that the government was intending to excise islands on our northern borders as part of the battle against people smugglers. I welcome the fact that we’ve finally had this briefing and it was a very useful briefing. I want to say at the outset that the Labor Party remains firmly committed to us being tough on border protection and supporting constructive proposals that deter people smugglers. We’re impressed with the briefing to the extent to which the Federal Police, the Defence forces and other agencies, their efforts have seen a significant deterrence in the flow of people through people smugglers to Australia and I congratulate the authorities for the way in which they have stepped up the effort and the way in which they have acted as a deterrent.

 In essence I sought the briefing to answer a number of fundamental questions, which are important with us responding to one specific element that the Government has put forward, the excision.  Those questions essentially were these; how does this measure strengthen the deterrence effort? Secondly, why won’t this measure act as a magnet for the people smugglers to just head for the mainland of Australia? And how will this measure prevent further boat departures towards Australia? Now nothing I’ve heard today convinces me that excision will deter the people smugglers and accordingly, I’ll be recommending to the Caucus next week that Labor opposes the excision measures.

 Having said that, we also explored in the meeting, other initiatives that can be taken to deter the people smugglers and there are important ways in which we can strengthen protocols and understandings with Indonesia to prevent people smugglers sending asylum seekers towards Australia. We also

 2

 believe that we need to develop better international understandings as to how processing of asylum seekers be undertaken. In particular, seeking protocols that process asylum seekers at country of first asylum. I stand ready to work with the Government to implement and legislate necessary changes to achieve these sorts of outcomes. I’m committed to working with the Government to strengthen border protection but I’m not convinced that this new measure announced by the Government with no consultation will prevent people smugglers heading towards Australia.

 JOURNALIST: Can you just explain about when you said that it might act as a magnet for smugglers just to come straight to the mainland?

 CREAN: Essentially if you look at the map the islands, and there are something like three thousand of them, caught up in the excision order, some of those islands are mere kilometres from the mainland. What’s to prevent a boat headed to one of those islands going the extra couple of kilometres and landing on the mainland? That’s the point, and if in fact the deterrence is to stop people coming to Australia, coming to Australian soil, mere excision isn’t going to act as that deterrent. It just draws people to the mainland, the non-excised areas. That’s the point.

 JOURNALIST: Does this make Labor look as though you have a softer attitude to the problem of asylum seekers than the Government?

 CREAN: We have an absolute commitment to toughening our border security. That’s why I’ve consistently argued for us reaching agreements with the Indonesians in particular, for protocols to return people who are found, subsequently, not to be refugees, genuine refugees. It’s why I’ve argued for an international framework, under the auspices of the UNHCR, for us being part of a global solution to the processing of asylum seekers. It’s why I’ve argued for the strengthening of our border protection through a coast guard. I’m absolutely committed to us being tough on border protection. What I’m not prepared to support is measures taken in isolation, which don’t add to that deterrence and may in fact weaken our resolve. How do you make yourself stronger on border protection by cutting off part of the country and drawing people closer to the mainland? That’s really what’s at issue here.

 JOURNALIST: Aside from that concern, do you have any concerns about that the signal it sends to inhabitants of those islands (inaudible) second class citizens? 

 CREAN: Well there are those issues and they have been raised by a number of representative community groups. The big concern though is the lack of consultation with those groups. And there’s also the concern that there wasn’t consultation, proper consultation with the State and Territory Governments as well. Now why is it that the Government saw the need to do this on Friday without consultation? It’s taken us a week to get any

 3

 explanation as to the need and nothing in that explanation convinces me that what’s proposed will act as a deterrent.

 JOURNALIST: Did you get an explanation for the lack of consultation?

 CREAN: Well essentially they said they had to act quickly, but when you say why wasn’t there effective consultation, they haven’t got an answer. And we know that this was a Government that was ramping up the issue in the Parliament over the last week. We also know that it was aware of certain circumstances in advance of last week, why wasn’t it raised in the Parliament? Not raised in the Parliament, not consulted about and then they expect people to respond positively to it. Well no wonder people are concerned about motive. We can question the motive but my major concern is impact, deterrence. I do not believe this adds to deterrence. I’m absolutely committed to working with the government to toughen our border protection but this measure, this measure will operate to encourage boats to head towards mainland Australia.

 JOURNALIST: Is there any intelligence on the boat that was spoken of last weekend, in particular, and in general on boat flows, that there is an increase in boat flows?

 CREAN: Yes there was and I’ve had access to that but I’m not at liberty to discuss it as you’d understand.

 JOURNALIST: It’s been reported that the boat that’s supposedly coming to Australia was provisioned in Indonesia and sent on.  What does that say about the Australian Government’s relationship with the Indonesian Government on this issue?

 CREAN: This is the report in the paper about the wooden hulled boat with thirty four on it? What was confirmed to us, in essence, was that it left Indonesia but when questioned about when it left, where it is, whether it’s still afloat, they were not able to give us any answers.

 JOURNALIST: Was that boat provisioned and sent on by the Indonesian authorities?

 CREAN: Well from newspaper reports we understand that to be the case.

 JOURNALIST: If that is the case what does it say about the Australian Government’s efforts to deal with this issue with the Indonesian Government?

 CREAN: I think it means that we need to strengthen our efforts with the Indonesians to try and prevent this problem at source. And I would’ve thought that the basis for strengthening that understanding existed

 4

 out of the Bali Conference in February. I’ve put to the Government today that we would like to see them use these specific examples that they claim to be concerned about, to use those examples to strengthen understandings with Indonesia to prevent the problem heading towards Australia.  I’m urging the Government to do it.  I’ve indicated my preparedness to play whatever constructive role I can in strengthening that understanding with Indonesia because I believe that’s the key to it.

 We have got to deal with the flow.  You can’t just try and deter at the gates. You’ve got to close the gates and you’ve got to patrol the area outside the gates.  So coastguard, agreements with Indonesia, these are critical elements and that’s what the Government should be concentrating its effort around.

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Mr Ruddock’s assertion that it is sensible for those Afghans whose claims have been rejected to return home now?

 CREAN: Well, I think that one has to look at the capacity for the country immediately to take everyone back and if Mr Ruddock has advice that they can be taken back immediately I would join him in urging that that return be done as quickly as possible.

 And we have supported the incentive, the financial incentive, for them to go home.  But, I’ve heard reports that suggest that it’s not possible to take them all back at once, it needs to be staged.  And I think that what we have to have is more openness about the true ability of the country to take them back over a particular timeframe.

 I’m encouraged by the change in the regime in Afghanistan that that timetable could be expedited but I think that we need to take sensible advice on the ability for them to be returned.

 JOURNALIST: And if it’s not safe for them to return now and the advice is that it should wait?  Would you support as a first step for those who accept the offer to be allowed out into the community rather than be kept in detention?

 CREAN: Well, I would want to look at the status, I haven’t heard so much that it’s not safe.  I think it’s…

 JOURNALIST: …Well safety because of the humanitarian crisis…

 CREAN: …We were told today that there were significant numbers of people who have already begun, significant numbers, not from Australia, significant numbers returning to Afghanistan.  I think that we need to take further advice on that and we’re more than happy to be inundated with information as to the ability for that country to take them.

 5

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean on another matter, does Labor support a free trade agreement between us and U.S and are you happy, or approve of the way Mr Howard has handled this in Washington?

 CREAN: I’m not happy with the way that John Howard has handled this in Washington.  John Howard says that we’re great friends with the United States.  What’s wrong with good friends talking tough to each other?  Not wimping out and not selling out Australian farmers.

 I do support openness in trade and greater openness in trade between our two countries but it has to be done consistent with the WTO guidelines and it has to be of benefit to our farming and manufacturing communities.  We can’t have a free trade agreement that continues the restriction on access for key products in this country.

 Those issues have to be put squarely on the table.  The Government has to say unless we can negotiate proper access on these issues we are not serious about talking the agreement with you because you are not serious.

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with it specifically being talked about now though, do you approve (inaudible)?

 CREAN: Well we haven’t seen the agreement.  We’ve seen vague notions that they want to talk free trade.  But how can you have free trade between the two countries when there is a Bill on the statute books that restricts trade from Australia?  What I want to know is what John Howard has done to get improved access for our agricultural and manufactured products into the United States.  Is it on the agenda?  Let’s look at the timetable, let’s look at the items that have been specified. But John Howard went there to praise them for friendship but he failed to use the friendship to get the best outcome for Australian interests.

 That’s a friend looking for need but not a friend indeed.

 JOURNALIST: But he raised the matter, the concern of farmers in Congress, that wasn’t enough?

 CREAN: No, of course it’s not.  In Congress? There were only 50 members of Congress there, weren’t there out of 500? I think that shows how seriously Congress is treating him. But you see what he should be doing is saying to the President of United States we will only negotiate free trade agreements if we get improved access to these products and these markets.

 Now no one’s expecting there to be an immediate answer to that, the negotiations have to progress it.  But we have to be setting out our agenda not just responding to theirs.  Responding to theirs hasn’t improved access to date.

 6

 And for the Prime Minister to say that what the Americans are doing is not as bad as the Europeans is hardly comforting.  Tell that to the Australian farmers who can’t get their products in to US markets.  They want outcomes, they want a Prime Minister that’s prepared to stand up for them not roll over and have his tummy tickled on the Congress floor.

 JOURNALIST: Is there any concern in your Party room about Australia ratifying the statute for the ICC? And secondly would you be concerned if Australia doesn’t pass the legislation and be on board for the start of it on July 1st?

 CREAN: We have considered this issue and we support ratification.  It’s also important if we are going to ratify that that occur before July 1st because that then deals you into the table to influence the composition of the Court and its role.

 This Government has gone around for the last four years on the international circuit saying that it was advocating ratification. Now it can’t even convince its own Party room.  This is a Government seriously divided on an issue that’s terribly important in terms of us being an effective global citizen and us having an influence in the way in which international jurisdictions are going to develop.

 Australia needs to be a player not a wimp.

 JOURNALIST: With the insurance crisis, with the AMA saying that some doctors won’t support the levy as well, what’s your reaction to that?

 CREAN: I haven’t seen any comments on that.  But my recollection at one stage of the game was that the Prime Minister indicated that any proposals he put forward would not involve a levy for doctors.  I think you’d need to go back and check his statements in relation to that.

 But I, quite frankly, haven’t seen the latest statements from the doctors.

 JOURNALIST: How senior were the people briefing you this morning, Mr Crean?

 CREAN: They were very senior. I think at the highest level across a number of departments and agencies. It was a top level briefing of high quality people. I have no qualms at all about the content, the access, the information that was given to us.  My complaint is the flaw in the Government’s strategy and I think the briefing helped confirm in my mind that nothing that’s proposed in this new measure is in itself going to act as a deterrent to the people smugglers.

 Ends.

