---
title: "Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei: transcript of doorstop interview: Australia Malaysia MOU on terrorism; terrorism in the region; UNHCHR report on detention; people smuggling; AFTA CER; North Korea."
date: "2002-08-01"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211245864
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FI376%22
---

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP

 TRANSCRIPT

 DATE: Thursday 1 August, 2002 VENUE: Doorstop - Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei

 TOPIC/S: Australia Malaysia MOU on Terrorism; Terrorism in the region; UNHCHR Report on detention; people smuggling; AFTA CER;  North Korea

 Mr Downer:  I think this idea of Australia and Malaysia concluding an agreement on counter-terrorism is a very important development in our bilateral relationship.  It is a way that our two countries can cooperate in trying to take forward the challenge that terrorism lays down in south-east Asia.  I think it will lead to an enhancement of the already pretty constructive relationship we have between our security services, police, and so on.  Certainly it will provide a framework for substantial exchanges of information on the movements of people in and around the region who may have association with terrorist-related organisations.  So this is part of a network of links that we are developing with countries in our region to contribute to the counter-terrorism agenda, and of course countries in the region are working amongst themselves in other ways as well to do the same thing.

 (interruption)

 Journalist:  (inaudible) evidence that there are links between terrorists operating out of Malaysia and Australia (inaudible)?

 Mr Downer:  No, I couldn’t say that.  I could say only that for Malaysia and Australia as well as other countries in the region, we are very concerned about terrorist organisations operating in the region.  Some of them are indigenous, some of them have links with outside organisations such as al Quaeda and as time goes on we learn more about these organisations, and the more we are able to exchange information and develop cooperation around the region, the more effective we’re going to be in dealing with counter-terrorist activities.

 Journalist:  You must have done some checks to see whether or not any of these characters that are associated with September 11, associated with (inaudible) have ever travelled to and from Australia.

 Mr Downer:  Ah, well that’s a different question.  I thought you meant just in relation to Malaysia.  Off the top of my head I don’t recall the details of links between people who may have been in Malaysia and may have been in Australia.  I guess there may have been such

 instances, but I’d have to check that, but more broadly, certainly, and not just in relation to the events of September 11 but also the al Quaeda network more generally.  Of course an enormous amount of work has been done on that, and my point here is that the more we’re able to exchange information and cooperate together in the region, the more effective we’re going to be in combating these organisations.  And a memorandum of understanding between Australia and Malaysia is a very effective way of providing a framework for us cooperating in counter-terrorist activities and providing greater security for the region.

 Journalist:  Does it reflect a view in Australia that Malaysia is the key problem area?

 Mr Downer:  No, it doesn’t reflect a view that Malaysia’s a key problem area, but there is a problem in Malaysia, as the Malaysian government has made clear.  There’s a problem though more broadly in South-East Asia as we found out some months ago, frankly somewhat to everyone’s surprise.  Jema’ah Islamiyah was planning a major operation in Singapore but this is an organisation, just to take Jema’ah Islamiyah, which has a network through not just obviously Singapore, but also Malaysia and Indonesia, and elsewhere in the region.  A lot of these organisations in the region are cross-border organisations.  They’re not confined to any one country, but there’s no doubt the Malaysians have been concerned about the situation in their own country and have been very active in addressing the issue of terrorism.

 Journalist:  Are you concerned that Malaysia is using genuine terrorist issues to suppress bona fide political dissent, including the use of the ISA, and also to stem international criticism of human rights issues in Malaysia?

 Mr Downer:  I think Malaysia genuinely does have a problem, and I think they’re being responsible in addressing that problem.  And the issue of international terrorism, including terrorist organisations in our own region, is a profoundly serious one, and we’re obviously deeply appreciative of efforts made by countries within our region that are prepared to address that issue, and we certainly very much have appreciated Malaysia as well as Indonesia’s and Thailand’s willingness to develop cooperative arrangements with Australia to help us deal with the issue more broadly (inaudible).

 Journalist:  (inaudible) structure in Malaysia by cooperating in a technical sense.  Isn’t the problem that you prop up a system that can be used for political abuse?

 Mr downer:  Well I would make the point to you which is I think is the central point here that whatever other issues there are, and there are a lot of issues of course around the region, including in Malaysia, which have often been discussed over the years, we have to be able to address more than one issue at one time, and the key issue that we have been addressing in recent months as a region, not just Australia and not just Malaysia, is this issue of terrorism. We’ve been trying to establish what terrorist organisations operate in the region.  We’ve been trying to establish whether there are links to al Qaeda in particular, and other organisations in the Middle East.  The more this is being investigated, the more concerned we’ve become, frankly, about organisations like Jema’ah Islamiyah, Laskar Jihad, and so on, which do have - particularly Jema’ah Islamiyah - a region-wide network, and whilst this isn’t a new organisation, what’s particularly concerned us is information about links between Jema’ah Islamiyah and various groups in the Middle East.  So I know there are other issues, but this is an issue that really has to be addressed effectively.  It can’t be addressed effectively by just one country alone in the region.  It’s got to be addressed effectively through broader regional cooperation.  And Australia’s making a major contribution to that regional cooperation, and

 these memoranda of understanding are just part of it.  We are for example working very closely with a country like Singapore to have a Memorandum of Understanding with Singapore, but we’re working very closely with Singapore, also in collecting information, sharing information, and helping to try to address this problem.

 Journalist:  What (inaudible) your memorandum of understanding with Indonesia that was signed in (inaudible)?  Has there been any substantive progress there?

 Mr Downer:  We’ve had very good cooperation with the Indonesians in recent months.  I think it’s been a good framework for cooperation and dealing with the issue of terrorism.  I’m not going into it naturally, and I think you’d understand why I’m not going into the nature of all of that cooperation we have with Indonesia, but as time’s gone on we’ve been able to work better and better with Indonesia.  If we go back to September 11, it certainly wasn’t an issue that we had extensive cooperation with Indonesia over, although we obviously had links with them, but since then the cooperation has developed effectively.  We’re happy with the way it’s going.  I had dinner last night with the Indonesian foreign minister and it was an opportunity for us to go through a whole raft of different issues of course, that we deal with together, but certainly it was an illustration of the strength of cooperation on some of these central issues to the region.

 Journalist:  Does this mean Dr Mahathir has softened his objections to Australian and Malaysian involvement with each other?

 Mr Downer:  No I don’t think he’s ever objected to Australia and Malaysia cooperating with each other.  I think he’s got a vision about regional political architecture which hasn’t been the same historically as Australia’s, but I mean I don’t think he objects to a constructive bilateral relationship between Australia and Malaysia.  One of the things I’d say about Australia and Malaysia is that although there have been some high profile disagreements over the last twenty years, at the working level the relationship is actually very strong.  The relationship between our defence forces, between our educational institutions, our business relationship, investment relationship and so on, these are very strong relationships with Malaysia and I very much value it.  And I mean my personal relationships with Malaysian ministers have been pretty strong.  I’m giving the Malaysian foreign minister a lift on our plane to Kuala Lumpur from here tomorrow.

 Journalist:  (inaudible)

 Mr Downer:  Well we’ve had some of these meetings in the past, as you know, but I am going to Malaysia with the specific purpose of signing the memorandum of understanding on the issue of terrorism, and I’ll be focusing on that while I’m there.  I won’t be getting into the whole range of issues that exist across the spectrum.

 Journalist:  (inaudible) whether or not Australia ought to be embarrassed by the report by the United Nations attacking the treatment of children particularly?

 Mr Downer:  Well, look, to be honest with you, a report like this is entirely expected.  It is not a professional report.  It’s a very emotive report.  It doesn’t take into consideration what the central issue is here.  The central issue is that people have come to Australia illegally.  They have had to be assessed where they’ve made asylum claims.  Where those asylum claims have

 been rejected, when it’s been determined that they’re not refugees, then they of course have refused to leave.  Now people are…

 Journalist:  But the issues here are the children and their treatment whilst in detention.

 Mr Downer:  Well people are not being maltreated in detention.  The question here is an entirely different question.  That is, where people, including families, where families and people generally are found not to be refugees, but are found to be illegal migrants, they should return home, and these people…

 Journalist:  (inaudible) the education standards are being criticised…

 Mr Downer:  Education standards are being criticised by the United Nations, but the judge, Justice Bhagwati, who is a retired Indian judge, admitted that he hadn’t actually visited the educational institutions.

 Journalist:  That’s because you wouldn’t let him go.

 Mr Downer:  He is in a position, if I may say so, where he has simply taken on board a whole lot of criticisms from activists, after spending just one day in Woomera.  His report is a report that in my judgement is entirely expected, because of the lobbying by a whole lot of activists on these issues, and when he is asked what alternatives Australia should pursue, he says, well, that’s not an issue for him.  Now, it is an issue for Australia.  What Australia wants to do is crack down on people-smuggling and people-trafficking into Australia.  We want to crack down on illegal immigration.  If we were to abandon the policies that we have in place now, then we would open the doors to people-smuggling and people-trafficking into Australia.  We would create for ourselves a much bigger problem than any difficulties and controversy we may be involved in at the moment.  And frankly I think there is a great deal of understanding in the international community about the challenge of this issue.  The importance of addressing people-smuggling.  At the ASEAN post-ministerial conference here today, there’s been discussion about the issue of people-smuggling, there’s growing regional resolve to address that problem, and Australia isn’t changing its policies.  Whatever some United Nations report may say, in order to open up opportunities for people-smugglers to bring people illegally into Australia and to earn substantial amounts of money through that process. If people want to come to Australia, whatever their circumstances, there are perfectly well-recognised and understood processes for them to come to our country.

 Journalist:  So does that mean it’s acceptable for Australia to break international law on children in order to observe the integrity of the borders?

 Mr Downer:  We certainly have not broken international law on children.  That’s completely wrong.  Australia has not broken international law in any way at all.

 Journalist:  This is the view of a judge from the United Nations.

 Mr Downer:  Well, if I may say so, whatever, this is a report which, as Mr Ruddock has explained, is neither comprehensive nor accurate.  Australia has not breached its international obligations.  Australia has fulfilled its international obligations, and if I may so, I think that the attempts by activists continually to politicise this issue, and try to get the United Nations to be part of political campaigns, are quite counterproductive because this sort of activist

 lobbying of the United Nations and the United Nations producing these reports which it’s done on several occasions, is having the effect of undermining in Australia the credibility of the United Nations.  I’m sorry about that.  I don’t want the United Nations’ credibility to be undermined in Australia.  But the fact is the Australian public understand perfectly clearly what the government is endeavouring to do here.  If people come illegally to our country, if they claim to be refugees, if they’re found not to be refugees, only to be illegal migrants, they should leave Australia and return to whence they came.

 Journalist:  So you’re attacking his views on the basis that he spoke to people who don’t agree with you?

 Mr Downer:  I’m not attacking his views on the basis of him speaking to anybody.  I am saying there is no doubt that political activists, and particularly activists on this particular issue of illegal migrants, have been lobbying the UN, including Justice Bhagwati, that they have been lobbying the UN and trying to encourage the UN to criticise Australia as part of their domestic political agenda.  Now, I regret it.  I regret it when the United Nations takes so seriously some of the claims that are made and takes so seriously the lobbying by a lot of political activists.

 Journalist:  So he’s been conned?

 Mr Downer:  Well, I think the report is an inaccurate report.

 Journalist:  Are you accusing him…

 Journalist:  Mr Downer, what’s Australia’s current position on the ISA (inaudible)

 Mr downer:  Well no matter how much you try to goad me into making controversial comments about … First of all I was goaded by the media to try to make controversial comments about Brunei while I’m in Brunei.  I’ve been goaded into trying to criticise the Indonesians for not doing enough on terrorism.  I’m now goaded into trying to inflame our relationship with Malaysia at a time when I think that relationship is working very well.  And I’m going to tell you, in conclusion, I won’t be goaded.

 Journalist:  Shouldn’t you express these views though?

 Mr Downer:  We have expressed views with the Malaysians on many issues on many occasions.  Today is a day when the Malaysians have let it be known that we’re to sign a memorandum of understanding with them to deal with the issue of terrorism.  I think that’s a very important development in our bilateral relationship.  I think it’s very important in a context of regional security, and I think for this day, and for this visit, it is important that I concentrate on that issue as being a central issue of what we’re trying to address.

 Journalist:  (inaudible)

 Mr Downer:  Well I don’t address all issues, all the time, every day, otherwise if I were to do that we wouldn’t achieve any successful outcomes on anything.

 Journalist:  just one question on the UN human rights report.

 Mr Downer:  yes, sure.

 Journalist:  you were just saying that you didn’t want the UN to lose its credibility in Australia, but you’re basically accusing this judge of lying in his report.

 Mr Downer:  I’m certainly not accusing him of lying.  Of course he’s not lying, that’s a terrible thing to say.  I’m absolutely not accusing the judge of lying.  I know Justice Bhagwati.  He wouldn’t lie.  I’m just saying that he has been lobbied very heavily by activists and obviously been influenced by them.

 Journalist:  (inaudible) been fooled by them?

 Mr Downer:  Well, I’m saying - not what you’re saying, and you’re saying - I’m saying what I’m saying.  You’re telling me what I’m saying, but I’m saying …

 Journalist:  Isn’t it a reasonable interpretation?

 Mr Downer:  Well it is not a reasonable interpretation.  It is a report that we have explained we regard as an entirely inadequate report.  The judge has been very heavily lobbied by political activists.  He’s conceded that himself on the late line program last night, and we think as a result the flavour of it has been influenced substantially by political activists on these issues.  These people, these political activists on this issue of illegal immigration, are basically trying to break down the capacity of Australia to deal with the problem of illegal immigration.  And people who are in these … Almost all of the people - almost all of the people -  who are in the detention centres have been found not to be refugees and have been asked to leave Australia and to return to whence they came.  These people can leave.  All but a very small number of people who haven’t had their applications processed, these people are welcome to leave Australia straight away.

 Journalist:  But the government has had the opportunity to respond to the report.  I mean, you were issuing your response before the report was issued.

 Mr Downer:  We certainly did respond to …

 Journalist:  So you’ve had input too?

 Mr Downer:  …Well we certainly have responded.  Well we had more than that.  We had input in the sense that Justice Bhagwati did call on me, and more importantly because I’m not the Minister responsible, but he called on Mr Ruddock and others, but I’m just making a point to you here that we don’t regard this report as an adequate report.  We don’t think it takes into consideration all the issues that we’ve had to deal with as a country.  We are not changing our policy, because we are not going to open up Australia again to illegal immigration and to people-smugglers and people-traffickers in order to make money at our expense.  We are not going to do that.  And I think the strength of Australia’s resolve in dealing with this issue has been simply borne out by the success of the policy, and it has been a policy that has been successful.

 Journalist:  On Malaysia, (inaudible) people like (inaudible) - do you accept that he’s a terrorist?

 Mr Downer:  I’ve said all I’m saying on Malaysia.

 Journalist:  A change of topic:  this afternoon you’re signing an agreement with ASEAN to assist the development of AFTA and the economic integration of ASEAN.  Do you think that in the longer term it will lead to more acceptance of Australia joining AFTA?

 Mr Downer:  Well I think, actually I wouldn’t put it that way around.  I think what is going to be important is the signing in September of the AFTA-CER, as in closer economic relations between Australia and New Zealand, the AFTA-CER closer economic partnership, and I think that is going to be a historic step forward in Australia’s economic relationship with ASEAN. There is the issue of course of AFTA itself and we want to see ASEAN countries have every capability available to them to continue to enhance the trade liberalisation agenda.  I think that’s very important.  And they’re making progress.

 Journalist:  Is there any sign of a mood change here about Australia joining AFTA eventually?

 Mr Downer:  Well, we haven’t been focusing on it here, because I mean most of the time I’ve been here the focus has been on security issues, but more generally I think that the fact that we’re on the threshold of signing this closer economic partnership with ASEAN is a very important development in our economic relationship with ASEAN.  I mean ASEAN is looking at, on the one hand, trade liberalisation initiatives with the so-called plus three, with China, Korea and Japan, and it’s looking at building this economic partnership and I hope in time better free trade links with Australia.  So, you know, all of this is …

 Journalist:  (inaudible) ASEAN's building its links with north Asia and not looking southward.

 Mr Downer:  Well I’ve explained to you how it is looking southward.  Absolutely.  I’m actually very happy with how our economic linkages with ASEAN are going.  Any critic - and, you know, there are critics - any critic who says that we don’t do enough with ASEAN should just take into account that in 2001 Australia had never had, Australia’s trade with ASEAN - I’ll put this slightly more articulately - in 2001 Australia’s trade with ASEAN was the greatest that it has ever been.  There’s an enormous amount of investment now. Something like 30 billion dollars worth of ASEAN investment in Australia and about 20 billion dollars worth of Australian investment in ASEAN.  I think our economic links with ASEAN are going ahead in leaps and bounds.  I’m very happy with the way it’s developing.

 Journalist:  Does Australia plan to expand the counter-terrorism MOU with the whole of ASEAN?

 Mr Downer:  Well we haven’t been talking to all of ASEAN.  But we have had discussions with the Thais and we hope to be able to sign a memorandum of understanding on counter-terrorism with Thailand before too long.

 Journalist:  and Singapore too?

 Mr Downer:  No, we haven’t approached Singapore.

 Journalist:  (inaudible) in talks with North Korea this afternoon?

 Mr Downer:  Well we first of all welcome the arrival of the North Korean Ambassador in Australia, and he has now arrived in Canberra, and this is a culmination of an effort which has taken a couple of years to re-establish effective diplomatic relations between Australia and North Korea.  Secondly, we very much welcome the opening up of dialogue now between North Korea and the United States and North Korea and, hopefully in time, North Korea and the Republic of Korea as well.  I understand that Secretary Powell and Foreign Minister Paek had a brief meeting yesterday, and that’s a very good step forward, and we hope that officials’ level talks will now be able to move ahead.  But we of course have a lot of concerns with Korea.  We have concerns about its missile development programs, missile proliferation, and so on, so obviously those issues will be on the agenda.

 ENDS.

