---
title: "Development of the Federal Court over 25 years: address to the Federal Court of Australia's 25th anniversary sitting, Court 21A, Law Courts Building, Queens Square, Sydney"
date: "2002-02-07"
creators:
  - "Williams, Daryl"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234045
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KDV56%22
---

 ATTORNEY-GENERAL THE HON. DARYL WILLIAMS AM QC MP

 7 February 2002 Federal Court 25th Anniversary Sitting

 Development of the Federal Court over 25 years

 Address to the Federal Court of Australia’s 25th Anniversary Sitting

 Court 21A, Law Courts Building

 Queens Square, Sydney

 9:30am, 7 February 2002 (EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY)

 Introduction

 May it please the Court in all its manifestations across the continent.

 It is a pleasure to address the 25th anniversary sitting of the Federal Court of Australia on behalf of the Commonwealth Government.

 May I  begin  by acknowledging  the  immense  contribution  the  Court  has  made  to  the rule  and  application  of  Commonwealth  law  in  the  last  quarter  of  a  century.   The Federal Court’s achievements are many and after 25 exemplary years there is certainly a great deal in the Court’s history to celebrate.

 The Court has distinguished itself as a superior court of the Commonwealth.  Indeed it has  developed  a  well  deserved  reputation  throughout  the  common  law  world  as  a world class civil court.

 Overview

 Since Federation there has been a considerable expansion in the size and importance of the  federal  judicial  system.   This  expansion  has  been  a  response  to  the  increasing complexity of Australia’s federal system.  And it has been a response to the expanded role of the Commonwealth in the nation’s life.

 A  major  revamping  of  the  federal  justice  system  came  with  the  establishment  of  the Family Court of Australia in 1976 and the establishment of this Court in 1977.

 There were two main reasons for establishing the Court.

 The first was to take over some of the workload of the High Court in matters arising under Commonwealth or Territory laws.  The second was to provide a federal forum to deal with special areas of federal law.

 The  Court’s  jurisdiction  now  covers  almost  all  civil  matters  arising  under Commonwealth  legislation.   The  Court  also  has  a  substantial  and  diverse  appellate jurisdiction.

 Judges

 In the period since its establishment, the Governor-General has appointed a total of 94 judges to the Court.

 2

 A number of members of this Court have gone on to hold higher office, attesting to the outstanding scholarship and ability of its judges.  Despite the Court’s relatively short history, five of its judges have subsequently held appointment as Justices of the High Court.   His  Honour  Justice  Brennan  was  elevated  to  Chief  Justice  of  Australia. Another  former  judge  of  the  Court,  Sir  William  Deane,  was  to  hold  the  office  of Governor-General of the Commonwealth.

 Quality of appointments

 Australia  has  been  well  served  by  the  quality  of  its  federal  judiciary.   Successive governments have appointed members of the bench on merit.

 However, while the quality of our judiciary is exemplary, it is important to recognise that its present composition does not reflect the diversity of Australian society.  To an extent this reflects the lack of diversity amongst those practising at the bar, especially at a senior level.

 It is of  particular concern that  there are  few women who practise in areas of  Federal Court jurisdiction.  However, it is pleasing that the number of women in the judiciary is  increasing.   Of  the  56  judges  and  magistrates  appointed  to  federal  courts  simce March 1996, 16 have been women.  This is nearly 30 per cent of all new appointments. It may be possible in the near future to make further inroads, particularly in relation to the Federal Court, without compromising on the quality of appointments to the bench.

 Role of the Judiciary

 Members  of  the  judiciary  are  key  players  in  upholding  the  rule  of  law. An  independent  judiciary  is  the  cornerstone  of  our  system  of  government. The  courts  have  to  maintain  and  enhance  public  confidence  in  the  judiciary  by  the quality  of  their  work.   Judges  must  remain  impartial  arbiters  and  avoid  activities incompatible with their exercise of federal jurisdiction.

 The Federal Court is meeting those standards.

 Growth in Federal Jurisdiction/Litigation

 As well as distinguishing themselves through their intellectual vigour, the members of the Court have a reputation for hard work and dedication.  The Court is a busy one.

 In  the  Court’s  first  year,  it  could  exercise  jurisdiction  under  11  Acts  and  442 applications were filed1.

 By  the  end  of  1990  when  Sir  Nigel  Bowen  retired,  this  workload  had  grown  to  the Court exercising jurisdiction under 90 Acts, with 2016 applications being filed2.

 The Court is now given original jurisdiction by over 150 Commonwealth Acts and in the last financial year 5385 applications were filed3.

 This increasing workload brings with it the challenge of ensuring that the delivery of justice continues to be timely, efficient and cost effective.

 

 1  Federal Court of Australia Annual Report 1977/78 2  Federal Court of Australia Annual Report 1989/90 3

  Federal Court of Australia Annual Report 2000/2001

 3

 Interpretation of Commonwealth legislation

 It  is  appropriate  that  this  Court  be  the  premier  court  for  the  interpretation  of Commonwealth legislation.

 In  this  regard,  it  is  not  intended  that  the  Court  supersede  the  Supreme  Courts. The role of the Supreme Courts is well-defined.

 There are, of course, areas of overlapping jurisdiction.  However, this overlap avoids jurisdictional disputes and facilitates the delivery of justice to court users.

 Impact of the Federal Magistrates Service

 The establishment of the Federal Magistrates Service is likely to have a significant and enduring impact on the Federal Court.

 As  the  Court  is  aware,  the  Service  has  been  established  to  deal  with  a  range  of  less complex federal disputes that would otherwise go to this Court or to the Family Court.

 The  Service  shares  jurisdiction  with  the  Court  in  administrative  law,  bankruptcy, human  rights  and  trade  practices  under  a  range  of  Commonwealth  provisions.   The Government  is  considering  other  areas  of  suitable  concurrent  jurisdiction  for  the Federal Magistrates Service where they involve matters of low complexity.

 Although it is expected the Federal Magistrates Service will reduce the burden of less complex cases on this Court, the considerable pressures on the Court and the nature of cases coming before it remain a concern.

 Migration Cases

 The increasing number of migration cases before the Court has taken up a significant portion of the Court’s resources4.

 This is of  particular  concern when so many of  the applications lack merit.  Indeed, I note that in 2000-2001 only 5 per cent of migration applications5 were upheld by the Court at first instance.  A significant number of cases, 31 per cent6, were withdrawn by the  applicants  before  the  final  hearing,  considerable  resources  of  the  Court  having already been expended.

 The Migration Act jurisdiction presents a significant challenge for federal courts and for the Government.

 The  Court  is  aware  that  the  Parliament  has  legislated  to  implement  a  new  judicial review  scheme  for  refugee  applications7.   This  legislation  is  intended  to  lessen  the burden on the courts by reducing the number of cases going to the courts.

 I expect that we will  all hear more about the operation  of  this scheme in the coming year and we will watch its impact on the Court’s workload with interest.

 

 4  The number of migration applications to the Court increased from 418 in 1996-97 to 1,121 in the last financial year, Federal Court of Australia Annual Report 2000-2001, p.43. 5

  Litigation Involving Migration Decisions, Fact Sheet, Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, www.immi.gov.au/facts/09litigation.htm 6  See above fact sheet. 7

  Migration Legislation Amendment (Judicial Review) Act 2001

 4

 Native Title workload

 Another significant impact on the workload of the Court has been in the area of native title.

 I am conscious that this has been a challenge for the Court.

 Many native title cases do not fit the traditional mould of court litigation.  The number of parties alone increases the complexity of much native title litigation.

 Slowly but steadily the case law on native title is increasing, as is the number of native title determinations.

 Last  financial  year  21  native  title  determinations  were  made,  bringing  to  32  the number  of  native  title  determinations  made  since  1993.   It  is  pleasing  to  note  that  a substantial  proportion  of  these  determinations  were  made  by  consent8.   The Commonwealth  appreciates,  nevertheless,  that  consent  determinations  involve significant work by both the Court and the National Native Title Tribunal in assisting the parties to reach agreement.

 The  Government  acknowledges  the  professional  and  committed  way  in  which  the Court has managed its native title workload.

 Recent Federal Court Innovations

 Coping with this significant and increasing workload has required the Court to adopt a flexible and innovative approach to delivering services to the Australian community.

 To  ensure  operational  efficiency  and  public  accessibility,  the  Court  has  adopted  a number of innovative initiatives which have distinguished the Court as a world leader.

 The  Court’s  individual  docket  system  and  the  Court’s  eCourt  strategy  are  two initiatives which have drawn accolades from litigants, the profession and lawmakers in Australia and overseas.

 These are initiatives of which the Court is justifiably proud.

 In  this  respect,  specific  mention  should  be  made  of  the  Court’s  role  as  leader  in  the haute  couture  of  judicial  attire.   The  Commonwealth  is  confident  that  the  Court  will continue to act as a leader in both court innovation and judicial fashion.

 Conclusion

 At  the  first  sitting  of  the  Court  25  years  ago,  then  Attorney-General,  the  Hon.  Bob Ellicott  QC,  predicted  that  the  Court  would  evolve  to  play  ‘a  significant  role  in  the development of the judiciary and the law in Australia9’.

 This prediction has been realised very quickly.

 Everyone  who  has  been  associated  with  the  establishment  and  work  of  the  Court  is entitled to feel proud of its many achievements.

 Sir  Nigel  Bowen  admirably  steered  the  Court  through  its  first  13  years.   Under  the leadership of your Honour the Chief Justice, the Court continues to flourish and grow in stature as a world class superior court.

 

 8  Federal Court of Australia Annual Report 2000-2001, p.47 9  Address of Welcome by the Attorney-General, Mr R.J. Ellicot QC 7 February 1977 at the swearing in of the judges of the Federal Court of Australia.

 5

 The  next  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  the  next  25  years  are  as  noteworthy,  and  as distinguished,  as  the  last  25  have  been.   The  Government  looks  forward  to  working with the Court to achieve that goal.

 May it please the Court.

