---
title: "Australian citizenship - an enduring symbol of unity."
date: "2002-11-28"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211250570
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5E186%22
---

 H135/2002 Australian citizenship - an enduring symbol of unity

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today said that Australian citizenship was an enduring symbol of our unity, and one which was highly valued by the community and the Government.

 “In recent times some media commentators have been quick to focus on divisive issues and have tried to devalue Australian citizenship, but the Australian community has increasingly embraced our citizenship as a common bond, something to be proud of,” the Minister said.

 “The Government takes the grant of Australian Citizenship very seriously and applicants are assessed against a longstanding set of criteria.”

 Mr Hardgrave said applicants for Citizenship must have a basic knowledge of the English language, be of good character and must understand the responsibilities and privileges of Australian Citizenship. These include voting to help elect Australia’s government and defending Australia should the need arise.

 ‘Those becoming Australian citizens must formally pledge their loyalty to Australia and its people and undertake to share our democratic beliefs and uphold and obey the law.”

 “Australia’s inclusive approach means that we have a very high take-up rate of Australian citizenship by eligible permanent residents, about 75 per cent, which compares favourably with many OECD nations like Canada and the US,” the Minister said.

 “This also means that a large proportion of people choosing to settle here have publicly committed to our values and way of life and this puts them on an equal footing with all other citizens.”

 Mr Hardgrave said the Government provides new citizens with a booklet “What it means to be an Australian citizen”. This provides a brief summary of Australia's history, heritage, symbols, institutions and laws, and helps our newest citizens better understand their new country and their responsibilities to it.

 “The Government continues to strongly encourage migrants to learn Australia’s national language, English, and provides up to 510 hours of tuition to eligible migrants and refugees through the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP).  An AMEP citizenship course which has recently been extended to all members of the community covers topics including the values and principles of Australian society, Australia’s parliamentary system of government, and the responsibilities and privileges of Australian Citizenship. The Government is also developing new pre-embarkation material which will teach migrants before they get here about Australian culture and values.”

 Contrary to comments made by some media commentators, while English skills equip people to become active members of the community, the language a person speaks at home is certainly not an indicator of their commitment to Australia,” Mr Hardgrave said.

  “A number of significant amendments to the Australian Citizenship Act 1948 were introduced earlier this year as part of the Government’s response and included measures to strengthen and modernise aspects of the integrity of the citizenship process.

 28 November, 2002  Media contact: Amanda Lynch on 0419 123862

