---
title: "Grass roots ALP members show more leadership than federal ALP."
date: "2002-06-03"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239275
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y0P66%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 03 June 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/283

 Grass roots ALP members show more leadership than Federal ALP The Australian Democrats have welcomed the moves of grass roots Labor party members to change ALP policy on mandatory detention, but warned supporters they had a long way to go in ensuring the Federal ALP returned to a position of respecting human rights and international law.

 Democrats’ spokesperson on Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said that mandatory detention was not the only issue where Labor support for Coalition policy had badly affected asylum seekers and refugees.

 “The introduction of Temporary Protection Visas with full support of the federal ALP had drastically increased the hardship facing refugees once they are released into the Australian community,” Senator Bartlett said.

 “There is no doubt that TPVs are the reason we saw an increase in women and children making the dangerous journey across the sea.  This is because refugees on TPVs are not able to sponsor their families to Australia.

 “These visas are deliberately designed to make life as hard as possible for these refugees, despite the fact that Australia legally owes them protection.

 “When this visa category was introduced, the Australian Government made a shameful declaration that agencies which were government funded and assisted refugees would have their funding cut.

 “This was cruel enough but the ALP then supported the Government in the introduction of the raft of legislation that introduced the ‘Pacific Solution’ and prevented appeals to the Courts,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “Clearly we are heading towards a position in Australia where the legal system and the politicians won’t be able to access information about those who are detained. Since the introduction of the ‘Pacific Solution’ asylum seekers are turned around and towed back out to sea or sent to offshore camps such as Nauru, Manus and the soon to be constructed Christmas Island camp.

 “Under the Pacific solution, which is supported by the ALP, our borders remain less protected from drug trafficking and illegal fishing, than men, women and children in leaky boats.”

 Senator Bartlett said he hoped the ALP grassroots members would be able to increase their pressure on the Federal party to ensure that Labor reversed its support for the many harsh and unnecessary components of the Government's approach to refugees.

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

