---
title: "A multicultural cocktail! Is Australia on the rocks? Speech, 29 September 2002"
date: "2002-09-29"
creators:
  - "Jonas, William"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Cultural conflict"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "Muslim Australians"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211248240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SP886%22
---

 

 "A Multicultural Cocktail! Is Australia On the Rocks?"

 Speech by Dr William Jonas AM, Acting Race Discrimination Commissioner &  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner, 29 September  2002, Newcastle

 I would like to acknowledge the Awabakal people, the traditional owners and custodians of the land  where we meet today. I would also like to thank the Newcastle and Hunter Region Ethnic  Communities Council for inviting me to speak today. 

 Today's theme, 'A Multicultural Cocktail - Is Australia on the Rocks' is a novel one. My invitation to  speak, which featured a picture of a martini glass, filled with what looked to be a number of drowning  Australians, had me faintly troubled at first. That picture prompted me to think about whether a martini  was really the most appropriate metaphor for multicultural Australia. 

 Now how, you may well ask, can we liken a martini to present day multicultural Australia? It's not hard  when you think about it. 

 To make the perfect martini you need four things: ice, vermouth, gin and an olive. There are several  secrets to getting the mix right:

 ●     temperature - the ice should be so cold and hard that it won't melt;

 ●     restraint - only the tiniest drop of vermouth is needed to coat the ice before you discard it;

 ●     use the best quality gin, preferably British; and 

 ●     only a green olive will do for a garnish. 

 As events over the last year have shown, multiculturalism in present day Australia does seem to fit  this recipe. The current political climate could be likened to an icy deep freeze impervious to concerns  about human rights. Vermouth is like compassion - our present politicians use it sparingly and stingily  before discarding it altogether. Gin, the most important element of any martini, is the legacy of 200  years of colonialism in Australia. Finally, the olive could represent the select few new migrants and  refugees allowed to become part of Australia's multicultural cocktail. 

 This is a very cynical and tongue in cheek view of multiculturalism. Rather than stretch this metaphor  any further, I want to talk to you seriously about whether multiculturalism is under threat in  contemporary Australia. I will begin by explaining what I understand multiculturalism means. I will then  examine what I think have been the major challenges to multiculturalism over the last twelve months.  Finally, I will end on a more constructive and positive note by talking about what we can do to defend  and uphold the principles of multiculturalism. 

 So what is multiculturalism? 

 Multiculturalism is a word that is often used but seldom defined. What does it mean? 

 Multiculturalism describes, recognizes and celebrates cultural diversity. This diversity is a significant  feature of modern Australian society. 

 Newcastle is no exception. The 2001 Census showed that almost 10% of people living in the  Newcastle area were born overseas. These people come from a range of countries including the  United Kingdom, New Zealand, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, the Philippines and  Macedonia. In addition, around a third of people living in Newcastle have at least one parent who was  born overseas. Clearly, Newcastle is 'multicultural'. 

 Multiculturalism is a policy that addresses the challenges and opportunities arising from cultural  diversity evident in places like Newcastle. It provides us with a framework for thinking and acting that  allows us to respond in a positive and constructive way - as individuals, as communities, as a nation -  to Australia's diversity. 

 Multicultural policy has undergone a number of significant developments since it was first adopted in  the 1970s. The latest version of this policy emphasises four main principles. These are: 

 HREOC Website: Speeches

 1. Civic duty: the idea that everyone should support the basic structures and principles of Australian  society.

 2. Productive diversity: the idea that Australians should all benefit from the cultural, social and  economic dividends created by cultural diversity.

 3. Social equity: the idea that all Australians are entitled to equality of treatment and opportunity. All  Australians should be able to contribute socially, politically and economically without being  discriminated against because of their race, culture, religion, language, gender or birthplace. 

 4. Cultural respect: the idea that all Australians have the right to express their own culture and beliefs  within the law and accept the right of others to do the same. 

 Today, I want to talk about how these principles have fared in Australia over the last twelve months. I  want to focus particularly on how events of the last year have impacted on what I think is one of the  most important principles of multiculturalism: cultural respect. 

 Over the last year, a number of significant events have occurred which have led me to question  Australia's commitment to the principles of multiculturalism. Australia's response to certain global,  federal and local events suggests to me that multiculturalism is under threat. 

 The terrorist attacks of September 11 have had a profound impact on how people in Australia respond  to cultural difference. Muslim and Arab-Australians felt the immediate repercussions of September 11,  becoming the targets of violence and retribution. The increase in incidents of racial vilification directed  against Muslims and Arabs in schools, workplaces, in the media and on the streets has been  documented by police, state equal opportunity commissions and community organisations around  Australia. Some examples include: 

 ●     fire-bombing and bomb threats to mosques in Brisbane and Sydney;

 ●     numerous physical and verbal attacks on Muslim women, particularly those who wear the hijab 

 or headscarf; ●     schoolyard taunts and graffiti - such as "death to Muslim scum" or "kill rag heads";

 ●     bricks being thrown through the windows of Muslim homes in the middle of the night;

 ●     and vandalism of businesses owned by Muslims and Australians of Arabic background. 

 Incidents like these have created a climate of fear and uncertainty for members of Australia's Muslim  and Arabic communities. When people live in fear of being attacked because of their religion or  ethnicity, clearly there has been a break-down in cross-cultural understanding and respect. 

 The increase in hostility towards Muslims and Arabs after September 11 has been compounded by  particular national and local events cynically linked by politicians and the media to provoke public  anxiety. 

 The Tampa 'crisis', which began in late August 2001, also stirred up fears of the Muslim or Arab 'other'  in Australia. It raised anxieties about the perceived threat to national security posed by desperate  asylum seekers on leaky boats. 

 The crisis was played out against the backdrop of an impending federal election. The 433 mostly Iraqi  and Afghani asylum seekers rescued by the Tampa became pawns in a contest to win votes. 

 In this contest, asylum seekers were portrayed as 'terrorists' and 'blackmailers' willing to throw their  children overboard in order to reach Australian soil. As we now know, the only thing that went  overboard on the Tampa was truth and compassion. 

 With these events happening internationally and nationally, the stage was set for ethnic tensions to  erupt on a local level. In Sydney, these tensions were revealed in the controversy over ethnic gang  rapes. 

 No-one is denying that the crimes committed by a group of young men of Lebanese background in  Sydney in 2000 were horrific. However, the recent media furore surrounding the trials and sentencing  of the rapists has done nothing but fuel racial divisions. 

 It is illogical to blame an offender's culture or religion for his or her crime. Individuals commit crimes.  Their communities should not - must not - be smeared merely by association. 

 HREOC Website: Speeches

 In an environment where globalisation has brought with it fears of economic and social change, some  Australians have sought scapegoats on which they can pin their anxieties. Refugees and ethnic  groups are popular and easy targets. But when we allow them to become the targets of political  rhetoric and public scorn, we all lose. By socially sanctioning intolerance towards any one particular  group, we make it more acceptable to discriminate against all minorities. Attacking the very principle  of cultural respect affects us all. 

 So what can we do to change things? Rather than end on a gloomy note, I want to leave you with  some practical suggestions for positive action. 

 I think we can begin by trying to be better informed about important issues like refugees and asylum  seekers. Who are refugees? Why are they seeking asylum? What happens to them in Australia? Look  beyond newspapers and talkback radio for answers to these questions. There are many good sources  of information out there addressing these questions from different viewpoints. My Commission's  publication Face the Facts which is about to be updated and re-launched on our website is a good  place to start. 

 We should all be more skeptical of what we read in the papers and hear on talkback radio. Muddled  opinions based on factual errors only inflame racial tensions. There have been so many examples  over the last year of journalists getting their facts wrong. 

 ●     Just recently you may have heard how The Australian's columnist Janet Albrechtsen was 

 caught out conjuring moral panic about ethnic gang rapes. Albrechtsen took the findings of an  academic study that talked about rape as a male initiation rite, twisted them around, and cited  the study as proof that rape of 'white' women was an initiation rite for Muslim males. The  original study talked about young males in general - not Muslim males at all. Luckily, her  misrepresentation captured the attention of the ABC's Media Watch program and was  exposed. ●     Another small example which has so far escaped the attention of Media Watch concerns this 

 claim: 'only 3% of migrants find Australia racist'. This figure was originally presented to the  media by both the Minister for Immigration, Philip Ruddock, and the Minister for Citizenship  and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave in early September this year. The claim was picked  up in numerous newspaper articles and cited as proof that Australia is a harmonious, tolerant  place. Now if journalists had bothered to examine the source of this statistic, they would have  found that the claim was misleading. The survey it came from did not ask new migrants the  direct question 'do you find Australia racist?' Instead, this finding was extrapolated from  responses to an unstructured open-ended question 'what things do you dislike most about  Australia?' 

 Be alert to misrepresentations like these. They may be small. But collectively they help shape the  prejudice that can lead to discrimination. 

 Finally, we should make the principle of cultural respect the foundation of your relationships with  others. Try to exercise - and encourage others to exercise - compassion and understanding in  relationships with people whose culture you may perceive as different from your own. 

 Without compassion, our society is debased and second rate. Like a Martini without Vermouth -  multiculturalism without compassion does not work. 

 Our society must recognise and accept that all of us have the rights to enjoy our own culture, to  profess and practise our own religion, and to use our own language without fear of discrimination.  That is a goal worth striving for. 

 Thank you.

