---
title: "Electorate Office, Stirling, SA: transcript of doorstop interview: meeting with Nauru President Rene Harris; people smuggling and illegal migration; International Criminal Court."
date: "2002-06-14"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211239635
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7ES66%22
---

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP

 TRANSCRIPT

 DATE:Friday, 14 June 2002 VENUE: Doorstop - Electorate Office, Stirling, SA

 TOPIC/S: Meeting with Nauru President Rene Harris People smuggling and illegal migration International Criminal Court

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: There are two things I want to talk about.  Just talk a bit about my lunch with President Harris but, secondly, on behalf of the government to say a little bit about Mr Crean’s latest flip-flop on the whole issue of dealing with illegal migrants and people smugglers.

 First  of  all,  as  far  as  President  Harris  is  concerned  we  had  a  very  amiable  lunch,  a  very successful  lunch.   We  talked  through  the  aid  program  which  is  part  of  the  memorandum  of understanding that President Harris and I signed in December of last year.  We talked about the issue of the asylum seekers in Nauru and the timing of those people leaving and he was happy with the arrangements.  Both in respect of aid and the asylum seekers I think he’s felt reassured by the messages that we’ve able to deliver.

 We had a discussion about the long-term economic prospects of Nauru; that’s obviously not an issue related to the asylum seekers but is nevertheless an important issue.  And we have two Australian economic advisers going to Nauru I think next week, very soon, and they’ll be working with the Nauru government to help with long-term economic management issues.

 I  would  say  this:  that  I’m  very  appreciative  of  not  only  President  Harris’  assistance  to Australia on this issue of asylum seekers and helping to deal with people smuggling, but that I think it’s important to understand he’s doing a lot to try to rectify the legacy that he inherited of economic mismanagement in Nauru and we appreciate very much as a brother country in the Pacific Island Forum the work that he’s been doing to restructure Nauru’s finances and its economy.

 Mr  Crean  today  announced  Labor’s  latest  position  on  dealing  with  the  problem  of  people smuggling.  At the end of last year Mr Crean himself voted for the excision of some of the islands from Australia’s immigration zone.  Today, straight after a briefing, and obviously not prompted by the briefing, Mr Crean announced that this time he’s going to vote against the excision of islands from Australia’s immigration zone.

 The  problem  with  Mr  Crean  and  the  Labor  Party  is  that  they  have  absolutely  no  idea  what they stand for.  One month they support the government on the excision in order to counter people  smuggling  and  deal  with  the  vile  trade  of  people  smuggling,  another  month  they’ve decided  to  go  along  as  they  have  today  and  support  measures  which  will  be  of  comfort  to people  smugglers.   The  bipartisan  strong  stance  against  people  smuggling  has  been  a  very

 important  component  of  making  sure  we  are  successful  in  dealing  with  people  smuggling. Today,  Mr  Crean  has  broken  that  bipartisanship.   He’s  sent  a  message  to  people  smugglers which  is  that  Australia  isn’t  as  strong  on  people  smuggling  as  it  used  to  be.   Mr  Crean  is giving comfort to people smugglers and he will stand responsible for any weakening of our capacity to deal with the problem of people smuggling.

 REPORTER: You said that he learnt nothing which convinced him (indistinct).

 DOWNER: Mr Crean was absolutely convinced at the end of last year the excision was necessary.  It’s now May, June this year, it’s now June 2002, and nothing can convince him that any further excisions are necessary.  The fact is that Mr Crean doesn’t know what he stands for, the Labor Party doesn’t know what it stands for, it’s internally inconsistent on this issue and the Labor Party is sending out a very encouraging and warm message to people smugglers, and I think Australians will be confused about where the Labor Party stands and I think Australians will be concerned that the Labor Party is giving comfort to people smuggling.

 REPORTER: Will the Australian government be giving more aid to Nauru?

 DOWNER: Ah, no we have a memorandum of understanding and we have an earlier agreement and we are still fulfilling our obligations under those agreements.

 REPORTER: Mr  Harris  said  you’d  renegotiated  your  package  in  some  way.   What  priorities  have  been brought forward?

 DOWNER: We haven’t changed this package of arrangements.  What we’ve done is we’ve gone through the details of what commitments we’ve made with the President.  We’ve had a look at each of those  areas  where  we’re  providing assistance,  we’re  not  providing any additional  assistance over and above what we committed ourselves to in the memorandum of understanding.  What we have … I mean we decided to do this some weeks ago, but what we have done is sent, or in the process of sending, two economic advisors to Nauru who are going to assist with the longer term planning of the economy and that obviously is a big issue for the Nauruans.  And that’s not offering further aid, that’s just talking about helping the government address some of their … as I have mentioned this already … their quite substantial financial issues.

 REPORTER: How long will it be before non-refugees are shipped off the island?

 DOWNER: Well, I’ve explained precisely the situation to President Harris and he’s happy with this and that is that we hope that just about all of the processing will be complete by the end of this month and for those who are found to be refugees, obviously not very many people, we’ll be arranging  for  the  resettlement  of  those  people  in  appropriate  places  and  for  those  who  are found  not  to  be  refugees,  in  the  case  of  the  Afghanis  which  is  the  bulk  of  them,  we’ve  … we’re offering a financial package for them to return to Afghanistan and we and others will be

 encouraging  the  Afghanis  to  take  up  that  offer  and  we  hope  that  it  won’t  take  too  long  for them to leave.

 But, you know, President Harris, you’ve spoken to him yourselves, I mean his position is that he’s happy with the arrangements now that are in place as I’ve explained them to him and as the AusAID officials did during the course of yesterday morning, I think it’s all working out fine.

 REPORTER: What are you going to do about asylum seekers that refuse to go?

 DOWNER: Well I don’t … I think, you know, that’s a hypothetical question, they haven’t refused to go and  I  think  the  important  thing  is  that  they  recognise  that  where  they’re  no  longer  asylum seekers, their applications have been rejected, they’re clearly just illegal migrants, that people who are illegal migrants should return to their homes.

 REPORTER: (Inaudible question)

 DOWNER: Well, we’ll provide them with incentives to go.

 REPORTER: UNHCR  is  saying  that  there  aren’t  sufficient  resources  for  them  to  go  home  to  and  that  if Australia is serious about getting them back, we ought to increase our foreign aid so there’s food, water and resources there.

 DOWNER: Well, we have a very substantial foreign aid package to Afghanistan and the UNHCR has said that they don’t want people to be forced back to Afghanistan and we’re not proposing to force people back, we’re providing them with financial incentives so they’ll have the wherewithal to  re-establish  their  lives  when  they  get  back  to  Afghanistan.   Already  I’m  advised  over  a million  people  have  returned  to  Afghanistan,  over  a  million  Afghanis  have  returned  to Afghanistan since around December of last year.  So I think it’s obvious, people who at one stage left the country because they feared persecution from the Taliban no longer have to fear the Taliban because the Taliban are no longer in office.

 REPORTER: But it’s the returnees that are causing some of the problem, a million extra people, they don’t have the food to actually cope with any more.

 DOWNER: Well, there’s substantial aid programs in Afghanistan.  Actually I don’t know that it’s lack of aid  which  is  the  problem,  I think  the  problem  in  Afghanistan  depends  very much  on  where you go in the country.  Some parts of the country are peaceful.  In some parts of the country there’s  still  tension.   Some  of  that  revolving  around  fighting  between  al  Qaeda  and  the Taliban against coalition forces including Australian troops and in some cases, some tensions between warlords.

 But take this as an … I take this opportunity to say that the overwhelming vote for the interim president Karzai to become the president of Afghanistan for the next 18 months is a symbol of a greater degree of national unity than some may have originally thought would be possible and that’s a very good sign that the president has been able to rally such strong support.  And so I think the situation is progressively improving in Afghanistan but, I mean, it is a difficult situation still, of course, there’s no question of that.

 But in the context of the United Nations convention on refugees, people no longer have to fear or need fear persecution in returning to Afghanistan and, I mean, one of the points we make is that if we provide people with some financial assistance when they do return to Afghanistan, even  though  they’ve  endeavoured  illegally  to  come  to  our  country,  in  those  circumstances they’ll have an opportunity to re-establish their lives there.

 REPORTER: And what if they don’t, how long is too long …

 DOWNER: Well, I mean that’s a hypothetical question, what if people don’t do things.  You don't know whether they will or they won't.  I think as time goes on they’ll increasingly realise that this is the intelligent option for them.

 REPORTER: So presumably you have fallback situations … ?

 DOWNER: In case they refuse?  Well, we discussed how we’re going to encourage them to take up the offer that’s been made to them, and we’re optimistic that in time they will.

 REPORTER: Those repatriation packages haven’t proven very popular with people in the (indistinct) have they?

 DOWNER: Well I think it’s too early to say.  I think we have to wait and see.  These people we’re talking about  are  in  any case  not  in  detention  centres  in  Australia,  these  people  are  in  Nauru.   The message that I would send to all of these people is a strong but a fair message.  And that is that  they have  …  where  they have  been  found  not  to  be  refugees  they are  illegal  migrants. They've  endeavoured  to  come  to  our  country  without  passports  or  visas  or  appropriate documentation.  There are perfectly well used and effective methods of coming to Australia … to this country … which are entirely legal.  They've chosen to circumvent legal methods of coming to Australia, they're not refugees, and they should return home.

 REPORTER: There are a number of Iranians on Nauru that have been processed and accepted as refugees (indistinct).  What percentage of (indistinct) Australia?

 DOWNER: Well, as we said, people who are refugees, Philip Ruddock is managing the exact destinations, but they’ll all be looked after.

 REPORTER: Will some come to Australia?

 DOWNER: Well, you'll have to ask Mr Ruddock that question.

 REPORTER: So will you be urging Labor members to cross the floor and support the excisions?

 DOWNER: Yes, I would, I would urge … well because the Labor Party traditionally runs sort of a three-line whip, that if you vote against the Labor Party in the parliament you get expelled from the Labor  Party.   I wouldn't  call  that  a  soft  and  democratic  way of  running  an  organisation  but anyway, that’s Labor for you.  It’s an authoritarian sort of a party.

 But look, I would say to the Labor Party the problem with Mr Crean’s position is that nobody knows  what  the  Labor  Party  stands  for.   One  week  they  say  they're  going  to  be  tough  on asylum seekers, they're going to be tough on people smugglers; the next week they say they're going to give people smugglers a free kick.  And today the Labor Party has given a present to the people smugglers.  The only people who’ll be opening the champagne tonight will be the people smugglers celebrating the decision that the Labor Party has made.

 REPORTER: Have you considered ways of forcibly removing people from Nauru, and, if so, what are the ways?

 DOWNER: No, we’re not considering ways of forcibly removing them.  We’re providing incentives for them to leave and we are optimistic that in time they will accept those incentives.

 REPORTER: Is there any (indistinct) way that you are having those incentives applied?  Like …

 DOWNER: Well  look,  we’ve  only  just  announced  them.   I  mean,  if  I  may  say  so,  without  wishing  to sound,  as  a  foreign  minister  would  never  sound,  even  remotely  exasperated  with  the repetitious nature of these questions, they … these people, remember the bulk of these people have only just been found in the last few days not to be refugees.  So they will obviously be going through a period of contemplating their options.  And we present them with a positive option for settlement back home with some assistance from Australian taxpayers so they’ll be able to re-establish their lives.

 REPORTER: But one of the … this government’s biggest beef is the length to which authorities will go to expire all their avenues of appeal and so on.  So …

 DOWNER: Mmm,  well  they  can,  as  I  understand  it,  in  most  cases,  they  still  have  an  option  of  further appeal.   They  can  do  that  of  course,  and  once  that’s  expired  there  is  no  further  option  for them.

 REPORTER: Why is President (indistinct) happier today than he was a few weeks ago when he was calling for (indistinct)?

 DOWNER: I don't know, are you happy today?  If you're happy today that’s something you could explain. You'll have to talk to him about that and you've had the opportunity to talk to him.

 REPORTER: Finally Minister, International Criminal Court.  I understand that your Coalition partners are saying they're  concerned  that  Australian  courts  should  have  authority over  Australian  cases. Is that something which you believe would be achievable?  Can we put that (indistinct)?

 DOWNER: Yeah, oh look, definitely.  I know that some … well, not just people in the National Party but there  are  people  around  the  country  who  have  some  concerns  that  Australian  courts  should have  primacy.   That’s  my  view  too.   I  think  Australian  courts  should  have  primacy  over Australian  citizens  and  I am  confident  that  the  International  Criminal  Court  will  not  in  any way undermine the primacy of the Australian legal system in relation to Australians.  And I am reassuring my colleagues of that.

 Okay.

 END OF SEGMENT

