---
title: "Australia's refugee stance destroying multiculturalism."
date: "2002-05-01"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236619
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VQF66%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 1 May 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/206

 Australia’s refugee stance destroying multiculturalism

 The Australian Democrats have warned that refugee policies introduced by the Coalition would fracture the fabric of Australian society.

 The Democrats’ Spokesperson on Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Andrew Bartlett, speaking at the Multiculturalism under Pressure conference in Cairns, said that there was no doubt that the Government’s refugee policies, which have continually received bi-partisan support, will have significant social and economic consequences for Australia.

 “In previous years, our strength as a nation has come from the multicultural nature of our society. Our reputation has been one of acceptance and tolerance for all communities,” said Senator Bartlett.

 “But in recent years, attacks on refugees and asylum seekers have been overt, and there can be no denying that they strike at the very heart of multiculturalism.

 “The Government’s stance makes it respectable for some Australians to hate another section of the community. Once it is okay to isolate and demonise one section of the community it is much easier to attack other minority groups.  This new emerging Australia is one we won’t want to live in.

 “The use of asylum seekers and refugees as a political tool by the two major parties has divided Australia and demonised migrant communities. Tolerance and compassion has given way to ignorance and blame, which has been directed at all Australians from an ethnically diverse background.

 “The cost will not just be social, but economic. The weakening of multiculturalism will ultimately mean lost opportunities for economic arrangements with other nations,” said Senator Bartlett.

 The Democrats warned that the temporary protection visa regime could result in second and third generation of temporary refugees living in a permanent state of instability, with obvious implications for the greater community.

 “Refugees arrive in Australia deeply traumatised. They are abused, detained, threatened and deliberately separated from their families for indefinite periods of time. They are denied access to Government assistance, given life long temporary visas and publicly demonised.

 “The Australian Government has no intention of investing any goodwill into these people. These punitive measures prevent people from healing and contributing to Australia.

 “One can only assume that they will harbour a life long resentment against the country which does this to them. This will result in a divided community and the failure of multiculturalism,” concluded Senator Bartlett. For further information contact: Senator Andrew Bartlett on 0418 743 789

 Please note: Senator Bartlett will speak at 11:30am (today) 1 May at the Multiculturalism under Pressure Forum being held at the Tradewinds Room, Pacific International Hotel, 43 The Esplanade, Cairns, Queensland.

