---
title: "Visit by Iranian Foreign Minister."
date: "2002-06-19"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211240589
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0XS66%22
---

 Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER FA90                     19 June 2002

 VISIT BY IRANIAN FOREIGN MINISTER

 The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Dr Kamal Kharrazi, visited Australia from 17 to 19 June.  This successful visit, the first by an Iranian Foreign Minister in over a decade, reciprocated my visit to Iran in July 2000.  During Dr Kharrazi’s time in Australia, I was able to reinforce our commitment to our relationship with Iran’s reformist Government.  Dr Kharrazi and I also exchanged views on a range of international issues, including the Middle East conflict and the war against terrorism.

 I am pleased to announce that Australia and Iran have agreed to establish a mechanism that will enable our two countries to cooperate on regional and international human rights issues and to discuss the human rights situation in our respective countries.  The establishment of this dialogue reflects a practical and constructive approach to addressing human rights issues. We plan to conduct the first round later this year.  We will also consider possible technical cooperation activities, including human rights education and training for the judiciary.

 Dr Kharrazi and I discussed in some detail Australia’s concerns, which are widely shared in the international community, about the development of weapons of mass destruction, especially in the Middle East.  Dr Kharrazi outlined Iran’s views on these issues and we agreed to explore them further at officials talks in Tehran in August.

 Dr Kharrazi and I agreed that we would like to expand our already strong trading relationship. He also explored these issues in a meeting with my colleague, the Minister for Trade Mark Vaile.  We agreed that Australia is a very reliable and competitive supplier of wheat to Iran and that it is in the interests of both sides for that to continue.  We would welcome action by Iran to open its economy to Australian investment and further its economic reforms.  We agreed that sending a strong business delegation to accompany Mr Vaile to the Australia-Iran Joint Ministerial Commission in Tehran in September would further the strong trading relationship and improve investment flows.

 In discussions on Iranians in detention in Australia, I reiterated Australia’s view that people who are not refugees should return to their countries of origin.  We discussed options for achieving this.  Dr Kharrazi also discussed this and related issues with my colleague the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs,  Philip Ruddock.

 I expressed Australia’s appreciation for Iran’s commitment to cracking down on trade in illicit drugs and for the cooperation we already enjoy with Iran in this area.

 Dr Kharrazi’s visit was most welcome, building on an already strong relationship with a free exchange of views.  We looked ahead to future opportunities for engagement and cooperation which will benefit both countries.

 Media Inquiries:  Chris Kenny (Ministerial) 02-6277 7500/0419 206 890 Julie McDonald (Departmental) 02-6261 1555

