---
title: "Democrats urge ALP and the Greens to support their call for a broader Senate Inquiry."
date: "2002-02-13"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234131
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/22Y56%22
---

 http://www.democrats.org.au

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Australian Democrats’ Immigration Spokesperson

 13 February 2002  MEDIA RELEASE                          02/056

 Democrats urge ALP and the Greens to support their call for a broader Senate Inquiry The Australian Democrats support the ALP’s call for a Senate inquiry into refugee children being thrown overboard, but are calling for the inquiry’s expansion to include the ‘Pacific Solution’, and the use of Australian defence personnel in the turning around, detaining and transporting of boatpeople.

 Senator Andrew Bartlett, the Australian Democrats’ spokesperson for Immigration, says that the Senate inquiry needs to be a comprehensive one, particularly as the Government’s refugee policy has had far-reaching consequences for our Pacific and Asian neighbours, as well as our own community.

 “The Democrats are seeking to have the matter referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Reference Committee for Inquiry, with a report due on 19 June 2002.”

 Primary concerns for the Democrats include, but are not limited to:

 (a) The impact on the operations of Navy and other defence forces due to their use in turning around, detaining and transporting boat people. (b) The processes and criteria being used to assess the asylum seekers who have been transferred to Papua New Guinea and Nauru. (c) The level of access to legal advice for people on PNG and Nauru, and the nature of the facilities in

 which the asylum seekers are detained. (d) Identifying the placement options for those people on Papua New Guinea and Nauru who are found to be refugees. (e) Whether any asylum seekers who are not found to be refugees will be unable to return to their country of

 origin and what will be done in such an event. (f) The extent and nature of Australia's international involvement in facilitating an orderly worldwide system for movement and settlement of refugees. (g) Likely future worldwide trends on the movement of refugees. (h) The impact and operation of the 7 Bills amending the Immigration Act that were passed by the Senate on

 26 September 2001. (i) Reviewing all reports, proposals and recommendations in relation to activities and facilities at the Woomera Immigration Detention Centre, including whether or not the centre should be closed down or

 its operations scaled back.

 Senator Bartlett said, "This is by no means a full list, but it does highlight the areas that require the most urgent answers”.

 "I am also very keen to ensure maximum community input into an inquiry to facilitate a comprehensive examination of this crucial area of public policy.

 "With more than 80 per cent of all asylum seekers detained qualifying as legitimate refugees, and living in the community, it is important that we understand our responsibilities to Australia’s newest members of the community," Senator Bartlett concluded.

 For interview: Senator Bartlett on 0418 743 789 or (02) 6277 3406

