---
title: "Bali conference on people smuggling but why is Pakistan missing from the table?"
date: "2002-02-24"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234414
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RRZ56%22
---

 KEVIN RUDD M.P. Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

 02-022

 MEDIA RELEASE

 BALI CONFERENCE ON PEOPLE SMUGGLING

 BUT WHY IS PAKISTAN MISSING FROM THE TABLE?

 Shadow Foreign Minister, Kevin Rudd, said today that it was unfortunate in the extreme that Pakistan - the largest source country of refugees in the region - will not be represented at this week’s Bali Conference on people smuggling to be co-hosted by Australian Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer.

 Pakistan is home to 3.1 million Afghan refugees in its own right.  There are more Afghan refugees in Pakistan than there are in all other regional states combined.

 These 3.1 million persons represent significant fodder for the international people smuggling industry.

 The purpose of the Bali Conference is to bring about a comprehensive regional agreement on combating unlawful international people movements.

 It has specifically been convened by Mr Downer and his Indonesian co-host at a foreign ministerial level so that major outcomes can be delivered from the convention.

 Pakistan’s absence at both foreign ministerial and ministerial level in general (Islamabad will only be represented by its Jakarta-based Ambassador) represents a real problem in delivering outcomes from the Conference.

 It would have been better if Alexander Downer, following his recent extensive tour of European capitals, had taken some time out to visit Pakistan and other source countries before his return to Australia to ensure that Pakistan was represented at the most senior level possible.

 Instead, Pakistan has delivered a cold shoulder to Australia.  Privately, Pakistan officials advised me in Islamabad in December last year that the absence of any high-level Australian concern about the financial burden faced by Pakistan in being host to 3 million plus Afghan refugees did not create a great reserve of goodwill on the part of Pakistan when it came to Australia’s need to get a good outcome from Bali.

 If Mr Downer was genuinely serious about delivering concrete outcomes, securing Pakistan’s high-level attendance should have been a first priority.

 Beyond that, I have today written to the Indonesia Foreign Minister, Mr Hassan Wirajuda, outlining the Australian Opposition’s bipartisan support for both the Bali Conference and the need for the Conference to produce concrete outcomes to combat the scourge of international people smuggling.

 Mr Rudd said that he believed that real outcomes were needed in four areas:

 o Dealing with the refugee problem at source, given the acute problems of underdevelopment and threats to physical security acting as “push factors” in a range of source countries;

 o Developing a region-wide legal framework against people smuggling so that people smugglers can have no “safe haven” in any jurisdiction across south and south-east Asia and beyond;

 o The parallel development of an enhanced system of extradition treaties between regional states to reinforce the legal regime referred to above; and o Capacity-building in the range of domestic agencies across regional states that have a responsibility for the prevention, interdiction and prosecution of

 people smuggling activity.

 Mr Rudd said he would be monitoring developments closely during the course of the Bali Conference.

 Ends Sunday, 24 February 2002

 For further information contact:  Kevin Rudd, MP on 0418 796 931

