---
title: "Women and Islam. Paper presented at the Islamic Law and the West: Can Secular Laws and Syriah Co-exist? seminar, 19 September 2002"
date: "2002-09-19"
creators:
  - "Hussain, Jamila"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Muslim Australians"
  - "Women"
  - "Equity"
  - "Stereotypes"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211247852
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3V186%22
---

 Women and Islam   

 Ms Jamila Hussain 

 Faculty of Law, University of Technology, Sydney   

 Transcript of paper presented at the   Asian Law Centre / Institute for Comparative and International Law   “Islamic Law and the West: Can Secular Laws and Syariah Co-Exist?” Seminar   on Thursday 19 September, 2002 

 

 

 

 My topic today is women and Islam generally, with a particular emphasis on the lives of  Muslim women in Australia today.     

 Before  you,  you  can  find  a  number  of  rights  which  were  given  to  women  by  the  Holy   Qu’ran in the 7th century A.D., about 1,400 years ago.  If you have a look down that list  of  rights,  can  you  see  any  which  are  not  compatible  with  modern  ideas  on  women’s   rights  and  equality?   The  Qu’ran  gave  spritual  equality  and  also  equality  to  women  in   many legal aspects.  It gave them the right to a separate legal identity (as Dr Faruqi has  pointed out earlier today); the right to own and manage their own property; the right to  inherit rather than the right to be inherited, which was the situation before Islam; the right  to a divorce.  There was a prohibition of female infanticide, which was practiced in pre-Islamic  Arabia;  polygamy  was  restricted  from  as  many  wives  as  a  man  might  like  to  a   maximum of four and then, of course, on the basis that if a man had more than one wife,  he should treat them all equally and fairly.  This was at a time when women in the West  had very few rights and I think if you look back you’ll see that it was really only in the 19th  and  sometimes  as  late  as  the  20th  century  that  Western  women  got  the  right  to  a   separate  legal  identity;  the  right  to  own  their  own  property;  the  right  to  keep  their  own   earnings if they worked; the right to a divorce, which was relatively easily available; and  other rights of that nature.  Islam was very much in advance of Western society at the  very beginning.   

 It’s all very well to have rights, but how do they translate into practice?  We don’t know a  huge  amount  about  the  lives  of  Muslim  women  in  the  early  days  of  Islam,  because   historians  are  generally  men  and  they  generally  concentrate  on  the  things  that  are  of   more interest to them.  The actions of the ruler, who was conducting a war against who,  government and other things of that nature.  There are not many historians who record  the day-to-day lives of women.  But we do know that there were many Muslim women in  those early days who took an active part in different spheres of public life.  We have, for  example,  a  woman  who  owned  and  ran  her  own  business  in  the  Prophet’s  first  wife,   Khadija,  who  was  a  businesswoman  and  employed  the  Prophet  to  look  after  her   business for her.  We have examples of women who worked for a living in the sister of  the Prophet’s wife.  We have examples of women who actually went to war and fought in  battle  and  many  other  women  who  went  to  the  battlefield  and  assisted  in  helping  the   wounded  and  other  incidental  matters  like  that.   We  have  the  example  of  Aisha,  the   Prophet’s wife, who taught men religious knowledge after the Prophet’s death, and who  was recommended as a teacher by the Prophet himself.  Aisha was also the leader of an  army.  She led her troops into the Battle of the Camel against Ali.  We have the example  of  a  woman  who  got  up  in  a  public  forum  and  argued  with  the  Caliph.   When  Caliph  

 Omar tried to limit the amount of dower that could be given to a woman.  A woman stood  up at a mosque and quoted the Qu’ran and the Caliph sat down and admitted that he  was  wrong.   And  we  have  an  example  of  women  who  held  public  office  in  Shifa  Bin   Abdullah, who was appointed the inspector of markets at Madina, and that was a very  important office.  So we know that women in those early days were not shy, shrinking  violets  who  were  staying  at  home  and  not  taking  any  part  in  public  life.   So  what   happened?  Where did it all go wrong?   

 Unfortunately, there are many examples of nearly all the world religions that have started  out  with  a  very  generous  and  liberated  attitude  towards  women’s  affairs.   But  then  as   time goes on, the rot sets in and as a religion becomes more institutionalised, you find  that male patriarchy takes over and women become sidelined and eventually they lose  their  rights.   Now  this,  unfortunately,  also  happened  in  Islam.   As  the  Muslim  empires   expanded, they came to contact with the Persians and the Byzantines, which were very  advanced  and  sophisticated  civilisations  in  many  ways,  and  they  picked  up  on  the   culture that they saw there.  So they started to veil their women and ask them to become  secluded,  rather  than  taking  part  in  public  life.   And  women’s  rights  were  generally   gradually  forgotten  and  just  withered  away.   Unfortunately,  we’ve  got  to  the  situation   which exists in most of the Muslim world now, where women do not have equal rights   with  men  in  the  public  sphere.   We  have  a  wide  range,  really,  from  one  country  to   another.   We  have  one  extreme  in  the  example  of  how  women  were  treated  by  the   Taliban in Afghanistan, where they did not even have access to education, which is one  of their basic Islamic rights; where they were not allowed to take part in public life; where  they were hardly allowed to leave the house, and certainly not unless covered from head  to  foot.   And  at  the  other  extreme,  we  have  much  more  liberal  societies,  such  as   Malaysia  and  Indonesia,  where  women  do  take  part  in  public  life  and  do  play  a  very   important part.  These are all Muslim or Islamic societies.     

 There  is  a  sign  of  change  happening  now.   I  was  in  Saudi  Arabia  in  March  and  we   always  think  of  Saudi  Arabia  as  being  an  extremely  conservative  society  in  relation  to   women’s issues.  I was most surprised to meet a number of Saudi women who are very  well educated, very Westernised in many ways, who are working and who are starting to  come  forward  and  question  the  laws  which  keep  their  lives  very  restricted.   I  think  the   process of change will probably be slow, but it is starting and we will have to see what  happens there in the future.   

 We also shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that most Muslim countries are countries of the  South,  or  developing  countries,  and  that  many  of  them  are  beset  by  poverty,  illiteracy   and the consequent reliance on traditional custom rather than knowledge, as Dr Faruqi  also  mentioned  before.   In  a  country  where  everyone  is  poor,  where  education  is  not   available, you can’t really expect a very high standard of intellectual debate and a very  great and sudden advance in women’s rights.  It’s a very slow process and to achieve  women’s  rights,  we  also  have  to  have  a  look  at  the  things  that  are  holding  them  back   and look at improving people’s standard of living, improving the standard of education,  both of the ordinary people and of the people in charge.   

 Recent Trends   

 In the last forty years or so, there has been a quite strong Islamic revival in many Muslim  countries throughout the world.  This has also affected women, in that more women are  becoming  conscious  of  and  proud  of  their  Muslim  identity  and  you  will  see  far  more  

 women now wearing hijab or a scarf in Muslim countries, as well as Western countries,  and normally they are wearing that because they choose to do so, because they want to  be recognised as Muslims, because they are proud of their faith, and not because some  man is saying you can’t go outside the house unless you’re wearing a scarf.  There are  more women who are seeking religious knowledge.  They are holding study circles, both  private and informal ones and more formal ones, and educating themselves about their  Islamic rights, as well as other aspects of education.    

 There are many more women who are seeking a return to the primary texts to go back to  the Qu’ran and the Hadith, to look at what those texts said about women’s rights and to  pass over some of the traditional interpretations, which have been very negative as far  as  women  are  concerned  because  the  jurists  who  interpreted  the  law  were  men  who   were interpreting it in the contexts of their own societies, mostly in medieval times.  Their  views of women’s place in society were not the ideas that people would have today, and  they were not the ideas of women’s place in society which were in existence at the time  of the Prophet.  There is a need to pass over all those backward-type interpretations, go  back to the original texts and see what rights the Qu’ran gave women and ask for those  rights to be put into practice.  That is happening slowly but surely in quite a number of  different Muslim countries.   

 Muslim Women in Australia   

 We have a stereotype and you’ve probably seen it in the media more than once.  Every  time  there’s  a  story  about  Muslims,  the  media  rushes  out,  grabs  some  lady  who  is   dressed in black, preferably with a face veil, stands her in front of the mosque, takes a  photo  and  that’s  the  illustration  of  Muslim  women  in  Australia.   So  we  have  this   stereotype that they come from Arab countries, they are uneducated, they don’t speak  English or they don’t speak English well, they wear long, black robes with face veils (or  long,  black  robes  anyway),  they  don’t  work  outside  the  home  (in  fact  their  husbands   won’t allow them to go outside the home), they don’t participate in society and they have  to do what their husbands tell them to do.  Now, is this stereotype correct?  I think there  are a few women who would represent this stereotype, but not very many, very few in  fact.   

 

 In the first point, that women are mostly Arabs.  Well, sorry, they’re not.  The Lebanese  community, I think, makes up about 13% of Muslim migrants and the Turkish community  makes up about 11%.  The Turks are not Arabs.  The rest of the community is made up  from  people  from  about  67  different  countries,  including  all  the  ones  up  there  on  the   screen  [Egypt,  Turkey,  Pakistan,  India,  Sudan,  Sri  Lanka,  Iran,  Iraq,  Lebanon,  Fiji,   Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Palestine, Somalia, Bosnia, Australia] and quite a lot of others  as well.  So the Muslim community in Australia is a very diverse community and Muslim  women, being half of that community, are also very diverse.  Another important factor is  that about 36% now are born in Australia so they are Australian Muslims.  Their parents  might be Lebanese, Turkish, Egyptian or whatever, but they are born in Australia, they  see themselves as Australian, but they also see themselves as Muslims.  So that goes  contrary to the stereotype.  Of course most of them are educated in Australian schools  because, although we have Islamic schools, they only educate a very small proportion of  the community.     

 Education   

 Secondly, there is very recent research by Dr Christine Asmar from Sydney University  on the participation of Muslims in higher education in this country.  As she found, and I’m  sure to her surprise and I’m sure to the surprise of many other people, Muslim women  are  more  highly  represented  in  higher  education  than  are  Australian  women,  and  I’ve   noticed  this  in  the  Faculty  where  I  teach.   When  I  first  started  at  UTS  about  six  years   ago,  there  wasn’t  a  Muslim  woman  in  sight,  but  nowadays  they  are  becoming  quite   common.  It is not unusual to meet a lady in her hijab in the corridors of the Law School.   However,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  of  course  a  large  number  of  women  who  are   refugees or who have not had the advantage of an education and so in the community  itself, you’ve got a very wide range of educational qualifications and abilities.  And that’s  the  same  in  every  mainstream  Australian  community.   You’ve  got  the  very  highly   educated and you’ve got people at the other end of the spectrum who have scarcely any  education at all.   

 

 Women’s Dress   

 The problem that seems to exercise the minds of the media more than anything else is  the  question  of  what  Muslim  women  wear.   I  think  Terry  Lane  was  writing  in  the   Melbourne  papers,  wondering  whether  Muslim  women  could  really  be  accepted  as   Australians if they insisted on wearing a scarf.  Pamela Bain has also raised the same  issue.  “Take off those veils”, she said as a headline in one of her articles.  It seems to  preoccupy non-Muslims to a far greater extent than perhaps it should.  It doesn’t matter  if women wear a scarf or not.  We accept that women can go and wear very little on the  beach, and nobody objects to that, but it seems to be a problem when women wear a  scarf.  I don’t know why, maybe someone can enlighten me.     

 You’ll find here that the dress of Muslim women varies a lot.  Some dress in a traditional  manner,  especially  if  they’re  first  generation  migrants  and  they  tend  to  dress  the  way   people  did  in  their  homeland.   If  you  go  overseas  for  a  couple  of  years,  in  another   country,  you’re  probably  going  to  keep  wearing  the  same  dress  that  you  wear  too.    You’re  not  going  to  suddenly  wear  a  sari  or  cheongsam  or  something  like  that,  so  it’s   quite  normal.   A  lot  of  Muslim  women  just  wear  ordinary  Western  dress,  but  the  thing   that is important, I think, is that the Qur’an says dress modestly and that applies to both  men  and  women.   So  modesty  is  very  important  to  Muslim  women  but  the  amount  of   clothing that they wear is not necessarily an indication of how religious they are.  Indeed,  some  very  religious  people  wear  Western  dress  and  there  are  some  not  so  religious   people who just wear ordinary dress.     

 Occupations   

 There is a range of occupations.  I know a Muslim woman who was in each one of these  occupations,  so  there  is  everything  from  a  traffic  engineer  to  shopkeepers,  teachers,   social  workers,  journalists  and  all  sorts  of  other  occupations.   Muslim  women  are   everywhere as far as work is concerned, and so they should be.  Of course they haven’t  yet reached these fairly exultant positions.  We have a Commissioner on the Industrial  Commission in New South Wales, so that’s a very good start and we’ve had women who  have been Judge’s associates, so they’ll get there in the end.     

 Participation in Society   

 Muslim women are very active, mostly in their own ethnic groups because that’s where  the need is most strongly felt, especially since the Federal government has cut funding  to community organisations.  It has become very important to do voluntary work in these  areas.   Teaching  English,  because  it’s  very  hard  to  function  in  Australia  if  you  can’t   speak  English,  different  kinds  of  vocational  education  which  will  help  women  get  jobs,   like  computer  skills,  different  children’s  activities  and,  most  important  (and  my  own   organisation does a lot of this), educating women in their Islamic rights so that they know  what they are entitled to and they won’t be fooled by some of the men in their society  who tell them that you can’t do this and you can’t do that.  They’re acting in welfare work  and  another  very  important  field  is  inter-faith  work,  with  principally  the  Christian  and   Jewish communities, but also other major faith communities.   

 I just want to round up by talking about the effect that some recent events have had on  Muslim  women  in  Australia.   We’ve  had  three  major  problems.   We’ve  had  the  border   protection  and  the  Tampa  crisis,  where  the  government  felt  that  appropriating  Pauline   Hanson’s ideas was the best way to win the election and so we had Cabinet ministers  say  that  “Muslims  throw  their  children  overboard,  they’re  illegal,  we  don’t  want  them”.    Then we had September 11 and the great deal of anti-Muslim feeling which arose out of  that.   And  in  New  South  Wales  we’ve  had  the  Lebanese  gang  rape  crisis,  where  a   number of young men of Lebanese background (although they were all born in Australia)  gang raped a number of young Australian women.  Of course these people, if they had  been  sporting  heroes  or  if  they  had  won  medals  at  the  Olympics,  would  have  been   Australians in all the media, but when they commit a crime, they’re Lebanese Muslims.   And that has had a very adverse impact on the Muslim community.     

 Muslim  women  tend  to  bear  most  of  the  bad  feeling  that’s  around,  simply  because   they’re visible.  If you can see a woman wearing a hijab, you know she’s a Muslim.  If  you want to vilify a Muslim man, you’ve got to perhaps stop someone on the street and  ask “Are you a Muslim?”, because otherwise you wouldn’t know.  Muslim women have  been  very  much  affected,  and  just  a  couple  of  examples  here  of  things  that  have   happened  recently.   There  is  a  Muslim  girls’  school  in  Sydney  which  booked  the  local   swimming pool during Winter for one hour per week on a weekday and one pool only, of  the three pools for swimming classes for the girls.  Community objections were such that  they  had  to  cancel  those  classes.   People  objected  because  they  were  for  Muslim   women only so the girls no longer have swimming classes.  There was also an attempt  to close a woman only gym which was owned by Muslim women because people were  writing to the press saying Muslim women can’t be exclusive, they can’t have their own  gym.   So  the  rights  of  Muslim  women  are  being  affected  by  anti-Muslim  feeling  which   there  is  in  the  community.   I  sincerely  hope  that  that’s  not  going  to  be  a  continuing   situation.   

