---
title: "Terrorism today."
date: "2002-05-08"
creators:
  - "Butler, Richard"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "International relations"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "National security"
  - "Federal issue"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211236808
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3LY66%22
---

  1

 TERRORISM TODAY 

 

 RICHARD BUTLER  MAY 9, 2002  HOBART, AUSTRALIA 

 

 

 For the ten years following the end of the Cold War, from 1990 until the turn of the  century, it became increasingly unclear what the fundamental dynamic of international  relations in the early part of the 21st century, would be. The collapse of the Soviet Union  and the resultant end of bipolar competition seemed to remove what had been seen, no  matter how reluctantly, as the organising principle of contemporary international  relations.   

 

 The competition between the United States and the Soviet Union had been desparate and  global.  It was truly a war, and even though the danger of it turning hot was avoided, (in  at least one instance - the Cuban missile crisis - this had been a close call) some public  figures, scholars, and commentators, seemed to lament the passing of an age where all  important values had been clear - the free west versus the "evil empire" of Soviet  communism.   

 When it was over, we in the West said we had won the war, where the truth was a little  more complex, namely, the Soviets had lost.  This is not a quibble.  Much error has  flowed from western triumphalism over the collapse of this Soviet Union.  The - we  

 won rather than they lost error - is one of the best contemporary examples of how 

 incredibly important it is for us to always know the real reason for events. 

 

 In 1990, the first President Bush declared that "a new world order" had emerged and 

 looked forward to: the world wide spread of democracy; universal adoption of the free 

 market economic system; and global cooperation, including between what had been the 

 major adversaries.  

 

 For a few months, his vision seemed to have been broadly accurate, in each of the three 

 areas.  Certainly this was the case at the Security Council of the United Nations, one of 

 the key centres for the organisation of global political cooperation.  

 

  2

 In the prior forty years, in the Security Council, the two deathly combatants had each cast 

 some 250 vetos, greatly abusing the original purpose of that unique power in order to 

 defend their empire, in the case of the Soviet Union, and their special clients, such as 

 Israel, in the case of the United States.  Beginning in 1990, the Security Council seemed 

 to enter a vetoless phase.  Indeed, there was a comical sanctimony amongst Ambassadors 

 of the five permanent members of the Council, who would place their hand on their heart 

 and exclaim "the veto?  Would I do a thing like that?" 

 

 The real answer, actually, was - absolutely!  As Australian Ambassador to the United 

 Nations, I sat for five years on the committee to reform the Security Council. All 

 proposed reforms were vetoed by the five permanent members.   

 The first test of the new age came in August 1990 when Saddam Hussein sent his army  into Kuwait, an action which consituted the first instance, since the foundation of the  United Nations, of a member State seeking to absorb a fellow member State.   

 President Bush said this action would not be allowed to stand and began working, both  through the Security Council and in the wider international community, to achieve  political legitimacy for the expulsion of Iraq from Kuwait and the military means to  achieve that, if that proved necessary.    

 For almost six months the Security Council demanded that Iraq withdraw and backed up  this demand by imposing far reaching sanctions on it. Saddam refused to comply and in  January 1991, military action led by the United States with some 29 other countries  participating and legitimated by resolutions of the Security Council, began.  It succeeded  rapidly in forcing Iraq out of Kuwait.   

 In another unprecented move, the Security Council then established a special  commission, UNSCOM, as a sub organ of the council, to bring about the removal of  Iraq's weapons of mass destruction capability.  That commission was led intially by Rolf  Ekeus, of Sweden, and later by me.   

 The council had in mind that UNSCOM’s job should have taken from between 12-24  months.  In the event, Iraq ejected the commission seven years later, with the job still not  completed.   

  3

 The United Nations and coalition actions against Iraq did seem, in the first instance, to  justify President Bush's assertion that a new world order had been born.  The coalition  included states from east, west and the arab world.  The far reaching resolutions of the  council on Iraq would not have been possible had there not been an entirely new level of  cooperation between Russia and the United States.  That cooperation continued for a  further few years and was evident in fields other than with respect to the problems in the  Persian Gulf and the Middle East.  But as the years passed, there were increasingly  diverse, and ever stronger signs of an unease amongst nations about a unipolar world and  about some of the policies of the sole super power-the United States.   

 Two countries in particular were increasingly uneasy - China and France - both also  permanent members of the Security Council and therefore in possession of the veto  power.  Their reasons were different.   

 China's, as ever, had to do with its abiding obsession - the Unity of China.  During the  period when I took part in meetings of the Security Council, on the Iraq issue, I never  heard a Chinese intervention which did not begin with the assertion that the fundamental  value was the sovereignty of the State and the need for it to be free from any intervention,  including multilateral intervention.  Its concern was and remains that neither the United  States nor the international community would ever be able to intervene on the Taiwan or  Tibet issues.  China saw the United Nation's actions in Iraq as containing within it the  possibility of establishing an example of, if not precedent for intervention which night,  one day, be applied to Tibet in particular.   

 

 France's growing hostility to United States' power rested on more self centred concerns  about what it might do to France's role in the world, including the use of the French  language.  There was also an historic French preference for multi polarity because of the  French belief that such a more complex state of affairs provided a more fertile field for  the exercise of fabled French diplomacy.   

 

 It was evident that, with the fall of the Berlin Wall, a world had passed away.  But it was  not clear what would replace that world.  This was the case in spite of: the claims of the  then US President; the clarifying actions of a veto-less Security Council; and, the  virtually universal rejection of the actions of Saddam Hussein.   

 The coming to power in Washington of the administration of George W. Bush, followed  by a series of early policy decisions which signalled that his administration's 

  4

 interpretation of American power was to be selfish and isolationist, did nothing to reduce  uncertainty about a unipolar world.   

 

 The terrorist attack on the United States on September 11, 2001 swept away all such  uncertainty.  The future uses of American power was immediately clarified, in both fact  and doctrine. It would be deployed in a war against terrorism, globally.   

 

 Bush II made a series of statements which included the assertions that: those who did not  help the United States would be considered to be its enemies; the war on terrorism would  be permanent; it gave the United States the right to execute preemptive strikes; and,  perhaps most extravagantly, what was at issue was a contest between good and evil with  respect to which the United States had exclusive right to determine which persons,  countries and actions fitted into which of those categories.  Among other instances of this  was the President's assertion that `an axis of evil' existed, an assertion which Secretary of  State Colin Powell was obliged to spend the subsequent six weeks clarifying or  explaining to Congress and around the world.   

 New relationships were forged by the United States with Russia, China, India, Pakistan -  in each case leading to the setting aside of major issues of concern to the United States in  the policies and conduct of those other States.  The War on Terrorism fostered more than  a few convenient marriages.   

 Old relationships, such as those with Europe and Japan were at least implicitly  downgraded, although within Europe the United Kingdom and its nimble Prime Minister  were identified as an exceptional friend of the United States.   

 The costs of 9-11 were massive and still incalcuable.  But what is clear, with respect to  financial costs, is that the prosecution of the War on Terrorism has blown away the  surplus the incoming administration inherited from President Clinton and Bush II's  current budgetary proposals involve a level of spending on defense, in the next five years,  which is simply astonishing. 

 

 There are many other effects of 9-11 which could be mentioned and the full implications 

 of which are not yet visible.  It is essential to recognize however that the reaction of the 

 United States' administration, and to some extent the people of the United States, to the 

 outrages committed last September has been to place the existence of terrorism in the 

 world and the need for it to be defeated at the center of all foreign and security policy. 

  5

 What happened on 9-11 was an outrage and terrorism must be defeated, but, a decision to 

 subjugate all other issues and concerns to the United States policy on terrorism, holds the 

 very great danger of obscuring the fact that there are other major issues and conditions in 

 the world which must be dealt with and, indeed, include conditions which have bearing 

 on the very existence of non-state groups prepared to use terrorism as the expression of 

 their hostility to existing conditions, and their determination to change them. 

 

 To make this point is not to excuse the murders of 9-11 or, worse, in some implicit way 

 to blame the victim, but we need to know the origin of things, the reason for events, such 

 as the end of the Cold War.  If we do not, we will not forge the right policies.  This is the 

 dictum of a practical application of the dictum that if we fail to learn from history's 

 mistakes we will be condemned to repeat them.  We need to know accurately how it has 

 come about that there are, now in existence networks of people and groups prepared to 

 use indiscriminate homicide as an expression of their beliefs or goals.   

 There are a multiplicity of such sources but I would identify four as being paramount - 

 unreliable and corrupt political systems, economic inequity, the circulation of wrong and 

 often deeply and wilfully misleading information about current events and their origin, 

 and, the interpretation of cultural differences in ways which seem to suggest the existence 

 of inherent or implacable hostility amongst various groups of people.   

 Former Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, in his recent Cohen lecture at Lehigh High 

 University, described cogently this phenomenon  

 "the great dangers come from political problems - some of them with underlying 

 economic and social causes - that are unresovled, unaddressed, incompetently 

 addressed or deliberatly left to fester, until they become so acute they explode.  

 Part of the fall-out of such explosions can be terrorism, including international 

 terrorism, but terrorism is not in and of itself a self-driving concept, or in and of 

 itself an "enemy". it is not even an ideology as anarchism was in the 19th century.  

 Rather it is a tool or tactic, resorted to in particular by the weak against the strong - 

 weak individuals, weak group's, weak States."   

 If a key problem which confronted States, including the United States, in the decade 

 following the Cold War was that of the uses of American power, then it is the case that a 

  6

 consequence of 9-11 has been the removal of ambiguity about those uses.  American 

 power will be deployed relentlessly against terrorism and its supporters.   

 This raises two truly serious problems - will the United States alone make all of the 

 relevant assessments and determinations of what constitutes a terrorist and therefore a 

 legitimate target of attack and, what, will happen to the other international agenda: the 

 alleviation of poverty, the management of the global environment and climate, the 

 management of oil supplies and prices, trade in arms, the non proliferation of weapons of 

 mass destruction, trade in narcotics, the growth in HIV and, the growing flow of 

 refugees.   

 These are matters which demand attention and which, if they are not attended to, will 

 increase the impetus of terrorist action against western developed countries, particularly 

 the United States.   

 If 9-11 were to become an obsessive concern, and there are signs that this is the case, we 

 will suffer the consequences that typically accompany obsessive behaviour. 

 

 Matters of intrinsic importance, which existed before 9-11, and continue to exist - such as 

 the growing gap between rich and poor in the world - will be deprived of the attention 

 they demand, because of the obsession.   

 In addition, at a deeper but dramatically powerful perceptual and psychological level, 

 there are the notions of equity and principle at issue in the response to 9-11.   

 The notion of equity is one of the most powerful motivations of humans.  Simply, if  prevailing circumstances, conditions, events, are perceived to be unfair, unequal, then  people become at least hopelessly alienated and very often extremely angry.  This is  inadequately recognised by the current U.S administration.  It is a dangerous failure.   

 Equally, the spectacle of western policy makers insisting that certain political principles  and principles of human rights must be followed everywhere, or else, but then bending  them to the needs of their war on terrorism does not go unnoticed.   

 The history of international relations has always been a dismal one from the standpoint of  the consistent observance of principles, even principles solemnly agreed in high councils  and then inscribed on parchment - such as in the charter of the United Nations.   

  7

 This has not escaped the attention of the philosophers from Plato through Machiavelli to  E.H.Carr.  But all point out the dangers posed by inequity and failure to attempt to apply  agreed principles consistently.  The now historic failure, hopefully to be rectified soon, to  extend to the Palestinian people the same right which supports the State of Israel - a  secure nation-state - has caused untold suffering and cost, both in situ and globally.  And,  it is not unconnected to the problems under discussion at this conference on terrorism.   

 

 If there are principles which support utter resistance to terrorism and I believe deeply that  there are, in both law and morality, then their widespread acceptance will rely, above all,  on them being applied to all and applied consistently.   

 In this context, I would call specific attention to an important study, published this year,  on the 20th century's most hideous failure - to resist and prevent genocide.   

 Samantha Power's book ."  A Problem from Hell" does many things but certainly makes  the case for the absolute necessity for key human principles to be defended, consistently,  everywhere.   

 For Australia, there are obvious direct actions that need to be taken to prevent and,  hopefully make a contribution to, the elimination of terrorism.   

 The key such actions are: greatly improved intelligence; strengthened domestic security  measures; continued control over the entrance of goods and persons into our national  territory; an increase in our level of international cooperation in these areas; and,  insistence on the continuing development and application of international law designed to  deter and punish terrorism.   

 Action to maintain Australian national security, in the face of what has now emerged as  the contemporary terrorist threat, should rest on a basic, logical, structure.   

 It begins with our seeking to have the greatest possible advance knowledge of those  threats.  This means we need to improve our own national intelligence capability.  The  keylimits to that are, and must be, financial and, the need to preserve the civil and privacy  rights of our own people in relation to the actions of the intelligence agencies.  We have a  reasonable track record in this area, but it can be improved and targeted more sharply on  the contemporary threat.   

  8

 That Australia has suffered little, so far, from the transplantation of ancient disputes from  Europe and Asia to Australia, as people from those areas have come here and become  Australians, is a major achievement.   

 The rise of modern terrorism and let us recognise, the increase in its popularity and 

 mystique as the ancient problems have remained unsolved, and the gaps between equity 

 and principle already referred to have grown, means that we may not be so fortunate in 

 the future.  We will need a greater quality and quantity of information on what actions 

 terrorist groups may be planning.   

 Similarly we need a greater degree of international intelligence cooperation, in this area. 

 the phenomenon at issue, as with so many activities in the contemporary world, is a 

 global one.   

 International intelligence cooperation is a take-no-prisoners business.  No information is 

 free.  Trades of information and careful nurturing of relationships are required and there 

 are inequalities deriving from the differing sizes of power of national intelligence 

 capabilities.  

 

 Australia has established specific areas of expertise and capability in this field.  It should 

 use those in cooperation with others, to enhance our security.  But it should trade 

 carefully. 

 

 Above all, it must preserve its independence of judgement. All intelligence materials 

 need the most scrupulous analysis and assessment. They can be wrong and tainted. 

 

 I believe a particular warning is appropriate in the present context.  We have a deep and 

 obviously extremely useful relationship with the United States in the field of intelligence 

 cooperation.  That should be maintained, but we must take great care to ensure that 

 judgements and objectives driven by US policy and US domestic politics are not 

 uncritically accepted by us as hard, objective intelligence materials when they may not 

 be.  

 

 Alliances have their inherent peculiarities, as well as their obvious benefits.  They can 

 challenge the independence of the smaller partner.  It is not in our national interest for 

 any such challenge to succeed, ever, but perhaps especially when our partner has 

 announced a doctrine of unfettered right to intervene militarily whenever it chooses, 

 associated with the notion that those who are not with them, are against them.  

  9

 

 A condition of basic importance to our security is to be able to regulate the entry of goods 

 and people into our national territory.  We, like all comparable countries, have done this 

 for a very long time, not least for financial reasons - customs  duties. We have particular 

 characteristics which influence our procedures deriving from the fact that we are an 

 island and from the need to keep our plants and animals safe from diseases which have 

 not existed indigenously. 

 

 In today's world: with trade as it has developed; sea borne trade based on countless  containers; massive flows of people, including, increasingly, involuntary and refugee  flows; the exercise of surveillance, let alone control of those flows, has become  immensely difficult.   

 A perfect outcome now seems impossible.  This is not to say that effectiveness cannot be 

 increased.  It can. The logic referred to earlier, moves from better information to 

 improved surveillance and control exercised, inter alia, on the basis of that information, 

 to strengthened domestic procedures designed to deter and/or prevent terrorist actions.   

 All of these actions are best conducted within a framework of law, both domestic and  international. While terrorists elementally challenge notions of legitimacy, action against  them which ignore or bend agreed legal standards would both fulfil the terrorists worst,  demonic, picture of the conventional order, and remove our ability to benefit from a key  part of the law prosecution and punishment of offenders.   

 Given the contemporary, post 9 -11 challenge, there is a case for the strengthening of  existing international law and procedures on terrorism. Australian international lawyers  have made outstanding contributions to the development of international law.  They  should do so again, in this field.   

 The need to engage ordinary Australians and the relevant professions - intelligence and 

 security officials; lawyers; the armed forces; policy advisors - in protecting our security is 

 not aided, indeed dangerously retarded, when those seeking elected office and then to 

 form the government, misrepresent the terrorism, refugee and security issues in order to 

 win elections; and are widely known to have done so, including possibly by recourse to 

 the fabrication of events.   

 Such action might help with an election in a popular democracy, that this appears to have 

 happened in Australia last year does not suggest that ordinary Australians are more 

 gullible, more prone to being frightened than their counterparts in comparable countries. 

  10

 

 Having lived for quite a while in the United States, my feeling is that the ability of 

 ordinary Australians to make up their own mind and resist manipulation, is very high in 

 comparison with others.   

 

 But there is the possibility of politicians exploiting incipient anxiety and xenophobia in 

 circumstances such as we faced when the Tampa was approaching our territory.  Prime 

 Minister Howard and his close colleagues did that last year in a manner which harmed 

 the Australian consciousness at home, and trashed our reputation abroad.   

 What was most disappointing in last year's events was that rather than seeking to lead the 

 Australian people to a clearer understanding of the inter-connectedness of our 

 world, the Prime Minister shot low, to win an election.  He and his colleagues have 

 argued that they were merely serving known public opinion.  Maybe, but they certainly 

 did nothing to inform it or lead it to a better place.   

 Domestic politics aside, these actions do not serve well the need to build the required  structures against terrorism.  They lead to massive investment in stopping boat people not  real terrorists.   

 The terrorist action which must be feared most is an attack with a nuclear or radiological  weapon.  This is possible.  Such a weapon would not require a missile or aircraft for its  delivery, a suitcase would do.  The likelihood of this occuring is not small.  Prevention of  it will require major international cooperation and continuing defence of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and other nuclear arms controls.  These latter arrangements are  currently under great pressure, principally as a result of new U.S. nuclear weapons  policies, the development of which has been explained as a response to September 11  there is, at least, a lapse in logic here.   

 For the longer term, the current state of our globalized world indicates that major action 

 is required on three fronts,not because of the problem of terrorism, but because these are 

 the three areas in which profound failure is occuring and great danger can be identified.  

 In each of these areas we need nothing less than a whole new paradigm.   

 The first of these is in the field of economic equity. Whatever benefits the realignment of  global economic relations, commonly called globalisation, have brought in  the last 20 years, alleviation of poverty in any comprehensive way has not been one of  them.  It is the case that while the world is now creating more wealth than ever before 

  11

 there are also more deeply poor people than ever before.  This is an unhealthy and  dangerous situation it has a bearing on the growth of terrorism.    

 The structures that have both produced this and seek to deal with it are clearly  inadequate.  They remain rooted in economic, political, administrative and indeed,  ideological constructs which are incapable of bringing about a more equitable distribution  of wealth.  Some new approaches have been tried, such as that of micro credit devised by  Mohammed Yunnus, but overall, a whole new paradigm for eliminating poverty needs to  be constructed.   

 The post Cold War cant about free markets fixing it all, is manifestly wrong.  Some of the  world's most successful capitalists, such as George Soros, and successful communists,  such as the Chinese, agree that past approaches to this crucial problem don't work.   

 Second, the field of information.  A good deal of the conflict and hostility that takes place  between nations and peoples today is abundantly fuelled by information and propaganda  that is false.  The paradox here, comparable to the poverty paradox, is that this is  occuring not in some dark age, but after the information revolution of recent decades.   

 There are grave perils, in terms of liberty, in any efforts to control information. But there  is now abundant evidence that cynical manipulation of information and the media, in the  variety of ways that now occurs, is deadly.  It sets people to killing other people.   

 What is elementally required is political responsibility.  Far too many political leaders, all 

 over the world, manipulate information for the purpose of retaining or extending their 

 own power.  Too often they specifically deploy ethnic and religious hatred for those 

 purposes.   

 People need to know facts not fables and the real causality of events, if they do not, 

 serious error, or worse, tragedy, will occur.   

 A new understanding, a new paradigm for responsibility in the creation, dissemination, 

 and use of information is required.  It will be very hard to build, especially in the age of 

 the internet, but failure to build it is not an option. 

 

 Thirdly, access to an application of technologies, in particular, in the area of weapons of 

 mass destruction.   

  12

 The revolution in applied technologies, especially in the biological and artificial 

 intelligence areas, has not only raised the possibility of solving long standing problems 

 but also an expansion in the proliferation of means of mass destruction.   

 The paradigm through which the international community has sought to deal with this 

 problem, for almost fifty years, is that of the non proliferation treaties in the nuclear, 

 chemical, biological and missile areas.    

 That paradigm has become flawed because of the failure of major weapon states to carry  out their undertakings and problems in enforcement, when breaches occur.   

 At a deeper level, a perennial problem in the relationship between science and ethics has 

 grown larger, especially in the area of biology.  This can be encapsulated in the question 

 -does the fact that something can be done mean that it should be done?  Some say yes, in 

 the name of science, but that unqualified affirmation breaks a vital link between science 

 and ethics.   

 

 Again, a new paradigm for the application of the products of scientific research, which  includes consideration of both human benefit antd ethical concern is needed and, it must  be supported by strengthened measures to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass  destruction.   

 

 The post Cold War, post September 11 landscape has become visible.  The challenges we 

 face are daunting, the stakes at issue are very high.   

 There is much we can do in Australia and by offering Australian cooperation 

 internationally.  

 

  But the deepest challenge of all is to change this world in some fundamental ways.  It 

 will take time.  We should start now. 

