---
title: "Howard Government failing child protection standards."
date: "2002-02-17"
creators:
  - "Cherry, John"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of CHERRY, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211234251
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B1Y56%22
---

 Senator John Cherry Australian Democrats Spokesperson on Children Senator for Queensland

 February 17, 2002             MEDIA RELEASE                      02/066

 Howard Government failing child protection standards The Howard Government is falling well short of its international obligations to protect the rights of children, exposing children who are subject to dealings with the Australian Government to emotional and financial hardship as a result, according to the Australian Democrats.

 Democrats’ spokesperson on Children, Senator John Cherry, said the Government’s proposed new rules restricting access to parenting payments appeared to breach the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, as did the mandatory detention of the children of asylum seekers.

 And, this week a new protocol on the rights of children in Armed Conflict came into effect ratified by over 90 countries including the United States and Britain, but excluding Australia.

 “Australia is in danger of becoming a country where we are seen to be falling well short of world best practice standards for the protection of the rights of children,” Senator Cherry said.

 “Mandatory detention of children breaches at least three articles of the Convention, in particular article 37 which requires every child deprived of liberty to be ‘treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes account of the needs of a person of his or her age’.

 “Proposed new rules denying access of sole parents and parents of disabled children to payments for failing to comply with onerous new administrative obligations almost certainly breach articles 26 and 27 recognising the importance of social insurance in maintaining the right of every child for a standard of living adequate to their development.

 “Australia’s woeful performance on indigenous child health, with a mortality rate 70% higher than that of non-indigenous children, breaches article 24 of the right of the child to enjoy the ‘highest attainable standard of health’, including combating child mortality.

 “Further, Australia has failed to join 116 other countries including the US, the UK and Indonesia in ratifying the new ILO Convention on the exploitation of child labour.

 “In light of these continuing failures, Australia’s refusal to ratify the new protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict is further evidence of a Government not prepared to take seriously its obligation to protect the rights of children.

 “The Democrats call on the Howard Government to lift its game in the protection of children, to join most other advanced countries in signing the new protocol, and to comprehensively review all policy shortcomings against the Convention of the Rights of the Child and to remedy them.

 “Only then can Australia hold its head up high as a good global citizen that takes seriously its obligations to protect the most vulnerable residents of our nation, its children,” Senator Cherry concluded.

 For further information: Pam Hose 0408 752 750 or John Cherry 0408 066 105

