---
title: "Minister launches multicultural and immigration products."
date: "2002-11-27"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211250549
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JB186%22
---

 H133/2002

 MINISTER LAUNCHES MULTICULTURAL AND IMMIGRATION PRODUCTS

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today launched a series of products to help navigate the Australian community through the important areas of multicultural affairs and immigration.

 “In the wake of the Bali bombings, it is more important than ever that all of us work and live together as Australians,” Mr Hardgrave said.

 “This horrific event has reaffirmed the importance of preserving what Australians of all religions and backgrounds have worked so hard to create, and what we all cherish - the Australian way of life which accepts and celebrates differences, whilst challenging everyone to contribute to this great nation.”

 “Australia is a nation enriched and strengthened by our cultural diversity and unified by our commitment to our nation and its democratic institutions, laws and values and our sense of justice - ‘a fair go’ for all.”

 “Every Australian benefits from our diversity and all Australians have the right to be active and equal participants in Australian society, free to live their lives and maintain their cultural traditions.”

 Mr Hardgrave was speaking in Brisbane at the launch of the multicultural information kit Multicultural Australia United through Diversity, a multicultural diary, the Australian Citizenship course Let’s Participate, a report on the settlement experiences of new migrants and the migrant project WACOL Remembered.

 The multicultural kit comprises fact sheets covering Australia’s cultural diversity and Australian Citizenship as the bond that unites all Australians.  It includes a pocket-sized booklet with facts on Australian multiculturalism and Citizenship.

 The Diary of Multicultural Events 2003 includes dates that have significance for Australia as a multicultural society.

 The Let’s participate citizenship course is an initiative introduced by the Federal Government to teach migrants about Australian culture, assist their integration into the community, and encourage them to take up Australian citizenship. Initially available only to clients enrolled in the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP), the course will now be available to any interested organisation or individual.

 Mr Hardgrave highlighted an important research report entitled “The Settlement Experiences of New Migrants” by Professor Sue Richardson and her colleagues at the National Institute of Labour Studies at Flinders University in South Australia.

 He also launched a Brisbane-based project, WACOL Remembered, which pays tribute to migrants and refugees who started new lives in Australia at Wacol Migrant Centre between 1947 and 1987.

 27 NOVEMBER 2002

 MEDIA CONTACT:  AMANDA LYNCH  0419 123 862

