---
title: "Biannual talks reaffirm our close relations with New Zealand."
date: "2002-12-23"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211251548
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/P1B86%22
---

 

 

 

 Media Release 

 FA199 - 23 December 2002 

 Biannual Talks Reaffirm Our Close Relations With New Zealand 

 I visited New Zealand from 20 to 22 December for talks with the New Zealand  Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Phil Goff. These biannual talks reflect the  closeness and importance of the trans-Tasman relationship. The meeting was held at  Lake Taupo. 

 The discussions covered bilateral relations, the war against terrorism, and global and  regional issues. Mr Goff thanked Australia for the assistance we offered New  Zealanders at the time of the Bali bombings. I expressed my appreciation for the  assistance of the New Zealand Government in placing those people granted refugee  status while on Nauru and Manus Island. This cooperation is a foundation stone of the  trans-Tasman relationship. 

 Next year is the 20th anniversary of the CER, which has been one of the world’s most  successful trade agreements with both countries gaining very substantial benefits from  it. We will commemorate this great link by publishing the documents that were  originally the basis of negotiation for a CER. This is the first time we have undertaken  a joint publication of this kind. 

 I also briefed Mr Goff on my visit to Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and Samoa and  discussed other regional issues. We share common concerns to strengthen  development and security in our immediate neighbourhood and we appreciate the very  close cooperation with New Zealand over a number of difficult issues in the South  Pacific - including Bougainville where we both participate in the Peace Monitoring  Group 

 On global issues, we discussed the war on terrorism, the situation in Iraq and the work  being done under UNMOVIC, Afghanistan and Operation Enduring Freedom as well  as the regional dimensions in Indonesia and other locations. We also talked about the  question of illegal migration, the very close cooperation we have in combating the  trans-national criminal organisations behind people smuggling, and ways of further  advancing that cooperation at the Bali II conference next year. 

 Media inquiries: Chris Kenny (Ministerial) +61 02 6277 7500 / Lyndall Sachs  (Departmental) +61 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 

