---
title: "Encouraging signs from emerging tourism markets."
date: "2002-09-20"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211247903
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J5H76%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Population Change

 Border Protection

 Migration Program

 Humanitarian Program

 Multicultural Affairs

 Indigenous Affairs

 Home Minister's Profile Frequently Asked Questions Contact the Minister Media Centre

 MEDIA CENTRE

 Encouraging Signs from Emerging Tourism Markets MPS 084/2002

 Visitor numbers from emerging tourism markets had increased despite the worldwide decline in international travel since 11 September 2001 the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock announced today.

 In the past 12 months, tourist numbers from China had increased 17.6 percent, 13 percent from Israel, 12.9 percent from the Republic of Korea and 10.7 percent from Vietnam.

 "The increase in those numbers has been linked to an encouraging improvement in the compliance with our immigration laws and the growth in bona fide visitors," Mr Ruddock said.

 "As a result, the overall approval rate for visitor visas has increased to 97.94 percent.

 "The non-return rate has dropped below two percent for the first time, which indicates that the initiatives implemented by my Department are working," Mr Ruddock said.

 "Approval rates and visa grant numbers from emerging tourism markets such as China and India continue to grow strongly."

 The number of people arriving in Australia and then applying for refugee status has dropped to 0.15 percent.

 Mr Ruddock was speaking at the launch of the Family Visitor Network in Melbourne today, which was established to allow Australians to help family members applying to visit them from overseas.

 "The Family Visitor Network is an Australia-wide information network aimed at raising community awareness about the Government's visitor visa policy, procedures and decision-making processes at overseas posts," Mr Ruddock said.

 "It was established in response to concerns that people in Australia did not understand what their relatives needed to do to obtain a visa and were confused about procedures at overseas posts and how to make enquiries."

 Part of this process will assist the community to appreciate the importance of people abiding by their visa conditions.

 "My Department recently released the discussion paper on Future Options for Indicators to Determine the Risk Factor List," Mr Ruddock said.

 "This paper provides the community with information on why such processes are in place and an opportunity to have input into the Government's visitor visa processes."

 An information kit to facilitate visitor visa applications is available by ringing DIMIA on 131 881 and following the prompts to speak to a family visitor telephone operator.

 20 September 2002

 See: Index of Media Releases

 | Home | Search | Links | Privacy | Disclaimer | Copyright | Site Map |

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media_releases/media02/r02084.htm Last update: 20 September 2002 at 16:31 AEST

  

