---
title: "Immigration past and present: some U.S.-European comparisons. Draft of a paper prepared for Paths to Integration: Similarities and Differences in the Settlement Process of Immigrants in Europe 1880-2000, Osnabruck, 19-21 June 2003."
date: "2003-06-19"
creators:
  - "Foner, Nancy"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Ethnic groups"
  - "United States"
  - "Cultural identity"
  - "Racial discrimination"
  - "Immigration"
  - "International comparisons"
  - "Overseas item"
  - "Europe"
  - "History"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211254475
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CVI96%22
---

 1

 Immigration Past and Present: Some U.S.-European Comparisons Nancy Foner School of Public Affairs, Baruch College, City University of New York

 Draft. Prepared for the Workshop, Paths to Integration: Similarities and Differences in the Settlement Process of Immigrants in Europe, 1880-2000,” Osnabruck, June 2003. Do not quote or cite without permission of author.

 As immigration changes the face of western Europe, the time has come to begin

 to systematically compare the experiences of immigrants today and in earlier eras. So far,

 as the call for papers for this conference notes, debates in the American scholarly

 literature about whether the “new” immigrants and their children will replicate the

 experiences of their predecessors in the early twentieth century have had little resonance

 in Europe. Clearly, this conference marks an important step forward in rectifying this

 situation.. In this paper, I would like to contribute to this historical-comparative

 enterprise by considering the relevance of past-present comparisons of immigrants in the

 United States for similar kinds of comparisons in Europe.

 Inevitably, in making these comparisons across space and across time, I  draw on

 material presented in From Ellis Island to JFK  (Foner 2000), which offers a comparison

 of immigration to New York today and a century ago.  But I also go beyond my own

 usual territory --  New York and the United States - to pose some new questions and

 offer some new comparisons. I begin with a few general comments about the benefits of a

 comparative approach for understanding migration and integration processes.   I then

 look at myths or memories about immigrants in the past in Europe and the United States

 - myths and memories that color views of immigrants today. A third theme concerns the

 implications of past processes of racialization among immigrants in the United States for

 2

 understanding race/ethnic relations in Europe. Finally, there is the question of the

 emphasis on and discourse about race on the two sides of the Atlantic in the context of

 contemporary immigration.

 Why Compare

 First, then, I want to say a few words about why I think a comparative approach -

 both across time and across space - is so important in migration research. Comparisons

 deepen our understanding of migration by helping us to ask new questions, identify

 important research problems, modify and evaluate theoretical formulations, and

 formulate explanations that could not be made on the basis of one case - or one time

 period -- alone. As the historian George Fredrickson has observed, a comparative

 approach undermines two contrary but equally damaging presuppositions - the illusion of

 total regularity and the illusion of absolute uniqueness. Or to put it another way, it

 enables us to see what is unique to a specific situation and what is more general to the

 migration process. I’d like to stress this point. The historian Nancy Green (2002) has

 recently written that historians are more inclined toward emphasizing historical

 continuities in understanding today’s migrant and settlement patterns than sociologists

 who see contemporary detail with disciplinary eyes that emphasize newness. Whatever

 the discipline of the scholar engaged in the comparisons, I think it is important to stress

 both the similarities and differences between past and present.

 Whether across time or space, a comparative perspective brings out aspects of

 contemporary immigration that otherwise might be minimized or overlooked.

 Comparisons with the past show what is really new about recent immigration; whether

 models and concepts elaborated in light of today’s immigration, such as transnationalism,

 3

 are unique to the current period or whether they also pertain to the past; and whether

 conceptual frameworks used to understand the past, like analyses of racialization

 processes among European immigrants to the United States, are useful in understanding

 the newest arrivals. Comparisons can highlight how European and American cities have

 changed as contexts for immigrant incorporation over time. And comparisons of the

 American and European experience underscore what is distinctive about the societies into

 which migrants move - as well as how historical and geographical peculiarities shape the

 timing of arrival, skill composition, and diversity of groups in immigrant flows.

 Memories of the Past

 A comparison of immigration today with the past invariably brings up the

 question of how the past is remembered. One reason, in fact, that I wrote From Ellis

 Island to JFK - and offered a systematic comparison of immigrants in New York’s two

 great waves of the twentieth century -- was to set the record straight. Many of the popular

 memories about the massive southern and eastern European immigration a hundred years

 ago are, in fact, myths --- what I have called the invention of immigration. These myths

 or memories matter because they deeply color how the newest arrivals in New York are

 viewed. In New York, indeed in the United States as a whole, yesterday’s immigrants are

 often remembered through a haze of history as folk heroes who worked hard, strove to

 become assimilated, and had strong family values and colorful roots - in short, what

 made America great. Against this image of immigrant giants of the past, present-day

 arrivals often seem like a pale imitation.

 If long-established Americans today have an image of immigrant heroes and

 heroines of the past who made America great, in Europe there is a very different kind of

 4

 notion about immigration and the past: that the presence of immigrants is new and

 unprecedented.

  Why did these different mythical constructions develop? After all, in  Western

 Europe, as Lucassen (2002) observes, there was significant immigration in the earlier

 decades of the twentieth century - much of it from eastern and southern Europe. Perhaps

 the most startling case, as Zolberg and Long (1997: 11) point out, is  France, whose

 foreign-born population reached 7 percent in 1930 - about the same level as today - and

 where, consequently, nearly one out of every four nationals in the 1990s had at least one

 immigrant great grandparent from Italy, Belgium, Spain or Poland. About 10 percent of

 the white population of Great Britain, Zolberg and Long state, is of immigrant descent

 (mostly Irish); a substantial number of Germans trace their origins to French Huguenot

 refugees of the seventeenth century or Polish workers of the late nineteenth; and a

 considerable number of Swiss are the children or grandchildren of early twentieth-

 century guest workers, mostly Italian (see also Moch 1992).

 Still, as Zolberg and Long also note, although the leading industrial nations of

 Europe at the turn of the twentieth century had substantial numbers of foreign residents,

 mostly they were temporary workers. Then, too, there was the Holocaust. Hundreds of

 thousands of people in Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark,

 Italy and Greece would be able trace their ancestry to immigrants from Eastern Europe

 had it not been for the mass murder of Jews by the Nazis, which also prompted many of

 the survivors to emigrate to Israel or overseas (Zolberg and Long 1997: 11-12).  And

 while in some countries, such as the French case that I just mentioned, the foreign-born

 were sizable in the early twentieth century, in most Western European countries and

 5

 major cities, the number and proportion of immigrants then was  - at least compared to

 today - relatively small. In some countries, this is especially dramatic. Thus, in the

 Netherlands, 9 percent of the population was foreign born in 2001, compared to only

 about 2 percent in 1920 -- 23 percent in Amsterdam in 2001 compared to 2 percent in

 1920 (Lucassen 2003). Writing of  foreign laborers and their families arriving in

 northwestern Europe in the 1960s and 1970s, in the context of a broad historical study of

 “moving Europeans,” Leslie Page Moch calls the numbers in the contemporary period

 unprecedented (Moch 1992: 174).

 This is quite different in the United States. Across the Atlantic a hundred years

 ago, a massive wave of immigration - which came on top of a large influx in the mid-

 nineteenth century -- dramatically transformed the United States. In 1920, after four

 decades of heavy immigration, 13 percent of the population of the United States was

 foreign born. (Recently, the percentage has risen to 11 percent.) In 35 of the nation’s 68

 cities with a population of at least 100,000, more than one out of five residents was

 foreign-born --  in New York, Boston, Cleveland, Chicago, San Francisco, and Detroit, it

 was closer to one in three (Alba and Denton, forthcoming). Indeed, in New York, in

 1910, the foreign-born represented 41 percent of the city’s population - a figure that still

 has not been reached today.

 The result is that an enormous proportion of Americans have ancestors who came

 in the last great wave of immigration at the turn of the twentieth century. According to

 one estimate, over one hundred million Americans can trace their ancestry in the United

 States to a man, woman, or child whose name appears in the record book in the great

 Registry Room at Ellis Island. Perhaps not surprisingly, the descendants of the earlier

 6

 immigrants - now fully established as “Americans” and having come a long way from

 the huddled masses who got off the boat at Ellis Island - look back to their immigrant

 ancestors with nostalgia to, as Hasia Diner (2000: 129) puts it in the context of Jewish

 memories of Manhattan’s Lower East Side, “explain who they are, where they came

 from, and the places they have been.”

 Whatever the origins of the myths or memories about immigration, the fact is that

 Europeans have only reluctantly - and recently - come to see themselves as belonging to

 immigrant societies; in  the United States, by contrast,  Americans have, for many

 decades, seen themselves as belonging to a “nation of immigrants.”  The incorporation of

 European immigrants, as Philip Kasinitz (forthcoming) has recently written, has been one

 of 20th century America’s most celebrated achievements. The Statue of Liberty and Ellis

 Island have become shrines to what makes America unique and, more and more in the

 decades since World War Two, they have eclipsed images of the American Revolution in

 the nation’s patriotic iconography (see also Bodnar 1995). The history of these two

 shrines, and their elevation to iconic status, is particularly interesting since  the Statue of

 Liberty was originally conceived by its creator and backers as a symbol of French

 American friendship and American political liberty - not of immigration. And Ellis

 Island, which ceased to be a mass processing station for immigrants in the 1920s, was

 actually closed in 1954 and abandoned, and left for ruin, for twenty years.

 As John Higham writes in his article on “The Transformation of the Statue of

 Liberty,” it was the termination of mass immigration that eventually led, in the 1940s and

 1950s,  to the special association of the statue with immigration:

 7

 So long as millions of immigrants entered ‘the golden door’ the Statue of Liberty

 was unresponsive to them; it served other purposes. After the immigrant ships no

 longer passed under the New Colossus in significant numbers, it enshrined the

 immigrant experience as a transcendental national memory. Because few

 Americans were immigrants, all could think of themselves as having been

 immigrants. The Statue of Liberty helped them to do so. Since it belonged to all

 the people and on the broadest level symbolized the nation as a whole, the statue

 connected the special heritage of newer Americans with the civic principles of all

 Americans. Fundamentally, the new meaning engrafted on the Statue of Liberty in

 the second quarter of the twentieth century worked to close the rift that mass

 immigration has opened in  American society (1984:80).

 As for Ellis Island, in 1990, after a six year $170 million renovation - by which time, the

 descendants of the Ellis Island immigrants were fully part of the American mainstream --

 the Ellis Island Immigration Museum was opened in the restored Main Building. It now

 receives more than a million visitors a year. In April  2001, when the Ellis Island

 Foundation digitized its immigration records and debuted its new website, the response

 was astounding, averaging more than 25,000 hits per second.

  Quite apart from these two shrines, immigrant imagery is part of contemporary

 political discourse in the United States - with leading political figures (many with

 parents, grandparents, or great-grandparents who came from abroad) making much of

 their immigrant roots. In New York, the grandparents of the current mayor, Michael

 Bloomberg, came from Russia; those of the previous mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, from

 Italy.  In a not atypical reference, the present Governor of New York State (George

 8

 Pataki)  - who also has immigrant grandparents - spoke in his recent campaign of today’s

 immigrants “living the American dream.”   On a national stage, Governor Gary Locke of

 the state of Washington, began his televised rebuttal, on behalf of the Democratic Party,

 to President Bush’s State of the Union address, this way:  “My grandfather came to this

 country from China nearly a century ago and worked as a servant. Now, I serve as

 governor just one mile from where my grandfather worked. It took our family 100 years

 to travel that mile. It was a voyage we could only make in America” (New York Times,

 January 29, 2003).

 So the memories of immigration are perpetuated. In this context, it is not

 surprising that they have affected popular conceptions and the popular literature - but

 they have also had an impact on the scholarship about the recent newcomers. To a great

 extent, the social scientific literature on immigration in the United States, whether

 explicitly stated or not, is almost always comparative - the comparison of course to the

 last massive immigration (Kasinitz forthcoming). Clearly, this has greatly enriched the

 American scholarly literature on immigration. But to the extent that the mythic

 constructions have seeped into the scholarship, they create problems. This is a concern

 raised by Zolberg and Long (1997: 13) in their comparative analysis of immigration’s

 impact in Europe and the United States. Zolberg and Long argue that debates about

 incorporation on both sides of the Atlantic are imprisoned within divergent mythic

 constructions - the United States as a nation of immigrants, on the one hand, and

 endogenous nations of Europe, on the other.  An uncritical acceptance, they write, of

 “the essentialized distinction between endogenous nations and nations of immigration

 fosters ignorance of Europe’s historical encounters with immigrant populations and

 9

 clouds the … parallel objective experiences of Europe and the United States in the second

 half of the twentieth century.”

 There is another way that the memories of immigration influence scholarship -

 and this concerns the very terminology scholars use in Europe and the U.S.  If, in popular

 discourse, the term immigrant often evokes nostalgic memories about what America is all

 about, American scholars, for their part, easily use the term to refer to those who come to

 settle in the U.S.  - and they often call the second generation, the children of immigrants

 or second generation immigrants.  One of the best-known scholarly books, in fact, on the

 second generation, Legacies, is subtitled, “The Story of the Immigrant Generation”

 (Portes and Rumbaut 2001).  (And, by two immigrant authors - from Cuba - no less!)

 European scholars tend to feel less comfortable with the term “immigrant” -- the

 implication often being that “immigrant” implies foreigner in the sense of “not one of us”

 (see Lucassen and Lucassen 1994: 12) and that it is stigmatizing (Wikkan 2002: 37).  One

 journal (The Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies) goes so far as to warn authors to

 avoid “immigrant” for non-migrants (presumably members of the second generation)

 because of its derogatory connotations. It could be argued that this discomfort with the

 term “immigrant” stems from  present circumstances in Europe rather than from a

 memory of things past. Yet one could also argue that the popular notion that before the

 recent influx, European nations were “endogenous nations” plays at least some part.

 The Dynamics of Racialization: How Exceptional is the U.S.?

 And this leads to another topic I want to consider: what we can learn from

 understanding the dynamics of racialization in the United States. Part of the romance with

 immigration in contemporary America has to do with the all too common, and invidious,

 10

 comparison between immigrants and native blacks. Immigrants are often praised for their

 grit, determination, and work ethic as against native minorities, who are often viewed as

 members of the “underclass” - as less reliable, less productive, less pliable and less

 tractable. Indeed, a number of studies reveal U.S. employers’ preferences for hiring

 immigrants over native blacks and Hispanics. 1

 In general, it is impossible to understand the dynamics of racialization, past and

 present, in the United States without a consideration of the African American presence

 and America’s history of slavery and segregation. This does indeed make the American

 case exceptional. Yet, I would argue, an appreciation of the processes by which eastern

 and southern Europeans became racial insiders in the United States may shed light on

 parallel developments among immigrants in the past in Europe. And precisely because of

 the different history of racial divisions in the United States, a cross-Atlantic comparison

 can sharpen the analysis of processes and dynamics in Europe.

 With regard to the past, a major question in American historical scholarship is

 how eastern and southern Europeans, to use images borrowed from Matthew Jacobson

 (1998), went from being whites of a “different” to the “same” color.  One factor was

 distancing from American blacks. The novelist Ralph Ellison has written that “one of the

 first epithets that many European immigrants learned when they got off the boat was the

 term ‘nigger’ - it made them feel instantly American” (quoted in West 1994: 3).

 Although Ellison’s periodization is wrong - when European immigrants first got off the

 boat in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, blacks did not figure much in their

 lives because so few blacks lived in northern cities like New York -- his comment

 captures an important racial dynamic that operated later on (see Foner 2003). It was the

 11

 mass migration of African Americans to northern cities after World War I which

 provided the opportunity for  Jews and Italians - then considered racially distinct from,

 and inferior to, northern and western Europeans -- to distance themselves from blacks,

 who were even lower on the ethnoracial status hierarchy. Thus, David Guterl argues in

 his recent book, The Color of Race in America, that the Great Migration of African

 Americans from the South to the North was a key factor in speeding the “absolute

 assimilation of immigrant groups (previously understood as racially distinct) into the

 singular “white race” (2001: 6) and of shifting the racial order in northern cities from a

 multiplicity of white races to a black-white binary and a focus on race as color.

 It’s important, however, not to go overboard in putting too much stress on the role

 of distancing from African Americans in turning Jews and Italians into racial insiders and

 members of an all-encompassing white community.2 Other - and I would argue more

 important --  factors play a role in explaining how Jews’ and Italians’ racial status

 changed. One is the point they started from - and it was not, so to speak, ground zero.

 Jews and Italians were considered white to begin with in terms of political and legal

 rights and were not subject to the same kind of systematic, legal, and official

 discrimination facing blacks and Asian immigrants. Jews and Italians, for example, were,

 from the very beginning, allowed to naturalize (unlike Asians) and to vote in states that

 restricted the suffrage to whites, and miscegenation laws were never enforced to prevent

 their marriages to people of northern or western European ancestry.  And there were

 other critical factors involved in turning Jews and Italians from disparaged racial

 outsiders into part of the racial/ethnic majority.  These include the end of large-scale

 eastern and southern European immigration in the 1920s that reduced fears about the

 12

 deluge of racial inferiors and also facilitated assimilation; the Nazi genocide, which made

 anti-Semitism less respectable, and the triumph, in the scientific world, of theories of

 nurture and culture over theories of nature and biology; the economic successes of Jews

 and Italians, especially in the years of post World War II prosperity; their increased

 intermingling and intermarrying with other European groups; and political struggles by

 the groups themselves to eliminate racial exclusionary barriers.

  Within the U.S., the big question is whether the shifts that enabled Jews and

 Italians to become part of the racial majority were a particular consequence of historical

 contingencies and their “racial starting off points.” Will any of the current groups now

 viewed as nonwhite come to be seen as white? Or is it misleading to pose the question

 this way? The very category white may be outmoded in the future as new ways of

 thinking about racial and ethnic divisions emerge. In terms of the present discussion, with

 regard to comparisons with Europe, a key question is whether any of the factors

 explaining the racial changes in the United States in the past were also at play in Europe.

 No doubt many were, among them immigrant economic assimilation and mobility and

 intermarrying and intermixing - to say  nothing of the reaction to the Holocaust in the

 years after World War II. Just which combination of factors operated in particular

 national contexts will become clarified as historians of European societies do their own

 analyses to trace the changes in stereotypes of and discriminatory practices against earlier

 immigrants  - Poles in Germany, Irish in Britain, and Italians and Russian Jews in

 France, to name three groups that Lucassen points to in his position paper.

 13

 Discourse About Race: Color  and Culture

 This brings me to the final topic concerning discourse about race in contemporary

 Europe and the United States. And, once again, to the impact of the American racial

 structure - in particular, the position of blacks and their history of special disadvantage--

 in shaping responses to immigration, the experiences of immigrants, and the way scholars

 themselves analyze the new arrivals.

 In the United States, immigrants are now often seen through the prism of race. In

 fact, many Americans who want to restrict immigration are worried that it will lead to

 “the end of the white race” - or as conservative critic Peter  Brimelow (1995) writes in

 his book Alien Nation, that immigrants will end up swamping white America. In the

 scholarly literature, this is obviously not an issue. What is a central concern in that

 literature is how the newest arrivals are changing conceptions and constructions of race

 and how they are affecting relations between groups which are defined as ethnically

 and/or racially distinct. In this regard, a major topic is the impact of the new immigration

 on relations with established racial minorities, especially African Americans. Mention

 almost any issue in the immigration literature and the question of  immigrant relations

 with established minorities comes up - in political science, in terms of how the growing

 Hispanic population will affect relations with African Americans in communities where

 Hispanics have numerically overtaken and begun to challenge African Americans’

 newly-won accession to positions of power; in economics, as to whether immigrants are

 hurting native minorities in the job market; and in sociology, whether some immigrant

 groups will experience segmented assimilation, as they are exposed to the life styles and

 outlooks in inner-city, minority schools and neighborhoods.

 14

 This is not surprising. Race, especially the black-white divide, has long been a

 significant (some might say the significant) social division in the United States --- the

 classic American dilemma, given the history of slavery, Jim Crow, and ghettoization.

 The nation continues to deal with the impact of the civil rights revolution, which sought

 to redress the wrongs of the segregation era. And blacks are a very substantial proportion

 of the nation’s population - 12 percent in 2000 - and the proportion is much higher in

 many major cities. While it has been shown that  races are not fixed biological categories,

 and that dividing populations into races has no basis in genetics, race is seen as real in the

 United States because, to paraphrase W.I. Thomas, people act as thought it is real and it

 has thus become real in its consequences.   In Cornell West’s (1994) much-quoted phrase,

 “race matters.” Newspaper stories refer to race all the time; so do politicians and

 activists; and so do scholars. Hundreds of courses on college campuses - and dozens of

 textbooks - focus on  “race and ethnicity” in the United States. And race is used to

 officially categorize people - the census being a case in point, with people now allowed

 to report themselves as belonging to two or more races, the races being White, Black,

 Native Indian, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders, Asian, and Other.

 In the American scholarly literature, there is agreement that race is a socially and

 culturally constructed category that usually has a close connection to “racism” as an

 ideology or attitude. There is, however, no one agreed-upon definition of “race,” although

 a definition recently offered by George Fredrickson would, I think, find broad

 acceptance: “the belief that socially significant differences among human groups or

 communities differing in visible physical characteristics and/or putative ancestry are

 innate and unchangeable” (Foner and Fredrickson, forthcoming). However scholars

 15

 define race in their studies, in every-day discourse in the United States, race tends to be a

 color-coded concept - Black, Red (Native Indian), Yellow (Asian), White, and Brown

 (Hispanic).

 In Europe, scholars often feel less comfortable talking about race. There is a

 concern that using the term gives legitimacy to discriminatory tendencies (see Lucassen

 and Lucassen 1994:201) and that it is associated with rigid divisions, of a U.S. black-

 white variety, based on color and physical identification that are less relevant - and need

 to be avoided -- in Europe. In Germany, there are other concerns, that go back to the

 particular historical circumstances in World War II. In a recent paper for a conference on

 transnationalism in Europe, Dietrich Tranhardt (2002) argues that terms like “blood” and

 “race” are taboo in political discourse in Germany because they are associated with the

 Nazis. Tranhardt argues that using the term “race” (and ethnicity) as classification

 categories, even for such purposes as policing and preventing discrimination, legitimizes

 and gives priority to these categories. In his view, no racial discourse is the best racial

 discourse of all.

 In Europe, immigrants are more likely to be stigmatized on the basis of culture

 than of race; in the United States, it is the other way around, and they are more likely to

 be stigmatized on the basis of race than culture. (As an aside: Americans, even well-

 educated Americans and scholars outside of the immigration field, continue to be

 astonished that Turks and Moroccans in the Netherlands are seen - as Lucassen puts it in

 his paper - as more “black” in public opinion than Surinamese of African ancestry, who,

 as compared to Turks and Morrocans,  differ less from the native population in culture

 and language and do better in socioeconomic terms. ) A key question is whether the use

 16

 of allegedly deep-seated cultural differences as justification  for hostility and

 discrimination against newcomers in Europe is, in fact, a kind of “cultural racism.” (And,

 in the context of a conference comparing past and present, whether cultural racism is

 something new or has a long history in particular countries.) Those who use the term

 “cultural racism” to describe the reaction to new immigrants in Europe argue that race is,

 in effect, “coded as culture;” the “central feature of these processes is that the qualities of

 social groups are fixed, made natural, confined within a pseudo-biologically defined

 culturalism” (Solomos and Back quoted in Fredrickson 2002: 8).  In George

 Fredrickson’s conceptualization of racism, culture and even religion can become

 essentialized to the point that they can serve as the functional equivalent of biological

 racism (2002: 145) - culture, put another way, can do the work of race, when peoples or

 ways of life are seen as unchangeable as pigmentation (Fredrickson 2002:8, 141). Or as

 Orlando Patterson (2003: 62) has recently argued, in so far as cultural determinism entails

 the conception of others as immutably different and inferior, it is racism.

 If cultural differences play such a large role in disparaging and stigmatizing

 immigrants in Europe, what implications does this have for integration? Will integration

 be less problematic, or follow a different path, in Europe because the stigma attached to

 immigrants is associated with culture and religion rather than, as in the United States,

 with skin color and biological race?

 One view, put forward by George Fredrickson, suggests that cultural, especially

 religious, forms of racist bigotry may be more durable than those tied to ideas about

 biology or genetics. He raises the possibility that, in his words,  “racist claims [based on

 biology or genes] are open to rational and empirical refutation, whereas the claims made

 17

 by sectarian religion are so deeply embedded in the matrix of faith and other-worldly

 authority that they are not similarly open to logic and observation” (2002: 147).

 But there are other implications, as well. After all, conversion, in the case of

 religion, or change in cultural patterns, in the case of culture more generally, are always a

 theoretical possibility. (In fact, in his conceptualization of racism, George Fredrickson

 argues that he would withhold the “R” word if assimilation is genuinely on offer, and he

 writes that it might be preferable to speak of “culturalism” rather than racism to describe

 an inability or unwillingness to tolerate cultural differences. Fredrickson 2002: 7) To the

 extent that assimilation takes place, in other words, cultural racism is undermined.

 However, when differences are believed to be rooted in genes or biology, they are seen to

 be innate and impervious to change.

 Or at least to change by assimilation and acculturation. Perhaps this is why

 discussions about the future direction and shape of  race and racial boundaries in the

 United States put so much stress on the role of intermarriage - which will, literally,

 change people’s skin color and facial characteristics.  The rising rates of intermarriage, in

 particular, between Hispanics and whites and Asians and whites are creating large

 numbers of  “multiracial” or blended individuals. One often mentioned scenario foresees

 multiracial individuals becoming part of an expanded white group; another predicts that

 they will merge into a new “non-black” or “beige” category that will be opposed to

 “blacks.” Whatever happens, what is interesting is how much the different forecasts for

 the “future of race” in the United States are seen as being tied to changing physical

 characteristics. Listen to the journalist Stanley Crouch (1996), who, looking ahead to an

 America one hundred years from now, predicts that “The sweep of body types,

 18

 combinations of facial features, hair textures, eye colors, and what are now unexpected

 skin tones will be far more common.”  It will, in other words, take a change in

 pigmentation and physiology to alter notions of racial difference - cultural assimilation

 will not be enough.

 These comments about the future — and about the durability and changeability of

 different forms of racism - are of course highly speculative. What they point to, however,

 is differences in paths of integration in the United States and western Europe -

 differences that, at least in part, are rooted in historical experiences. In many ways, this

 paper has raised more questions than it answers. It has suggested some ways that

 comparisons of immigrants past and present in the United States can shed light on similar

 comparisons in Europe, and pointed to  contrasts in the way that immigrants of the past

 are remembered and immigrants today are analyzed on the two sides of the Atlantic. In

 my own studies, I am constantly reminded that New York - where I do my research -

 stands out in many ways from other immigrant destinations in the United States. Clearly,

 further comparisons should take into account differences among U.S. cities as well, of

 course, as variations among nations - and cities - in western Europe.. There is, in short,

 much work to do that considers how understanding immigration in the past can help

 illuminate the present - in both the United States and Europe. And, to add to the mix - as

 I have tried to do here - the need for analyses that look across space, as well as across

 time, to consider the immigrant experience in different places and time periods.

 19

 Notes

 1  The studies also show that, for a variety of reasons, immigrants are more willing than native minorities to tolerate harsh conditions, low pay, and dead-end jobs.  Even rock-bottom wages look good compared to what immigrants can earn back home; many see their stay as temporary; they are less disturbed, than native blacks, by jobs that require deference to better-off, often white, supervisors; and native blacks often have a cushion of state welfare benefits, that are unavailable to newly-arrived immigrants (Foner 2000; see also Waldinger and Lichter 2003).

 2  As a number of historians note, Jews may have marked themselves off as different from African Americans, but, at the same time, their history of persecution and exclusion in Europe led them to identify with the plight of African Americans (Diner 1995).  A posture of sympathy for blacks, as Eric Goldstein (1997) argues, fulfilled Jews’ emotional need to distinguish themselves as “whites of another kind.”

 20

 References

 Bodnar, John. 1995. “Remembering the Immigrant Experience in American Culture.” Journal of American Ethnic History 15: 3-27.

 Brimelow, Peter.  1995. Alien Nation: Common Sense About America’s Immigration. Disaster. New York: Random House.

 Crouch, Stanley. 1996. “Race is Over.” New York Times Magazine, September 26, 170-171.

 Diner, Hasia. 1995 [1977]. In the Almost Promised Land: American Jews and Blacks, 1915-1935, 2d. ed. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.

 2000. Lower East Side Memories: A Jewish Place in America. Princeton: Princeton University of Press.

 Foner, Nancy. 2000. From Ellis Island to JFK: New York’s Two Great Waves of Immigration. New Haven: Yale University Press.

 2003. “Immigrants and African Americans: Comparative Perspectives on the New York Experience Across Time and Space,” in Host Societies and the Reception of Immigrants, edited by Jeffrey G. Reitz. La Jolla, CA: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies.

 Foner, Nancy and George M. Fredrickson. Forthcoming. “Immigration, Race, and Ethnicity in the United States, Then to Now: Social Constructions and Social Relations,” in Not Just Black and White: Immigration, Race and Ethnicity, Then to Now, edited by Nancy Foner and George Fredrickson.

 Fredrickson, George M. 1997. The Comparative Imagination: On the History of Racism, Nationalism, and Social Movements. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 -------- 2002. Racism: A Short History. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 Goldstein, Eric. 1997. “A White Race of Another Kind: Immigrant Jews and Whiteness In the Urban North, 1914-1945.” Paper presented at a meeting of the Organization Of American Historians, San Francisco.

 Green, Nancy. 2002. “Comments on Transnationalism and Diaspora.” Workshop on Transnational Ties and Identities: Past and Present, Wassenar, Netherlands, November.

 Guterl, Matthew Pratt. 2001. The Color of Race in America, 1900-1940. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

 Higham, John. 1984  [1975]. Send These to Me. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University

 21

 Press.

 Kasinitz, Philip. Forthcoming. “Race, Assimilation, and ‘Second Generations,’ Past and Present,” in Not Just Black and White: Immigration, Race, and Ethnicity, Then to Now, edited by Nancy Foner and George Fredrickson.

 Lucassen, Leo. 2002. “Paths of Integration: Similarities and Differences in the Settlement Process of Immigrants in Europe, 1880-2000.” Position paper.

 2003. “Immigration and Paths of Integration in the Dutch Metropolitan Area, 1918-2001.” Unpublished paper.

 Lucassen, Jan and Rinus Penninx. 1997. Newcomers: Immigrants and Their Descendants            in the Netherlands 1550-1995.  Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis.

 Moch, Leslie Page. 1992. Moving Europeans: Migration in Western Europe Since 1650. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

 Patterson, Orlando. 2003. “Racism’s Evolution.” Contexts 2: 61-65.

 Portes, Alejandro and Ruben Rumbaut. 2001. Legacies: The Story of the Immigrant Second Generation. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 Tranhardt, Dietrich. 2002. “Prophecies, Ius Soli, and Dual  Citizenship: Interpreting the Changes in the German Citizenship System.” Paper presented at the Workshop on Transnational Ties and Identities: Past and Present, Wassenar, Netherlands, November.

 Waldinger, Roger and Michael I. Lichter. 2003. How the Other Half Works: Immigration And the Social Organization of Labor. Berkeley: University of California Press.

 West, Cornell. 1994. Race Matters.  New York: Vintage Books.

 Wikkan, Unni. 2002. Generous Betrayal: Politics of Culture in the New Europe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Zolberg, Aristide R. and Long Litt Woon. 1999. “Why Islam is Like Spanish: Cultural Incorporation in Europe and the United States.” Politics and Society 27: 5-38.

 22

 

 1  The studies also show that, for a variety of reasons, immigrants are more willing than native minorities to tolerate harsh conditions, low pay, and dead-end jobs.  Even rock-bottom wages look good compared to what immigrants can earn back home; many see their stay as temporary; they are less disturbed, than native blacks, by jobs that require deference to better-off, often white, supervisors; and native blacks often have a cushion of state welfare benefits, that are unavailable to newly-arrived immigrants (Foner 2000; see also Waldinger and Lichter 2003).

 2  As a number of historians note, Jews may have marked themselves off as different from African Americans, but, at the same time, their history of persecution and exclusion in Europe led them to identify with the plight of African Americans (Diner 1995).  A posture of sympathy for blacks, as Eric Goldstein (1997) argues, fulfilled Jews’ emotional need to distinguish themselves as “whites of another kind.”

