---
title: "Our population, our future: what sort of country do we aspire to be? Conference organised by Manning Clark House, 2003"
date: "2003-10-09"
creators:
  - "Mcmichael, Tony"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Economic growth"
  - "Public health"
  - "Environmental management"
  - "Population size"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260023
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MISA6%22
---

  Our Population, Our Future 

  ur Population, Our Future 

  at Sort of Country Do Aspire To 

  Tony McMichael 

  National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health 

  The Australian National University 

  Wealth, power and influence have long been the dominant, universal, motifs in national 

  aspiration and identity, Those values die hard. Indeed, they probably are an expression of 

  the evolutionary hardwiring of the human species. Over hundreds of millennia, “fitness”, 

  in the value-free survival stakes, has accrued  to the family groups, tribes and societies that 

  have found ways of maximizing those three attributes. 

  Today the world comprises approximately 230 nation-states, many of them relics of 

  nineteenthdcentury power-plays and others the sometimes artificial products of twentieth- 

  century decolonisation, These nation-states persist with this abovementioned ancient 

  competitive tradition, primarily in pursuit of materialist objectives, and often tinged with 

  aggression and self-righteous ideological fervour. While the world’s national and 

  subnational populations are a wonderful manifestation of human historical and cultural 

  diversity, they also perpetuate longstanding tensions and competitive strivings. They thus 

  facilitate a world of winners and losers, as free “globalised” markets become the organising  principle of inter-national trade and relationships. We live in such a world; a world where, 

  according to most criteria, economic and political inequality persists - indeed, even 

  increases - despite the rhetoric and the sometimes specious international statistics. 

  Australia is caught up in the prevailing paradigm of “economic growth”, with little heed 

  being paid to social, environmental and spiritual costs. Our Prime Minister, in recent 

  times, stated that the national government’s main objective for this first decade of the 2lSt 

  century is to achieve an average annual economic growth rate of 4%. This has been 

  --------------- 

  Page 19 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  described recently by Clive Hamilton as a “growth fetish” - a preoccupation with material 

  acquisition, to the neglect, often the detriment, of other emerging social concerns. The 

  agendas of environmentalism, urban planning, social and spiritual wellbeing, and 

  sustainabilipat-large all remain sidelined while we persist with the politics of wealth 

  creation, (competitive) consumerism, traditional notions of “battlers” and “disadvantage”, 

  and, now, homeland security. 

  Richard Eckersley and others have shown that a plethora  of data reveals that levels of 

  happiness have not increased, and may even have receded in recent decades in Australia 

  (and in other developed nations), while psychosocial problems such as depression, drug 

  abuse and suicide have increased among young people, We are consuming more, but 

  enjoying life a bit less. Further, unthinkingly, we have now ventured deep into an 

  unprecedented level  of household consumer debt. Australian families have, in the past  half-decade, been spending against as-yet unrealised (and unguaranteed) capital gains on 

  property. Harvey Norman stores report escalating annual profits. 

  As this consumerism rises, so does our collective ecological footprint. The value that we 

  extract from nature is now greater than can be naturally replaced. Hence, we have moved 

  into ecological debt. Evidence for this is now all around  us, including: (i) our contribution 

  to global climate change via the excessive emissions of greenhouse gases, (ii) the continued 

  decline in freshwater availability and quality, (iii) salinization of much arable land, (iv) 

  depletion of various coastal fisheries and shell-fisheries, (v) the extinction of plant and 

  animal species, and (vi) the inexorable spread of exotic species (such as the cane toad, river 

  carp, African grasses throughout the Top End, etc.). 

  So, how does an. epidemiologist relate to this? Well, viewed fulsomely, epidemiology is 

  about understanding the determinants of human wellbeing and health at a whole+of- 

  population level. While most epidemiologists address questions that pertain to the recent 

  past (has the introduction of hormone replacement therapy affected breast cancer rates?) or 

  the present (is obesity associated with increased blood pressure?), there is growing 

  recognition of the need to elucidate and estimate the impact of today’s trends on 

  tomorrow’s health outcomes. The perspectives of ecology have recently fostered the 

  Page 20 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  subdiscipline of “ecological economics”. Similarly, an increasing minority of 

  epidemiologists are addressing larger and more complex questions about current and 

  future changes in human ecology and in the natural ecosystems upon which we depend for 

  “lifedsupport”. Those “ecological” epidemiologists (I number myself among them) are 

  registering concern and research interest in studying how these ongoing social and 

  environmental trends affect, or will affect, human wellbeing and health. 

  Some of our current public health concerns need to be understood within this framework. 

  We now are, according to mainstream statistics, the second fattest nation on Earth - after 

  the “fast-food nation” Americans. While the stomach-banding surgeons, the multinational 

  drug companies, and the gene therapists line up to profit from the medicalisation of 

  Australian obesity, the real explanation for this expanding problem lies in the radical shifts 

  in social diets and daily patterns of physical activity. We have, through wealth creation, 

  transformed the way that we live. We have achieved that elusive nirvana which, for all of 

  history up to modern times, has lain beyond the horizon from the rigours of natural 

  selection - the capacity to find and consume a high level of food energy while expending 

  minimum energy in so doing. Obesity is not a problem of aberrant individual behaviour. It 

  is a manifestation of a collective social lifestyle that has become increasingly out of kilter 

  with basic human biology. 

  O n  the environmental front there is much evidence that the prospects for good nutrition 

  and health, for harmonious social existence, and for freedom from conflict and warfare 

  depend on societies living within the constraints of the natural environment. Repeatedly, 

  in past societies and civilizations that attempted to live beyond Nature’s means, the levels 

  of health and survival have been adversely affected. As a clever (though not obviously wise)  species, we have many ways of expanding the human carrying-capacity of the natural 

  environment - through agriculture, fossil fuels, synthetic chemical additives, trade, 

  introduced food species and so on. However, this expansion must be carried out within 

  the capacity of the natural world. In Australia it is evident that our irrigation practices 

  have exceeded this natural capacity. As a major agricultural exporter we are, inadvertently, 

  exporting our stocks of soil nutrients (trace elements). Our dietary dependence on cloven- 

  hoofed European mammals has occasioned great damage to our topsoils and to woodland 

  Page 21 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  and forest. In the long run this is not a wise way to manage our (relatively fragile) natural 

  resource base. We must, therefore, reorganize our priorities and practices in ways that 

  sustain the Australian resource base for future generations. 

  Population size is another, obvious, determinant of human society’s environmental impact.  Similarly, the demographic distribution of population affects the pattern of impact. 

  Australia’s high level of coastally-based urbanization intensifies the pressure on particular 

  regions and ecosystems. There is no certain answer to the perennially controversial 

  question about Australia’s optimal population size. The answer depends on several things: 

  (i) levels of consumption, (ii) choice of technologies or production methods, (iii) whether 

  we do the “human carrying capacity” arithmetic for Australia on its own or for the whole 

  world, (iv) notions of security, (v) etc. The point is not to argue about which criterion 

  should prevail. The first-order need is to get the several main interest-groups and academic 

  disciplines to engage constructively in a discussion about how to balance competing and 

  complementary criteria. 

  Of course, no such local intra--Australian strategy makes sense if we continue to live in a 

  “fortress world” wherein the problems of population density, poverty, tension and strife 

  persist or proliferate in the world’s poorer countries. We Australians should strive to 

  temper our fears and anxieties over “terrorists” and queue-jumping refugees with a 

  recognition that, internationally, a stitch in time will save nine. That stitch can only be via 

  a paradigm-shifting shakeup in aid and trade regimes, entailing the (barely thinkable) 

  levelling up of material conditions and opportunity between nations and regions, and by 

  collective commitment to environment-friendly technologies. 

  Page 22 

