---
title: "New Shadow Ministerial responsibilities."
date: "2003-07-02"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH"
subjects:
  - "Health and Ageing portfolio"
  - "Shadow Ministry reshuffles"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211255048
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TUR96%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 JULIA GILLARD M.P.   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Shadow Minister for Health   

 NEW SHADOW MINISTERIAL RESPONSIBILITIES   

 I am delighted to have been appointed as Labor’s Shadow Minister for Health.  After the 2001  election, Simon Crean showed great faith in me by appointing me as Shadow Minister for  Population & Immigration.  I will always be immensely grateful to Simon for giving me that  responsibility and I thank Simon for now giving me this new opportunity in his team.   

 I look forward to taking the fight up to Minister Patterson and the Howard Government,  which wants to wreck Medicare.  Labor is the party that built Medicare and only Labor will  protect and extend it.  Labor believes that your Medicare card, not your credit card, should be  the determinant of that access.     

 As Shadow Minister for Health I will be continuously campaigning to save Medicare and will  also be developing new policies to strengthen Australia’s health system.   

 I have enjoyed my time as Shadow Minister for Population and Immigration.     

 I thank the many ALP members, who contributed last year to the development of Labor’s  asylum seeker and refugee policy, Protecting Australia and Protecting the Australian Way.   As this policy confirms, nothing is more important to Labor and to Australia than the integrity  of our immigration system.  Labor will take this policy to the next election and will continue  to hold Minister Ruddock to account for undermining the integrity of our immigration system  through the Cash for Visas scandal.  No-one should be able to buy their way into this country  by making donations to the Liberal Party.   

 Policy work has commenced on a way to focus population growth on the regions of Australia  that want growth while taking the pressure off the Sydney basin.  I am sure this work will  continue.   

 I congratulate my successor in these portfolios, Nicola Roxon MP, who will bring  commitment, energy and flair to this role.   

 Despite having had responsibility for Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs for only four  months, I have had the chance to meet many Indigenous Australians.  I hope that I will meet  many more in the course of my new duties and I pledge that Indigenous health will be a focus  of mine, working closely with the new Shadow Minister for Reconciliation and Indigenous  Affairs Bob McMullan MP.  

         2 July 2003 

 For further information contact   Julia Gillard MP on 0417 361 637  Jamie Snashall on 0407 438 746 

 

 

 

