---
title: "Sammaki family."
date: "2003-11-06"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Sammaki family"
  - "Visas"
  - "Children"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260975
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2BVA6%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator Amanda Vanstone  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation 

  7i.03 

  6 November 2003 

  Sammaki Family 

  In his speech at the Bali Memorial Service this year the Prime Minister said “The events of  the last year brought the people of Australia and the people of Indonesia closer together.” 

  The Sammaki children have already endured significant trauma, losing their mother in  horrific circumstances. There are also Australian children who lost parents in this terrible  tragedy. Brothers and sisters lost their siblings. Parents lost their children. Friends lost  friends. Indonesian families have equally suffered. 

  I am sure the people of both Australia and Indonesia would welcome an opportunity for the  Sammaki children, innocent victims of the Bali tragedy, to be reunited with their sole  surviving parent. 

  I have decided to intervene and grant a permanent resident visa on humanitarian grounds 

  to Mr Sammaki. This is not a protection visa. Mr Sammaki is not a refugee. 

  My decision is not about Mr Sammaki but is based on what is best for the children. This  visa will open the way for the Sammaki children to be permanently reunited with their  father because it allows Mr Sammaki to sponsor his children as permanent residents to  Australia. The visa will entitle Mr Sammaki and his children to appropriate support. 

  Mr Sammaki is now out of the Baxter Detention Centre. He has been flown to Adelaide this  afternoon in the company of an ACM officer. He has been met at the airport by NGO and  Departmental representatives. His visa will be evidenced and he will be offered assistance  to fill out the appropriate application forms to propose his children to Australia. Under  established arrangements Mr Sammaki will have access to a range of settlement services, 

  including access to Centrelink and Medicare. 

  Minister’s media contact: Damon Hunt 0419 691 944 

  Mr Sammaki. 

  The facts are that Mr Sammaki travelled unlawfully to Australia after spending 8  years illegally in Indonesia. Prior to this he lived in Iran. Mr Sammaki has been  found not to be a refugee. His claim for a protection visa was rejected by the original  decision maker, the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Federal Court. It is clear that 

  he is not entitled to a protection visa. 

  It is important to recognise that everyone held in a detention centre has either been  judged not to be a refugee, as is the case with Mr Sammaki, or is awaiting  determination of their claim for refugee status. 

  The Sammaki Children 

  Mr Sammaki has two Indonesian children Sarah, aged 4 and Safdar aged 8. Sadly  Mr Sammaki’s Indonesian wife Endang died as a result of injuries received in the  Bali bombing. Visitor visa applications were lodged on behalf of the children but  were refused as the decision maker was not satisfied that they would abide by the  visa condition requiring them to depart at the end of their visit. The handling of these  visa applications has been sound and unexceptionable. Commonsense would  support these decisions. 

  Putting aside the issue of whether the children and their supporters would abide by  the visa condition to return it is obvious that one or more intermittent visits to see  their father and the subsequent separations would impose further stress on children  who have already suffered significant trauma. Some people have used the media to 

  publicly express their support for the children to visit their father. Others have  chosen to privately express this view. A visit is not a permanent solution. It would  impose further anguish on the children and leave them vulnerable to being used by  people as political pawns. 

  I am advised that Mr Sammaki wanted very much to be permanently reunited with  his children in Indonesia. Mr Sammaki had been an illegal resident in Indonesia  prior to his arrival in Australia. Without a guaranteed right of return to Australia  Indonesian officials would not allow him entry. 

  Mr Sammaki has also had the option of permanently returning to Iran with his  children. This option has been available for some time and indeed a number of  people have elected to return to Iran. Mr Sammaki has refused to sign the relevant  papers and pursue this option. 

  In his speech at the Bali Memorial Service this year the Prime Minister said “The  events of the last year brought the people of Australia and the people of Indonesia  closer together.” 

  The Sammaki children have already endured significant trauma, losing their mother  in horrific circumstances. There are also Australian children who lost parents in this  terrible tragedy. Brothers and sisters lost their siblings. Parents lost their children.  Friends lost friends. Indonesian families have equally suffered. 

  I am sure the people of both Australia and Indonesia would welcome an opportunity  for the Sammaki children, innocent victims of the Bali tragedy, to be reunited with  their sole surviving parent. 

  I have decided to intervene and grant a permanent resident visa on humanitarian  grounds to Mr Sammaki. This is not a protection visa. Mr Sammaki is not a  refugee . 

  My decision is not about Mr Sammaki but Is based on what is best for the children.  This visa will open the way for the Sammaki children to be permanently reunited with  their father because it allows Mr Sammaki to sponsor his children as permanent  residents to Australia. The visa will entitle Mr Sammaki and his children to 

  appropriate support. 

  Mr Sammaki is now out of the Baxter Detention Centre. He has been flown to  Adelaide this afternoon in the company of an ACM officer. He has been met at the  airport by NGO and Departmental representatives. His visa will be evidenced and  he will be offered assistance to fill out the appropriate application forms to propose 

  his children to Australia. Under established arrangements Mr Sammaki will have  access to a range of settlement services, including access to Centrelink and  Medicare. 

