---
title: "Ruth Cruz Mendoza."
date: "2003-10-20"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Cases (Law)"
  - "Illegal immigrants"
  - "El Salvador"
  - "Custody (Family law)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260435
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YROA6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND  INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Ruth Cruz Mendoza Ms Ruth Cruz Mendoza's case has attracted much attention and there is an understandable level of  concern in the Tasmanian community.

 The issue of custody is central to this case. Ruth's sister and her father must resolve the custody and  living arrangements so that my Department can work with Ruth and her supporters to seek a resolution to  the matter. Officials will also canvass various options for Ms Mendoza to be able to further her studies in  Australia next year.

 Meanwhile, discussions will be take place between departmental officials and Ms Mendoza's migration  agent to make appropriate arrangements so that she can stay in Australia and complete her Year 11  studies.

 Attached is a summary of some of the key concerns.

 RUTH MENDOZA CASE: KEY ISSUES OF CONCERNS

 ●     

 Ms Daysi de Escobar sponsored her sister, Ruth, to visit Australia for a 45 day holiday starting 1  December 2000. The application was accompanied by a statutory declaration from Ms Escobar  which stated that she was only inviting Ruth for a 45 day holiday and that she understood that the  visa did not permit further stay or further visa applications to be lodged while Ruth was in Australia.  ●     

 Permission from Ruth's father for Ruth only to visit Australia was provided. There was no  permission for her to remain beyond that time. This was confirmed when an officer of the  Department contacted her father in 2001. ●     

 Despite Ms de Escobar's statutory declarations and the fact that Ruth's father had only given  permission for Ruth to come to Australia for a short holiday, attempts were made to enable Ruth to  stay in Australia.  ●     

 Eventually, an application for a Protection Visa was made on the grounds that Ruth allegedly feared  being subject to gang violence if she returned to El Salvador. ●     

 This application was refused as the delegate was not convinced that Ruth's protection claims were  well founded.  ●     

 The decision was affirmed by the Refugee Review Tribunal. Without divulging the details of the  RRT decision, I note the Tribunal found "there were a number of matters raised by the Tribunal  which the applicant was not able to explain to the Tribunal's satisfaction and there were significant  inconsistencies in the applicant's account which caused the Tribunal to doubt that the story was  true".  ●     

 It has been claimed (Hobart Mercury, 11 July 2003) that Ruth's closest relative is her eldest sister  (Ms de Escobar) on the basis that Ruth's father did not take care of Ruth.  ●     

 Ms de Escobar has provided no documentary evidence to show that she has legal custody of Ruth.  When her case was being considered, a Departmental officer telephoned Ruth's father in 2001 and  was advised that: - he, Ruth and the rest of the family lived together with Ruth's maternal grandmother until he re-married; - at that time, he moved to a house nearby but continued to have close contact (daily or every  second day) with Ruth and her brother and other sister who remain in El Salvador; - he continued to look after Ruth even after he re-married and had not given permission for Ruth to  remain in Australia beyond her short holiday; - he had not signed over custody of Ruth to Ms de Escobar or anyone else; - he has been living in the same area for at least the last 11 years and working at the same place for  over 18 years.  ●     

 Arrangements are being made for Ruth to remain in Australia until the end of the year so she can  complete Year 11.  ●     

 Under current circumstances, she would then be required to depart. If Ruth then wished to return to  Australia, she would need to apply for another visa. In connection with that application, and until  she turns 18, she must obtain written permission from the custodial parent for her to live with her  sister in Australia. No such written permission has been provided in the context of the visas that  Ruth has sought beyond that for the initial 45 day holiday. ●     

 The Government has made a commitment to expedite processing of a student visa application, were  she to make one, after she completes Year 11 and leaves Australia.  ●     

 The issue of custody is central to this case. Ruth's sister and her father must resolve the custody and  living arrangements so that my Department can work with Ruth and her supporters to seek a  resolution to the matter. ●     

 It is not normal practice for me or my Department to release an RRT decision. However, it would be  open to Ms Mendoza to do so and this may assist Tasmanians to understand the full complexities of  this case.

 20 October 2003

 Media contact: Damon Hunt 0419 691 944

 See: Index of Media Releases



