---
title: "Press conference: 4 July 2003: Adelaide: unauthorised boat arrivals."
date: "2003-07-04"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "ATSIC"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211255105
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CIU96%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

 Press Conference, Adelaide, 4 July 2003

 Unauthorised boat arrivals

 Mr Ruddock: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I want to just clarify, first, one issue for the record. It has now been  firmly established that the vessel entered the migration zone at the Port Hedland port. I mean, it's rather interesting that the  port extends very much out into the open sea, but it's a question of geography, I suppose in that sense, as to what the  boundaries of ports are and, therefore, the nature of the migration zone.

 The issue of how people are dealt with when they enter the migration zone is quite clear: they're dealt with in accordance with  the Migration Act, which sets out the procedures that should be followed. If people are unlawful non-citizens seeking to  access Australia, that is they are without a visa, then we are obliged to detain them, they are detained. 

 We then have to discover what their purpose was in seeking to enter Australia, who they are, where they're from, and for that  reason we process, initially, people to ascertain whether there are any issues that arise in relation to, particularly, our  protection obligations.

 Notwithstanding the way in which these issues have been reported, there is no substance to the suggestion that we are dealing  with asylum seekers until we know whether or not there are claims and whether or not people intend to make claims. So we're  not dealing with asylum seekers; we're dealing with unlawful non-citizens. 

 We will establish in the process whether or not people are making claims. If they do make claims and they are of substance,  they enter a form of processing where they receive asylum seeker assistance in developing those claims. They are considered,  at first instance, by the Department. They have an opportunity to appeal those decisions to the Refugee Review Tribunal. And  I dare say, like others, they might well be advised to enter the judicial system if they think our decision-making is in any way  flawed. 

 What route is followed time will tell. The question of where you are processed is a matter that the Department determines. It is  not a question of law; it's an administrative issue. There is no particular requirement that people ought to be entered onto the  mainland, detained in any particular detention centre. As long as people are available for processing within the jurisdiction of  Australia, and that includes Christmas Island, then our legal obligations are met.

 I think it is important, in the context of a view that might develop that one group of people have reached Australia by getting  into a boat and seeking to make a voyage, that we do nothing to enhance the perceptions that Australia is again open for  business in the context of people smuggling. 

 There is a prospect, a very real prospect, that people who have been unwilling to venture into boats might see this, in the way  it is being portrayed, that Australia is again open for business. I would be very disappointed if that perception developed. And  one of the reasons I persist with the view that the processing ought to occur at Christmas Island is to reinforce the view that  people are not reaching Australia by getting into boats of this character.

 Are there any questions?

 Reporter: On the matter of logistics and costs, would it not have been simpler to deal with them at Port Hedland?

 Mr Ruddock: The issue of costs can't be seen in isolation. The issue of costs has to be seen in the context of what perceptions  you fuel and what the likely outcomes are. One of the substantial savings that we made in returning money to the Budget this  year derived from the success of the measures that we had put in place to discourage people smuggling. 

 And the success of those measures limits the exposure of costs. Anything that undermines those measures heightens the  possibility of very increased and considerable costs and I think that's the issue of costs that you need to weigh up.

 Reporter: Are you saying that they, the people-- a conscious decision was taken to send the people to Port-- to Christmas  Island rather because if they were processed on the mainland that would send a message, as you were saying, that Australia  was open for business again?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I think there are perceptions in relation to these matters and the perception-

 Reporter: And is that perception important in …

 Mr Ruddock: Oh absolutely.

 Reporter: … [unclear] where people are sent?

 Mr Ruddock: Absolutely. The perception is of crucial importance. I mean the idea, that because we've gone 18 months  without any boats, which has been an extraordinary success, an extraordinary success, that one venture that appears to deliver  people to the Australian mainland might change the way in which people react needs to be at the top of your mind.

 Reporter: Was their position established before or after they were removed to Christmas Island?

 Mr Ruddock: The advice that I received was five minutes ago, the formal advice, that having examined all of the material  that the vessel was within the migration zone.

 Reporter: Was that known when the decision was taken to send them to Christmas Island that they were in the migration  zone?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I mean, I answered the question. I was advised five minutes ago that that issue had been finally resolved.  Look, there have been some discussions about whether or not the vessel was in the migration zone.

 Reporter: Mm.

 Mr Ruddock: The issue has been raised; the matter was finally determined and put to me five minutes ago.

 Reporter: So you are you now bound to bring these people to Australia and process them in Australia?

 Mr Ruddock: No, we're bound to process them in accordance with law and the issue of where they are processed is an  administrative matter.

 Reporter: So you're confident that there's no legal obligation for them to be brought ashore on the mainland and to be  processed here?

 Mr Ruddock: The outcome is quite clear: the legal obligation is to process them in accordance with the Migration Act. The  Act does not specify that people have to be detained onshore or detained in a situation where we cannot administratively and  conveniently deal with it. 

 I mean, there are some issues, as well, about entering people into Port Hedland, which has not been canvassed, but I will put it  to you frankly. At the moment they do not have separation detention at Port Hedland and one of the important issues in  dealing with populations of unlawful non-citizens is to ensure that people are not contaminated by views developed by talking  to other detainees. 

 It needs to be an environment in which the questioning can be undertaken without people being prompted to take particular  courses because they believe that it might be more helpful to them than anything else. So separation detention is important. 

 I'm advised at the moment that that could not have been achieved at Port Hedland and that Christmas Island is also, for  administrative convenience, more appropriate. But Christmas Island is within the Australian jurisdiction, we're not moving  them from jurisdiction, and we can have them anywhere within the jurisdiction. That's the point I'm making.

 Reporter: The timing, though, of when authorities found out that they were actually in our migration zone, though, is  important. 

 Because, if they knew before they were removed to Christmas Island, it can leave the Department and perhaps the  Government open to charges that you were trying to remove them stealthily and therefore deprive them of the extra rights that  now sort of accrue to them because they were in our migration zone. Can you rule that out?

 Mr Ruddock: I'll give you the answer I gave before, which is this. There have been discussions that have been undertaken  between my Department and other departments that have information about the definition of a port and whether the vessel was  within a port. And there is other advice that needed to be obtained about the implications of that information. And the advice I  received that concluded a view on this matter was five minutes ago.

 Reporter: Was the Government, though, trying to remove their rights by stealth?

 Mr Ruddock: No. The Government made a decision. And I made the decision, and that was two days ago, that this group of  people would be taken to Christmas Island and not in any knowledge that they may have, may have, entered the migration  zone. I mean, I wasn't aware two days ago that the boundaries of the port went well beyond what you would regard as a port  and the shoreline.

 Reporter: Can I ask you a question about an operation, too, at Sydney Airport last night, about taxi drivers targeted for,  among other things, immigration breaches? 

 Mr Ruddock: Mmhm.

 Reporter: Can you tell us what the purpose of that was and whether it was successful?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I understand three people were detained as unlawful non-citizens or breaching visa conditions. And  operations of that sort do occur from time to time to establish whether or not people are in breach of the Migration Act. And I  think there have been three such compliance operations in the last few months. 

 Those operations usually involve not only my Department but police authorities as well as social security and tax authorities.  To ensure that people are properly declaring income, not claiming other benefits, that they have a lawful entitlement to be  involved in the industry and that they're not breaching the Migration Act.

 Reporter: Should it serve as a warning to others?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, look, we are involved in dealing with a whole range of immigration issues, including whether or not  people are breaching visa conditions onshore. We locate something like 17,000 people a year. Most of them, when they're  found, make arrangements to go voluntarily, but a proportion have to be detained and others removed. This is part of an 

 ongoing operation that deals with all aspects of border control.

 Reporter: Do employers have an obligation to check the status of people who they're giving jobs to?

 Mr Ruddock: Employers can satisfy themselves as to whether people have a lawful entitlement to work. And if they wish to  give information to us about people who are applying for employment with them, they can. There is in prospect further  legislation to enhance employer sanctions. If an employer knowingly employs somebody who is unlawful and in effect  harbours them, that is also an offence under the Migration Act.

 Reporter: Is your view that the people who arrived off Port Hedland should, in fact, go through the entire legal process,  which as you pointed out can take a number of years, that that process should happen within them remaining on Port  Hedland? In other words, I guess, ruling out--

 Mr Ruddock: No, Christmas Island.

 Reporter: Not Port-- Christmas Island, I beg your pardon. In other words, I guess, a short way of putting it is, would you rule  out at this point in time them coming to an Australian mainland detention centre at all?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I wouldn't rule anything out. I never do. There might be reasons of health, there may be other reasons  that you would want to transfer an individual detainee from a particular location to another, and that occurs for operational  reasons. 

 What I can say is this. At Christmas Island, in the facility that is there, we have processed people under the arrangements for  the Pacific Solution, that is as an excised territory, and we have processed people under the provisions of the Migration Act. 

 There were a group of people from Sri Lanka where the same issue arose: had they entered the migration zone at a particular  point in time when they landed at Cocos Island or had they not? And in the end the decision was made that they'd entered the  migration zone. 

 They were processed in accordance with those arrangements, it was done at Christmas Island, those people have now been  processed and I don't think any were found to be refugees and have, in fact, gone home.

 We will endeavour to undertake processing properly, in accordance with law, and have it resolved as quickly as possible. I  certainly hope that if we're dealing with people who do not have asylum claims that we can get them out very quickly, but  time will tell.

 Reporter: How much more expensive will it be to process them at Port Hedland-- at Christmas Island than at Port Hedland?  What's the cost to the Government?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I mean, I can't be prescriptive about that, but I wouldn't want to be. The figures vary from detention  centre to detention centre. The increased cost primarily arises because of the fact that they have entered the migration zone. I  mean, that's essentially the increased cost. 

 But I notice that, you know, the Labor Party's been saying something about these issues. And-

 Reporter: [Unclear] a stuff-up.

 Mr Ruddock: Is that right? Yeah. 

 Reporter: How do you feel about that?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I think it's been a program which has been extraordinarily successful in containing unauthorised arrivals  in Australia. But I'd encourage people to look at the Labor's Party policy in relation to these matters, because the Labor Party's  policy is about removing Australian involvement from processing and handing over that responsibility to the United Nations. 

 And all I can say is I think most Australians take the view that these matters ought to be dealt with in accordance with our law  as quickly as possible. And I don't think, particularly, Australians will be happy at the sight of a large number of prospective  pro bono legal advisers becoming almost orgasmic at the prospect of being able to get to Christmas Island and to offer them  advice.

 Reporter: How would you describe those people?

 Mr Ruddock: I think I've used enough colourful words to make your day.

 Reporter: How do you feel about the boat getting so close to the Australian coastline?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, look, I'm obviously disappointed that that's occurred, obviously. It would have been preferable if it had  been identified well in advance of reaching the Australian shoreline. I mean, that would have been preferable. But I can  understand how it happened. 

 When you know that we were aware of news reports in the Indonesian press over last weekend, and that Indonesian officials  along with the International Organisation for Migration missed by a day, I think, reaching them in Indonesia, where they  would have been detained and processed essentially under the auspices of the regional cooperation model, then it was  disappointing that they moved away.

 Now, when a vessel moves, you then have to make a judgement as to where you think they are going to go.

 And the judgement that was made here was that it would follow the route taken by other vessels. Now, the route that was  taken by other vessels essentially was in an easterly direction along the Indonesia archipelago and essentially turning off at  about Timor possibly to try and access Darwin or the Ashmore Reef. This vessel didn't do that. It headed South and into the  Indian Ocean and directly towards the West Australian coast.

 Now, as a judgement call, there'll be some questions asked about why it was made and whether it ought to have been handled  differently, and I'll leave the proper judgements to those who are qualified to call into question, if need be, the decisions taken  and to undertake that review.

 Reporter: Has this exposed a flaw in Coast Watch or our northern defence?

 Mr Ruddock: The only point I'd make is that arrival of vessels in our lateral zones is not new. I reminded some of the people  I talked to today that it wasn't so long ago that we had some Afghans on one of the highways in Western Australia, located  after they'd arrived. A number of years ago a Chinese lady, sadly, drowned off Coburg Peninsula in the Northern Territory,  where a vessel carrying Chinese unlawfuls arrived. 

 There was another vessel that landed in Cape York. And my recollection of that was the absolute astonishment of the people  involved after they'd been located and rescued and flown by helicopter over the mangrove zones infested with crocodiles.  When they suddenly realised how exposed they were and how impossible it was to be able to walk to any place that might be  seen as comprising civilisation.

 There was another group, I think they were perhaps Sino-Vietnamese, who landed in the area of the Kimberleys and again was  lost for a number of days and almost, I think, suffered from not only hypothermia but also malnutrition and lack of water. 

 And there was another vessel, I recall well-- I'm surprised how many there were that actually landed. There was another, I  recall, that had three people. I think there was an Algerian, a Somali and, I think, an Iraqi who landed on an island, and were  taken out by one of the rips when they tried to swim to another island, again to try and find fresh water, and essentially  drowned because they weren't located for a number of days.

 Look, I'm not blaming those in the past for those lapses; I'm simply saying that if you seek to monitor every movement across  the North of Australia, there will be occasions on which you might miss one.

 Top

 Indigenous Affairs

 Reporter: Can I ask you a question about indigenous affairs? Wilson Tuckey has written that there is a fundamental  impediment in Aboriginal culture for them to be able to handle money in a fashion that meets prudential taxpayer  requirements. Do you believe there's that fundamental cultural inability to manage money there?

 Mr Ruddock: I think what he was arguing-- and we may have read his submission differently, I saw some News reports on it.  But my reading of what he put and what he certainly put to me was that he is a believer in what is called bottoms-up funding:  that is that the people themselves should have access to the funding and then determine who they want to provide the services  to them. 

 And this is one of the issues that is being looked at in the review of ATSIC. As to whether or not the funding arrangements  should be centralised and essentially top down, or whether the funding ought to be more regionalised or localised and be  funding essentially engineered by the community, where they control it, they're able to source who the service providers might  be. And I think it's a proper debate to have.

 Reporter: Yeah. But he believes in bottoms-up funding because he has this view that ATSIC, as it stands at the moment, falls  prey to this cultural inability of Aboriginal people to …

 Mr Ruddock: Mm.

 Reporter: … handle money.

 Mr Ruddock: Well, you may have read more into the submission than I have. I think the primary focus of the submission  was on an issue that I think it is appropriate that the ATSIC review should look at, and that is whether or not the governance  arrangements ought to be top down or bottom up.

 Reporter: Though the comment was made that Aboriginal people, their cultural background is hunter gathering. I mean, it's a  fairly pointed comment, from his perspective, of their inability from a very sound and strong cultural base to be able to  manage money. Now, they're saying they're outraged and this is very racist. I mean, do you think that it is a racist statement?

 Mr Ruddock: Look, the point I'd make, and I'd make it again, is that many indigenous people are arguing very strongly that  decision-making ought to be regional. And that the people involved ought to be able to determine the nature of the services  they receive, and if they're going to have ownership of it, that decision-making ought to be bottoms-up. 

 I think that is a proper issue to debate and I think anything else is really extraneous to the principal question, which is being  looked at in the ATSIC review.

 Reporter: Yes. But those people who are also in agreement with that argument aren't running it because they think that, as  Aboriginal people, they have a fundamental inability to manage money. They're running that argument for other reasons. The  two don't have to go hand-in-hand. So I wondered if we could-- if you could actually just address that concrete statement that  he made about the cultural inability to handle money?

 Mr Ruddock: No. Look, I think that it's very important in relation to cultural issues to understand the enormous diversity of  situations which indigenous people are in. Many live in many remote situations. Some have had very high levels of education  and achieve at extraordinarily high levels within the Australian community and are outstanding role models. Other people  have not had the same opportunities. 

 And I think that one needs to recognise that there are important issues, in terms of giving people educational opportunities, in  terms of giving people skills of being able to be involved in governance issues, that need to be addressed. And we are about  addressing those sorts of issues. 

 But look, the idea that one cap fits all, I think, is a flawed view. But I do believe very strongly, as I said to you before, that the  issue of top down or bottoms-up is an issue that the ATSIC review is looking at, I think it is a proper issue to look at. And if  you separate it from some of the more extraneous issues, it's a question on which they will undoubtedly deliberate and give us  some valuable insights.

 Reporter: But irrespective of the actual model, is it-- could he perhaps have been more sensitive in the way that he's--

 Mr Ruddock: And I'm not going to comment any further on what he says. My comments are about the review and the way in  which I expect it to be undertaken and the substantive issue, which I think he was entitled to raise.

 Reporter: Do you believe that ATSIC's issues are more to do-- there's clearly an issue there of governance, because that's  what's being reviewed at the moment. But is the governance issue one of leadership, or is it one of the notion, structure and  philosophy of ATSIC itself?

 Mr Ruddock: Look, I don't think you can dismiss leadership. Leadership is required in any community. And good leadership  is an important part of being able to function effectively and to produce policies and outcomes. But you need also to have,  often, skills that come through-- effective education, which comes through experience, that comes through some training in  dealing with issues of governance.

 And we are about addressing those issues. There are a number of programs that we have implemented at various levels that  are designed to achieve just that. We've agreed to certain additional funds being provided to ATSIC to deal with the capacities  of its Regional Councils and its primary body, the ATSIC Commission into giving a good understanding of governance  issues. 

 We've funded the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations and that organisation is involved in looking at the capacities of  indigenous organisations around Australia and their governance arrangements. 

 In relation to young people, IATSIS, the Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, is playing a significant role  today in developing young leaders of the future by giving them experience in addressing governance issues.

 Top

 Unauthorised boat arrivals (continued)

 Reporter: Sir, can I just ask you one more question in relation to the boat?

 Mr Ruddock: We might make this the last.

 Reporter: I'm sorry to labour the point.

 Mr Ruddock: Mmhm.

 Reporter: You said you only found out this afternoon that-- you only had confirmation this afternoon …

 Mr Ruddock: Mm.

 Reporter: … that the boat was in Australian waters. Did anyone in Government or anyone in any Government agency know  at the time it was decided to be towed out of Australian waters, or out of the migration zone, that it was, in fact, in the  migration zone?

 Mr Ruddock: Look, people might have had opinions. I mean, I can't say there aren't opinions. What I'm saying to you was  very, very deliberate, because I don't want you to be under any misunderstanding. I received advice shortly before this press  conference that my officers had concluded that the vessel reached the migration zone. 

 They were in discussions before that with Customs, port authorities and the Australian Government Solicitor I assume, the  AGS, the Attorney-General's Department, in terms of establishing in a concluded way what the facts are and then applying the  law and in order that they could give me advice. And that advice was given to me ten minutes ago.

 Reporter: But just to clarify finally, yes, 'cause you said earlier the decision was taken two days ago and you didn't--

 Mr Ruddock: I mean, I could actually-- I could actually-- I-- no. I could actually give you-- I don't know whether I've got it  here or not. I could actually give you the written advice, with a handwritten note from the Acting Secretary of the Department,  that said, you know, this is the position. 

 Reporter: But what was the critical definition of the port that you referred to earlier?

 Mr Ruddock: The ports have boundaries and they're all defined-

 Reporter: You mean different ports have different boundaries?

 Mr Ruddock: Yeah, they're surveyed. [Laughs]

 Reporter: Right.

 Mr Ruddock: And so you actually have to get, you know, a GPS. You know somebody's got to actually make a fix off a  satellite, determine where the vessel is, and then relate it to the actual boundaries and be able to give you a fix. And once  you've got a fix that you're within the boundaries of the port, then you've got the question that we had to look at about what  the Act actually means. I mean, this is not an issue that we have dealt with before and so it was an issue that required quite  extensive consultation and advice. That's the-

 Reporter: So now that you have that information, how far out to sea was the boat and how far within the port was it?

 Mr Ruddock: I mean, I can't answer that question. I mean, I've heard that people say three kilometres, I heard then it was six  point one kilometres, I heard the port went out ten kilometres, you know? 

 Reporter: But now that's been clearly defined.

 Mr Ruddock: I will get you some advice. I don't seek to micro-manage those issues. I have been advised by my Department,  having consulted with the ports authority, looked at the GPS reading, consulted with Customs and the Australian Government  Solicitor, that they can now tell me that the boat was in the migration zone. And that's really the issue.

 Reporter: But those who towed it may have known it was in the migration zone at the time.

 Mr Ruddock: Look, they don't establish that question. The issue is a question of fact and that fact was established  conclusively 10 minutes ago, …

 Reporter: Mm.

 Mr Ruddock: … when advice was given to me. 

 Now, in relation to the impact, the import of this, let's understand that the import of it is how you were processed not where  you were processed. And I know some people want to make it a question of where you were processed. But it is not a question  about where you were processed, that is an operational issue. The issue about how you were processed is determined by  whether you were within or outside the migration zone.

 Reporter: Look, you mightn't be able to answer this, but given that you have to get a GPS fix on the boat, and the boat  obviously had to be there for it and that was obviously two days ago that happened, how come a conclusive answer was only  arrived at 10 minutes ago? Or how come you were only advised of the conclusive answer 10 minutes ago? Or probably 30  given how long our press conference has gone, sorry.

 Mr Ruddock: Yeah. Well, officers of my Department and officers of other departments that need to come together and work  through those issues sometimes take a little time. I don't think it makes one iota of difference in terms of the question we are  looking at whether this matter was determined two days ago or today. I don't think it makes one iota of difference. It certainly  doesn't make any difference to where they are going to be processed. 

 Now, that's what people are trying to say should be influenced. I'm saying inside the migration zone, outside the migration  zone, they are going to be processed on Christmas Island. That's what I'm saying. And so if they're going to be processed on  Christmas Island, they're going to be moved to Christmas Island. And that was a process that it was appropriate to start then  and it's a process that will be concluded.

 Now, what does vary is when you start the processing when they reach Christmas Island, which is probably in a couple of  days, how that processing will be undertaken. The decision today, 10 minutes ago, half an hour ago, whatever it was, has  determined that when that processing starts, it will be in accordance with the Australian Migration Act as I've outlined to you.

 And I think that's enough, OK?

 Reporter: Thank you very much.

 4 July 2003

