---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Rydges Lakeside, Canberra: Friday 14 November 2003: Carmen Lawrence, tax and welfare reform, refugees."
date: "2003-11-14"
creators:
  - "Swan, Wayne"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "ALP National Executive"
  - "Low income"
  - "Tax rates and margins"
  - "Refugees"
  - "LAWRENCE, Carmen"
  - "LATHAM, Mark"
  - "Carmen Lawrence"
  - "tax and welfare reform"
  - "refugees."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261312
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IVWA6%22
---

 

 

  Wayne Swan MP Shadow Minister for Family and Community Services   TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, ACOSS CONGRESS, RYDGES LAKESIDE, CANBERRA, FRIDAY 14 NOVEMBER 2003    E & OE - PROOF ONLY   SUBJECT:  CARMEN LAWRENCE, TAX AND WELFARE REFORM, REFUGEES     JOURNALIST:         Are you satisfied with Carmen Lawrence being elected the new national president of the Australian Labor Party?  SWAN:     Oh, certainly. I think Carmen will be a very good president.     JOURNALIST:     Do you think that it could open up leadership wounds within the party considering her views?  SWAN:     No, no, look I don’t. Carmen will be a very good President and she will be a steady hand. I’ve got no concerns about it at all.       JOURNALIST:      …indistinct      SWAN:      I think Carmen will be a great extra-parliamentary leader of the Labor Party. I think her election reflects a democratic process that was well overdue and it’s great to see.      JOURNALIST:    This morning Mark Latham was basically telling you to butt out of his portfolio and he won’t comment on yours. Have you got anything more to say about tax policy today?  SWAN:     Well my job is to stand up for low- and middle-income working families who aren’t getting a fair go. I’ve been shadow minister for family and community services for the best part of five years and in that time I’ve talked about the excessive tax burden which is now being borne by low- and middle-income earning Australian families who are doing it really tough.   So yesterday I was invited to address the Economic Opportunity Conference and I spoke at length about the obscenity of one million families on modest incomes who are paying sixty cents in tax on every additional dollar they earn from overtime. That needs to change. I’ve talked about that since the introduction of the new tax system. Mark’s talked about it and we both agree that it ought to be reformed.   1

 

 JOURNALIST:   indistinct…about how those tax cuts should be  targeted?   

 SWAN:    Well we’ll always have a healthy debate about priorities. 

 We know absolutely at the ACOSS Congress here today the importance of access to  affordable health, education and housing, and Simon and Mark and I have identified  that as a first order priority.    

 In addition to that we’ve talked about the fact that the new tax arrangements in this  country have severed the link between hard work and reward. And what I was talking  about yesterday was giving some reward to those hardworking Australians who have  made this economy strong.    

 I was also talking about the very high taxes paid by people moving from welfare to  work - seventy, eighty cents in the dollar paid by those people. And I simply made the  point that when there are calls from the business community for changes in the tax  system, they ought to realise there are millions of hardworking Australians paying a  lot more tax than them.    

 That was the point I made yesterday and that was the point I’ve been making over the  last three years since the introduction of the new arrangements, which have  punished and hurt hardworking Australian families.   

 JOURNALIST:    So you’ve got no plans to stop advising Mark Latham?    

 SWAN:     I’m not advising Mark Latham. I’m talking within my 

 portfolio. Family and Community Services is the biggest portfolio. It provides income  support to ten million Australians and the interaction of the tax and social security  system is vital. It’s one that I’ve spoken about continuously because I’ve been the  spokesperson for five years. I’m not impinging on anyone else’s portfolio I’m talking in  mine and I’m talking constructively about positive proposals for the future. If I could  just recommend that you read my speech from yesterday.     

 JOURNALIST:   What do you think of this Government’s form in relation  to the 14 Kurdish refugees?    

 SWAN:     Look, I’ll leave comments in that area to Rob 

 McClelland. I’ll just make this point. This is a government that continually tries to  camouflage the insecurities that it creates domestically by fanning the flames of  international security.    

 With this government, I think what you see is that selfishness comes wrapped in the  flag. As this country has become more and more insecure, the government wants  people to focus their eyes internationally. Even there its record on border security is  appalling. The real question about this boat is how did it get through border  surveillance?       

 JOURNALIST:    Do you think the government lied here?   

 SWAN:      I don’t think there’s any question that Australians do 

 believe the Government bends the truth on a whole host of matters every day for  political advantage, and they’ve done it again. 

  2

  3

 

 JOURNALIST:    Just back on the tax issue, those who’ve spoken out  against Mark Latham are all supporters of Kim Beazley…    

 SWAN:     No, look, I haven’t been speaking out against Mark 

 Latham’s views, I’ve been speaking out and expressing views that I have had and  publicly espoused at doorstops like this for the last three years. There’s nothing new  in any of the comments that I’ve made about the intersection of tax and social  security.  

 

 So my comments were written about these things well before other people chose to  place this in a leadership context. It’s got nothing to do with it. It’s a very hard policy  area, which deserves hard thinking and debate in the party.    

 JOURNALIST:    But why has Mark Latham got his back up, though?   

 SWAN:     Well you’ll have to ask Mark Latham that, but I’m 

 talking in my area which, as you know, I’ve been talking for a very long time. And I’ll  keep talking in my area not in the context of leadership or anything else, in the  context of getting a fair go for battling Australian families who are struggling to bring  up their kids and the lack of access to affordable health and education and when  they work some overtime, not to have the government - Mr Howard and Mr Costello -  take sixty cents in every dollar.    

 They’re not working for forty cents in the dollar. That’s the point I made in my speech  yesterday, which I had been booked in to do for three months. So they are comments  I was making independent of any other debate and I’ll continue to make them  because it’s really important to the future of the country and the security of Australian  families and the people trying to move from welfare to work.       

 ENDS Friday 14 Nov 03  Web: www.SwanMP.org 

 Contact:  Wayne Swan on 0418 795 329  Matt Linden on 0407 430 613  

 

