---
title: "Vanstone doesn't front for first battle as Minister for Immigration\n"
date: "2003-10-08"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "VANSTONE, Amanda"
  - "Visas"
  - "Government regulation"
  - "RUDDOCK, Philip, MP"
  - "Ministerial discretion"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211259953
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/T6LA6%22
---

 

 Nicola Roxon MP   Shadow Minister for Population and Immigration  Shadow Minister for Women   

 Vanstone Doesn’t Front for First Battle as  Minister for Immigration   

 Labor Disallows TPV Regulations 

 

 Labor today blocked the Government’s new migration regulations that aim to extend  Temporary Protection Visas to even more people.  M

 E D I A  R E L E A S E  

 

 Labor will not allow the new Minister for Immigration, Senator Vanstone, to extend a  bad system - a flawed system - to even more people.  We note she wasn’t even  prepared to turn up and debate these regulations.   

 The Howard Government has used temporary protection visas in a way that the name  makes clear was never intended.  The Government has manipulated the system to use  temporary protection visas to keep people in long-term limbo.   

 Labor’s refugee and asylum seeker policy, released last year, made clear that we do not  support a system of rolling visas that only give temporary protection.  Short term,  temporary protection can be appropriate in some circumstances, but long-term limbo  and uncertainty is just a recipe for misery.   

 Labor disallowed these new regulations for two key reasons:   

 i) The regulations seek to extend the failing, rolling Temporary Protection  Visa system to a new class of people such as those who arrive lawfully  (perhaps as tourists or students) and then make a protection claim; and    

 ii) The regulations give the Minister even more extensive personal powers, at a  time when serious questions are being asked over the current use of existing  powers.   

 Minister Vanstone can be assured that Labor will continue to pursue the allegations of  ministerial discretion being misused by her predecessor, Minister Ruddock, and ensure  that she does not face the same temptations of granting visas to friends and fundraisers.   

 We will also continue to highlight the unfairness of the Temporary Protection Visa  regime that she has inherited, and that currently affects nearly 9000 people living and  working in communities across Australia.   

 

 8 October 2003 

 

 

 For more information call:  Nicola Roxon or Chris Black on (03) 9687 7355 or 0417 386 535 

