---
title: "Minister challenged Hobart students on citizenship and multicultural affairs."
date: "2003-07-16"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Hobart"
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Multicultural education"
  - "Secondary schools"
  - "Awards"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211255518
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WJW96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H87/2003 - 16 July 2003

 

 Minister Challenged Hobart Students on Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today encouraged  Hobart students to fully explore the complexities surrounding citizenship and multicultural  affairs.

 'As the decision-makers of the future, it is important that students are aware of the enormous  benefits of our cultural diversity, have the opportunity to discuss these issues, and are  encouraged to contribute to ensuring Australia continues to be one of the world's most  successful multicultural societies,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Mr Hardgrave was at the Hutchins School in Sandy Bay to present the Citizen 2030  educational program.

 Mr Hardgrave challenged the students over a range of issues dealing with the importance of  citizenship.

 'There is not a region in Australia which has not been shaped in some way by our migrant  history,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Citizen 2030 is a multimedia educational program, which is designed to encourage students  to consider the ongoing impact and importance of citizenship.

 'This program examines and acknowledges the significant contributions that migrants have  made to Australian society,' Mr Hardgrave said. 

 Mr Hardgrave is also calling on all Australians to design and send him a postcard outlining  the importance of their local migrant heritage and citizenship as part of the All of Us: a  roadmap to Cultural Diversity in Australia competition.

 Winning entries will be included in a commemorative book. For more information on this  competition and to access entry forms, visit www.minister.immi.gov.au/minister2/index.htm. 

 While in Hobart, Mr Hardgrave also launched A Guide to the Role of Police in Australia  which is designed to assist newly arrived migrants understand their rights and  responsibilities under Australian law.

 'This booklet will help engender confidence in all Australians, particularly those recently  arrived of the need to work with the police,' he said.

 'It is vital that new migrants and refugees are provided with information on Australia's  policing processes and fundamental legal concepts, as they often arrive from countries with  vastly different legal systems and standards,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

