---
title: "Opening address to Conference of the CFMEU Construction Division."
date: "2003-10-13"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKPLACE RELATIONS"
subjects:
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition"
  - "Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union"
  - "Building industry"
  - "Industrial relations"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260138
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MKMA6%22
---

  1 

 

 

 FOR MEDIA   

 CRAIG EMERSON  Member for Rankin 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKPLACE RELATIONS  

 

 

 Opening Address to Conference of the CFMEU 

 Construction Division   

 Adelaide   

 13 October 2003   

 When planning was underway for this annual conference of the CFMEU Construction  Division a lot of thought would have been given to Tony Abbott and his so-called  ‘exposure draft’ of the construction industry legislation.   

 Everyone knows - and some of the more conservative newspapers in the country  acknowledged - that the Cole Royal Commission was set up as a political diversion  from the Government’s troubles back in early 2001.   

 Everyone knows that when the Howard Government is in trouble it creates political  diversions.   

 Just ask the asylum seekers whom the Government falsely and maliciously claimed  had thrown their children overboard.   

 It has been throwing the truth overboard before and ever since.   

 Where are those weapons of mass destruction that the Government used as an excuse  for the war in Iraq?   

 Remember John Howard lying to parliament, denying having met with his friend Dick  Honen on ethanol subsidies just weeks after the meeting took place?   

 Or Peter Costello claiming there had been no personal tax cuts in living memory,  when, in fact, Labor had cut personal tax seven times? 

  2 

 

 Or Peter Costello’s serial lie that Labor’s so-called L-A-W law tax cuts were never  paid ‘for one day and for one dollar’ when, in fact, half were paid early and half were  converted into superannuation for workers that Costello himself axed in the 1997  Budget?   

 Or Peter Costello’s lie that Labor had never produced Budget surpluses?   

 Or that John Howard Golden Oldie that he would ‘never ever’ introduce a GST?   

 Or Howard’s promise to keep Medicare ‘for all of us’?   

 Or Tony Abbott, who said three times he had ‘absolutely not’ bankrolled a legal case  against One Nation?   

 Or, to turn the full circle, Abbott in his tabling speech on the construction industry  draft bill, when he said “reforming the [construction] industry is not a matter of being  `pro' or `anti' union”?   

 Oppositions usually run a Waste Watch on wasteful government spending.     

 We should run a Truth Watch on the Howard Government’s lies - but we’d be too  busy counting Government porkies to do anything else.   

 Now that John Howard has given Tony Abbott the job of fulfilling his 1980s promise  to ‘take a scalpel to Medicare’ - one promise Howard intends to keep - does this  mean the Government’s anti- union agenda has been abandoned?   

 Not bloody likely!   

 The new bloke - Kevin Andrews - hardly seems to be out of the Reith-Abbott head-kicking mould.   

 But I’d make three observations about him.   

 First, right up front in his maiden speech he blamed ‘rampant unionism’ for  Australia’s economic woes.  Kevin Andrews is no friend of the trade union  movement.   

 Second, the only action Kevin Andrews has taken as the new minister is to intervene  at the Industrial Relations Commission to try to stop building workers attending  report-back meetings on the impact of the Government’s draft legislation on them and  their families.   

 So true to form, when a Liberal minister intervenes, it’s against the unions and their  members.   

 Third, Kevin Andrews owes everything to John Howard, who elevated him to the  Ministry and now to Cabinet - ahead of rivals such as Joe Hockey and Mal Brough.     

  3 

 Kevin Andrews will do what Howard wants.     

 And we know what Howard wants: the annihilation of the trade union movement in  this country.   

 A couple of weeks ago John Howard boasted of his efforts in removing the rights of  working Australians to bargain collectively and to be represented by a union.   

 Addressing the Business Council of Australia, Howard spoke of Australia’s economic  achievements. Right at the top of a long list of his proud reforms he said:   

 “We now have fewer than one in five private sector workers who  belong to trade unions.”   

 Kevin Andrews will be Howard’s puppet with Howard pulling the strings - pursuing  his 25-year ambition to destroy the great Australian trade union movement.   

 Howard not only can’t tell the truth, he can’t stand the truth.     

 And the truth is there are 1.8 million proud union members in Australia and each of  them is part of a family.   

 Can Howard name any other organisation with such massive membership?    

 I want to make some comments on the relationship between the Parliamentary Labor  Party and the trade union movement.  The Australian Labor Party sprang from the  union movement.  The shearers’ strike was busted by vicious anti- union legislation.   The shearers decided to get representatives into the parliament to cha nge the laws and  achieve their aspirations for themselves and their families.  And so, The Australian  Labor Party was born.   

 The more things change, the more they seem to stay the same.  Today the building  unions are confronted by vicious Tory anti-union legislation.   

 I will strongly represent the interests of the union movement and working Australians  in the Federal Parliament and I have the strong backing of Simon Crean to do so.   

 The Howard Government can’t stand trade unions, but it hates strong unions.   

 And that’s why it went after the CFMEU Construction Division through the Cole  Royal Commission.   

 The leaking of the sealed volume of the Cole Royal Commission let the cat out of the  bag.     

 In this secret volume, Cole says that the way the Government set up the inquiry  required him to make findings about conduct or practices that ‘might’ have broken the  law—those were his words.    

 He says:  

  4 

 

 “Most of the matters investigated by the commission `might' have  constituted a breach of civil or criminal law. If I did not make any  findings in relation to such matters, then the number of findings that  would have been open to the commission would have been very small.  That would not have been satisfactory, because it would have unduly  limited the evidential material  to which I could make references in  explaining the need for reforms that I have recommended”.   

 So the cat’s out of the bag.  And what a dirty, smelly creature it is: a $60 million  vicious attack on building unions by the Howard Government.   

 In organising this attack on unions, the Government didn’t want to alarm employers.     

 So Abbott wrote a letter of comfort to them, providing an assurance that the  commission was `not inquiring into any particular company' and that the focus of the  inquiry would be on the unions.    

 This same Minister authorised a payment by the Office of the Employment Advocate  on behalf of two people who gave evidence against the CFMEU in Federal Court  proceedings and whose conduct the court described as ‘reprehensible’ and ‘deceitful’.     

 Is it any wonder that the commission did not find one instance of tax evasion in this  industry?    

 Is it any wonder that, in an industry that averages one workplace fatality a week, the  Cole Royal Commission found only two breaches of occupational healt h and safety  by employers Australia wide?    

 And if any further proof of blatant bias was needed, what about the taped  conversation of Royal Commission investigators with three subcontractors here in  South Australia?   

 When the subbies said they didn’t have any dirt on the CFMEU, the investigators  terminated the interview, saying: “you are not much good to us”.   

 On the tape, one investigator tells the subbies that unions “don’t give a rat’s arse”  whether the subbies get their super payments or not.     

 One of the subbies later told the Australian Financial Review: “It was strange,  because that sort of thing doesn’t happen in Adelaide” and “It’s a pretty kosher place,  we don’t have any drama here”.   

 I am told that there are further revelations on the tape on the attitude of these Cole  Royal Commission investigators, with the statement by one of them that:   

  "to go fishing in Victoria you need to have a licence, unless you're an Abo."   

  5 

 I ask the new Attorney-General, Phillilp Ruddock, as the Minister responsible for the  conduct of Royal Commissions - and for the administration of the Racial  Discrimination Act - what action he proposes to take about these comments?   

 And does the Government still stand by its claim that the Cole Royal Commission  was conducted in a professional and non-partisan manner?    

 It’s not as if the construction industry is struggling, or not performing compared with  other industries.    

 On a range of economic indicators, this industry is doing well.    

 The Government cites Econtech and the observation that it costs more to put a wall of  plaster in a high-rise building than it does in a house.    

 So it should; working on high-rise buildings is dangerous!   

 It’s pretty clear the Government has little interest in the safety of construction  industry workers.   

 The Government’s preferred model for the construction industry is the Athens model.     

 The Sydney Olympics facilities were constructed with a unionised workforce, on  time, within budget and with one fatality - which was one too many.   

 Construction of the Athens Olympics facilities is with a non-unionised workforce -  the Howard Government’s dream come true.     

 Construction is behind time, over budget and there have been up to 20 fatalities  already.   

 The Howard Government wants to bust the CFMEU because it is union strong and  union proud.   

 But having strong unions does not mean that anything goes.    

 Like unions, Labor will not tolerate corruption, extortion or criminal behaviour in the  building industry.   

 But neither will we allow John Howard and his puppet Kevin Andrews to assault the  legitimate rights of building unions to protect and advance the wages, conditions and  safety of their members.     

 There are problems in the construction industry, most of which—predictably—were  glossed over or ignored comp letely by the Cole Royal Commission.    

 The Government is refusing to tackle some of the most serious issues in this industry:  non-payment of workers compensation premiums; non-payment of superannuation;  non-payment of other employee entitlements; the use of phoenix companies to avoid 

  6 

 these obligations; the use of phoenix companies to avoid or evade obligations to pay  tax; and occupational health and safety in this industry.     

 Instead, the draft bill repeats much of what the government has put forward before in  Peter Reith's second wave bill in 1999.    

 Compulsory secret ballot provisions have already been rejected by the Senate.   

 Isolating such amendments to one industry does not change the fact that they are  unacceptable.    

 Secret ballots can already be ordered by the Industrial Relations Commission when  and where they are appropriate or necessary.    

 But making them compulsory every time is both unwieldy and unreasonable.    

 And what if a union wants to end a strike earlier than was originally planned?    

 Its members would have to get back together and have another secret ballot.    

 At the 100th anniversary of the establishment of the Australian Industrial Relations  Commission, the Howard government has come up with yet another way of  undermining it—by proposing that the ACCC, instead of the AIRC, should deal with  difficult industrial relations issues in the construction industry.    

 Labor is not just concerned about the impact of this legislation on the construction  industry; we know that it is a stalking horse and just the start of yet another attack on  the rights of working Australians to bargain collectively.   

 Tony Abbott said so, on the day he released the exposure draft, saying it would be  “stupid” not to.     

 We know the Howard Government would love to see this legislation apply across the  board to all workplaces; we know it because they have already tried to do it through  the Senate.    

 In the planned Australian Building and Construction Commission the Howard  government has in mind not a watchdog but an attack dog—a coercive scheme of  regulations and regulators, programmed with the government's ideological values,  intruding to inflame disputes.    

 The Government is back to telling porkies with its claim that the Building and  Construction Commission would be independent.   

 Its own draft legislation reveals that the Commission would be under the direction of  the Minister.   

 Labor will not allow John Howard to use this construction industry legislation as a  stalking horse to strip away the remaining protections for working Australians and  their rights to bargain collectively. 

  7 

 

 A cooperative approach to issues in the construction industry would have had a much  better chance of success, but the Government never wanted a cooperative approach  with any union.     

 It’s not in their Liberal blood.   

 Labor will participate in the Senate inquiry processes to look at issues not examined  by the Cole Royal Commission or the Government, such as the non-payment of  employee entitlements and workers compensation premiums and the use of phoenix  companies to avoid these obligations and tax.   

 But we see no merit in the Government’s punitive building industry legislation and  Labor will oppose it lock, stock and barrel. 

