---
title: "Putting the Australian Labor Party in international perspective: refereed paper presented to the Australasian Political Studies Association Conference."
date: "2003-09-29"
creators:
  - "Scott, Andrew"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Labour parties"
  - "ALP"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211259573
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OPUA6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Putting the Australian Labor Party in 

 International Perspective 

 

 

 

 Dr Andrew Scott 

 School of Social Science and Planning 

 RMIT University 

 

 

 Refereed paper presented to the 

 Australasian Political Studies Association Conference 

 University of Tasmania, Hobart 

 29 September - 1 October 2003 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 1 

 Abstract 

 This paper assesses the Australian Labor Party's current debates over future directions  with reference to attempts by the left of centre political parties in other western nations,  especially in Western Europe, to deal with the end of the economic "golden age" since the  early 1970s and the widespread resurgence of neo-liberal ideologies since the late 1970s.  The dominant recent view of such comparisons has been through the ideological lens of  the "Third Way". This vision however tends not to see relevant variations between the  experiences of social democratic parties in individual Western European nations as they  have sought to deal with adverse circumstances since the early 1970s.  Nor does the Third  Way view sufficiently extend to the widely varying background landscapes: that is, the  different levels of historical achievement by left of centre parties in the different nations.   Some social democratic parties in European countries are pursuing more progressive  political agendas than the British Labour Party under Tony Blair and they are starting  from a very different basis of policy achievement and political strength than either the  British or Australian labour parties. The nature and extent of these international  differences need now to be highlighted from an Australian political perspective in order to  better inform the current debate about the range of options for the ALP and the current  comparative condition of the Australian party system.  As part of this analysis, the  relationship between the erosion of the traditional blue-collar support bases of the major  left of centre parties in various nations, amid economic restructuring and challenges to  traditional immigration patterns, and the rise of support for anti-immigrant policies and  parties, need to be carefully examined and evaluated.   

 The Australian Labor Party is currently in opposition at the national level and has 

 been for seven years.  As such it is like most nominally left of centre parties in 

 western nations.  A ‘swing to the right’ has been reported in western Europe since 

 the big rise in support for JÃ¶rge Haider’s xenophobic Freedom Party in elections in 

 Austria in October 1999, and that party’s entry into a conservative-led coalition 

 government, which ended 30 years of social democrat-led government in that nation.  

 The ‘swing to the right’ in Europe has included: a rise in support for anti-immigration politicians in Switzerland in October 1999; the election of a conservative 

 government in Spain in April 2000; the defeat of the left of centre ‘Olive Tree’ 

 coalition and return of Silvio Berlusconi as Prime Minister of Italy in June 2001; the 

 replacement of a Labor government with a conservative/christian democratic/liberal 

 coalition government in Norway in September 2001, underpinning which the anti-immigration Progress Party holds the parliamentary balance of power; the election of 

 a right of centre government to replace the social democratic government of 

 Denmark in November 2001 and its subsequent enactment of the harshest 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 2 

 immigration laws in Europe, in what has traditionally been one of the continent’s 

 most tolerant countries; the election of a moderate conservative coalition to replace 

 the social democratic government of Portugal in March 2002; the defeat of the 

 Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin and the strong showing of the neo-fascist Jean-Marie Le Pen in the Presidential election in France in March-April 2002; and the 

 surge in support for the party of assassinated populist Pim Fortuyn in the 

 Netherlands election in May 2002, which helped end eight years in office of a left-led 

 (Labour Party coalition) government in that country.   

 

 Against this trend however has been the fact that a socialist government remains in 

 office in Greece; that Sweden’s social democratic government was re-elected in 

 September 2002 and that in the same month the social democrat Gerhard Schroeder 

 was re-elected as German Chancellor on a platform opposed to the United States 

 (US)-led war with Iraq (as well as to US-style economic policy).  And, although 

 French voters put Le Pen ahead of the Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin in the 

 first round of voting in the Presidential election, they then - shocked at what the 

 accumulated effect of miscellaneous protest votes had done - marginalized Le Pen in 

 the second round in October 2002, rallying behind the more mainstream candidate of 

 the Right, Jacques Chirac, on a platform of moderation.1  The mainstream party of the 

 Right in Austria (the People’s Party) did likewise in 2002 to Haider’s Freedom Party 

 following the strong, Europe-wide reaction against Haider’s party’s entry into 

 government in 1999.  The Austrian Social Democratic Party’s vote also rose in the 

 November 2002 elections, although not sufficiently for it to return to Government.  

 Further, the rightist coalition government elected in the Netherlands quickly 

 collapsed, in October 2002, after ‘Fortuyn’s List’ fragmented, and a new election was 

 held in January 2003 in which the Labour Party’s vote rebounded to the point where 

 serious discussions occurred about it entering into coalition government with the 

 other major party, the Christian Democrats.  The unprecedented election of the 

 Workers’ Party’s Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva (‘Lula’) as President of Brazil in October 

 2002 is also worthy of note in any balanced discussion of recent international political 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 3 

 trends.  It should also be recalled that it was only three years ago that Europe was 

 seen as having undergone a ‘swing to the Left’, with 11 of the 15 European Union 

 (EU) member nations being governed by left of centre parties early in the year 2000.  

 What is certain then is that there is electoral volatility in Europe, just as there is 

 elsewhere in the western world.2   

 

 In discussions about this electoral volatility, parallels have been drawn between the 

 rise of the anti-immigrant right in Europe and Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party in 

 Australia.  The relationship between the erosion of the traditional blue-collar support 

 bases of the major left of centre parties in various nations, amid economic 

 restructuring and challenges to traditional immigration patterns, and the rise of 

 support for anti-immigrant policies and parties, need to be carefully examined and 

 evaluated.  An Australian journalist (then European correspondent for The Age 

 newspaper), Geoff Kitney, wrote in October 1999 in the days after the rise of Haider’s 

 party in Austria that: 

 

 support for the far right is fed by disillusionment over the failure of free market  economics to improve the lives of ordinary people after the fall of communism.   Unemployment and poverty in former Soviet bloc countries have been the only dividend  for millions of people.3   

 Another informed Australian journalist, Tim Colebatch, wrote just after the official 

 inauguration of the controversial new Austrian government, in early 2000, that the 

 

 coalition government…formed in Vienna last week [was] between the People's Party  (their equivalent of our Liberal Party) and the right-wing populist Freedom Party (their  more successful version of One Nation).    

 He cautioned that: 

 

 overreaction can only fan the sense of grievance and xenophobia that is the source of his  [Haider’s] growing political strength. It might suit people in the West to present him as 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 4 

 leading some neo-Nazi movement in Austria, but those who actually follow Austrian  politics know that is untrue.    

 …His antennas sense every displeasure and discontent among Austria's lower middle  class ... Haider promises them a comfortable status quo, if only the asylum-seekers and  immigrant workers were sent away and the EU was not extended (to include Eastern  Europe)... Haider's party is a print-out of the discontents with this (welfare) state….    

 American political scientist Max Riedlsperger, an avowed left-liberal, says the idea that  Haider and his party hold “the seeds of totalitarianism" is laughable.  Haider, he argues  in a 1996 book, Austro-Corporatism: Past, Present, Future, is essentially a politician  stirring up protest votes: against immigration above all, against unemployment, welfare  cheats, high taxes and poor government services, crime and soft sentencing.    

 The Freedom Party has prospered under Haider largely because Austria's system of  proportional representation kept condemning the two major parties to govern together  in a “Grand Coalition". This slowly eroded the raison d'etre of the conservative People's  Party, the junior partner in the coalition, and ensured that protest votes could only go  elsewhere, primarily to Haider.    

 …he appeals to the young because he comes over as…a cool guy who says things you're  not allowed to say, prefers casual clothes to suits and puts Austrians first. As  Riedlsperger argues, he plays on “the disconnect between the political elite and the rank-and-file", allowing ordinary people to “express these feelings that are kind of pent-up".    

 This is the politics of grievance, not Nazism.4   

 Similarly, with the Netherlands, commentary has emphasised that Fortuyn appealed 

 as a colourful outsider to the consensus, behind-closed-doors approach of the 

 previously governing multi-party coalition.  There are clear resemblances in all of 

 this to the part played by Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party as an outlet for the 

 expression of discontent against the Australian political establishment, including on 

 economic policy, following the ALP’s convergence with the conservative parties in 

 favour of neoliberalism in the 1980s and early 1990s.   

 

 The electoral volatility which has recently been evident in parts of Europe, as in 

 Australia, must be seen at least partly as the product of labour and social democratic 

 parties’ own failure in recent decades to promote policies which advance the 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 5 

 interests of their traditional supporters.  The decline in the ideological gap between 

 parties caused by the move of labour and social democratic parties to the Right has 

 certainly weakened individual voters' partisan attachments and affected election 

 results in Britain and Australia; and it may well have done so also in other nations, in 

 Europe. 

 

 After the election to government in 1997 of a British Labour Party sharply shifted to 

 the Right under Tony Blair, a process influenced in part by the Hawke and Keating 

 Australian Labor Party governments of 1983 to 1996, there was an endeavour to 

 philosophise the policy departures of modern social democrats as amounting to a 

 new ‘Third Way’.5  This slogan in turn attracted some support in some ALP quarters, 

 among acolytes of Blair and the then US President Bill Clinton, as the ALP faced its 

 first few years trying to renew from Opposition.  The so-called ‘Third Way’ has been 

 effectively criticised from several perspectives however.  Although it claims to offer a 

 strategy for renewing the left of centre that avoids both the free-market liberalism of 

 the New Right and the state socialism of the Old Left, it has been criticised for, at the 

 least, “conceding too much to neo-liberal prejudice”.6  As Will Hutton notes in his 

 important new book, The World We’re In, “the social democratic parties in Germany, 

 the Netherlands and Scandinavia…have given up less ground than [Britain’s] New 

 Labour”.7  Blair’s Labour Party has prompted “widespread distrust among its own 

 supporters of the borrowed American conservatism that informs many of its criminal 

 justice and social policies” and as a result, Hutton argues, “it will need to be more 

 open to European examples and models rather than having its options closed down 

 by a blinkered focus on America”.8  The ALP has also been heavily influenced by 

 ideas from the US Democrats, some of them via Blair’s New Labour, and it will also 

 need now to be more open to European examples and policy models if it is to rebuild 

 support.  The policy position of European social democratic parties, and its contrast 

 with that of the Clintonised British Labour Party, can be readily seen in the 

 Declaration of Paris signed at the (most recent) congress of the Socialist International, 

 held in November 1999.9  Blair’s government and any pretence it makes to social 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 6 

 democratic credentials have been particularly badly dented in the last twelve months 

 including among its peers in Europe and in the eyes of its erstwhile supporters in the 

 ALP by its gung-ho support of the US-led war on Iraq and by its earlier attempts to 

 adopt very harsh measures against refugees.  On both issues it has been rebuffed by 

 other European nations including even by France under the conservative President 

 Chirac.  The ALP under the leadership of Kim Beazley in 2001 took a hostile attitude 

 to refugees like that which Blair has taken.  Under the subsequent leadership of 

 Simon Crean however it has moderated that hostility somewhat and also, 

 significantly, it opposed the unilateral US-led war on Iraq, unlike Blair’s New Labour 

 but like the social democratic parties of Europe.  

 

 There are of course historical organisational differences between ‘labour’ and ‘social 

 democratic’ parties in that labour parties are formally affiliated with trade unions.  

 Nevertheless, the Australian Labor Party, the British Labour Party, and the New 

 Zealand Labour Party, in common with the Western European socialist and social 

 democratic parties - but unlike the US Democratic Party which is at most a liberal 

 democratic rather than a social democratic party - have all long been members 

 together of the Socialist International.  The historical importance of the organisational 

 distinction between labour and social democratic parties may be overstated, given 

 the central importance of cooperation with national trade union bodies in the 

 continental European social democratic parties10.  In fact it is those parties which 

 have built up the strongest corporatist institutional arrangements involving trade 

 union co-operation at the level of national government policy making.  The notion 

 that the Australian labour movement has been “pragmatic, lacking principles, bereft 

 of theory” in comparison with northern hemisphere counterparts because of its 

 ‘labourist’ rather than ‘socialist’ or ‘social democratic’ history has also been rightly 

 criticised.11  Even if such distinctions were once important they are generally seen as 

 having reduced since the 1970s with the Whitlam Government bringing Australian 

 Labor more into line with European ‘social democratic’ parties’ policies in its 

 initiatives for health and welfare provision.12  The two types of left of centre party, 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 7 

 whether ‘labour’ or ‘social democratic’, face essentially similar strategic and policy 

 challenges now. 

 

 There have been important and instructive political variations between the 

 experiences of socialist and social democratic parties in individual Western European 

 nations as they have sought to deal with the end of the economic "golden age" since 

 the early 1970s and the widespread resurgence of neo-liberal ideologies since the late 

 1970s.  There have also been widely varying and enduring historical achievements by 

 the left of centre parties in these nations, which should not be glossed over.  As well 

 as pursuing more progressive political agendas than the British Labour Party under 

 Tony Blair some social democratic parties in European countries are starting from a 

 very different (much firmer) basis of policy achievement and political strength than 

 either the British or Australian labour parties.  The nature and extent of these 

 international differences need now to be highlighted from an Australian political 

 perspective in order to better inform the current debate about the range of options 

 for the ALP and the current comparative condition of the Australian party system.  

 In his new major history of the Left in Europe, Geoff Eley points out “the variegated 

 hegemony of neo-liberal policies throughout Europe”13 in the 1980s and 1990s.  

 “Where government favoured them and public values backed full employment, 

 unions survived, whether socialists or conservatives governed”14, he points out.  

 “Swedish union density rose from 67.7 percent in 1970 to 82.5 percent by 1990” in 

 contrast to elsewhere.  “Where social democratic corporatism was strongest - 

 Scandinavia, Austria, West Germany - damage to the working class could be 

 contained, whether in jobs, incomes, benefits, political representation, union 

 organization, the socially organised capacities of working-class communities, or the 

 social value accorded to labor and its culture and traditions.  There, even under 

 retreat, organized labor kept better resources and self-confidence in the political 

 arena”.15  Ideas for “a revised social contract based on distributive justice, social 

 citizenship and the welfare state…alternatives to radical marketization…were still 

 functioning in parts of Western Europe…despite the dominant neo-liberalism of the 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 8 

 1980s; [in] Scandinavia, West Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, [and] even 

 France”.16   

 

 Neo-liberalism has not swamped all social democratic parties in the world in recent 

 decades uniformly.  Full employment survived into the 1990s in Sweden, well 

 beyond the trend in other nations.  The defeat of the Social Democrats in the 1991 

 Swedish elections was seen by some at that time as evidence that neo-liberalism had 

 conquered even the strongest stronghold of western social democracy.  However, the 

 fact remains that this non Social Democratic government was voted out of office after 

 only one term in Sweden in 1994 after it made cuts to welfare.  The Social Democrats 

 have since their return to government in 1994 been re-elected twice and have 

 successfully adapted, and essentially preserved, the Swedish model.  Successful 

 adaptation has likewise occurred in Denmark.17  Nations such as Sweden, Denmark, 

 Norway and the Netherlands are continuing to provide strong public welfare outlays 

 and to build high-skill economies through high levels of public investment in 

 education and strong governmental, industrial and social partnerships.  They have 

 continued to achieve solid economic growth while retaining a comparatively very 

 even distribution of wealth and income.  The Social Democratic Party has now 

 governed Sweden for no less than 62 out of the 71 years since 1932.  The Australian 

 Labor Party has been in office for just 24 of those years.  The reasons for the 

 hegemony and resilience of social democracy in northern Europe would repay 

 revisiting now as part of any open-minded consideration of policy and political 

 options for an ALP seeking to rebuild support.  Australian Labor could benefit from 

 closer study of the policies followed in particular northern European nations which 

 have been instrumental in achieving economic prosperity with comparative equality 

 there, and from closer study of the possibility of transferring such policies to 

 Australia. 

 

 Elements in the Australian labour movement have, of course, previously looked to 

 the Scandinavian model of social democracy as a way of transcending their political 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 9 

 problems, embedding better workers' rights and social welfare entitlements, and 

 generally moving beyond the limitations of Anglo-Saxon economic and political 

 culture. The 1987 Australia Reconstructed report on a trade union and government 

 delegation to Scandinavia and Western Europe was a concerted effort to bring some 

 of the fruits of the Scandinavian and other Western European social democratic 

 parties’ success to Australia.18  There have been more fleeting glimpses of appealing 

 ‘European models’ many times since too.  The strong, quality vocational training 

 system in Germany and the ability of vocationally trained individuals in Germany 

 and Denmark to adapt to a variety of skilled occupations along a secure career path; 

 the prevalence of generous paid maternity leave, of paternity leave, the relative 

 gender equality and the priority given to the rights and needs of children in 

 Scandinavian countries; the social charter/chapter for workers’ rights adopted in 

 Europe in the late 1980s, and the required role across that continent for works 

 councils, are among many continuing policy attractions of ‘European models’                   

 which have occasionally attracted the interest of Australian Labor.  In employment 

 policy, parts of Europe such as the Netherlands have been held up in recent years as 

 an alternative model for Australia to the US in achieving a very low unemployment 

 rate but without low-wage jobs, inequality, stress in the workplace or welfare cuts.  

 The victory of the Socialist Party in the French parliamentary elections in 1997 

 chiefly on the issue of unemployment and on a platform of expansionary direct job 

 creation and shorter working hours after only a short period of conservative 

 Government during which unemployment had risen gave heart to the federal ALP, 

 and to the Left in particular, then.  While Jospin’s government in France lasted only 

 until 2002, the regulated reduction of working hours since 1997 is rated by many as a 

 success in helping reduce unemployment and it has also left a social legacy.  

 Another set of successful (and arguably ‘social democratic’) employment and 

 industrial relations policies pursued in Europe in recent years has been in Ireland.  

 Europe's rising "new left" in the mid to late 1990s, particularly with the initial 

 ascendancy of Oskar Lafontaine in the first Schroeder German Social Democratic 

 Party government, and the change to a left-of-centre government in Italy in 1996, led 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 10 

 by a former communist from 1998 to 2001, attracted Australian interest in Europe as 

 a clearly countervailing influence and alternative social and political model to the 

 US, notwithstanding Lafontaine's early exit from the German Government and 

 Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder's decision to align for some time to more orthodox 

 neo-liberal economic policies.  The recent reported ‘rise of the right’ in Europe may 

 have dissipated this interest but continental European social democracy is likely to 

 offer much more promise for ALP policy and political renewal than a continuing 

 adherence to the essentially neo-liberal policies pursued by Clinton and Blair. 

 

 Following the 1987 release of the report of the Australia Reconstructed mission, Francis 

 Castles - a British-born scholar of Scandinavian social democracy and of comparative 

 public policy, who from the mid 1980s to 2001 was a prominent academic in 

 Australia (and New Zealand) before his recent return to Britain - generally 

 supported the direction of that report’s proposals.19  However, he expressed some 

 reservations about its underlying rationale.  Castles emphasised then that Australian 

 ‘laborism’ was quite distinct from the European ‘social democratic’ tradition and that 

 Australia had created a ‘wage earner’s welfare state’ by other means than traditional 

 European-style state provision, notably through equalising of primary incomes 

 through arbitrated regulation of the labour market.  Indeed, he contended then that 

 “one might easily mount a case that laborism [in the policy sense] works just as well 

 as the social democratic strategy” and at that time he criticised other scholars for 

 their “simplistic” and “dismissive” classification of Australia as a merely liberal 

 welfare state.20  For many years, Castles defended the policy record of the Australian 

 Labor governments of 1983-1996 in moderating market-driven inequality.  For many 

 years he has been cited as the main authority by defenders of the relative adequacy - 

 by international standards - of Australia’s welfare provision.  Very recently, 

 however, Castles has conceded that 

 

 Welfare gains by regulative means can also be removed without that fact being as  evident as it would be if reflected in substantial public spending shifts.  And Castles’ 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 11 

 claim [now] is that they have been removed…such removal was possible without a  major clash of values because few ordinary citizens realized just what was at stake.  The  cost of achieving policy objectives relatively invisibly is that the relevant policies can be  removed no less invisibly.21   

 Today, indeed, Castles himself believes that the industrial relations deregulations 

 unleashed, and the social policy restrictions imposed, by successive Australian 

 governments in the 1990s have so eroded Australia’s distinctive welfare state that it 

 has now reached the point that the only positive future does indeed lie in attempts 

 “to redesign Australian welfare institutions along more European lines”.22  This is a 

 significant statement. 

 

 Defenders of the Hawke government's early and sharp right turn away from the 1982 

 social democratic economic platform upon which it had been elected pointed to 

 similar actions by the contemporary governing socialist parties of France and 

 Greece.23  They could also have added: Spain.  There is no doubt that the 1980s were 

 difficult times intellectually for left of centre parties to be in office.  However some 

 European social democrats have responded in a relatively far-sighted way to the 

 1980s experience of financial market pressure to abandon policy.  They have kept 

 their original social democratic objectives.  Will Hutton describes how French 

 Socialists have for long envisaged that a “single [European] market and single 

 currency would create a complete European economic space sufficiently large to host 

 a challenge both to the [US] dollar and to the conservative ideology of the financial 

 markets, and so create the possibility of the kind of expansionary monetary and fiscal 

 policy that both [Jacques] Delors and [Francois] Mitterand - from their experience in 

 the early 1980s - knew was impossible for any single European economy”.24 Will 

 Hutton’s book champions the idea that there is a general ‘European social model’, 

 distinct from US-style capitalism.  He wants to protect what he sees as Europe’s 

 associative, stakeholder capitalisms, with their strong public realms and their 

 embedded social contracts (including adequate levels of public spending, and 

 comprehensive welfare provision) before the march of an imposing ideologically 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 12 

 American form of ‘globalisation’.  “Europe does have an approach to capitalism that 

 is distinct from that of the US, and although there are different variants across 

 Europe, more unites than differentiates them”, Hutton argues.25  A strong resistance 

 has been previously noticed in continental Europe to the US cultural dominance 

 symbolised by the ubiquitous spread of McDonalds fast food restaurants which 

 threaten both the former distinctive, individual cafes and the continuing viability of 

 quality regional food produce. 

 

 In The World We’re In Hutton challenges the claims of superior US economic 

 performance in recent decades, emphasising that the strong growth of the US 

 economy from 1995 to 2000 was an old-fashioned consumer boom built on record 

 credit and is therefore unsustainable.  “The credit that has driven the consumption - 

 and much of the jobs growth - has been taken on by ordinary wage-earners even as 

 their wages have been squeezed in real terms…they [therefore] face highly uncertain 

 economic prospects with enormous cumulative debts…The great job-generating 

 machine is coming to the end of its capacity to deliver”, he contends.26  Hutton 

 emphasises the reality of entrenched and massive poverty and inequality, and 

 tolerance of these, in the US and the contrast between this and Europe (including 

 Britain).    He criticises the torrent of “propaganda” which has emanated from 

 twenty-five years of neo-liberal political dominance in the US and which has 

 pervaded the world’s financial press, tending to praise American labour force 

 ‘flexibility’ and tending to unfairly condemn, by contrast, Europe’s labour force as 

 ‘sclerotic’.  Hutton mobilises counter evidence that Europe in fact works better and 

 fairer than America.  It is well known that the official US unemployment rate 

 understates the actual extent of the social problem due to the very high numbers of 

 imprisoned men in that country.  It has been estimated that “a further 2 per cent 

 could be added to the [US] official unemployment rate if the large numbers of 

 incarcerated males in that country are counted…[in which case] US unemployment 

 would look very similar to many other countries”.27 Hutton supplements this with 

 the revelation that “the non-employment rate for men aged between twenty-five and 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 13 

 fifty-four over the period 1988-95 was 11.9 in the US (excluding the very high US 

 incarceration rate in prison)…[wheras it] averaged 11.7 per cent in Germany, Italy 

 and France”.28  Drawing on the work of Fritz Scharpf, Hutton further writes that: “the 

 Nordic countries have achieved high employment with high social spending and 

 generous levels of income support for the unemployed”, and that “the size of a 

 welfare state and generosity of unemployment benefit have no impact at all on 

 employment”.29  A separate study by Goodin et al has produced clear evidence to the 

 effect that social democratic welfare states from the mid 1980s to the mid 1990s 

 demonstrated superior records to liberal regimes not just in social policy but also in 

 economic policy outcomes.30  Hutton highlights the continuing success of tyre-maker 

 Michelin despite “the allegedly crippling confines of the 35 hour week recently 

 introduced in France”.31  Against the much-hyped US leadership of the so-called 

 ‘New Economy’32 he points to the more substantial industrial success of Finland’s 

 Nokia, the world’s leading mobile phone company33.  The ALP policy document in 

 the last federal election, An Agenda For The Knowledge Nation, also rightly highlighted 

 the success of Finland’s Nokia, along with famous Swedish brands such as Volvo 

 and Saab.34  However, a difference between Hutton and Australian Labor politicians 

 in 2001 is that Hutton openly acknowledges the fact that Nokia actually prospered in 

 a high taxing, strongly unionised, comprehensive welfare state.35   

 

 In the 1990s, writes Hutton, the comparatively “slow overall growth in European 

 employment [occurred] in the backwash of German reunification and European 

 preparation for monetary union”.36  European unemployment’s “chief cause lies in 

 lack of demand in Europe - demand which remains depressed in part because until 

 the single currency is bedded down the EU cannot have the same indifference to the 

 consequence of stimulating demand as America, and in part because such 

 stimulation has been ruled out by the necessary rigours of forming a single 

 currency”, he argues.37  By comparing educational outcomes more broadly than just 

 universities Hutton also highlights that “in Germany, for example, 80 per cent of 

 school-leavers go on to receive either vocational training or a degree, and all except 1 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 14 

 per cent receive formal post-secondary education or training, [whereas] in the US 46 

 per cent of school-leavers gain no certificate or degree…and an extraordinary 31 per 

 cent receive no formal training or education after school”.38  “German workers have 

 high levels of education and training…and the training system is integrated into the 

 educational system, so that students move seamlessly from schools into training 

 colleges or company based apprenticeship systems.  Sixty per cent of German 

 teenagers are engaged in some form of vocational training, which carries little of the 

 social stigma it still bears in Britain, where it is seen as a second-class option for those 

 unable to pursue formal academic qualifications”.39   

 

 Hutton is keen to realise “the real political possibilities of…[the] Europe-wide 

 institutions and processes, and the purposes to which they are put”.40  He considers 

 that “It is perfectly possible to design a more politically accountable system of 

 European governance in the here and now, building on what we have, but respecting 

 the principle that as far as possible government authorities should be close to the 

 people in the member states”.41  He recognises the patchy history and contested 

 versions of the European project but argues that a European approach is now 

 essential for social democratic values to succeed.  Until Jacques Delors in the late 

 1980s, “the European enterprise was becoming ever more [just] an exercise in 

 extending free market principles”.  However with the ‘social charter’ in 1989 and 

 following the Maastricht treaty of the early 1990s, “Delors’ achievement, in short, 

 was to begin to give a distinctive European face to Europe’s capitalism”.  The 

 difficult question now, after Delors, is “how is European capitalism to retain its 

 character before the march of the market that the EU itself is [now] dedicated to 

 further?”, Hutton asks.42  “European leaders …feel they need Europe to be more like 

 America, accepting the tidal wave of propaganda from the US that the European way 

 is at heart wrong, and that what Europe must do is be Americanised”.43  At the same 

 time there is “a growing distrust of the European project among individual European 

 electorates as they see Europe knocking down structures that have served them well 

 while offering little or nothing to put in their place”.44  There is also a “growing belief 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 15 

 among the peoples of Europe that the EU is increasingly a creation of its political and 

 business elites around their own agenda”.45  Hutton is concerned that “the single 

 currency and the single market, if they are not organised as an economic and social 

 space around European values, uniquely expose European capitalism to its de facto 

 Americanisation”.46  “Some of the disaffection among Europe’s electorates is plainly 

 rooted in the knowledge that voices within national communities increasingly count 

 for less and that there is no vehicle for them to count for more - and so they take 

 revenge on what is to hand [including refugees].  Paradoxically, the object of their ire 

 is the European Union even though European institutions, correctly conceived, are 

 among the remedies”, in his eyes.47 

 

 For Europe to succeed, Hutton acknowledges that “the decision-making process 

 must become more accountable”.48  Hutton’s proposals include for the EU “to 

 establish minimum rates of corporate taxation that prevent companies from playing 

 one country off against another…This would underpin the tax and social insurance 

 base that supports welfare, education and health expenditure throughout Europe - 

 and stop the drift away from taxing capital towards taxing labour…By providing 

 them with the wherewithal in underwritten minimum tax rates (there should be no 

 constraint on high tax rates) and thus a secured tax base, along with commonly 

 agreed outcomes, collective action at the European level can empower member states 

 to offer their citizens a better social deal…there is already evidence that 

 competitiveness increases with a rising tax burden - up to certain reasonable limits.  

 The EU will allow states to exercise this choice, rather than condemning them…to 

 join in a race to the bottom”.49 

 

 The debut of the "euro" on world currency markets was anticipated as the beginning 

 of a renaissance of a more unified Europe as a counterweight to US financial 

 domination.  Hutton lends support and credence to this prospect.  “The euro…gives 

 Europe a world currency - the only conceivable challenger to the dollar, with all that 

 implies, including the option of running its economy on more expansionary lines”50 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 16 

 and of reforming financial institutions such as the IMF so that they play a much more 

 socially acceptable role in the world.  Since Hutton’s book was written the 

 positioning of major European nations against the United States of America over the 

 issue of war on Iraq has further highlighted trans-Atlantic differences.  Europe in 

 some important ways is emerging as a social democratic alternative to US neo-liberalism.   

 

 How does all this relate to Australia?  Australia of course cannot readily become part 

 of a major geographical bloc built on high skills, equitable economic prosperity and 

 substantial welfare state provision as Britain might by fully embracing Europe.  The 

 best Australia could manage along these lines would probably be an amalgamation 

 with New Zealand including a single currency (called the “ANZAC”).  However this 

 would not have much effect on the world balance of power.  Nevertheless, the strong 

 and convincing contestation of the idea that globalisation has cut off political options 

 and made the European welfare state unaffordable51 is very relevant to the opening 

 up of Australia’s economic and social policy options now.  The sceptical view of 

 “globalisation” and how it impacts and does not impact on the possibilities of social 

 democratic parties attaining their policy objectives, if disseminated now, would 

 generate a greater sense that there are in fact some substantial policy options 

 available to the Australian Labor Party.  The successful experience of some small 

 individual nations within Europe, such as Denmark, in successfully adapting their 

 advanced economic and social models in the 1990s suggests that it is possible for 

 Australia now to go in similar policy directions.  Australia does have some traditions 

 of equality and fairness - including, historically expressed in, and partly because of, 

 its strong Labor Party - which most voters wish to preserve against further 

 Americanisation.   

 

 Australia and Britain sit between the US and the nations of northern Europe, though 

 closer to the US, on most comparative social measures. The most recent available 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 17 

 data on inequality in disposable money income52 within nations, which now covers 

 the 1990s, is indicative: 

 Inequality in OECD nations in  the 1990s Decile Ratio*

 *The Decile Ratio is the ratio of the income of the person at the 90th (top) percentile  to the person at the 10th (bottom) percentile of disposable money income

 Sweden

 Finland

 Norway

 Luxembourg

 Denmark

 Netherlands

 Germany

 Belgium

 France

 Switzerland

 Austria

 Spain

 Canada

 Australia

 United Kingdom

 Italy

 United States

 0 1 2 3 4 5 6

 

 In other words, the typical high income earner in Sweden gets about two and a half 

 times what the typical low income earner gets; in Australia, the typical high income 

 earner gets a bit under - and in Britain a bit over - four and a half times what the 

 typical low income earner gets; while in the United States the typical high income 

 earner gets more than five a half times what the typical low income earner gets.  As 

 the compiler of this data, from the Luxembourg Income Study, Professor Timothy 

 Smeeding writes, what it shows is that:  

 

 the  range  of  inequality  and  of  social  distance  between  rich  and  poor  in  the  rich  and   medium-income nations of the world is rather large in the mid-1990s…[this I think is 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 18 

 an understatement given the real differences in the quality of lives for millions of people  that these figures actually express]   

 [and therefore that] globalization does not force any single outcome on one country…   

 [Instead,] labour market institutions, welfare policies, etc. - can act as a powerful  countervailing force to market driven inequality. Even [in] a globalized world, the  overall distribution of income in a country remains very much a consequence of the  domestic political, institutional and economic choices made by those individual 

 countries.53   

 This confirms the picture from the extensive empirical study undertaken by Francis 

 Castles in his Comparative Public Policy: Patterns of Post-war Transformation54 of just 

 how widely, and why, the trajectory of policy transformation has varied from 

 country to country including into the 1990s; and how much politics still matters in 

 shaping economic and social policy outcomes within nations. 

 

 Other social indicators also show significant contrast between the US on the one 

 hand, and Australia, Britain and the rest of Europe on the other.  The United States is 

 an unusually violent society.  The murder rate in the US is more than triple that of 

 Australia and more than triple that of the EU member states average.55  The latest 

 United Nations research ranks Norway number 1 and Sweden number 2 in the world 

 in human development.56  Australia as a society could realistically aspire to reach 

 these levels.  The ALP could formulate policies which might make this achievable 

 and such policies are likely to be popular with the Australian people. 

 

 Recent policy announcements by the Australian Labor Party to defend the universal 

 health program of Medicare first introduced under Whitlam and consolidated under 

 Labor Governments in the 1980s have explicitly been expressed as opposition to an 

 American-style situation of mass public exposure to a lack of adequate basic health 

 care.  Australian Labor under Crean has released new policies on education, and has 

 indicated that it is about to release further policies on paid maternity leave, as part of 

 a continuing move away from the Beazley era of being a small policy target.  These 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 19 

 new policies are more likely to make an impact if they express clear philosophical 

 support for the principle of increased public investment in both university education 

 and post-school vocational training; and for the principle of a re-regulated labour 

 market in order to attain equitable social policy outcomes.  The policies are also 

 much more likely to be credible if the ALP overcomes its reluctance to acknowledge 

 that substantial innovative taxation, as well as expenditure, changes are now needed 

 if Australia is to actually acquire the resources to adequately lift its public investment 

 in education, training, job creation and regulation, and progressive social welfare 

 initiatives.   

 

 There remain obvious obstacles to simply transplanting overseas models or even 

 parts of them to Australia, including for instance the fact that the Nordic nations are 

 relatively small and monocultural.  As part of any analysis of prospects for policy 

 transfer from northern European nations to Australia now there would need to be a 

 systematic collation of comparative information on the social characteristics of the 

 respective nations, and realistic appraisal of their political contexts including the 

 varying configurations represented in their political parties and the political effect of 

 differences in electoral systems, such as proportional representation. 

 

 The point however is that it is now particularly timely, and it can only be beneficial, 

 for the ALP to re-establish a truly international - instead of its recent very limited and 

 distorted overseas (i.e. Clinton American and Blair British) - perspective on the 

 political and policy options open to it.  Regaining a true international perspective, 

 informed by a broad comparative politics, involves recognising what kind of society 

 Australia actually is compared with others and what kind of society it might or 

 might not (want to) become.  It also involves acknowledging where the ALP actually 

 belongs in the world families of political parties.  An opening up of Australian 

 Labor’s horizons now to the real possibilities which lie amid the currents of 

 contemporary European social democracy is likely to improve the ALP’s prospects 

 for credible policy development and political renewal.  

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 20 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 21 

 References   

 Erik Albaek, Leslie Eliason, Asbjoern Sonne Noergaard and Herman Schwartz (eds),  Crisis, Miracles, and Beyond:  Negotiated Adaptation of the Danish Welfare State, Aarhus  University Press, Aarhus, forthcoming, 2003.   

 Australian  Council  of  Trade  Unions  (ACTU)/Trade  Development  Council  (TDC),   Australia Reconstructed: ACTU/TDC Mission to Western Europe: A Report by the Mission  Members  to  the  ACTU  and  the  TDC,  Australian  Government  Publishing  Service,   Canberra, 1987.   

 Australian Labor Party, An Agenda For The Knowledge Nation: Report Of The Knowledge  Nation Taskforce, Chifley Research Centre, Canberra, July 2001.   

 Gordon  Barclay  and  Cynthia  Tavares,  International  Comparisons  of  Criminal  Justice   Statistics  2000,  Home  Office  Research,  Development  and  Statistics  Directorate  [UK],   Issue 05/02; accessible at http://www.aic.gov.au/stats/international/intcomp.html   

 Stephen Bell (ed), The Unemployment Crisis in Australia: Which Way Out?, Cambridge  University Press, Cambridge, 2000.   

 Geoffrey  Brennan  and  Francis  G.  Castles  (eds),  Australia  Reshaped:  200  Years  of   Institutional Transformation, Cambridge University Press, Melbourne, 2002.   

 Francis  Castles,  “Australia  and  Sweden:  the  Politics  of  Economic  Vulnerability”,   Thesis Eleven, No. 16, 1987, pp 112-121.   

 Francis Castles, Comparative Public Policy: Patterns of Post-war Transformation, Edward  Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, paperback edition 1999.   

 Francis  G.  Castles,  “Perhaps  Australian  Labour  Movement  has  Come  of  Age”,   Canberra Times, 17 August, 1987.   

 Tim  Colebatch,  “Why  We  should  not  be  Spooked  by  Haider’s  Rise”,  The  Age,  8   February, 2000.   

 Geoff  Eley,  Forging  Democracy:  The  History  of  the  Left  in  Europe,  1850-2000,  Oxford   University Press, New York, 2002.   

 Anthony  Giddens,  The  Third  Way:  The  Renewal  of  Social  Democracy,  Polity  Press,   Cambridge, 1998.   

 Robert  E.  Goodin,  Bruce  Headey,  Ruud  Muffels  and  Henk-Jan  Dirven,  The  Real   Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999. 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 22 

 

 Ian  Holland  and  Sarah  Miskin,  Interpreting  Election  Results  in  Western  Democracies,  Current  Issues  Brief  no.2  2002-03,  Department  of  the  Parliamentary  Library,   Canberra, August 2002.   

 Will Hutton, The World We’re In, Abacus, London, 2003.   

 Geoff Kitney, “Austria’s Warning to Europe on Extreme Politics”, The Age, 9 October,  1999.    

 Stuart Macintyre, The Labour Experiment, McPhee Gribble, Melbourne, 1989.   

 Stuart  Macintyre,  “The  Short  History  of  Social  Democracy  in  Australia”,  Thesis  Eleven, No. 15, 1986, pp 3-14.    

 Christopher  Pierson,  Hard  Choices:  Social  Democracy  in the  21st  Century,  Polity  Press,   Cambridge, 2001.   

 Timothy  M.  Smeeding,  Globalization,  Inequality  and  the  Rich  Countries  of  the  G-20:   Evidence  from  the  Luxembourg  Income  Study  (LIS),  Discussion  Paper  No.  122,  Social   Policy Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2002.   

 Socialist  International,  Declaration  of  Paris,  accessible  at 

 http://www.socialistinternational.org/5Congress/XXISICONGRESS/DeclParis-e.html   

 Charles  Sowerwine,  “National  Fronts,  Immigrants  and  Refugees:  The  Revival  of   Racism  in  France  and  Elsewhere”,  The  Marion  Adams  Memorial  Lecture  2002,   inaugural  professorial  lecture  delivered  at  The  University  of  Melbourne  on  19   November,  2002;  transcript  at  

 http://www.arts.unimelb.edu.au/events/lecture/adams/2002.html   

 United  Nations  Development  Programme,  Human  Development  Report  2002:   Deepening  Democracy  in  a  Fragmented  World,  Oxford  University  Press,  New  York,   2002. 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 23 

 

 

 1  The events in France are well explained and analysed in Charles Sowerwine, “National Fronts, 

 Immigrants and Refugees: The Revival of Racism in France and Elsewhere”, The Marion Adams 

 Memorial Lecture 2002, inaugural professorial lecture delivered at The University of Melbourne on 19 

 November, 2002; transcript at http://www.arts.unimelb.edu.au/events/lecture/adams/2002.html 

 2  This summation of recent international electoral trends is derived from numerous newspaper reports 

 and from data in Ian Holland and Sarah Miskin, Interpreting Election Results in Western Democracies, 

 Current Issues Brief no.2 2002-03, Department of the Parliamentary Library, Canberra, August 2002. 

 3  Geoff Kitney, “Austria’s Warning to Europe on Extreme Politics”, The Age, 9 October, 1999.  

 4  Tim Colebatch, “Why We should not be Spooked by Haider’s Rise”, The Age, 8 February, 2000. 

 5  Anthony Giddens has been the chief proponent of the concept in a series of texts commencing with 

 his The Third Way: The Renewal of Social Democracy, Polity Press, Cambridge, 1998. 

 6  Christopher Pierson, Hard Choices: Social Democracy in the 21st Century, Polity Press, Cambridge, 

 2001, p 131. 

 7  Will Hutton, The World We’re In, Abacus, London, 2003, p 53. 

 8  ibid. 

 9  http://www.socialistinternational.org/5Congress/XXISICONGRESS/DeclParis-e.html 

 10  On which see Geoff Eley, Forging Democracy: The History of the Left in Europe, 1850-2000, Oxford 

 University Press, New York, 2002, pp 31, 65. 

 11  By Stuart Macintyre, in The Labour Experiment, McPhee Gribble, Melbourne, 1989, p 35. 

 12  See articles in the journal Thesis Eleven: by Stuart Macintyre, titled “The Short History of Social 

 Democracy in Australia”, No. 15, 1986, p 8; and by Francis Castles titled “Australia and Sweden: the 

 Politics of Economic Vulnerability”, No. 16, 1987, p 120. 

 13  Eley, p 383.  Emphasis added. 

 14  ibid., p 391. 

 15  ibid., p 427. 

 16  Eley, Forging Democracy, p 451; emphasis added. 

 17  See  Erik  Albaek,  Leslie  Eliason,  Asbjoern  Sonne  Noergaard and  Herman  Schwartz  (eds),  Crisis,  

 Miracles, and Beyond:  Negotiated Adaptation of the Danish Welfare State, Aarhus University Press, 

 Aarhus, forthcoming, 2003. 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 24 

 

 18  Australian  Council  of  Trade  Unions  (ACTU)/Trade  Development  Council  (TDC),  Australia 

 Reconstructed:  ACTU/TDC  Mission  to  Western  Europe:  A  Report  by  the  Mission  Members  to  the  

 ACTU and the TDC, Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 1987. 

 19  Francis G. Castles, “Perhaps Australian Labour Movement has Come of Age”, Canberra Times, 17 

 August, 1987. 

 20  Castles, “Australia and Sweden: The Politics of Economic Vulnerability”, p 118. 

 21  Geoffrey Brennan and Francis G. Castles, “Introduction”, in Geoffrey Brennan and Francis G. 

 Castles (eds), Australia Reshaped: 200 Years of Institutional Transformation, Cambridge University 

 Press, Melbourne, 2002, p 11.  Emphasis in original. 

 22  Francis G. Castles, “Australia’s Institutions and Australia’s Welfare”, in Brennan and Castles (eds), 

 Australia Reshaped, p 49. 

 23  This point was explicitly made by Hawke Government Senator Gareth Evans in defence of the 

 Government’s economic policies in a heated debate at the Victorian ALP State Conference on 26 

 October, 1986. 

 24  Hutton, p 377; see also pp 388, 410. 

 25  ibid., pp 324-325. 

 26  Hutton, p 213. 

 27  Stephen Bell (ed), The Unemployment Crisis in Australia: Which Way Out?, Cambridge University 

 Press, Cambridge, 2000, p 196. 

 28  ibid., pp 317-8.  Emphasis added. 

 29  ibid., p 318.  

 30  See Robert E. Goodin, Bruce Headey, Ruud Muffels and Henk-Jan Dirven, The Real Worlds of 

 Welfare Capitalism, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999. 

 31  Hutton, p 302. 

 32  ibid., pp 176-186. 

 33  ibid., pp 303-4. 

 34  Australian Labor Party, An Agenda For The Knowledge Nation: Report Of The Knowledge Nation 

 Taskforce, Chifley Research Centre, Canberra, July 2001, p 10. 

 35  Hutton, pp 303-4. 

 36  ibid., p 343 

 37  ibid., p 448. 

 Andrew Scott:  Putting the Australian Labor Party in International Perspective   

 Page 25 

 

 38  ibid., p 193. 

 39  ibid., p 328. 

 40  ibid., p 361. 

 41  ibid., p 363 

 42  ibid., p 380. 

 43  ibid., p 381. 

 44  ibid., p 382. 

 45  ibid., p 384. 

 46  ibid., p 387. 

 47  ibid., p 389. 

 48  ibid., p 391. 

 49  ibid., p 402. 

 50  ibid., pp 456-7. 

 51  And this is the conclusion reached, from a very cautious review of the key literature, by Pierson in 

 his Hard Choices: Social Democracy in the 21st Century, pp 86-89. 

 52  The data are extracted (choosing only the OECD nations for which data from the 1990s are 

 available) from Figure 1 of Timothy M. Smeeding, Globalization, Inequality and the Rich Countries of 

 the G-20: Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), Discussion Paper No. 122, Social 

 Policy Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2002. 

 53  Smeeding, pp 10-11, 3, 29. 

 54  Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, paperback edition 1999. 

 55  Average per year 1998-2000.  Source: Gordon Barclay and Cynthia Tavares, International 

 Comparisons of Criminal Justice Statistics 2000, Home Office Research, Development and Statistics 

 Directorate [UK], Issue 05/02; accessible at http://www.aic.gov.au/stats/international/intcomp.html 

 56  United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 2002: Deepening 

 Democracy in a Fragmented World, Oxford University Press, New York, 2002, p 149. 

