---
title: "Govt must change policies, not just Ministers."
date: "2003-09-29"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Ministerial reshuffles"
  - "VANSTONE, Amanda"
  - "ABBOTT, Tony, MP"
  - "Medicare"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211259453
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0LIA6%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  29 September 2003                MEDIA RELEASE                                  03/695                

 

 Govt must change policies, not just Ministers   

 Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett, today said the Prime Minister’s  ministerial reshuffle does not bode well for those Australians in poor health and refugees.   

 Senator Bartlett said he hoped that Ministers Abbott and Vanstone would approach their new  portfolios with more understanding than they had displayed in relation to their previous  responsibilities.   

 “Both ministers have employed heavy-handed and bullying tactics when it comes to dealing with  people under their Workplace Relations and Family and Community Services responsibilities,” said  Senator Bartlett.   

 “The Democrats hope they will take this opportunity to adopt a fresh approach to their work, based  on empathy.   

 “The test for Senator Vanstone will be to undo the disgraceful legacy Philip Ruddock leaves in  relation to this Government’s treatment of refugees.   

 “Minister Ruddock is responsible for the dehumanising of refugees and overseeing the indefensible  policy of locking up of children behind razor wire.   

 “Many lives have been destroyed under this policy and it is imperative for the new Minister to  redress this situation.   

 “Minister Vanstone’s first job must be to commit the Government to a more humane policy for  those currently in detention and to finding a more workable solution to those who come to Australia  as refugees.   

 “Much has been made of Senator Vanstone’s so-called ‘moderate’ credentials.  I hope she  rediscovers these in her new job.   

 “Minister Abbott must also adopt a fresh approach if he is to achieve a sustainable health system for  all Australians.   

 “It is quite clear that Minister Patterson had failed to develop a feasible health package,” said  Senator Bartlett.   

 “The Government’s proposals are seriously flawed and will lead to higher charges for patients.   

 “The Democrats will not support any moves to destroy Medicare.   

 “Minister Abbott must go back to the drawing board and develop a new package designed to  strengthen the health system, not weaken it,” concluded Senator Bartlett.   

 For media inquiries please contact Serena Rogers on 0419 833 571  

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

