---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop: Wednesday 5 March 2003: East Timorese asylum-seekers; children in detention; United Nations in East Timor; Iraq; Robert Thomas; bulk billing."
date: "2003-03-05"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "East Timor"
  - "Alternative detention measures (Immigration)"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Iraq"
  - "UN peacekeeping operations"
  - "UN Resolutions"
  - "Medicare bulk billing"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211564593
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UJP86%22
---

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION    

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT DOORSTOP WITH JULIA GILLARD MP,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION -   CANBERRA, WEDNESDAY 5 MARCH 2003   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects: East Timorese Asylum-Seekers; Children in detention;  United Nations in East Timor; Iraq; Robert Thomas; Bulk  billing 

 

 CREAN:  Today Labor’s announcing that it’s moving to finally resolve the  circumstances and status of the sixteen hundred East Timorese that fled East  Timor post-1989 - people who fled a regime in which they were subject to  threats and torture. The people that have been living in Australia ever since that  time.    

 We will be moving in the Senate tomorrow when the Migration Legislation  Amendment Bill comes forward to confer permanent status on them. This is a  one-off situation.  It’s in recognition of the special circumstances surrounding the  East Timorese - people whose status has not been considered by successive  governments and who, if it had been considered at the time, clearly would have  been given refugee status. We believe that in all the circumstances, it’s timely to  move and that’s why we will be moving this amendment tomorrow.    

 We’ll also be seeking in that legislation tomorrow to resubmit our amendment to  get the kids out from behind the razor wire. This is something that we have  proposed now for some time, which Minister Ruddock stemmed a backbench  revolt on his side - because there were many that wanted to support this  proposal - by saying he would act to get them out from behind the razor wire.  That hasn’t happened, and so we’ll be using the opportunity again in the  legislation tomorrow to move this amendment.  Perhaps Julia will have more to  say about this.   

 GILLARD:  The amendment that we are moving about the East Timorese is to  create an East Timorese special humanitarian visa class. Its terms have been  tightly confined to ensure that it only applies to the East Timorese whose claims  were frozen by the Australian Government - that is, people who now find  themselves in the circumstance where they could be deported to East Timor, not 

  1

 because they’ve done anything wrong, but because the Australian Government  has done the wrong thing by them.    

 The amendment that we’ll be moving tomorrow about children and detention is  the same amendment we moved in the House of Representatives. It would  compel the Government to get unaccompanied children out of high security  detention and into appropriate foster or community care arrangements, and it  would compel the Government to allow children with their families to live in  circumstances like the alternate detention trial at Woomera. Minister Ruddock  last year, in response promised changes. He has done absolutely nothing and  there is no suggestion that there is any change on the horizon. As we stand here  today, there are approximately 120 children in domestic detention.    

 JOURNALIST:  [inaudible]   

 GILLARD:  Not as a result of the announcement.  Obviously there’s always  churning in the detention numbers as people’s claims are processed, but there  has been no implementation of that announcement.    

 JOURNALIST:  [inaudible] on where these children would be moved to?   

 GILLARD:  Under Labor’s amendment, unaccompanied children would be in  foster families or in appropriate community care arrangements, which might be  administered by churches or appropriate non-government organisations. Children  with their families would be in circumstances like the alternate detention trial at  Woomera - that is, ordinary-style housing which is secured and does have a  security presence there so there is no question of absconding or anything like  that. But it is obviously a better circumstance for children to live in.    

 I would note on the security issue that Minister Ruddock asserted that our  amendment would cause security problems. Well, we know that people routinely  break out of Woomera itself. Someone has broken out of Villawood today. There  has never been a case of absconding from the alternate detention trial at  Woomera, so no security issues are raised by Labor’s amendment. And the  Minister knows that his own expert independent detention advisory group  recommended the change that we are seeking to put into law.    

 JOURNALIST:  The Government, as I understand it, is going to get one of  those pilots going outside of Baxter.  Is that the only area where it’s needed, or  are there other centres that need that sort of arrangement quickly?    

 GILLARD:   Predominantly with asylum-seekers concentrated in the  Baxter facility, that is the best location. But the Government made, Minister  Ruddock made a ministerial statement last year - not that he was thinking about  doing it, not that he was going to start consultations to do it, not that it might be  done in five or ten years time - he said it would be done. Well, Liberal  moderates cast their vote on the basis he said it would be done. Given it hasn’t  been done, when they come to cast their votes again, the only course really  open to them is to vote for Labor’s amendment.  

  2

 

 JOURNALIST:  Are there still unaccompanied minors in detention?   

 GILLARD:   We’re not aware of unaccompanied minors at this stage,  certainly not in the very junior age ranges. But there is nothing, as a matter of  law, to stop us being in the circumstance we’ve been in in the past where a kid  as young as eight years old was in high security detention unaccompanied.    

 JOURNALIST:  But isn’t the point that the Federal Government is making  now is that it’s really only the accompanied children that’s the issue, that they  have moved to get, before they could get the unaccompanied out?    

 GILLARD:   There hasn’t been movement as a result of the  announcement. There’s obviously been general movement in the detention  figures. There wasn’t a big flurry of movement as a result of the announcement.  But the statistics tell the story - approximately 120 kids are still in detention  onshore in Australia as we’re standing here now.    

 JOURNALIST:  What’s the Government’s reaction to the suggestion of a the  special visa pass for East Timorese?    

 GILLARD:  Minister Ruddock has denied the need for such a visa. What he is  saying is, of the sixteen hundred, they will be rejected.  Some of them are  otherwise eligible for Australian visas.  They might, for example have married an  Australian citizen.  But apart from those, he is saying that they do need to return  to East Timor and they will ultimately be forcibly returned if that’s necessary.    

 JOURNALIST:  Do you feel [inaudible].  I noticed that Kofi Annan has  requested a slowing in withdrawal of UN forces there if there’s increased militia  activity.    

 GILLARD:  There are issues, obviously, about East Timor and the militarisation  there and security problems.  But, really, our case about these East Timorese is  based on one simple fact - why are they in this position?  Because the Australian  Government put them there.  Who should fix it? The Australian Government  should.  And if they’re not going to, well we’ll fix it for them through this  amendment.    

 JOURNALIST:  Well, can I ask Mr Crean, would you support the continued  deployment of Australian troops in East Timor as part of an extended peace-keeping role as requested by Kofi Annan, or do you think our forces are being  too stretched?    

 CREAN: Well, we have an obligation in terms of East Timor, and we have  supported our peace-keeping effort in East Timor.  Indeed, if it hadn’t been for  the Australian troops, who knows what would have happened in the aftermath of  independence in East Timor? So, Australian Defence Forces played a key role.  The question of the continuation, of course, we would respond to a United  Nations request, and respond positively if the United Nations thought that.  

  3

 That’s been consistent with our position that these issues and the resolution of  conflict and the peacekeeping dimension should all be done under the authority  of the United Nations.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask you on Iraq?  As the UN Security Council starts, you  know, considering these final measures, do you believe that at the moment  there already exists authorisation for military action against Iraq under 1441, or  does there need to be a further authorisation?   

 CREAN: There has to be a further authorisation.  And 1441, in my view,  is clear about that.  It does talk about material breach, but it also talks about  reporting back to the Security Council, and the Security Council determining the  appropriate response to that.  Their next important step, of course, is Dr Blix’s  report on Saturday, our time, in which case the Security Council has to consider  the position based on that report.  But the weapons inspectors have been doing  their job.  They will report progress.  They should be allowed to complete their  job.  But the Security Council should be the only determining body in relation to  action or otherwise.   

 JOURNALIST: So Labor will only support military action if it has explicit UN  authorisation?   

 CREAN: Yes, but Labor still is strongly of the view that the peaceful  resolution to this issue can occur, but that will only occur, also, through the  United Nations’ processes.  We are totally opposed to supporting any action  outside of the authority of the United Nations, and we will continue to argue  that.   

 JOURNALIST: Even if one of the five permanent members vetoed the war?   

 CREAN: Well, I think people are very fascinated and seem to be  preoccupied with the veto.  I think the veto issue has become less of a problem  over recent weeks.  It still may happen, but the truth of it is there are two  options before the Security Council.  One that’s being sponsored by the UK and  US and Spain, which effectively authorises action, because it concludes that Iraq  hasn’t complied.  There is a second proposal that is essentially being promoted  by the French that says progress has been made and more time should be  allowed.     

 Now, the judgement between those two resolutions has to be made by the  Security Council, and it will be.  And it’s important that it is.  What would be  totally inappropriate is for the US to take action outside of that process and then  invoke its Coalition of the Willing.  It becomes a very interesting challenge for  John Howard in those circumstances.  He says he’s not locked in.  I hope he’s  not.  But he must make it clear now, he must join with us and say that Australia  will not support through its troops any action not authorised by the United  Nations.   

  4

 JOURNALIST:  Mr  Crean,  in  the case of the Melbourne man in custody in Saudi  Arabia and being publicly flogged - should the Australian Government be  protesting more loudly about that matter?  And what’s your general reaction to  it?   

 CREAN: It should.  It’s an inappropriate response.  We wouldn’t condone  it here, and we should have been making much strong representations to the  Saudi Government on his behalf.   

 JOURNALIST: Going back to the children in detention issue, can I just double  check - what kind of secure facility would you suggest the children should be  put in, given that Woomera wouldn’t be able to hold all those children?   

 GILLARD: What we’re talking about are facilities modelled on the alternate  detention trial at Woomera - so, not the Woomera compound with which people  are familiar from their TV screens.  The alternate detention trial is four ordinary  houses, secured at the perimeter by a light beam.  If someone breaks the beam,  an alarm rings.  And there are guards stationed there 24 hours a day.     

 But it does mean people live in family groups in ordinary-style accommodation.   They prepare their own food which, of course, is a big issue when you’re dealing  with the feeding of children, particularly young children.  And all of the reports  we’ve had from asylum-seekers is that it is a much better way to deal with the  issue of caring for their children whilst they are detained.  We’re calling on the  Government to develop that kind of capacity to deal with children and their  families.  There is no security issues raised, but it’s better for the kids involved.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there no such facility available at the moment for children?   

 CREAN: Well, there is the alternate detention trial at Woomera, so that’s  been a pilot facility.  They would need to develop further stock, that is true.   Minister Ruddock that they are prepared to look at developing further stock, but  what he does is he talks about it, he just doesn’t do it.   

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t the South Australian Government stopping it?   

 GILLARD: No, that’s not the case.  The Government last year announced  that it would be doing something about children in detention.  Ministerial  statement - normally when you make a Ministerial Statement, you’ve got  something to say about something you’re immediately going to do.     

 What Minister Ruddock announced last year was that he was prepared to  contemplate this and go into consultation about it.  Now, some of those  consultations are happening, but not fast enough, and there is no end to the  road in sight.  It’s the Government’s responsibility to be dealing with kids in  detention.  Minister Ruddock is the Minister responsible for the detention of  those children, and he’s the one that’s got to resolve it.   

  5

  6

 JOURNALIST: Will you be support the issue of it being set up at Baxter, or  another area?   

 GILLARD: It needs to be set up, obviously, wherever the stock can be  developed.  It doesn’t necessarily have to be alongside the Baxter facility, but it  needs to be somewhere where the Government can secure the appropriate  housing and make the necessary arrangements.  As I say, the Minister for  Immigration is always keen to establish his responsibility for the good news in  the Immigration portfolio.  Well, the good news comes with the hard issues.   Children in detention is one of the worst issues.   

 

 He said last year he was going to address it, and he needs to get on and do  that.  Liberal moderates, when they’re considering our amendment, should be  thinking to themselves, ‘Well, if he told us last November that he was going to  fix it, and we’re voting in March and there are 120 kids still in detention, is this 

 hot air or something more?’  And I think the answer to that question is pretty  obvious.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Crean, just a quick one on Medicare and bulk billing.  This  morning on radio, you canvassed two options - one increasing the percentage  paid to doctors to bulk bill; the other increasing across-the-board the Medicare  rebate.  Why was neither of those options included in Stephen Smith’s options  paper released last week?  Is it new policy, and how will you pay for it?   

 CREAN: Well, you ask the question about how it’s going to be paid for.   Tell me where the billion dollars the Government has announced today is coming  from.  Now, if there’s a billion dollars available to be spent, why shouldn’t it be  spent on restoring bulk billing?  And if it is spent sensibly, we can restore bulk  billing.  The difference is that the current Government doesn’t want to restore  bulk billing as an option for all Australians.  It wants to means test it.  And it’s  going to be spending in areas that drive the means testing.  Labor would redirect  that funding and restore bulk billing.    

 JOURNALIST: So does that mean you think it will be one of Stephen Smith’s  options, and when will he be told?   

 CREAN: Well, the question of this billion dollars has just come out of the  blue.  It came out of the blue because the Government was in trouble yesterday.   Originally, when a billion dollars was put forward - because the Minister Kay 

 Patterson wouldn’t rule out means testing earlier last month, the billion dollars  was floated, only to be debunked.  Now, what Stephen Smith has put forward is  alternatives in relation to the $80 million spend.  And that is a targeted program  to restore bulk billing.  If, in fact, we’re talking about a billion dollars of 

 expenditure, it clearly opens greater scope for Labor’s alternative approach.   We’re committed to restoring bulk billing.  John Howard wants to kill off  Medicare.   

 (ends) 

