---
title: "Immigration, asylum and extremist politics in Europe: Paper presented to Workshop of the Contemporary Europe Research Centre at the University of Melbourne."
date: "2003-11-05"
creators:
  - "Jupp, James"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Extremes (Politics)"
  - "Europe"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260919
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3MXA6%22
---

  IMMIGRATION, ASYLUM AND EXTREMIST POLITICS IN  EUROPE 

  Paper presented to Workshop of the Contemporary Europe Research Centre at the  University Of Melbourne; the National Europe Centre at ‘The Australian National  University, and the contemporary European Studies Association of Australia, on “Australia  and the European Union: Partners or Adversaries?” 5 November 2003, at the Contemporary 

  Europe Research Centre, the University of Melbourne. 

  Dr James Jupp, Australian National University 

  The Australian and the European experience of immigration and refugee flows and of 

  ethnic relationships is quite different, although each could learn from the other. Indeed, 

  Australia has been using its long experience of immigrant settlement to urge its policies  on others through its role in intergovernment agencies concerned with the growing 

  movement of people. This has had most effect on the United Kingdom, where Home  Secretary David Blunkett recently floated the idea of putting asylum seekers on hold in 

  third countries, while the leader of the Conservative Party was met with ridicule when he 

  suggested placing them on an unspecified island. Australia has never been faced with an 

  uncontrolled rush of asylum seekers. To prevent this from happening it negotiated  ‘orderly departure’ agreements with Vietnam, and has signed agreements with China and 

  lran to return their citizens. I n  I99 1 it instituted mandatory and irrevocable detention for  all undocumented arrivals and developed this more fully in the late 1990s. All of this it 

  has justified to the UNHCR as legitimate within the Convention on Refugees of 1951. 

  Similar bilateral agreements, mainly with African countries, are now common in Europe. 

  I n  some respects Europe and Australia are moving in the same restrictive direction, 

  espccially in the use of the ‘third country haven’ provision based on the notion that people 

  have” a right to asylum but not a right to choose the country of asylum”, as Philip 

  Ruddock recently put it. 

  2 

  The Australian immigration program for permanent settlement is carcfirlly controlled at 

  a level of about 100 000 per annum. Net migration stands at about 60 000 because of 

  permanent departures. There is a recent increase in long-term temporary entry which is 

  closer to the practice of many EU states who mostly abandoned the idea of immigration 

  for permanent settlement thirty years ago. All arrivals in Australia need a valid visa to  avoid detention and probable deportation, which is not the case in Europe. This effective 

  control weakens the basis for anti-immigration extremist groups when compared with the 

  European situation. Moreover, despite a long history of official racism, Australia docs  not have a fascist tradition. It has one of the oldest two-party systems in the world which 

  has never been disrupted by war or revolution. Lesser parties have only rarely gained 10 

  per cent of the vote. Only one of these, One Nation, has been centrally concerned with 

  immigration. It rapidly disintegrated after early sLtccess i n  1998. It is all the more 

  remarkable, then, that Australia has implemented a regime for asylum seekers which is 

  more rigorous in many respects than that adopted in Europe when faced with much  greater numbers (Jupp 2002). 

  The European Contrast 

  Australia has no land borders and most of its neighbours do not adhere to the UN 

  Convention on Refugees. All members of the European Union and the Nordic Union 

  subscribe to the Convention, to the Schcngen agreement (now the Amsterdam Treaty) 

  effective from 1995 and the Dublin Convention on asylum seekers of 1990 (Geddes 

  2000).. These require the first country of entry to take responsibility for undocumented 

  arrivals or asylum seekers. Each state reserves the right to deal with such immigrants 

  within the context of its national law and administration, subject to the U N  Convention 

  and to the European Convention on Human Rights. This gives considerable scope to 

  political forces opposed to immigration and refugees to influence legislation and 

  administration,. There is a wide discrepancy between the welfare state humanism of the 

  3 

  Scandinavian states and the Netherlands, the reliance on the police of France or Italy, the 

  muddled response of the United Kingdom or the rather carefree approach of Greece. 

  Most European states administer immigration through their law enforcement agencies 

  (Ministry of Justice, Home Office, Ministry of the Interior ) and the emphasis is often on  deterrence and punishment. Most of them allow an 'exceptional right to remain' for many 

  who are not strictly Convention refugees, which Australia does not. About 40 per cent of 

  those seeking asylum in Europe are given this lesser status. Thus the flows into western 

  Europe are unpredictable and create uncertainty and hostility which encourages 

  opponents of all kinds of immigration and ethnic change(see Table One) . Moreover,  European states allow temporary entry on work permits and have much greater tourist 

  flows than Australia. This has created a large residue of those remaining outside of 

  effective control, to the extent that many states, including the United Kingdom, have no 

  clear idea of how many are in the country without official approval. This uncertainty can 

  be exploited by media and political agitation against all forms of immigration and ethnic  variety, though this also occurs in Australia where the numbers of 'illegal overstayers' is 

  known with reasonable accuracy. 

  European policies towards asylum seekers often exacerbate the problems which cause 

  many to see these as welfare dependents liable to lapse into crime. Restrictions on the  right to work are an obvious example, forcing many into illegal work as the only source 

  of financial support. A minority see crimes, such as drug dealing, as an easier alternative. 

  The widespread belief that immigrants are inore crimiiial than the native-born is 

  measurably true in some European states though not in others or in Australia. The 

  uncertainty of temporary protection is another factor making it difficult to integrate into 

  society. This is likely to affect the growing class of temporary protection visa (TPV) 

  holders created by recent Australian policy changes. That most asylum seekers come 

  from societies which are much poorer and less stable than i n  the European Union or 

  Australasia, faces governments with the equally unpalatable choice of providing special 

  welfare services or accepting ghettoes and endemic povcrty. Australia has, at least now 

  focussed its modest iininigraiit settlement services on recent refugees. 'This has not 

  4 

  State 

  Austria 

  Belgium 

  prevented refugees forming the core  of disadvantaged immigrants. But it is more 

  effective than the absence of such provision in many European states. Yet where there is 

  such provision, as in Scandinavia or thc Netherlands, there is growing resentment about 

  'special treatment' for immigrants - an issue raised by One Nation in Australia 

  1995 1996 

  5 9 1 9  6 9 9 1  

  11 420 12 433 

  TABLE ONE; Asylum Applications since 1995: European States and Australasia 

  5092 

  973 

  9370 12331 12200 12512 

  1272 3 106 3 170 1651 

  Denmark 1 5:); 1 5 : : :  

  Finland 

  21 416 

  104353 

  France 22375 30907 38747 47291 

  98644 95 113 78 564 88287 

  Greece 1 1 312 1 1 643 4 376 

  3 883 

  2 953 1 5 2 8  3 083 5 499 

  4 626 7 724 1 1  096 10325 

  Portugal I 457 I 270 

  Ireland 

  Italy 

  "lands 

  Norway 

  -~ 

  I I 

  Spain I 5 6 7 8  I 4 7 3 0  

  424 1 179 

  1 732 675 

  29 258 22 170 

  1 4 6 0  1 7 7 8  

  - 

  rKeden 1 9 0 4 7  1 5  753 

  Switzerland 17 02 1 1 8 001 

  55000 37000 

  297 

  4 975 

  I Australia 7 632 9 758 365 307 224 234 6 654 8 405 7 926 9 489 N.Z.  6 719 

  675 1 3 1 7  

  1858 

  I 1 1  122 I 3 3  364 1 15 564 19 620 

  I I I 1 

  2 271 1 8  373 I 10 160 I 10842 I 14782 

  12844 1 1  231 16303 23 515 

  23 982 41 302 46068 17611 20633 

  I: 41 500 58 487 91 200 98 900 92000 13065 12366 1 1495 1 972 1 5 2 8  1551 1601 Source: UNHCR website. The DlMIA wcbsitc gives different figures for Australia and elsewhere as it operates on a July to June year. 

  5 

  Many European states do not have coherent and planned immigration programs organised 

  through a national ministry. Often the only legal routes towards permanent settlement are 

  to apply for asylum or to marry a citizen. Two-thirds of asylum applications in the world 

  are made to European states, with Britain recently replacing Germany as the main target. 

  Germany now counts 12 per cent of its population as 'foreign born' despite maintaining  for many years that it was not an immigration country. I n  the past decade the largest 

  numbers of asylum seekers in Europe have come from Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, Turkey 

  and former Yugoslavia. With the exception of Turkey this pattern has also been repeated 

  for the Australian humanitarian and asylum seeker intakes. Orderly quotas of refugees  are settled in Australia and New Zealand,the United States and Canada, Sweden, the 

  Netherlands, Norway, Denmark and Finland by arrangement with the UN High  Commissioner for Refugees (Lie 2002; Lineback & Olson 2001).. All other refugees 

  seek asylum, either at the border or when already within the country. The former 

  frequently do not have a visa where required. while the latter do. To secure permanent  I-csidence they must usually satisfy the authorities that they qualify under the specific 

  requirements of the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol. Rejection rates vary from 

  country to country and time to timc but often range between 80 and 90 per cent. But  much larger numbers are allowed to remain in the country of asylum on a temporary basis 

  which might last for years. This is far more liberal than the Australiaii practice of only 

  giving temporary protection to those judged Convention refugees while deporting or 

  detaining all others. 

  Many extremists object to all forms of alien migration, but it is asylum seekers and illegal  overstayers who have provoked most recent political reaction and hostility (EUMC 

  2002).. Between 1995 and 2000 Gerniany greatly reduced its asylum seeker intake by 

  changes to the law, but still received 827 000; Britain received 308 000; Sweden 65 

  000; and Denmark 38 000. The sudden escalation of British figures from 46 000 in 1998 

  to 76 000 in 2000 provoked considerable public concern and media agitation. Over the 

  same six years Australia, with a larger population than Sweden and Denmark combined, 

  6 

  received 60 000 asylum applications, This also provoked a major political reaction and 

  drastic changes to refugee law and practice. 

  Ethnic Variety 

  All the democracies of western Europe, like Australia and New Zealand, have increased 

  ethnic variety based on immigration. European variety is also often long-established and 

  complex. The history of most nation states over the past few centuries has been one of 

  nationalising previously differing ethnic groups within their boundaries, which some 

  groups have resisted more steadfastly than others (Vertovec & Cohen 1999).. Australia  and New Zealand, have both preferred assimilation to the British-derived norm despite 

  official commitment to mu1 ticulturalism in the past thirty years. These historic  developments have produced a kaleidoscope of ethnic, religious and linguistic variety, 

  which may be summarised as: 

  Relatively monocultural with recent changes due to immigration: Norway, Sweden, 

  Denmark, Portugal, Greece, Austria, France, Germany, Australia 

  Officially bilingual or multilingual: United Kingdom, Ireland, Belgium, Finland, 

  Spain, Switzerland, Italy, New Zealand 

  Religiously diverse with a minority language; Netherlands. 

  This classification obscures much minor variety. Greece, by treaty has had to recognise 

  the Thracian Turks; Norway, Sweden,New Zealand and Australia have indigenous 

  minorities; Irish is a minor language in Ireland although officially equal with English;  Germany by treaty recognises Schleswig Danes; Italy by treaty accepts several minor 

  languages but not Italian dialects; France refuses to give official status to its large 

  Breton-speaking minority; and so on. Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Australia and  New Zealand are predominantly Protestant; Portugal, Austria, France, Ireland, Belgium, 

  Spain and Italy are Catholic; Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands are divided; 

  while Greece is Orthodox. All have Jewish communities of varying sizes and Islamic 

  populations of recent immigrant origin which now usually outnumber the Jewish 

  population. There is, then, plenty of scope for discrimination and resentment and a need 

  for more pluralistic notions of 'nation building' than in the monocultural past. 

  There was plenty of room for ethnic disputes and compromises before the more recent 

  influx of immigrant workers, refugees, tourists, students and illegal entrants. Historically 

  the parties of the 'Left' have favoured liberal, multicultural or cosmopolitan policies,  though this is not historically true in Australia nor necessarily of their supporters in the 

  working class. The parties of the 'Right' have emphasised national unity and 

  homogeneity and the assimilation ( or in extreme cases the expulsion or decimation) of 

  ethnic minorities. The French emphasis on common citizenship enabled the Jews to be 

  officially emancipated two centuries ago but offers little to those wishing to preserve 

  Breton or Islamic distinctiveness. The German insistence on 'blood-based' citizenship 

  has only recently been relaxed under a Social Democratic government and earlier 

  spawned the horrendous imposition of racial purity under the Nazis. Less ideologically 

  inclined nations have all defined themselves in terms of core cultures and founding  principles, including such recently established societies as Australia. These nation- 

  building approaches have not simply been 'debates' or 'discourses' but have often 

  involved severe repression of minorities. Majoritarian democracy may exacerbate 

  tensions by empowering the majority rather than protecting the minorities. However 

  authoritarian systems have often been built on similar principles, most notably in Nazi  Germany. The formcr Soviet-type states have left a very ambivalent heritage by 

  cncouraging cultural pluralism provided this did not sustain separatism or nationalism. 

  Racist arid Extremist Parties 

  Most European states have effective parties based on ethnic or religious minorities as 

  well as reactionary parties hostile to ethnic minorities and further immigration. Britain 

  x 

  has had the former but not the latter - Australia the latter but not the former. Italy, 

  Austria, Denmark and (briefly) the Netherlands, have anti-immigration parties which are 

  so influential that they have been admitted to government and even given the immigration 

  ministry. In Switzerland the recent rise of the SVP has made it equally influential on the 

  traditional multi-party federal government. France, Germany, Sweden, Spain have kept 

  such parties from office. Britain, Ireland, Greece, Australia and New Zealand have 

  pushed them to the margin. This variety often reflects conscious tactics and alliances. I t   may also mean that 'mainstream' parties have adopted policies which pre-empt the appeal 

  of extremists - as in the United Kingdom, Australia or Spain. Governments which have 

  successfully resisted these trends, as in Sweden or New Zealand, are less common than 

  those which have been punished for doing so, as in Denmark or Norway, or which have 

  shifted their ground, as in the United Kingdom. The temptation to 'play the race card' is 

  always there and can be activated by the success of extremist parties at the ballot box 

  (Gibson 2002). 

  Whether a party is 'extremist' may be a matter of taste. This is usually best understood 

  within the context of the established organisations and ideologies of particular societies. 

  For the purposes of discussion we might look for the following characteristics: 

  A central emphasis on race and ethnicity in the party's appeal, which may focus on 

  recent immigrants or have its origins in much older racist traditions; 

  Frequent involvement in street violence or even 'terrorism' (bombings, killings, 

  assassinations etc.); 

  Sympathy for previous racist movements and especially for Nazism and Fascism; 

  Alienation from the established parties and the system of parliamentary elections; 

  Glorification of the past of the dominant ethnic group; 

  Reliance on a charismatic leader 

  A combination of these usually characterises parties which arc marginal to electoral 

  politics even if they contest elections. They may influence the political system but are 

  usually denounced by all major political figures relying on electoral support. Such parties 

  may suddenly come in from the margins by gaining mass support - the 'Nazi syndrome' of 

  the early 1930s which still haunts much of Europe. Distinguishing between essentially 

  'racist' parties and 'populist' parties may be difficult. One Nation was quite clearly 

  'populist' and gained much of its support on that basis. But it also got support from small  activist groups which were much closer to the European patterti. 'Populism' is much 

  more potent electorally than 'extremism' and thus more dangerous for harmonious ethnic 

  relations and the acceptance of immigrants and refugees. Its advocates can claim not to  be racists, while knowing full well the support that they gain from more obvious racists. 

  The recent electoral success or failure of relevant parties is indicated in Table Two. The  parties listed may be broadly conservative, but have used xenophobia actively in recent 

  elections to enlarge their vote. Some, like the Dutch Pim Fortuyn List may not even be 

  conservative at all but so diverse that they rapidly disintegrate. Some have entered  governments, while others give their support. Such a tactic is rarely possible in systems 

  not using forms of proportional representation. The anti-immigration parties have 

  generally been described as on the 'Right' and have had most influence on voters and 

  parties at that end of the political spectrum (which is still recognised in Europe whatever 

  may be true of the English-speaking countries). 

  Major parties like Forza Italia, the Vlaams Blok, the Swiss SVP or even the Spanish PP  are not exclusively concerned with immigration and cthnicity even when they make this 

  an electoral appeal. The SVP appeal in the October 2003 Swiss elections included 

  opposition to entering the European Union. Even lesser parties such as One Nation tried 

  to extend their program into areas of general concern. While most minor parties depend 

  on charismatic leaders, these are not always from the same mould as previous fascists or 

  conservatives. One Nation and the Danish Peoples Party were both lcd by women while 

  Pim Fortuyn was a homosexual and Winston Peters (NZ First) a Maori. The leader of the  Swiss Peoples Party (SVP), Christoph Blocher, is a multimillionaire. Most such parties 

  try to draw support from all social sections by appealing to engrained prejudices and 

  fears. 

  I O  

  TABLE TWO; Support for anti-immigration parties in Europe and Australasia 

  Front National 

  NPD/REP/DVU 

  16.9% 

  3.3% 

  State Recent Vote 

  FPO Y 10.2% 

  Government/ 

  Opposition 

  Year 

  2002 Austria Government 

  Belgium Vlaanis Blok I 9.9% 1999 

  200 1 

  1999 

  2002 (pres) 

  1998 

  Opposition 

  Denmark Government 

  Finland Opposition 

  France Opposition 

  Germany Not applicable 

  Greece 2000 

  2002 

  Not applicable 

  Not applicable Ireland 

  Italy 2002 Government Liga Nord 

  AN 

  1 12% 

  Netherlands Government 2002 

  200 1 

  Pim Fortuyn 17%) 

  Norway Government 

  Portugal 2002 

  2000 

  Government 

  Not applicable Spain 

  Sweden Not applicable 2002 

  2003 Switzerland Government 

  UK Br.Nationa1 P. I 0.2% Not applicable 200 1 

  Opposition Australia 200 1 

  1999 New Zealand Opposition 

  Note: "Government' means either that the party is in government or that the govemmcnt 

  depends on it in parliament. 'Opposition' means that the party is reprcsented in parliarncnt 

  but that it docs not support the government. 'Not applicable' means that the party is not 

  represented in parliament. 'Recent vote' is for the latest lower house election (except for 

  France). 

  'The Impact on Policy 

  Most public policy continues to be made by major ruling parties and public servants.. 

  These will, of course, take account of any significant rise in electoral support for the 

  minor parties, as well as keeping an eye on public opinion polls. As most European  governments are coalitions or dependent on minority support, the anti-immigration 

  parties may exert considerably more direct influence than they do in the one or two party 

  governments of Britain, Australia, Ireland , Sweden or New Zealand. They may even, as  recently in the Netherlands, give power over immigration to a minority party. But a more 

  normal reaction in all systems has been for the major party of the 'Right' to pre-empt 

  nationalist and even xenophobic policies and thus hope to undermine the vote for 

  minorities. The Australian Liberals did this with much success in 2001, whereas the 

  British Conservatives failed miserably to do so in the same year. 

  In both countries the major party of the 'Left' found itself adopting policies which it had 

  previously denounced, as a way of maintaining its vote among the working class. British 

  Labour, like many European parties, began to stress the need for national unity and social 

  solidarity, especially after the transfer of the Home Secretaryship from Jack Straw to 

  David Blunkett in 2001. Australian Labor endorsed most of the policies of the Coalition 

  government arising from the detention and transfer of asylum seekers i n  2001 and the  security measures adopted in response to the September attack on New York. Other 

  social democratic parties were less willing to shift but some suffered electorally as a 

  result. There were quite different results in superficially similar societies. I n  Austria the 

  FPO lost half its vote in 2002 but this went over to the mainstream Peoples Party (OVP) 

  with whom they had been in coalition. I n  Switzerland the Swiss Peoples Party (SVP) 

  supported a referendum, opposed by all other parties, which would have made it almost 

  impossible for asylum seekers to enter by land. This was very narrowly defeated in 

  November 2002. However the party then went on to increase its vote substantially in 

  October 2003. 

  12 

  Policy shifts in the last few years may be summarised as: 

  Reasserting national culture, assimilation and loyalty 

  Tightening the control of asylum seekers 

  Seeking international co-operation in controlling movement 

  Reducing commitments to multiculturalism and humanitarianism 

  Attempting to insti tute more 'rational' immigration systems 

  These shifts have not been incompatible with continued assertion of human rights, racial 

  equality and the need to 'integrate' immigrant minorities and to cater for 'indigenous'  languages and cultures (Lavenex 2001). Most anti-immigration parties claim not to be 

  racist. Violent racism is limited to the extra-parliamentary fringes and is denounced by 

  leaders of all parliamentary persuasions. But allegations of crime, drug trafficking and 

  political violence are often used in mainstream debates. Christian conservatives may join 

  with secular liberals in criticising somc aspects of Islam. More recently the equation of 

  Islam with terrorism has made the lot of many Muslims difficult. Muslim leaders have 

  often been expected to control their coreligionists, an expectation long abandoned for 

  Christian clergy. 

  Towards a 'rational' immigration policy 

  Racism and xenophobia are normally dismissed as irrational. But immigration policy 

  can also be irrational or, at best, subjcct to conflicting demands. Some European states, 

  notably Ireland, Greece and Italy, were so used to being net losers of emigrants that they 

  had scarcely any laws or practised to deal with recent influxes of new arrivals. Others, 

  such as the Scandinavian states, had developed a very liberal approach, especially 

  towards refigecs, but found that their previous ethnic homogeneity was challenged by 

  large numbers of new arrivals. All differed from the classic New World states of 

  immigration by seeing immigrants as temporary sojourners, which many had indeed been  in previous decades. Even after the ending of specific guest worker systems in the 

  1970s, work pemiits remained a major basis for admission. Immigrants were not 

  13 

  cxpected to settle but were a flexible labour force which could be encouraged or 

  discouraged as the need arose. This had been the historic experience of Italians in France 

  and Switzerland, of the Irish in England, of Poles in Germany, France and Belgium or of 

  linns in Sweden. Such temporary labourers were specifically rejected by Australia after 

  1901 as part of the White Australia policy. Quite recently temporary residents have 

  come back into fashion in Australia, but as highly skilled students and professionals 

  rather than unskilled labourers. 

  The rationality of work permit immigration appeals to business, to economists and to  those politicians and public servants who are influenced by them. (Castles & Miller 1998; 

  Stalker 2000). It solves many industrial problems, including labour shortages, strikes, 

  trade union demands and social provision by having a disfranchised workforce. But it 

  does not solve social problems and resultant majority fear and resentment. To have large  numbers of 'non-citizens' - often unskilled males - with insecure jobs and status, is not a 

  good recipe for social harmony, let alone social justice. Free movement of labour within 

  the European Union and on equal terms, provides the current solution but does not apply 

  to the large numbers seeking to enter from outside the EU. 

  Another irrationality was the post-imperial policy of Britain, France, Belgium, the 

  Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Italy, which encouraged the entry and settlement of 

  large numbers from usually impoverished or unstable former colonies. Most immigrants 

  in Britain and France were seen as 'British' or 'French' officially but not by many of the 

  indigenous voters (Spencer 1997).. This did not arise for Australia as the White Australia 

  policy outlasted the British imperial system and had always discriminated on the basis of 

  race rather than nationality. 

  'I'his varied and often irrational basis for immigration created a wide variety of practices. 

  With the introduction of free movement i n  Schengen Europe ( which excluded Britain,  Denmark and Ireland) it became imperative to cqualise rules and conditions. Generally 

  this has meant seeking a 'lowest coinmon denominator' policy,. in which the tightest 

  restrictions and least generous provisions can be universally applied. The fear of 

  14 

  terrorism after September 2001 increased this trend. The Amsterdam Treaty of 1997 

  proposed a Common Eiiropean Asylum System and this was furthcr developcd at 

  Tampere in 1999. Since then opinion has hardened and anti-immigration parties have 

  flourished. As a Canadian commentator puts it: "a CEAS is unlikely to be advantageous 

  or generous to asylum seekers". (Gallagher 2002:379). The CEAS is planned to be fully 

  developed by 2005. 

  Rationalising immigration laws does not necessarily mean liberalising them. In Austria, 

  where the influence  of extremists has been significant, laws passed recently have been 

  described as ?'the most restrictive" in Europe. Work permits are subject to a strict annual 

  quota of about 8 000, are not necessarily linked to residence permits and do not allow 

  permanent residence, though recently modified to allow for ten years under specific 

  qualifications. Regulations effective from 1 '' January 2003 oblige those who have arrived  since 1998 to complete a German-language and local knowledge test, failure to complete 

  which within four years can lead to canccllafion of residence permission. Key personnel 

  are trcated more generously than seasonal workers, who have no right to family reunion  or to unemployment benefits. (Stadt Wien, 2003). In one sense stringent and restrictive 

  policies work rationally by limiting public fear and resentment. H u t  they do not lead to  amicable social relationships, given that largc minorities are already present and will 

  grow by rcproduction even if immigration is limited. Moreover, most European states 

  face declining workforces and ageing populations and will need to maintain a reasonable 

  level of immigration in the future. 

  Conclusions 

  For those who like neat correlations, there is little in the recent European experience of 

  resistance to immigration which gives much guidance. The two major rccipients of 

  asylum seekers, Germany and Britain, do not have strong racist parties. While this may 

  be inhibited in Germany by post-War anti-Nazi legislation and a cutoff level for 

  15 

  parliamentary representation, there is a remarkable contrast with the experience of 

  neighbours as different as conservative Austria and Switzerland or the liberal 

  Netherlands and Denmark. In the United Kingdom neither the National Front nor the  British National Party has ever won more than the odd local government seat. However 

  both Britain and Germany have an unfortunate recent record of racial violence - leading  to deaths in both. These are not confined to recent immigrants and refugees but often 

  involve the local children of those who have been settled for many years. Those who seek 

  for socio-economic causes might note that the recent unemployment level in Germany 

  has been more than twice that in Britain. Social democratic Germany, Britain and Sweden 

  all have quite violent neo-Nazi movements outside the formal party system. 

  For the rest of Europe one might distinguish between states where anti-immigrant parties 

  are weak; those where they are popular enough to make a claim on effective legislative 

  representation; and those where they have been strong enough  to join governments or to 

  lend them necessary support. Anti-immigrant partics cxist throughout Europe and, like 

  other minorities, have legislative representation through proportional representation 

  systems.. However, the electoral systems alone do not account for differing 

  parliamentary influences. 

  Despite all this variety, some generalisations might be made: 

  the strength  of anti-immigration parties is not closely related to social, economic or 

  cultural factors nor to the size of recent immigrant intake; 

  anti-immigration parties lie on the 'right' of the spectrum and draw most of their 

  supporters from the 'right' parties; 

  they tend to appeal to the less educated, the provincial and those often not directly 

  affected by immigration but subscribing to 'traditional' ideas of the nation; 

  anti-immigration parties often rise quickly but tend to reach a ceiling;  street violence is often a sign of frustration when there is no electorally effective 

  anti-immigrant party; 

  the main party(ies) of the 'right' will co-opt much of the program of anti-immigrant 

  parties 

  16 

  the parties of the 'deniocratic lcfi' may respond by also co-opting or not resisting but 

  are often at a disadvantage because of the ambivalence of their supporters; 

  there will be a significant element 'fighting racism' but without much effective  electoral following as it, too, is seen as 'extremist'; 

  the overall trend is to tighten immigration and refugee control with public approval, 

  partly as a method of reducing anti-immigrant support. 

  Parliamentary politics in Europe and Australia in the past five years have domesticated 

  what might otherwise have developed as violent and destabilising reactions.. Violence 

  against minorities has either been sporadic and unorganised or has been adopted by 

  parties like the BNP in England or the neo-Nazis in Germany with little electoral appeal. 

  The major political parties have acknowledged a degree of ethnic variety even if they will  not subscribe to multiculturalism as a desirable policy. The major European parties have 

  accepted free movement within the European Union and substantial tourist, student and 

  business migration globally. All the states reviewed have maintained their commitment to 

  the Refugee Convention and Protocol, though they have interpretcd this very differently. 

  The impact of anti-immigration parties has generally been to restrict this commitment. 

  However, they alone are not to blame. Minor extremist parties certainly sharpen the 

  'debate' but they are not always the determining factor. 

  The ethnic situation in most of Europe is currently quite combustible. Even states with 

  negligible electoral followings for extremist parties, such  as the United Kingdom, Ireland 

  or Sweden, may have violent minorities. The aggravating role of the British National 

  Party in the riots in Lancashire in 2001 IS a case in point. Both the BNP and the much 

  more overtly neo-Nazi Combat 18 have strong links with European nco-Nazi groups and 

  influence on the racist elements in soccer and rock music (Lowles 2002). Similar groups 

  in Denmark, Sweden and Germany are openly dedicated to violence rather than to 

  electoral politics. Yet at the same time some governments, churches and NGOs are 

  actively endorsing multicultural and integrative policies and denouncing racism. The 

  European Union and individual states guarantee minority language rights to a greater  extent than ever before. 

  17 

  The Convention on Human Rights gives greater nominal protection to immigrants and 

  ethnic minorities than is available in Australia. There is often a contradiction between 

  policies adopted nationally and those implemented locally. In London, Vienna, 

  Amsterdam and Melbourne local authorities have implemented multicultural and 

  settlement policies which are more sympathetic to immigrants, refLigees and ethnic 

  minorities than are those of their national governments. 

  A more 'rational' immigration policy for the European Union  as extended might include 

  the following rather than the increasingly restrictive current approaches: 

  an overall annual total allowing permanent residencc on defined social, occupation 

  and educational criteria within any signatory state; 

  guarantee of similar social provision and occupational protection for immigrant 

  workers in all states, including trade union and welfare rights;  a defined possibility of changing temporary to permanent status after a suitable period 

  of residence; 

  all permanent residents to have defined rights of family reunion; 

  a uniform provision for naturalisation based on length of residence and an acceptable 

  record of work and integration; 

  a uniform policy for the settlement of accepted refugees, whether from asylum 

  seekers or through UNHCK selection; 

  freedom of movement within the extended Union; 

  common laws and standards for deportation of non-citizens; 

  agreements for repatriation between the Union as a whole and compliant third states;  the creation of an international agency with resources to monitor the above. 

  Ititcrnationally agreed policy and machinery to secure legal equality and freedom 

  from discrimination. 

  Effective co-ordination of border control practices and principles 

  Failing some similar iiiteriiatiorial initiatives within the European Union as extended, 

  immigrants, refugees and even long-established minorities are under threat. (Amato & 

  Batt 1999). This has been made more serious by the escalating fear of terrorism and thc 

  rising numbers of asylum seekers. The Australian government has responded t o  this by 

  maintaining its draconian regime against unauthorised arrivals. It has met with little 

  resistance from the official Opposition. This has worked to the advantage of the national 

  government, rather than encouraging specifically anti-immigration parties as in many 

  European states. A very similar process can be observed in the United Kingdom, except 

  that the Conservative opposition wants even more draconian measures. One 'solution' to 

  the problem of extremist parties is to outflank them by adopting somc of their program  while effectively crushing them at the ballot box. This pragmatic answer holds out little 

  hope of improvement for those seeking to move from poor and repressive societies into 

  the affluent and democratic states of Europe, North America and Australasia, This 

  presents a major challenge to an extended European Union, as it includes poorer societies 

  with less democratic traditions within its bounds (Uqarcr & Puchala 1997; Jordan & 

  Duvell2002). 

  The basic dilemma faced both in Europe and Australia has been that official commitment 

  to refugee obligations has mobilised xenophobic sentiment which wishes to see such 

  policies severely amended or abolished. This has impacted on the policies of political  parties with varying force. Australia initially took the road of making undocumented 

  asylum seekers punishable by detention and subsequent loss of rights to remain 

  permanently. The United Kingdom took a strong interest in this approach, although i t  

  baulked at mandatory detention as too expensive and inhumane. Other states such as 

  Germany and Sweden used the principle of'third country protection' to turn away asylum 

  seckers from their borders. I n  effect Australia did the same by arguing that residence of 

  more than one week in an intermediate state invalidated asylum claims or brought 

  penalties for those making a successfid claim. This was dcspite the fact that these 

  intermediate 'safe havens' (such as Indonesia or Thailand) were not signatorics to the U N  

  Convention. Recent changes to the trcatment of asylum seekers arriving by air makc i t  

  almost impossible to secure permanent residence in Australia and consequent citizenship. 

  Australian governments have argued that Europe needs a consistent and coherent 

  immigration policy and this finds a ready echo in Europe. But Australia has gone  beyond its previous adherence to the UN Convention and Protocol in directions which arc 

  19 

  more appealing to the European extremists than to the major parties and the governments 

  they control. 

  References and Resources: 

  Atnato, G. and Batt, J. (eds) (1999) The Long-Term Inzplicutions cfEU Elzlurgeinent: The 

  Nuture of the New Border, Florence, The European University Institute. 

  Austra1ia:Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs website: 

  ht t p:llwww. immi . gov.au 

  Castles, S. and Miller, M. ( 1  998) The Age uf Migration (2'ld editioil), New York, Guilford 

  Press. 

  Cesareo, V.(ed) (2003) The Eighth ltuliuri Report on Migrutioiis 2002; Milan,  Fondazione I .S. MU. 

  European Commission (200 1 ), Conzmuiiiculion jroin the Commission to the Council and 

  the Europeuri Purlianzent on u Coininon Policy on lllegul Irtzvzigration 

  (Com(200 1 )672 final), Brussels, European Commission. 

  kuropean Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (2002), EUMC Annuul Report 

  2001, Vienna, EUMC. 

  Europeuiz Race Bulletin ( 19952003); London, lnstitute of Race Relations. 

  C;allagher,S. (2002) "Towards a Common European Asylum System". Internutionul 

  Journal LVlI(3) Summer, 375-394. 

  Geddes,A. (2000) Inzrnigrution and Ezirupeun Ii?tegrution; Manchester University Press. 

  Gibson, R. (2002), The Growth of Anti-lnzmigrunt Purties in Western Europe; Edwin 

  Mellen Press, Lewison ( N Y ) .  

  .lordan,Bill and Duvell, Frank (2002), Iiwgulur Migmtiorz, Cheltenham(UK), Edward 

  Elgar. 

  Jupp, J. (2002) From White Awtr.alicr tu Wuomeru; Melbourne, Cambridge University  Press. 

  Lavenex, S. (2001), The Europeanisution o f R e f i p e  Policies; Aldershot, Ashgate. 

  Lie, B. (2002) Imn?igration and imnzigvur7ts 2002; Oslo, Statistics Noiway. 

  20 

  Lineback, B. and Olson, M .  (cds) (200 I ) ,  Boirnds o/Seczir.ity;the Reception of Resettled 

  Refiigees in Sweden, Stockholm, Integrationsverket. 

  Lowlcs,N.(2002) White Kiot;the Violent Stoty of Comhut 18; Bury(UK), Milo Books. 

  Migrant News (1 995-2002) ((monthly); University of California at Davis: 

  http://migration.ucdavis.cdil 

  Refugee Council of Australia websitc; IiC1p:i/w~w.rcfLigcccouncil.or~.au 

  Spencer, I.R.G.( 1997) British Immigration Policy since 1039; London, Routledge. 

  Stadt Wien (2003) Vienna Integration Policies - Fact Sheets, Vienna, Office of the 

  Executive City Councillor for Integration. 

  Stalker, P. (2000), Workers without Frontiers; Geneva, International Labour Office.  Ugarer, E.M. and Puchala, D.J.(eds.)( 1997) Immigrcition into Western Societies; London, 

  Pinter. 

  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees website: http:i/www.uiilicr.ch 

  (Statistics) 

  US Committee for Refugees (2002) Worldwide Refiigee Information-Cozintly Reports;  Washington, USCR. 

  Vcrtovec, S. and R.Cohen (eds) ( 1  999), Migration, Diusporas and Transnationalism; 

  Cheltenham(UK), Edward Elgar. 

  (6 190 words) 

