---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop: Wednesday 4 June 2003: Parliament House Canberra: Philip Ruddock and visas; leadership."
date: "2003-06-04"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR RECONCILIATION AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Ministerial discretion"
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
  - "RUDDOCK, Philip, MP"
  - "Party leadership"
  - "ALP"
  - "Philip Ruddock and visas"
  - "leadership."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211563198
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RCJ96%22
---

 

 

 Julia Gillard  MP                          Laurie Ferguson MP

   Shadow M ister for Population and Immigration                                          Shadow Minister for Citizenship            

 Shadow Mi ter for Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs                                          and Multicultural Affairs   

 

 

 

 

 

 in   nis  

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY 4 JUNE 2003   E&OE   

 SUBJECTS: Philip Ruddock and visas; Leadership   

 GILLARD: The Labor Opposition will continue to raise the visa scandal allegations we  have been pressing in the Parliament over the last week, this is a Government that  campaigned at the last election on the basis of the importance of the integrity of the  immigration system.     

 What we now know is that there are three substantial examples where Minister Ruddock  still has questions to answer.    

 Example number one is the Buddhist monastery that made a $100,000 donation to  Mr Ruddock’s electoral campaign and received a huge number of religious worker visas.    

 Example number two is the asylum seeker Mr Hbeiche whose claim was rejected by the  Department, by the Refugee Review Tribunal, by the Federal Court, by Minister Ruddock  twice following interventions by the Member for Parramatta and then, after a donation  was made by a Mr Karim Kisrwani to the Liberal Party and after Mr Kisrwani made  representations on behalf of Mr Hbeiche, a visa was granted.    

 The third case is the case we focused on today, the case of Mr Dante Tan who is a  fugitive from the Philippines, wanted for questioning and potential judicial proceedings in  relation to that nation’s biggest corporate fraud. This man came to Australia under the  Business Skills Visa program. There is no evidence he ever ran a business, his visa was  cancelled by the Department because they could not find him. The visa cancellation was  reversed, a donation was made on his behalf or by him directly to Minister Ruddock’s  electorate office and he is now an Australian citizen potentially wanted for extradition to  the Philippines. This is a major scandal in the functioning of our migration system and  Minister Ruddock needs to fully answer every question we have asked and he needs to  put before the Parliament every document relevant to these cases.    

 JOURNALIST: Julia, he has given answers, have you actually got evidence to show  that he was bribed into giving these visas?    

  1

 GILLARD:  I don’t believe Minister Ruddock has given any answers we can  rely on at this point. In relation to the Buddhist monastery, we still don’t know what  representations or what interventions he made. The version has changed over time in  relation to the matter involving Mr Hbeiche.  We are still unclear as to why the Minister,  on the third occasion the matter was brought before him, changed his mind. He said a  bishop intervened and he said he got community representations. What we know is that 

 the community representations were from Mr Kisrwani and what we also know is that the  bishop intervened but we don’t know the date of that intervention. So it might well pre-date the earlier rejections.     

 In relation to the Dante Tan case raised today there is no evidence before us that there was  any checking about this man’s compliance with his business visa, we don’t believe he  ever ran a business in Australia and we do know that after Mr Kisrwani intervened and  after a donation his visa cancellation issue was fixed.     

 JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock has said that, when we have asked in the past about  particular donations, he said well if a donation was made I would not necessarily know  about it.  It would have been properly declared; that is the end of the matter.  Do you  think he is lying?    

 GILLARD:  Well, number one: a $100,000 donation is a major donation; it’s the  size of the donation that is involved in the Buddhist monastery example. I would find it  incredible that a Member of Parliament wouldn’t know that a $100,000 donation had been  made to their local election campaign. In relation to the Dante Tan matter, the donation  was posted to his electorate office.  And in relation to the Hbeiche matter, it’s not true to  say the matter was properly declared. It was declared at the end of last week after a week  of questioning in Parliament.     

 JOURNALIST: So has Mr Ruddock been lying about it?    

 GILLARD:  Well, we certainly aren’t in a position today to say that we are  satisfied by any of the answers that Mr Ruddock has given. If Mr Ruddock can dispel  these allegations lock, stock and barrel by producing the files, the departmental files then  why doesn’t he? Can I just say Laurie Ferguson has got something to add, too.    

 FERGUSON:   Look, as I say, it seems that Mr Kisrwani was at the helm of  Australian immigration, the situation where he convened the original function where  $3,000 was donated in regard to Hbeiche.  Mr Tan is, in the words of Mr Kisrwani, a  person without abode in the country. Who does he use in the whole country as the address  for the cheque? Mr Kisrwani’s house.     

 In a situation where Mr Kisrwani rings up not the Ministerial office for once, but the  actual electorate office a few days after the cheque arrives at the electorate office, now  supposedly not disclosed. Mr Kisrwani now, today, we have seen, has the effrontery,  because of a very close relationship with the Minister over 20 or 30 years to think he can  ring up the department and actually put himself forward as a representative of the  Minister.    

 That is what the Minister said today that Mr Kisrwani just basically rang up and said,  “Oh, Philip is interested in this case”. The fact that he has got the effrontery, the fact that  he thinks he can do this, a person associated very closely, intimately to the Minister for  two to three decades really says something about his influence in the use of Ministerial  discretion in this country.    

 JOURNALIST: Do we need to find some more evidence other than some cushy  phone calls and (inaudible)?    

  2

 FERGUSON:   The Minister has clarified today that Mr Kisrwani has initially been  acting illegally.  He finally got around to the admission that he has got no right legally to  be doing what he is doing. It is quite clear that every five minutes he has got a case and is  on to the Minister’s office, and I bet you my bottom dollar that if we look at Ministerial  discretion in this country, we are going to find approaches by Mr Kisrwani are a  significant number of these cases.    

 GILLARD:  Can I say, too, I think the Government’s attempt to reverse the  onus of proof here is inappropriate. There is enough material on the public record now to  cause concern about the integrity of our visa and immigration system. It is not for us to  fossick out every fact.  Minister Ruddock is a Minister of the Crown.  He is paid by  Australian taxpayers to run a system with integrity. If he has got the complete answer,  why doesn’t he just walk in to that Parliament and put it down on the Parliamentary table.     

 He has not done that after days of questioning in Parliament.  Iif he has got the answer,  then why doesn’t he give it to us. His only response to that is that he wants to protect the  privacy of individuals involved.  Well, the truth is we all now know who these individuals  are. But if he wants to give us these files with the names blacked out, then we will take  them.  And if they do show there is no problem, then that is the end of the matter.  But, in  circumstances where the Minister refuses to give direct answers to questions and refuses  to produce the document when donations and visas appear to be marching together hand  in hand, then that I think is a major issue in our immigration system and a major issue for  this Minister and this Government.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Ministerial intervention should be scrapped?    

 GILLARD:   Labor, when it announced its refugee and asylum seeker policy last  year, said - and this remains our policy - that we believe that there should be an  independent committee that recommends to the Minister whether or not his or her powers  of intervention should be used, and that should be a transparent process. It is only if you  do it like that you can put it above the sort of circumstances we have seen develop in the  last two weeks.     

 JOURNALIST: As far as the privacy argument is concerned, it is not just people’s  names - we may know the names but we don’t know all their circumstances and all their  details.  There are very stringent privacy laws in place.  Surely the Minister cannot just  override those?    

 GILLARD:  Minister Ruddock uses the privacy laws to assist him when he  thinks it is in his interest to not disclose details of individual claims. When he thinks the  privacy laws do not assist him, then he waives them. It was Minister Ruddock that read  into the Hansard every detail of Mr Hbeiche’s claim; we didn’t do that. We also know,  more generally in the refugee and the asylum seeker area, that Minister Ruddock has not  been above going through the details of what he believes to be bogus refugee and asylum  seeker claims. If he had always taken the consistent view about privacy, I would believe  him but he hasn’t.    

 JOURNALIST: People who support Kim Beazley coming back as leader say there  will be a challenge before the end of June and that there is now open canvassing going on.   What is your response to that?    

  3

  4

 GILLARD:  Well, can I say that, if open canvassing is going on, I read about it  in the media but I see no evidence of it in the Labor Party. I think that the job we have got  to do is to focus on the big issues and the integrity of the immigration system, particularly  given the role that the integrity of the immigration system played in the last election. This  is, of course, a Government elected on the slogan, “We will decide who comes to this  country”.  In those circumstances, that is a big issue, and we will be focusing on that  issue. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Some would argue in Caucus, though, that the best candidate to  take Labor into the next election is Kim Beazley and they say they are now counting  numbers and they have at least 35.  Do you believe that Mr Crean can withstand a  challenge?    

 GILLARD:  I believe that Simon Crean will lead Labor to the next election and  he is undoubtedly the best person to do that.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think he has a better or a worst chance now (inaudible)    

 GILLARD:  I think Mr Howard is going to rue the day that he decided to stay  on as Prime Minister.  I actually think we will now move on to a new phase in Australian  politics where, instead of speculating about whether or not the Prime Minister is going to  retire, people will actually be holding him to account for what he does or what he fails to  do as Prime Minister. I think the fact he is a Prime Minister without a domestic agenda  will be increasingly before the Australian people.  And when they vote at the next  election on health and on education and on jobs and on issues like probity in public life,  they won’t be exercising that vote for John Howard.    

 JOURNALIST: But isn’t John Howard tougher to beat than Peter Costello?    

 GILLARD:  I always thought that Peter Costello was a poor campaigner.  I  think he spectacularly demonstrated that in the last election campaign with the Telstra  error.  Having said that, I think we can beat John Howard and I think we will.    

 JOURNALIST:  Should  Mr  Crean bring on a spill?    

 GILLARD:  I don’t think so, I think Mr Crean is the leader of the Labor Party.  I  think he is doing a fantastic job.  I think the polls show us within striking distance for the  next election and, in those circumstances, I think what the backbench wants him to do and  what the Australian people want him to do is to keep doing what he is doing so  successfully - campaigning on the domestic issues.    

 JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)    

 GILLARD:   I suppose politics is an unusual game.  Peter Costello would have  been sitting around a Cabinet table with John Howard for the best part of two years  thinking that the Prime Minister was going to retire. Politics can throw up some odd  bedfellows.   

 (ends)   

 

