---
title: "Stopping people trafficking in sex industry a high priority."
date: "2003-04-01"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "People trafficking"
  - "Prostitution"
  - "Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee"
  - "Parliamentary questions"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211559251
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0P396%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS 

 Stopping People Trafficking In Sex Industry A High Priority

 MPS 20/2003

 Departmental response to questions taken on notice during Senate Estimates hearings about this subject, 11 February  2003

 The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, said today his department would  continue to work closely with other relevant agencies to stamp out the heinous practice of people trafficking.

 'The trafficking of anyone for the purposes of sexual slavery is unacceptable and the Government has demonstrated that it  takes these matters seriously by taking action,' Mr Ruddock said.

 In the financial year up until February, immigration compliance staff located 134 people working illegally in the sex industry.  Of those located, four women have made complaints about trafficking - that is they stated they were brought to Australia  under false pretences by unscrupulous individuals for the express purpose of forcing them into a form of sexual slavery.

 'Each person found working illegally in the sex industry is carefully interviewed to ascertain, among other things, the ways in  which they came to be working in the industry,' Mr Ruddock said.

 Any suggestion that a person has been coerced or deceived into prostitution is passed on to the Australian Federal Police  under formal co-ordination arrangements between the two agencies.

 Since the amendment to the Criminal Code on Slavery and Sexual Servitude in 1999, the Department has referred nine cases  involving 19 people, to the Australian Federal Police for investigation.

 Arrangements under the Migration Act enable law enforcement agencies to make use of a Criminal Justice Visa to keep  witnesses lawfully in the country, if they do not have another visa during the investigation and prosecutions.

 'However, there have been some misleading assumptions with reports on trafficking confusing those who come to Australia  willingly to work in the sex industry, after agreeing to pay organisers for the arrangements,' Mr Ruddock said.

 'There is an important distinction between these two groups.

 'It is not a credible suggestion that hundreds or thousands of people are being trafficked unwillingly into the industry and have  escaped detection over many years.

 'So far this financial year more than 10,000 people working illegally or in the country unlawfully have been located. While I  do not diminish concerns on trafficking, the actual complaints from individuals do not match the level of claims being made.

 'My department's compliance staff conduct ongoing operations across many industries and based on the number of locations,  the claims being made about the wide extent of trafficking cannot be substantiated.

 'The Government treats the issue of people trafficking in the sex industry with a high priority and while numbers involved  appear to be low, operational activities will continue both within Australia and overseas to bring this industry to an end,' Mr  Ruddock said.

 1 April 2003 

 Response to questions taken on notice during Senate Estimates hearings.

 QUESTION TAKEN ON NOTICE ADDITIONAL ESTIMATES HEARING: 11 February 2003 IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS PORTFOLIO  (72) Output 1.3: Enforcement of Immigration Law

 Senator Sherry asked:

 People trafficking

 1. Does DIMIA ask persons who they find to be illegally in Australia if they are trafficked? Is this part of procedure? If  not, why not?

 2. Are there formal procedures between the AFP and DIMIA regarding people who are trafficked? If so, what are they? 

 3. What steps have been taken to maximise coordination between DIMIA and the Australian Federal Police (AFP), and  between DIMIA and other State and Territory police forces, in relation to the investigation of potential offences  pursuant to the Commonwealth Criminal Code Amendment (Slavery and Sexual Servitude) Act 1999 and relevant  State and Territory legislation?

 4. Can people in detention who have been the victims of people trafficking be removed from detention to testify  against traffickers in court? If so, how many have done so in what cases over the past two years? 

 5. What occurs if their deportation occurs before the court case - can they remain to testify? If not, what can be done to  remedy this situation which appears to result in the prosecution of people traffickers? Can you outline the process in  this situation?

 6. Now that the Government has signed the UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons which  contains the obligation to make efforts to prevent the victims of trafficking from revictimisation, will it be considering  any changes to immigration processes such as a specific visa for victims of trafficking? If not, why not? 

 7. Are you providing training to staff on differences between people smuggling and trafficking, new processes arising  from the protocol being signed and requiring staff to refer victims of trafficking to advocacy and support groups?

 8. What steps are or have been taken relating to the ongoing and/or planned implementation into legislation, policy and  practice by DIMIA of the Protocol? 

 9. Where women have reported victimisation related to slavery and sexual servitude, and made statements to DIMIA,  the AFP or other bodies, what protective measures have been implemented to ensure their safety, and what support has  been offered them as a victim of crime?

 10. According to DIMIA figures in 1998-1999 237 women and 6 men found to be working in brothels were deported.  Do you know how many were the subject of people trafficking? Did you ask? If not, why not? 

 11. Were there any investigations that arose from this? Can you tell us more recent figures from 1999-2000 and 2000-2001? 

 12. What funding is available to non-government organisations to address this serious violence against women?

 Answer:

 1. If people are found working illegally in the sex industry, they are asked about the nature of their presence in  Australia as part of a structured interview. The questions they are asked include references to whether they are working  against their will, any debt owed to another person in relation to their travel to Australia, any employment  arrangements and the level of freedom that they have held. If an indication of people trafficking emerges from this  interview, the case is referred to the AFP for investigation.

 2. DIMIA and the Australian Federal Police (AFP) have a Service Agreement, which provides a framework for co-operation and collaboration in order to combat organised illegal immigration and serious or complex migration fraud.

 Under this Service Agreement, people trafficking offences are referred to the AFP for investigation. The AFP advises  DIMIA whether the matter is accepted for investigation. Where a matter is not accepted for investigation, the AFP will  advise DIMIA why the matter was not accepted and will, where appropriate, recommend alternative methods of  handling the matter.

 3. Through the Service Agreement, DIMIA has in place formal co-ordination arrangements with the AFP for the  referral of such cases. The AFP has responsibility for investigations under Commonwealth Criminal Code Amendment  Act (Slavery and Sexual Servitude) Act 1999. These arrangements ensure that the appropriate referrals are made.

 DIMIA and the NSW Police Force have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) relating to working  arrangements between the two agencies for the provision of information to support criminal investigations.

 4. A detainee may, while in immigration detention, be taken to a court to give evidence. Under the Migration Act 1958  (the Act), it is possible for a Criminal Justice visa to be issued in order to enable a person who is to give evidence in  court to be released from detention. However, DIMIA has been unable to identify any records of detainees being  released in order to give evidence in court.

 5. Under the Criminal Justice Visa scheme persons who are unlawful non-citizens and liable for removal from  Australia are able to remain temporarily in Australia if their presence is required for the administration of criminal  justice. Under the scheme a person determined by law enforcement agencies as being required to testify can be granted  a visa for this purpose. 

 Such a visa is granted following the Commonwealth Attorney-General or a relevant State/Territory Attorney-General,  Director of Public Prosecutions or Police Commissioner issuing a Criminal Justice Certificate. Once a Criminal Justice  Certificate is issued, a Criminal Justice Visa is granted in accordance with the Act. The visa remains in force until such  time as the Criminal Justice Certificate is cancelled.

 6. The Australian Government already has legislation and policy in place to appropriately manage issues that may arise  in regard to persons who are victims of trafficking. Consequently, it is not considered that new legislation or additional  visa classes will be required to align existing processes with the UN Protocol.

 There are a number of mechanisms such as bridging visas, Criminal Justice Visas and Ministerial intervention powers  already in place to allow people to remain lawfully in Australia in order to resolve issues arising from victimisation of  persons as defined under the UN Protocol.

 DIMIA is in the process of assessing its operational methods as part of its response to this issue. This is being  undertaken in order to improve the effective application of the existing legislation to identify and respond appropriately  to victims of trafficking.

 7. The difference between people smuggling and people trafficking is documented in several DIMIA publications  including Fact Sheets, 'Protecting the Border' and the functional directory - all of which are available to all staff. In 

 addition, a training strategy is in place that specifically makes reference to the difference between people smuggling  and people trafficking. DIMIA is reviewing its future training requirements and policy directions to ensure staff  understand the UN Protocol definition, and our obligations towards it.

 As matters relating to people trafficking are forwarded to the AFP for investigation, DIMIA does not refer victims to  advocacy and support groups. However, Australia makes a range of support services available to all unlawful non-citizens in detention, including those who are identified as victims of trafficking. These services are provided through  both government and charitable organisations.

 8. Please refer to the answer to Question 6 for an explanation of steps being taken to apply the UN Protocol. Please  refer to the answer to Question 7 for steps being taken in practice. DIMIA's response to the signing of the UN Protocol  is an ongoing process that will incorporate appropriate development in cooperation with our whole-of-Government  partner agencies.

 9. All matters relating to people trafficking are referred to the AFP for investigation. During the AFP's investigation of  the matter, the case officer may apply to the Commissioner to place their witness in the Witness Protection Program  under the Witness Protection Act 1994. In addition, the AFP and Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) are able to  apply to a court for a range of measures designed to provide protection to witnesses giving evidence, where it can be  established that there is a genuine concern for their safety. This is applicable to all court matters including those  involving victims of trafficking.

 10. As outlined in the answer to Question 1, people in the sex industry found to be illegally working in Australia are  asked questions to ascertain whether they have been trafficked. If indications of people trafficking emerge from these  interviews, the matter is referred to the AFP for investigation. According to both DIMIA and AFP records, no referrals  of people trafficking cases were made to the AFP in the period 1998-99. It should be noted, however, that the  Commonwealth Criminal Code Amendment (Slavery and Sexual Servitude) Act 1999 did not come into effect until  September 1999.

 11. Between September 1999 and February 2002, DIMIA and AFP records show that a total of seven referrals  (involving 16 persons) were passed by DIMIA to the AFP. Since the DIMIA/AFP Service Agreement was signed in  February 2002, comprehensive referral processes have been in place and two additional referrals (involving three  people) have been passed to the AFP. The total number of people trafficking cases investigated by the AFP since 1999  is 13 (this includes matters that have come to attention by means other than referral by DIMIA).

 12. DIMIA provides funding to non-government organisations through grants awarded under the Community  Settlement Services Scheme and through core funding of Migrant Resource Centres and Migrant Service Agencies. 

 The purpose of this funding is to assist the effective settlement of newly arrived migrants. Organisations receive  funding to provide a variety of services to assist migrants and refugees during the period of adjustment that they face  prior to full participation in Australian society. Although some of these services address the needs of women, they do  not specifically focus on the issue of the trafficking of women. 

