---
title: "Minister congratulates national school debating champions NSW."
date: "2003-05-24"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Secondary students"
  - "Debates"
  - "New South Wales"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211562682
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/66G96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H70/2003 - 24 May 2003

 

 Minister Congratulates National School Debating Champions NSW

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today congratulated  the New South Wales State team for winning the grand final at the Immigration National  Schools Debating Championship.

 NSW successfully debated that Australia's strategy on boat people was a success, edging  out Tasmania in a highly competitive debate at the Queensland Parliament House this  afternoon.

 Mr Hardgrave was guest of honour at the debate, and briefed the participants before the  grand final.

 "I was very impressed with the quality of both teams," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "They both showed excellent understanding of a complex and topical subject, and elucidated  their cases well.

 "Students who are involved in debating learn to research both sides of an issue. This is a  skill which will stand them in good stead throughout life," he said.

 "By learning to explore the nuances and subtleties surrounding important issues, students  can come to an informed decision.

 "There are few more complex social issues than those relating to immigration and  multicultural affairs, and I was very impressed with the arguments put forward by both  teams," he said.

 The New South Wales team won their preliminary final against Australian Capital Territory to  make it to the grand final.

 Tasmania graduated to the grand final, for the first time in more than 20 years, after  successfully debating against Queensland.

 Both teams were represented in the Australian National Debating Team announced at the  completion of the debate.

 The winning team will travel to Canberra to meet the Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Philip Ruddock, spend time with Mr Hardgrave, and  watch Parliament in action.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

