---
title: "National Youth Roundtable members meet Minister."
date: "2003-03-20"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "National Youth Roundtable"
  - "Political participation"
  - "Youth"
  - "Multiculturalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253836
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DOV86%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H28/2003 - 20 March 2003

 National Youth Roundtable Members Meet Minister

 A group of five young Australians, participating in today's National Youth Roundtable, met  with the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, at Parliament  House this week to discuss multicultural youth issues.

 The meeting enabled the five young people to discuss their projects with Mr Hardgrave,  before presenting their papers to the Government as part of the National Youth Roundtable  today.

 The five participants of the meeting were An Vo from Parkwood, Western Australia; Michael  Apout from Melbourne, Victoria; Caroline Risley from Bendigo, Victoria; Simon Khalil from  Sydney, New South Wales and Zhi Soon from Revesby, New South Wales.

 Mr Hardgrave supported the event which was hosted by the Minister for Children and Youth  Affairs, Larry Anthony.

 Mr Hardgrave congratulated the youth on their involvement with the Roundtable, particularly  their commitment to issues that are important to the Australian community.

 "Through their projects, these five young people will gain valuable insight into the views and  perspectives of young Australians on a variety of issues. 

 "I commend the work they have committed themselves to and look forward to the outcomes  of the Roundtable," Mr Hardgrave said. "These young people show the next generation of  leaders to be perceptive and articulate. They are a safe set of hands indeed."

 Each year the National Youth Roundtable, which was established by the Federal  Government in 1999, brings together 50 young people from diverse backgrounds and  locations across Australia to exchange with the Government their views and perspectives.

 The outcomes of the Roundtable will be sent to relevant Ministers.

 Minister Hardgrave said he would seek further follow-up meetings with the youth roundtable  representatives.

 Editor's note: A photograph is available on request from DIMIA Public Affairs on (02) 6264 2244

 The Projects and Participants

 An Vo

 

 A 24-year-old tax accountant with degrees in economics and law, An Vo met with Mr  Hardgrave to discuss his project exploring the social equality and inclusiveness of all  ethnicities in Australian life.

 An is a prominent young leader in the Vietnamese Community in WA and through his  ongoing volunteer work as a tutor, he has identified a worsening trend in cultural conflict  between the migrant generation of Vietnamese and their Australian-born children. An is  interested in exploring this conflict on the Roundtable this year. 

 Michael Apout Victorian law student Michael Apout, 21, met with Mr Hardgrave to discuss his project which  looks at helping refugee students get the most from the Australian Education system.

 A refugee from Sudan, Michael had to seek accommodation through youth housing  organisations, and has first hand experience of what it means to be a refugee student in  Australia, which has made him keen to look at this issue on the Roundtable. He feels that  there is not enough understanding about the challenge students from refugee backgrounds  face. 

 Since settling in Melbourne, Michael has contributed significantly to the needs of Sudanese  youth in the western suburbs as a founding member of the New Sudan Youth Association of  Australia and was a representative at the Victorian Multicultural Youth Roundtable.

 Caroline Risley Year 12 student Caroline, 17, from Bendigo Secondary College met with Mr Hardgrave to  discuss her project on social equality and humanitarian issues with a focus on  homelessness.

 Caroline is an active fundraiser and is involved with a number of organisations in Bendigo.  She writes articles for the youth supplement of the Bendigo Advertiser 'Loop' and works with  the "Lead On" youth organisation. 

 Simon Khalil Sydneysider Simon Khalil met with Mr Hardgrave to discuss his project which looks at the  way Muslims are portrayed in Australia and conversely at the way Christians are portrayed  in some Muslim countries.

 With a Christian Father and Muslim Mother, Simon has concerns about the portrayal of  Muslims worldwide since the September 11 attack in New York.

 He is trying to get local community members involved in his project and during their meeting,  Mr Hardgrave offered a number of community contacts to assist Simon with his work. 

 Zhi Soon 17-year-old Zhi is a student at Hurlstone Agricultural School and met with Mr Hardgrave to  discuss his project, which looks at the deficiency in participation of ethnic youth on Councils,  asking 'Is this the attitude of the youth or the attitude of the establishment keeping them  out?' 

 Zhi has been a Peer Support Program Instructor, a member of the SRC and the president of  the Interact Club at his school. He is the current president of the Liverpool District SRC and  has been involved in a number of fundraising activities.

 Zhi is interested in opening communication lines between youth organisations and various  forms of governance; promoting racial harmony among young people; and examining the  availability of youth development opportunities.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

