---
title: "Stop white anting ATSIC."
date: "2003-04-01"
creators:
  - "Clark, Geoff"
  - "Robinson, Ray"
source: "ATSIC"
subjects:
  - "Aboriginal organisationsLocal Government and Community Housing Program"
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Financial management"
  - "ATSIC"
  - "RUDDOCK, Philip, MP"
  - "Media bias"
  - "Grants"
  - "Australian National Audit Office"
  - "Community Development Employment Projects"
  - "Government agencies"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211559272
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MPY86%22
---

 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission 

 Media Releases

 Stop white anting ATSIC

 1/4/2003 

 Joint statement Chairman Geoff Clark, Deputy Ray Robinson

 It’s time the mainstream media and the Federal Government stopped using the Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islander Commission as the ‘whipping post,’ for every problem in Aboriginal Australia.

 It’s time they got their collective foot off our neck and came clean on who is responsible for the  third world conditions in our communities.

 ATSIC is not responsible for the provision of essential services in health, housing, education and  employment. 

 The media know this but do not report it. Why?

 Minister Ruddock knows it but rarely say a word in defence of this organisation. 

 All Indigenous people ought to ask themselves why the mainstream media and mainstream  politicians want to white-ant ATSIC ?

 We have issued this statement because it is time our people stood up and got some real facts on  the table.

 We need to let it be known that mainstream State and Territory governments are happy to sit back  and let us take all the public blame for their failures but privately let us shoulder more and more of  their responsibility in delivering essential services to our people.

 We ought to be asking why it is that the Minister for ATSIC is happy to move, as he has done so  often in recent months, against this organisation and its leaders, based entirely on “perceptions.”

 What about facts, Minister?

 We wonder why he has never moved to close down a detention centre given the widespread  perception amongst large sections of the Australian community that asylum seekers are treated  inhumanely in those centres?

 Despite 12 short years of existence, ATSIC has delivered more to Indigenous people than any  government, Federal, State or territory, in 200 years of colonial rule.

 The current ATSIC model is the best we have. We need to unite to protect and build on it. Has one  ATSIC critic ever put up a better model, which delivers more power to our people?

 We urge all members of the ATSIC elected arm to categorically reject any move by Minister  Ruddock or those working for him, to take any further action to strip away the powers of the duly  elected ATSIC Board ahead of his own review into the organization.

 We are happy to work with that review. We have stated so publicly. 

 For the Minister to now suggest he will move on separation of powers on the basis of “perceptions,”  before the review has even had time to canvass such a threshold issue is an insult to both the  consultation process now under way with our people and to the review team itself. 

 We are heartily sick and tired of media reports suggesting a bitter feud between us is making  ATSIC dysfunctional. This is rubbish.

 ATSIC is not dysfunctional. 

 We have a number of political differences as do most mainstream political leaders.

 We are able to put them aside and work together to deliver better outcomes for our people.

 Anyone with more than a passing interest in ATSIC knows that the first fully-elected Board of  ATSIC got more work done at the coalface than any other before it.

 We are honoured to have been elected as Chair and Deputy Chair to that Board and to have been  re-elected to the current Board of Commissioners.

 The first elected Board recognised that we needed to make the States and Territories accountable  for their failure in delivering basic services to our people. The Commonwealth cannot. We can.

 That’s why we put aside our political differences with them and signed essential service agreements  with every State and Territory government during the last term of the Board. We will focus during  this term on their implementation.

 Aboriginal people are not concerned about what they read in The Australian or the Brisbane Courier  Mail. Both newspapers sell very few copies in our communities.

 Our constituents are more interested in the fact that ATSIC has, time and again, been forced to  step in and provide the services to their constituents because the Commonwealth, States and  Territories have not accepted their responsibilities.

 This is the real debate in Indigenous Affairs.

 The fact is the Commonwealth cannot make the funders of first resort—the States and  Territories—accountable for their expenditure in providing basic services to their Indigenous  citizens.

 No one has to take our word for it.

 They need look no further than the latest report from the Australian National Audit Office on  ATSIC’s management of the $860m in grants it provides to Indigenous organisations around  Australia to provide such services. 

 These funds are contained within the Community Housing and Infrastructure program and CDEP,  the two programs the mainstream media repeatedly suggest should be taken from ATSIC.

 The report blows a huge hole in the central core of their logic.

 The ANAO said ATSIC’s financial management of more than $860m in grants was sound.

 It clearly stated the real problem for ATSIC was the fact that it was being forced into providing  supplementary funding because the States and Territories would not accept their responsibilities in  this regard.

 The recent Commonwealth Grants Commission report into Indigenous funding made it clear that  ATSIC’s major program-CHIP- was the best targeted Indigenous assistance program in Australia. 

 That program is now delivering housing and essential services to more than 40,000 people in 600  communities around the country. 

 The Grants Commission also reinforced the fact that it was mainstream government programs that  failed to meet the needs of Indigenous Australians.

 The Australian National Audit Office has recently given ATSIC its ninth unqualified audit, yet our  critics say millions of dollars are being squandered. 

 Why then, are they not calling for the abolition of the Australian National Audit Office, or the  abolition of the Commonwealth Grants Commission?

 From our viewpoint all of their misinformed bile is reserved for ATSIC.

 One only has to take a moment to realise those who lobby for ATSIC to lose its programs want less  accountability not more.

 They want those programs taken from the most scrutinised agency in the country and handed over  to the States and Territories, the least scrutinised in the country in terms of delivering outcomes  for our people.

 ATSIC is not perfect. Show us a Commonwealth, State or Territory agency that is?

 But we are not dysfunctional.

 There are due processes in place for dealing with the personal problems we both face. 

 Those processes should be allowed to run their course or are we also to accept that the  presumption of innocence is not something blackfellas can expect from your justice system.

 The media is free to attack ATSIC. But freedom of the press is a two-edged sword. The media have  a responsibility to reports the facts, not lies and prejudice.

 They can continue to white ant ATSIC as much as they like but we call on all our fellow members of  the elected arm to fight for more power for our people against those who wish to take it away.

 The best way to start is to bring the real accountability debate in Indigenous Affairs out into the  open and to call on the Commonwealth Government to let the review and legal processes run their  proper course.

 ATSIC’s programs provide it with the leverage it requires to get the Commonwealth, State and  Territories to the negotiating table.

 We repeat that leverage has, and is being, well used by ATSIC to forge agreements with State and  Territory Governments across the country. 

 Take those away and ATSIC loses its power as the only Commonwealth agency able to hold the  States and Territories to account.

 Now that would be a tragedy.

 No-one should ever forget that despite what the politicians and the mainstream media say the  recent ATSIC election resulted in a record turnout of more than 50,000 voters, record nominations  and a substantial increase in new voters (7,600 enrolled in 10 weeks)

 ATSIC is clearly increasing its relevance to Aboriginal Australia. 

 Those are 50,000 solid reasons why we need to defend our record against those who, for their own  reasons, continually seek to diminish a proud record of achievement on the ground for our people.

 Geoff Clark Chairman

 Commissioner Ray Robinson Deputy Chairman

 April 1, 2003.

 

 

 www.atsic.gov.au

