---
title: "Minister launches handbook to improve migrant knowledge of Australian law."
date: "2003-06-20"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Immigrants"
  - "Legal services"
  - "Government information"
  - "Books"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211254534
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2TO96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP 

  Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 Media Release H81/2003 - 20 June 2003

 

 Minister Launches Handbook to Improve Migrant Knowledge of Australian Law

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today launched a publication to  assist newly arrived migrants understand their rights and responsibilities under Australian law.

 'This booklet will help engender confidence in all Australians particularly those recently arrived of the need  to work with the police,' he said.

 'It is vital that new migrants and refugees are provided with information on Australia's policing processes  and fundamental legal concepts, as they often arrive from countries with vastly different legal systems and  standards,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 'This is a practical, informative guide that outlines the criminal justice system in Australia, provides a list of  emergency service contact numbers, and highlights avenues of action for victims of crime.' 

 'Many recently arrived migrants may not be reporting crime because of a variety of cultural reasons.'

 Mr Hardgrave was speaking in Brisbane at the launch of A Guide to the Role of Police in Australia, which  was developed by the Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory Bureau, with funding assistance from the  Commonwealth Government's Living in Harmony initiative.

 'World Refugee Day is an excellent opportunity to foster greater awareness of the initiatives developed by  Australian institutions to create a more inclusive and cohesive society,' Minister Hardgrave said.

 The Guide is produced in eight languages including English, Arabic, Afghani (Dari), Bosnian, Chinese  (Mandarin), Farsi, Somali and Vietnamese.

 Mr Hardgrave said the guide was an excellent example of the commitment of Australia's State and  Territory police forces to the delivery of culturally appropriate, customer oriented services to all Australians.

 'Strengthening relations between police, and culturally and linguistically diverse communities is an  important step towards ensuring that the needs of multicultural Australia are met, and that community  harmony continues to be achieved,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

