---
title: "Democrats attack government's shameful action over deportation."
date: "2003-12-22"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Reynolds, Kate"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
  - "Deportation"
  - "Kuwait"
  - "Sudan"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262649
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PJAB6%22
---

 

 Senator Lyn Allison Kate Reynolds  

 Australian Democrats   Australian Democrats 

 Acting Leader Member of the SA Legislative Council 

 22 December 2003                 MEDIA RELEASE                                 03/903 

 

 Democrats Attack Government’s Shameful Action Over Deportation   

 The  Australian  Democrats  have  criticised  the  Federal  Government’s  shameful  treatment  of  a   Kuwaiti  man  in  his  late  twenties  deported  10  days  ago,  only  to  end  up  stranded  in  Tanzania  and   then Johannesburg, with no country able to accept him. 

 Democrats’  Refugee  spokesperson  Kate  Reynolds  MLC  said  Eidreiss  Sneman,  who  was  born  in   Kuwait  to  Sudanese  immigrant  parents  and  has  spent  nearly  three  years  in  detention  in  Australia,   had reportedly now been sent back to Johannesburg. 

 Mr  Sneman  was  flown  by  the  Australian  Government  to  Johannesburg  in  South  Africa,  but  was   refused permission to continue on to Sudan, and instead was sent to Tanzania, where he was thrown  into a game of ‘human hot potato’. 

 “The Federal Government cannot abrogate responsibility for this man. It has rejected his claim for  asylum  and  attempted  to  remove  him  from  Australia  without  securing  the  agreement  of  another   country to accept him. 

 “The Democrats demand that the Government act to ensure Mr Sneman is returned immediately to  Australia.   Because  he  is  ‘stateless’  and  cannot  be  imprisoned  indefinitely  in  Australia,  the   Government has no other option but to release him to live in Australia or provide proper assistance  to find a new and safe country to live in.” 

 Ms Reynolds said, “However you look at it, the fate of this man is in the hands of the Australian  Government. 

 “The  Government  was  willing  to  send  him  away  from  Australian  shores,  without  taking   responsibility for the consequences. 

 “This  disgraceful  and  possibly  illegal  treatment  will  not  be  condoned  by  Australian  courts  or   international human rights bodies. 

 “Situations such as these highlight the secrecy of this Government, which refuses to provide details  of its agreements with the South African Government relating to deportations. 

 “One way or another, the Federal Government is going to have come clean about how this sad and  internationally embarrassing situation came about,” Ms Reynolds concluded. 

 

 

 Media Contact:   0412 637 387   08 8237 9474   

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

