---
title: "Children should not be held in detention centres."
date: "2003-08-25"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Children"
  - "Family Court of Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211257500
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/308A6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Children should not be held in detention centres   

 Senator Brian Harradine today welcomed news that the Family Court had ordered that  five children should be released from a South Australian immigration detention centre.   The Family Court also said that children should not be locked in detention.   

 “Putting children in immigration detention centres is completely unacceptable”, Senator  Harradine said.  “We have to find a solution to this problem which puts the best interests  of children first.”   

 Earlier this month the British chief inspector of prisons, Anne Owers, issued a report in  relation to the detention of asylum seekers in Britain which said that   

 … the detention of children should be an exceptional measure and should not  exceed a very short period - no more than a matter of days.   

 … the welfare and development of children is likely to be compromised by  detention, however humane the provisions, and that will increase the longer  detention is maintained.1   

 “Ironically, the Owers report generated great controversy in Britain when it was  discovered that four children had been held in detention there for over a year.  By contrast,  Australia has many such cases, with this Family Court case dealing with children who  have been held for over two and a half years”, said Senator Harradine. 

 

 “A recent media report (Weekend Australian, 2 August 2003) stated that one of the  children ‘pictured himself in terms of “sadness, grief and disbelief that he could be  perceived as someone bad enough to be incarcerated for such an extensive period”.’  The  boy had harmed himself and suffered self-doubt and disturbed sleeping patterns.   

 “There are almost 120 children in immigration detention in Australia.”   

 

 25 August 2003   

 Senator Brian Harradine, Tel. 03 6234 5122 

 

 1    HM Inspectorate of Prisons, An Inspection of Dungavel Immigration Removal Centre.  October 2002.  The report was released to the public on 14 August 2003. 

  963656

