---
title: "Escapes from Woomera: transcript of doorstop interview, Parliament House."
date: "2003-02-03"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Escape from custody"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "South Australia"
  - "Woomera"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211252694
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C2G86%22
---

  Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS 

 

 Escapes from Woomera  Doorstop interview, Parliament House, 3 February 2003  

 Mr Ruddock: Well, can I background you firstly on what I know has  happened last night.  

 This was clearly a premeditated and very serious incident. The  group of people who have escaped were from what is know as the  'Oscar Compound'. That belies its nature. It's an area in which  detainees who may have been involved in the riots earlier in the  year or late last year and people who present management  difficulties in the detention centre are held.  

 Last night a detention officer - of course the area is monitored  electronically - observed something was happening. Fifteen  detainees were endeavouring to break into the sterile area between  the external perimeter palisade fencing and the compound fencing.  Two vehicles approached. A number of events took place which are  of a very serious character but let me just say that those aiding and  abetting the escape attempted to drive over detention officers as  they were trying to constrain the escape. The report I have read  says that one of the detention officers was attacked around the legs  with a tyre lever. Another was hit in the chest with a similar  implement. 

 As I said, this was premeditated, very deliberate. They came with a  device deliberately fashioned… as a large car jack to prise open the  palisade fencing. They came with items of equipment. They also  came with coverings for their faces so that they could not be  identified and as I say this is not I think the action of well-meaning  people trying to help refugees.  

 The only other matter I would avert to is that the population we  have is relatively small these days. We don't have a large amount of  boat arrivals in detention. I think that in Woomera there are 91 or  there were 91 detainees… all single males in the centre, all single  males…all of whom who have had decisions in relation to refugee  claims if made. There are possibly five I think that have not had  decisions taken because of character concerns, outstanding 

 character concerns. There may be some who are pursuing legal  remedies to try and point to possible formal technical errors in the  decisions in relation to refugee claims made.  

 The population we are dealing with today with no boat arrivals for  over 12 months is clearly a group of people who have been  processed. 

 Question: Mr Ruddock, do you know what category those six fell  into? 

 Mr Ruddock: I don't know the full details, I know that there is  three Iranians, two Afghans, one Iraqi. I know that all of them are  in their 20's, early to late 20's and possibly one 30 year old. 

 Question: Is security at Woomera adequate? Will that be reviewed? 

 Mr Ruddock: Well look, I mean we review these issues always.  With the smaller numbers... the number of people who are involved  in the detention function has been decreasing and it would be  preferable to have them all in one centre. I have foreshadowed that  we were anxious to close the Woomera centre because of the 

 reduced numbers, but we've kept it going because of our concern to  provide an alternative detention model for women and children and  that is at present at Woomera. And we haven't yet been able to 

 include consultations which will enable the development of such a  model in the Port Augusta region and we will look at whether or not  we have to make some compromises in relation to that, but  obviously with reduced numbers we don't expect that we would see  events of this sort. 

 Question: Do you have any details regards condition at this stage? 

 Mr Ruddock: I'm told two detention officers were admitted to  hospital because of the potential for quite serious injuries as a result  of the beatings they received. 

 

