---
title: "Senate extends sympathy and regret for SIEV- X victims."
date: "2003-10-16"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "SIEV X incident"
  - "Senate"
  - "Parliamentary motions"
  - "Visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260312
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K8NA6%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  October 16, 2003                     MEDIA RELEASE                                03/ 743              

 

 Senate Extends Sympathy and Regret for SIEV X  Victims   

 Two years after 353 people seeking asylum in Australia died at sea aboard the boat known as the  SIEV X, the Senate has passed an Australian Democrats’ motion expressing regret and sympathy at  the tragic loss of so many innocent lives.   

 On October 19, 2001 a boat known as the SIEV X, bound for Australia and carrying 421 passengers  and crew, sank.  A total of 353 people, including 146 children, lost their lives.   

 Democrats’ Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the Senate agreed to finally acknowledge and  express “regret and sympathy” over the tragedy, which occurred during the 2001 Federal Election  campaign.   

 Senator Bartlett said the acknowledgement of the tragedy also meant the Government must extend  compassion to those most affected.   

 “A number of those who lost their lives had close family members in Australia who are on  temporary protection visas. Two years on, those people are still living a precarious existence,  unsure of their future,” Senator Bartlett said.   

 “A young mother who lost three children when the boat sank is just one case.  Sondas Ismail was  finally been able to join her husband in Australia after being caught up in Indonesia, and now is  faced with the ridiculous situation whereby they, and their new baby, all have visas which expire at  different times.   

 “How can people recover from such a tragedy when faced with such a lack of compassion?”   

 The Democrats’ motion called on the Immigration Minister to grant those refugees in Australia on  temporary protection visas and who suffered a personal loss through the sinking of SIEV X, a  permanent visa on humanitarian grounds. 

 It also called on the Government to establish an independent judicial inquiry into all aspects of the  People Smuggling Disruption Program operated by the Commonwealth Government and agencies  from 2000. 

 

 

  For interview with Senator Bartlett, please call Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

