---
title: "Labor clouds weakness with more bureaucracy."
date: "2003-12-09"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
  - "Shadow Ministry"
  - "National security"
  - "ALP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262239
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/V74B6%22
---

 Minister for Justice and Customs

 Joint News Release

 Attorney-General The Hon Philip Ruddock MP

 Minister for Justice and Customs Senator the Hon Chris Ellison

 9 December 2003

 Labor clouds weakness with more  bureaucracy 

 The announcement by the Labor Party that it will establish a Department of  Homeland Security shows that the Opposition will use layers of wasteful  bureaucracy to cloak its weakness on border protection and national  security. 

 Mr Latham has already made it clear that he believes terrorists might gain  entry to Australian shores among unauthorised boat arrivals and that  volunteer recreational fishermen should be in the frontline to prevent their  entry. 

 In the Parliament on 10 December 2002, Mr Latham referred to a need for a  coastguard "to fight the terrorists" and that owners of commercial and  recreational vessels "should be the eyes and ears of a nation concerned  about terrorism". 

 If Mr Latham was serious about Labor's approach to these vital national  issues, he would support the excision of islands from our migration zone to  prevent illegal boatpeople trying to enter Australia and give unequivocal  support for mandatory detention. 

 He has the opportunity to support his rhetoric with action by backing the  Government in removing islands from the migration zone, but has failed to  do so. 

 The Opposition Leader has, in the past, made statements that he strongly  supports mandatory detention but is now wanting to water down the  principle and walk away from the policy he says Labor introduced. 

 Instead, Labor plans to duplicate the functions of the Attorney-General with 

 a cynical window-dressing exercise which will bog Australia's anti-terror  efforts down in bureaucratic quicksand. 

 Australia's current national security co-ordination arrangements are working  very well and have been tested by events like the Rugby World Cup. Labor's  plan to set up another government department would be grossly wasteful. 

 There is currently a clear line of direction from the National Security  Committee of Cabinet, the Prime Minister and the Secretary of the  Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet to the Commonwealth's  Departments and agencies and through them to State and Territory  counterparts. 

 Labor's proposal would muddy these arrangements by establishing a "fifth  wheel" whose functions would overlap and conflict with those of the Attorney-General, Minister for Immigration and Minister for Justice and Customs.  

 Under Labor's "streamlined" arrangement, four ministers would deal with the  issues currently covered by three ministers - a recipe for increased  confusion, not more efficiency. 

 Australians deserve to know what policies the Labor Party has in the crucial  areas of border protection and national security. 

 For example, will the Shadow Minister for Customs, Senator Mark Bishop,  commit Labor to 100% x-ray examination of all incoming shipping  containers - a massively expensive policy which would cause international  trade to grind to a halt, and which no other country has put in place? 

 The Howard Government has funded state-of-the-art container examination  x-ray facilities which are part of a strong border protection system  preventing illegal fishing, stopping illegal entrants and  detecting and  preventing the importation of illicit drugs and other dangerous prohibited  items. 

 Australia is clearly focused on and committed to the international fight  against terror and has put in place a tough and effective approach to border  protection. 

 An expensive and wasteful bureaucratic reshuffle would divert valuable  resources and spark dangerous squabbles over responsibilities between  different departments. 

 Media inquiries:          Steve Ingram (Mr Ruddock's office) (02) 9251 9303/(0419) 278 715 Simon Troeth (Sen. Ellison's office) (02) 6277 7260/(0439) 300 335

 

