---
title: "Alexander Downer: Loose with the truth on border security."
date: "2003-11-14"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Kurds"
  - "Melville Island"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Turkey"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261317
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DUWA6%22
---

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs    

 

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: LOOSE WITH THE TRUTH ON  BORDER SECURITY    

 The events on Melville Island last week and the extraordinary sequence of events  that have followed go to the heart of the Howard Government’s breach of truth  and trust with the Australian people.    

 And again Foreign Minister Downer is in the centre of the action.    

 On 9 November, Mr Downer claimed of the 14 Kurds who landed on Melville  Island:    

 “They didn't apply for asylum when they were in contact with Australian  authorities or with the Australians themselves on Melville Island.”    

 But forward the clock a few days and now the People Smuggling Task Force has  confirmed that the 14 Turkish asylum seekers actually did seek asylum.    

 Does the Howard Government tell the truth on anything? Mr Downer said on 12  November that: “The advice I had on Sunday through the talking point from the  Department of Immigration was that they hadn't [sought asylum]…" A key  question that Mr Downer needs to answer is: did he at any point before making  the statement on 9 November that the 14 Kurds had not sought asylum, ask  specifically whether they had sought refuge in Australia or not?    

 The Australian people have been given more versions of what happened on  Melville Island from Downer and Vanstone than they can count on their fingers  and toes.     

 It is breathtaking that there could be further prostitution of the truth on such  matters given the extraordinary revelations of the events that transpired during  the children overboard affair two years ago. 

 

 This is a government that will do anything and say anything to obtain political  advantage.     

 

 

 

 Ends 14 November 200   

 

 Further information: Alister Jordan 0417 605 823 

 

