---
title: "New appointment for Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council."
date: "2003-03-04"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council"
  - "Appointments"
  - "Advisory bodies, Government"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211564525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9DP86%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H19/2003 - 4 March 2003

 New Appointment For Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council

 Prominent Queensland Multicultural Community leader, Mrs Jeannie Mok has been  appointed to serve on the Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council, the Minister for  Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, announced today. 

 Mrs Mok is currently the Managing Director of the Asian Pacific Institute in Queensland and  the Director of the Queensland Multicultural Community Centre. 

 Mr Hardgrave said that Mrs Mok brings extensive experience to the RRAC in migrant  settlement issues as an academic and in her varied work history. 

 'This experience equips her to make a valuable contribution to the Refugee Resettlement  Advisory Council,' he said.

 'Mrs Mok replaces the position left vacant by Ms Michelle My Nguyen who resigned late last  year, after making a significant contribution to the Council, to pursue new business ventures.

 'Mrs Mok's appointment to the RRAC will ensure that Council's advice will continue to  represent the wide views of the community,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 The Council advises the Minister on settlement priorities and on the appropriateness and  adequacy of settlement services. Its work complements the broader work and focus of the  Council for Multicultural Australia.

 'RRAC's work is vital in ensuring that there is community input on policies and programs  affecting refugees and migrants and each Council member brings a variety of personal and  professional expertise, from their experience in working on refugee and migrant issues,' Mr  Hardgrave said.

 Mrs Mok will join nine other members of Council who were appointed for a third term in  November 2001. Other members of the Council are:

 ●     Major General Warren Glenny AO RFD ED (Rtd)

 ●     Dr Mohammed Taha Alsalami

 ●     Mr Paris Aristotle AM

 ●     Ms Carmel Guerra

 ●     Mr Kevin Liston

 ●     Ms Margaret Piper

 ●     Mr Gerald Searle

 ●     Rev Eileen Thomson

 

 ●     Ms Maritsa Eftimiou

 Details of the Council's membership are below.

 REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL  Biographical details of Members:

 Major General Warren Glenny AO RFD ED (Rtd) Major General Warren Glenny AO, Chair of the Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council, is  the former Chief Executive Officer of AUSTCARE. He is a former General Manager with  Coles Myer having commenced with Fosseys in 1968. Major General Glenny also has a  distinguished career in the Army Reserve spanning more than 40 years, commencing as a  cadet with the Royal New South Wales Lancers and retiring in 1994 as Major General  commanding the Reserve 2nd Division. 

 Dr Mohammed Taha Alsalami Dr Alsalami is a prominent leader in Sydney's Muslim community and is also concerned  about human rights abuses in Iraq. He is the Chair of a local Community Refugee  Settlement (CRS) group and Chair of the Human Rights Organisation of Iraq Inc. Dr  Alsalami is also involved in a number of Muslim community and cultural groups in NSW. 

 Mr Paris Aristotle AM Mr Aristotle is the Director of the Victorian Foundation for the Survivors of Torture Inc. He  has been involved in a number of organisations and Government committees dealing with  refugees and issues relating to rehabilitation of torture and trauma survivors. Mr Aristotle is  currently co-convenor of the National Forum of Services for Survivors of Torture and Trauma  and is a part time Commissioner with the Victorian Law Reform Commission. In 2002 he  was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for his work with refugees and survivors  of torture.

 Ms Maritsa Eftimiou Ms Eftimiou is a member of the Migration Review Tribunal. She was formerly a legal  practitioner specialising in refugee law. She has extensive experience in teaching  immigration and refugee law at the University of New South Wales and the University of  Technology Sydney. Ms Eftimiou is a member of the Consumer Trades and Tenancy  Tribunal. She has been involved with community-based legal centres and was a legal  advisor for the Gay and Lesbian Immigration Task Force. 

 Ms Carmel Guerra Ms Guerra is the Director of the Centre for Multicultural Youth Issues, Victoria. Ms Guerra  has been a youth worker for over 15 years, with extensive experience in program delivery  and policy development with ethnic communities and young people, including work with both  newly arrived refugee groups and established communities. She is currently involved in a  number of activities and committees that address migrant and refugee youth issues.

 Mr Kevin Liston Mr Liston has been the Director of the Australian Refugee Association since 1983. He is also  currently the Managing Director of ARA Jobs (Job Network provider and Registered Training  Organisation). He has over 20 years experience in refugee settlement in South Australia and  has been extensively involved in refugee organisations including the Survivors of Torture  and Trauma Assistance and Rehabilitation Service, SA Refugee Week Committee, SA  Council of Churches' Refugee and Migrant Issues Committee and the Refugee Council of  Australia. Mr Liston is also a member of COSMIC, the South Australian State Settlement 

 Planning Committee.

 Ms Margaret Piper Ms Piper has been the Executive Director of the Refugee Council of Australia, since 1991.  Ms Piper is also a board member of the Asylum Seekers Centre and the Refugee Advice  and Casework Service. She was a founding member of the Australian National Consultative  Committee on Refugee Women. She has also travelled extensively, visiting many countries  of first asylum and refugee source countries in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Latin  America. 

 Mr Gerald Searle Mr Searle is the former Director of the WA Catholic Migrant Centre. He has been extensively  involved in WA refugee and community based organisations. Mr Searle is the founding  member the Refugee Council of WA, Chair of the WA Refugee Week Committee and a  former member of both the WA Settlement Planning Committee and the Advisory Committee  to the Australian Bishops Conference on Migrant and Refugee Interests.

 Reverend Eileen Thomson Reverend Thomson is the former Director of Anglicare Western Region in Queensland. She  has had extensive experience in community issues through her role with Anglicare, her work  with the Refugee Week Committee (AUSTCARE) and as the Chaplain for the University of  Southern Queensland.

 Mrs Jeannie Mok Mrs Mok is the Director of the Queensland Multicultural Community Centre and the  Foundation Principal/Managing Director of the Asian Pacific Institute. She migrated to  Australia as a business migrant in 1981 and established two companies and has run several  businesses. She previously lectured in the English Department at the University of Malaya  for eight years. Mrs Mok is a member of several committees including the Queensland  Multicultural Women's Advisory Committee to the Premier, the Community Learning/Skilling  Committee (Department of Employment/Training Board) and the Queensland Royal  Children's Hospital Board.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

