---
title: "New contracts for migrant English language tuition in Sydney."
date: "2003-08-07"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)"
  - "Sydney"
  - "Australian English"
  - "Language education"
  - "Migration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211256377
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GM3A6%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H107/2003 - 7 August 2003

 

 New Contracts for Migrant English Language Tuition in Sydney

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today launched  contracts that will provide English language tuition to over 6,000 migrants and refugees in  western and south western Sydney over the next five years. 

 'This is a significant investment by the Australian Government in ensuring that new arrivals  have every opportunity to learn our national language and so take the first and most  important step towards full participation in Australian society,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 The contracts, between the Australian Government and the acl Consortium, are worth more  than $100 million over five years.

 The contracts were won by acl Pty Ltd, in partnership with Macquarie Community College,  the University of Western Sydney English Language Centre, KU Children's Services and  Mission Australia.

 'The acl consortium has been associated with Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)  delivery since the introduction of tendering in 1998, and has again been successful in  winning the contracts for these regions,' said Mr Hardgrave.

 'Local knowledge and experience, together with wide consultation with AMEP clients and  community networks, ensures acl Pty Ltd provides educational and settlement programs  tailored to the needs of newly arrived migrants.'

 Across Australia, the new contracts that began in each state and territory on 1 July, will help  more than 100,000 new arrivals on their journey to successful settlement in Australia.

 'The contracts will help maintain AMEP's vital nation-building role as a facilitator of  community harmony and cohesion,' Mr Hardgrave said. 

 'The contracts enable English language tuition to be delivered in a variety of modes,  including in classroom and community based settings, through distance learning and a  Home Tutor Scheme.

 'This commitment will ensure that wherever AMEP clients are, and whatever their  circumstances and learning preferences, they will be able to access tuition and settlement  support which is most appropriate to their needs.

 'Nationally, the Australian Government has allocated more than $500 million over the next  five years to the AMEP, including $114 million this financial year.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

