---
title: "Address to the ACTU Congress on the Cole Royal Commission."
date: "2003-08-20"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKPLACE RELATIONS"
subjects:
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
  - "Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry"
  - "Building industry"
  - "ABBOTT, Tony, MP"
  - "Tax evasion"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211257292
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QG6A6%22
---

 

 FOR MEDIA   

 CRAIG EMERSON  Member for Rankin 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKPLACE RELATIONS 

 20 August 2003 

 

 ADDRESS TO THE ACTU CONGRESS ON THE COLE ROYAL COMMISSION  

 

 When the Howard Government is in deep political strife it creates a diversion.    

 Just ask the asylum seekers who the Government falsely and maliciously claimed had  thrown their children overboard.   

 So it was in 2001, when petrol prices had surged past $1.00 a litre, the GST was  proving to be anything but Peter Costello’s ‘streamlined new tax system for a new  century’, Liberal Party president Shane Stone had described the Government as ‘mean  and tricky’ and ‘out of touch’ and Peter Reith was disappearing down the gurgler  through his uniquely Liberal approach to the use of telecards.     

 Labor had won the Western Australian and Queensland elections and Labor’s Leonie  Short had captured the Liberal jewel in the Queensland crown - the blue ribbon seat  of Ryan.   

 Already that mad right-wing ideologue, Tony Abbott, had been frothing at the mouth  in the parliament, spraying Labor MPs with vitriol about our links with the trade  union movement.   

 And so was resurrected the idea of returning to the old Tory formula of union bashing  as the Government’s desperately needed diversion.   

 But the Government’s own polling revealed the public had rightly judged it to be  highly partisan in its involvement in the MUA dispute.   

 Some subtlety was needed.   

 But how to be subtle and partisan at the same time?     

 Answer: a Royal Commission into unions, but one that is heavily biased - a Royal  Commission into the building industry with skewed terms of reference, a skewed  commission with skewed inquiry processes.   

 But the last time a Federal Tory Government tried to smear the labour movement  through a Royal Commission was when it set up the Costigan Royal Commission into  the Painters and Dockers Union.   

 That Royal Commission blew up in the Fraser Government’s face - exposing rampant  tax evasion through the notorious Bottom of the Harbour schemes: schemes in which  prominent Liberals were involved up to their snorkels.   

 The then Treasurer John Howard had to be dragged kicking and screaming into the  parliament to legislate against these blatant, contrived bottom of the harbour schemes.     

 He did so only after Treasury had compiled a series of briefing notes as thick as a  telephone book, begging him to stop the rorts.   

 Now as Prime Minister, John Howard had learned from the Royal Commission that  blew up in the Government’s face 25 years ago.   

 He didn’t want a Royal Commission delving deeply into tax scams in the building  industry.  Who knows which donors to the Liberal Party might be implicated?   

 So this Royal Commission needed to focus squarely on the activities of building  unions - brushing lightly over tax evasion and the avoidance of employee entitlement  obligations through phoenix companies.     

 And the Government did not want to alarm employers, so Tony Abbott wrote a letter  of comfort, providing an assurance that the Commission was ‘not enquiring into any  particular company’ and that the focus of the inquiry would be on the unions.   

 This same zealot authorised a payment to the Office of the Employment Advocate  (OEA) on behalf of two people who gave evidence against the CFMEU in Federal  Court proceedings, whose conduct the Court described as “reprehensible” and  “deceitful”.   

 So is it any wonder that the Commission did not find one instance of tax evasion in  the industry?   

 Is it any wonder that in an industry that averages one workplace fatality a week, the  Cole Royal Commission found only two breaches of occupational health and safety  by employers Australia-wide?   

 In its warm embrace of crony capitalism - and its constitutional incapacity to tell the  truth most recently on display in Manildra-gate - the Howard Government does not  want to shine a light on the tax evasion and shonky practices of phoenix companies.   

 It spent $60 million of taxpayers’ money on a politically-motivated Royal  Commission, three times the amount it spent on the collapse of insurance giant HIH. 

 

 And it wants to make share options - the favoured device for bloating executive  salaries - tax deductible so that the working men and women of Australia have an  opportunity to contribute to the obscene salary packages on offer.   

 It is a government happy to call on taxpayers to help fund the massive redundancy  packages of failed corporate executives but which refuses to guarantee the  entitlements of employees made redundant from corporate failures - unless, of course,  they are the employees of the Prime Minister’s brother.   

 The only way to achieve genuine change is through co operative reforms involving  state governments, construction industry employers, relevant unions, and the ACTU.   

 A cooperative reform package has a much greater chance of success than Tony  Abbott’s conflict-ridden approach.   

 But he doesn’t want a successful outcome for the industry.     

 To prove himself to his boss as a right-wing ideologue and a viable candidate for the  leadership from Sydney, Tony Abbott’s political aspirations are best served by a  waterfront style dispute with the building unions.   

 Never mind the cost to the construction industry.    

 Labor will oppose Tony Abbott’s provocative, one-sided legislation scheduled for  parliament next month, because we see no fairness in singling out workers in one  industry for a harsh and oppressive set of rules that go well beyond what applies to the  rest of the workforce.   

 Australians have every reason to fear that the Howard Government has in mind not a  watch dog but an attack dog - a coercive regulator, programmed with this  Government’s ideological values, intruding on the scene to inflame disputes.     

 Australians want the Government to provide the means to settle industrial disputes so  that work can continue, not to impede their resolution and create yet more conflict.   

 Like unions, Labor will not tolerate corruption, extortion or criminal behaviour.     

 But nor will we allow Tony Abbott to assault the legitimate rights of building unions  to protect and advance the wages, conditions and safety of their members.   

 And nor will we allow Tony Abbott to use his construction industry legislation as a  beach head for his cherished Second Wave of legislation to strip away the remaining  protections for working Australians and their right to bargain collectively.   

 Last week we defeated Abbott’s attempts to take over and then weaken the States’  unfair dismissal laws.   

 Contact: Craig Emerson 0418 781 386 

 I said when Simon Crean appointed me to this portfolio that if Tony Abbott sponsored  legislation it would almost certainly be anti-worker and for that reason we would  oppose it.   

 

 True to form, Mr Abbott has 12 pieces of legislation before the parliament, a Dirty  Dozen bills, all of them anti-worker.  And Labor will oppose them all.   

 Labor is proud of its links with the trade union movement.   

 Labor proudly recognises the trade union movement as the lifeblood of the Party.   

 We will repel Tony Abbott’s relentless attacks on the wages and conditions of  working Australians.   

 And with you, the great Australian trade union movement, we will develop and  implement policies to advance the interests of the millions of working Australians  whose life chances depend so critically on the election of a Labor Government. 

 

 

 

 

