---
title: "The mind and mood of Australia (just a little unplugged). Paper presented to the Australian Institute of Company Directors, 29 May 2003"
date: "2003-05-29"
creators:
  - "Levine, MicheleRoy Morgan Research"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Iraq War"
  - "Social values"
  - "Governor General"
  - "Corporate governance"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "Opinion surveys"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211562929
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NES96%22
---

  Roy Morgan Research Pty. Ltd. 

  Quality System Certified to AS/NZS IS0 9001  A.B N 91 007 092 944 

  Ref [x:\admin\exective\ltrml\paperspeechbnood & mind of ausc.doc;ll 

  h in â¬ rali 

  (just a little unplugged) 

  Australian Institute of Company Directors 

  Presented by 

  Michele Levine, Chief Executive  Roy Morgan Research Pty Ltd  Melbourne, Australia 

  May 29,2003 

  On Budget night May 2001, with support for the L-NP Government at a record low, Consumer  Confidence low, real unemployment high, the Australian dollar low, and the economy stalled  on the GST, Gary Morgan and I presented a paper to CEDA and PricewaterhouseCoopers .  The paper was, in hindsight, prophetically entitled, "Only Real Leadership Or A Crisis Can  Save The L-NP Coalition". 

  Since then we have seen: 

  . 

  . 

  Ansett collapse 

  Tampa - The asylum seeker incident in August 2001 

  September 11, 2001 - The terrorist attack on the World Trade Centre in New York 

  Children overboard claims - Reports that asylum seekers were throwing their children  overboard, followed by questions on the accuracy of the reports. Navy admission that no  children had gone overboard until the boat had sunk (2 days before the election) and  questions over whether and when the Government had known this. 

  . The L-NP re-elected to Government  . Enron collapse  . First criticism of the Governor-General for his handling of child sex offences in his time as Archbishop in Brisbane Ansett I1 collapse Children overboard report - Independent assessor to the Senate Select Committee on the children overboard incident 41 1 Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, G.P.O. Box 2282U, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia Tel: (03) 9629 6888 Fax: (03) 9629 1250 (03) 9224 5387 Email: melbourne@roymorgan.com Website: www.roymorgan.com Oflices also in: Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, Canberra, London, Auckland and USA 

  Bali bombing 

  War inIraq 

  Debate on US military attack on Iraq, with or without UN sanction 

  Pan Pharmaceuticals stripped of its license 

  AMP announcements re split of UK and Australian business; problems in the UK and major  drop in the AMP share price 

  The resignation of the Governor-General m 

  Two-party Preferred Vote 

  The L-NP is still in Government today. So what is the mood of the people - my working title  and the answer to that question is "just a little unplugged". 

  We are no longer really "plugged in" - linked into an understandable, reasonable, and  predictable corporate reality - everything is not in good order with everything very much as it  should be. 

  But nor are we completely "unplugged", so we can step back and understand what's going on -  where it all fits, and have a rational well-considered view. 

  We're "just a little unplugged". 

  2 

  Our research is showing heightened levels of uncertainty and fear, and we're not talking fear  of having to pay more tax or fear of unemployment. In fact, Roy Morgan Consumer  Confidence - which measures people's expectations of their own financial situation and the  Australian economy - is high. Roy Morgan Consumer Confidence is running at 127 - the  highest since July 1994. 

  No, the fear and uncertainty relates to world unrest. Towards the end of 2002,76% of  Australians were concerned that 2003 would be a year of global unrest (www.rovmorgan.com  Morgan Poll Finding No. 3585). 

  There is also a concern voiced among the people following the dramatic events surrounding  HIH, AMP, and Pan Pharmaceuticals, that there are likely to be more, not less, of these  problems in the near future (58% said more, 34% said lower, 8% couldn't say). 

  At the same time, and probably inextricably intertwined with this heightened insecurity is a loss  of confidence in most fundamental institutions: 

  . The Church - less than half the Australian population (48%) now believe Ministers of Religion have high ethics; (www.rovmorgan.com Morgan Poll Finding No. 358 1) . Only 16% rate politicians as high on honesty and ethics. It is the services and professions that Australians are increasingly rating as high for honesty and ethics; . Controversy surrounding Australia's Governor-General; a United Nations - the United Nations has been seriously damaged by the Iraq situation according to most Australians (69%), and indeed a majority of people around the world. Australians' sense that we can believe what we hear is at a very low ebb. M I  The dot.com rise and fall is still within living memory. The collapses of companies that looked indestructible, eg Enron, Worldcom, Arthur Anderson, HIH, Ansett, One-Tel, and now AMP's loss of over 50% of its value; Misinformation from the highest levels of Government, eg the "children overboard" charade, played out just before the last election; and . Most recently, the rescue of the young US soldier, Jessica Lynch, from hospital in Baghdad - Hollywood style with the cameras rolling. Whether we've succumbed or not to watching Channel Ten's "Big Brother" or "The Matrix", we all know George Orwell's "Big Brother'' in 1984, or we know Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World". The uniting theme is, of course, that "aZE is not as it seems - you can't beEieve what you see or what you are told". 3 

  But perhaps we have forgotten the key of 1984 - words don't mean what we think they mean.  We are now living with "newspeak", embedded reality. 

  Only 18% of Australians rate TV Reporters as high on honesty and ethics. Less than 10% of  Australians rate Newspaper Journalists as high on honesty and ethics. (www.roynorgan.com  Morgan Poll Finding No. 3581). 

  In 1998, I presented a paper to CEDA entitled, "The Mood of the People and the Election -  Listen CarefuZly". In 1998, I think the issue was "listening" - or the need to listen. In the  aftermath of the June 1998 Queensland election in which Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party  was recognised as a growing force, there was much talk of "listening to the people". 

  I pointed out that One Nation existed in 1998 because those who had lost, or feared loss, had no  mechanism by which they could be heard. 

  "The buggers won't listen to me. You can ring up the radio stations and the politicians  won't listen. (You can) write to parliamentarians and they don't reply. I feel left out,  unlistened to and ostracised, 'I said a Brisbane man in his late fifties.  "The Mood of the People - Listen Carefully" 

  Today, there is much "listening activity" - we have institutionalised "listening" - politicians  listen to their electorates, companies listen to their customers, some Company Boards listen to  their shareholders - but do they respond to them? In 1999, Steve Bracks listened to and  responded to the Victorian electorate and is now Premier. Do most politicians listen and  respond? Do Company Board members listen to their shareholders, understand them, really  seek to make sense of what they are saying, take responsibility, and ask the questions their  shareholders want them, and need them, to ask? 

  While it is relatively easy to listen, if we really want to understand and make sense of what  people have to say, and be able to communicate with them and respond responsibly to them, we  need to see the world from their perspective. 

  Today, people still do not feel they have a voice that they can make heard, they are more  uncertain and fearful, they have experienced a loss of confidence in the fundamental  institutions that they could normally trust, and they feel they can't believe what they are told. 

  At the heart of the Roy Morgan Research business is asking questions, recording and analysing  the answers. For more than sixty years, with over 4 million interviews, more than 10,000  focussed discussion groups and in-depth interviews, Roy Morgan Research has been  representing the views of Australians to Australians. This, of course, is at the heart of what  Roy Morgan (the man) set out to do in the early 1940s. 

  4 

  “I have spent the best part of my life measuring public opinion. I believe people’s  views matter and that measuring public opinion is extremely important. ‘I  Roy Morgan 

  Just before he died in 1985, Roy Morgan was asked why measuring public opinion was  important. 

  His answer, which I agree with, was in three parts as follows: 

  Firstly, “To stop journalists from claiming to be able to write ‘The public  demands, etc., ’ when they don’t know what public opinion is on that particular  subject. 

  Secondly, to identify the real question - the central ‘core’ of a problem. “This  forces people to face the problem. Public opinion polls not only do this, but also  make sure that (by publication) the public and journalists know the problem and  the public’s attitudes towards the issue (as percentages). This forces our leaders 

  and the public to recognise the real problem and hopefully consider it.” 

  Thirdly, “Publishing several times a year* reasonably accurate percentages for  voting intention. This created a continuous ‘election atmosphere ’, rather than a  phoney atmosphere created by so called ‘leaders’ and journalists. ” 

  I feel very fortunate to be able to “plug out” of the world of media, and respond to the mind and  mood of Australian people. “A little unplugged” is a language closer to reality these days when  you have access to the Roy Morgan Information System. 

  I would like to share with you what we’ve learned about how Australians are responding to  some of the big issues today - the War in Iraq, the  overn nor-~eneral, corporate collapses 

  First, the war. 

  In the lead up to the US military attack in Iraq - Australia was deeply divided on the issue  (www.rovmorgan.com Article No. 36, Finding No. 3615 and Finding No. 3616). 

  Now that the military campaign in Iraq is over and the regime of Saddam Hussein destroyed,  many questions still remain for Australians, and indeed, people all over the world. Is the world  now a safer place or more dangerous? Is there now greater stability in the Middle East or less?  Has the threat of terrorism been reduced? What about the reconstruction of Iraq - who should  be involved and who should pay for Iraq’s reconstruction? What has been the effect on the  image of the United Nations and indeed the United States following the War in Iraq? What  will be the impact in the Middle East? 

  A Roy Morgan and Gallup ~ternational poll, conducted in 45 countries among more than  35,000 people, found more Australians fear that the world is a more dangerous place (49%) 

  * Today, the Morgan Poll asks voting intention each week. 

  5 

  than believe it is a safer place (34%) as a result of the War in Iraq - and there is concern about  increased terrorism. Few believe the threat of terrorism has been significantly reduced by the  War in Iraq (24%) - most say it has not (69%), (7% can't say) www.rovmorgan.com Morgan Poll  Finding No. 3627. 

  Australia's views about the US, and our relationship with the US, are complex and interesting. 

  When asked about the impact of American foreign policy on Australia - more Australians see it  as negative than positive (43% vs 3 1 %). This puts Australia on middle ground globally. For  instance, at one extreme, 70% of people in Turkey say the US foreign policy has had a negative  effect, and at the other extreme, more than 80% of people in Kosovo and Albania say US  foreign policy has a positive effect on their economies. 

  While a majority of Australians (62%) agree with the US that military action in Iraq was  justified, the same level majority (63%) believe the US is too keen to use military force in other  countries. This is the conflict. 

  In most countries surveyed, the US military action in Iraq had a more negative than positive  effect on people's attitude to the US. And again, already mentioned, a majority of Australians  (69%) believe that the United Nations has been seriously damaged by recent events. 

  Somehow we are given the impression that the people are a somewhat amorphous "mass" out  there - people who are unlike "us", but otherwise relatively indistinguishable from each other -  and who shift en masse as the 60-ish percent majority. 

  The reality is there is no such reality - no 60-ish percent majority that moves en masse. There  are all sorts of people, in different circumstances, with different backgrounds, beliefs and  values. They have very different ways of viewing the world, and everything that goes on in the  world. Their reality is their own reality. 

  People make choices, and seek to understand the world and the war in very different ways. The  majority who believed the war justified were predominantly older, male, and L-NP voters;  while those who believed the US too ready to go to war were more likely to be women,  younger, students and Australian Democrat or Green voters. Less than one in three Australians  both believed the war was justified, and at the same time believed the US to be too ready to use 

  military force. 

  In Australia, when people were asked whether the US military action had had an effect on their  attitude to the US, most said "no". For those for whom it had an effect, the effect was more  likely to be a negative one. 48% said that it had "no effect", 18% a "positive" effect and 31% a  "negative" effect. 

  6 

  On the issue of the UN Roy Morgan Research found that beyond the belief that the UN should  have supported military action (61%), was the view espoused by some that the UN’s  inaction has devalued them. Words like “irrelevant” and “toothless” were used. 

  “They’re just impotent if they do nothing ”.  “Because I think that’s their role, they were not prepared to act so that makes them  irrelevant ”.  “Because the UN tends to be toothless”. 

  “lf the United Nations can’t do it who can? The United Nations is pretty weak and if it 

  can’t do what it’s supposed to, get rid of it, disband it completely”.  “They are a spineless body and they have no good in this world”. 

  There was also a view expressed that a sign of strength and solidarity from the UN would  have prevented the war, and especially if France and Germany had come in behind the move.  This view is aligned to the more general view that a diplomatic solution would have been better  than a military one. 

  “If they had all been in agreement, they may not have gotten to this stage”. 

  “lf they were seen to have been behind it, it may not have gotten to the point it is now”. 

  “I think that if the UN had acted we might not be in the mess we are now in”. 

  “lf the Coalition stood up there would have been disarmament”. 

  www.royrnorgan.com Roy Morgan International Article No. 36 

  The War in Iraq has raised more questions for Australians about how much we can really  believe what we see and hear. 

  Australians - a little more cynical than their US counterparts - are still left with some  unanswered questions. Why did there have to be a war? We’ve been told there was proof that  Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction; that the world would be a safer place; there  would be less threat of terrorism; that Iraq was somehow related to the September 11 terrorist  attack on the World Trade Centre in New York by Bin Laden’s Al-Qaeda network. The reasons  keep changing and therefore we can’t trust anything. 

  I’m reminded of George Orwell’s quote: 

  “Who controls the present controls the past” 

  Nineteen Eighty Four from George Orwell (1949) 

  Amidst all these unanswered questions, and half-truth “newspeak” answers, Australians  appeared, before the war, to have dealt with the conflicting issues, and formed their views on  the war - based on fundamental values. 

  7 

  There should be no war under any circumstances. There can be war only if the UN sanctions it.  There can be war if it is the US will. 

  The recent rescue of Jessica Lynch was the final blow for gullibility - even those who had  never questioned what they read, saw, or heard, had to be a little non-plussed. 

  When we see this representation of our Prime Minister in the Mercury, a Tasmanian daily  paper, it shows the sorts of concerns Australians are living with. 

  As all  of this has played out Prime Minister Howard's popularity has gone from strength to  strength. The most recent Morgan Poll on leadership shows approval of the way John Howard  is doing his job is at a high 65% (May 20-22,2003) - this is up 9% since March 24-25,2003 -  after one week of War in Iraq when Mr Howard's approval was 56%, and substantially higher  than the 52% approval Mr Howard received in September 15-17,2002, amidst high levels of  debate over whether Australia should support US President George W Bush's proposed military  action against Iraq. ( w w w . ~ o y i n o ~ ~ a n . ~ o m  Morgan Poll Finding Nos. 3633,3557 and 3613). 

  8 

  President Bush's approval has also soared (71%)' as has that of Prime Minister Blair in the UK  (47%)2. 

  Australian electors' support of Mr Howard and his L-NP Government has faltered each time a  lie, or the possibility of a lie, misinformation, or a cover-up, has been alleged. But it is  important to see the situation in context - leaders always gain support in times of war. When  there is a war Australians stand behind our national leader -just as it appeared many Iraqis  stood behind Saddam Hussein until the end. 

  However, attitude towards "US Democracy" in Iraq will only be known when properly  conducted independent public opinion polls can be regularly undertaken . We have been  approached to conduct public opinion polls in Iraq but it is still too dangerous. 

  The Governor-General 

  For over a year, the majority of Australians (66%) have believed Dr Hollingworth not suitable  to be Governor-General (only 22% said he was, and 12% couldn't say); and the majority (63%)  said he should have resigned (www.roymorrran.com Morgan Poll Finding No. 3634). 

  On Sunday, May 25, Dr Hollingworth resigned as Governor-General of Australia. 

  But this is the end point - how did it get to this? 

  Before looking at how the Australian people viewed the Governor-General and the associated  controversy, I'd like to suggest the thought that the Governor-General is the ultimate  non-executive director. 

  With that thought in mind, we may all listen just a little more carefully to what the people  think. 

  Roy Morgan Research's qualitative research uncovered deeply held concerns about the issue of  the Governor-General.  Many of those who believed Dr Peter Hollingworth to be unsuitable voiced the obvious  reasons: 

  - 

  - 

  - 

  his inaction as Archbishop in Queensland;  the rape allegations (lesser impact and less belief);  the Church and State issue. 

  ABC News April 27-30,2003  MORI April 2003 

  9 

  However, there were more fundamental problems - problems associated with the way Dr  Hollingworth handled the situation, which gave Australians a window through which to view  Dr Peter Hollingworth, the person, and his values. 

  On the fundamental underlying values dimensions, the Governor-General was seen to be: 

  1. 

  2. 

  3. 

  4. 

  5. 

  6. 

  Individualism - Self-centred rather than interested in the nation. The Governor-General  was seen to have the "I" disease. He made the wrong choice putting the Church over the  Children; and made another wrong choice in not resigning for so long - putting his own  position ahead of the good of the nation and the dignity of the position of Governor-  General. 

  uality expectations - The quality of his judgement and therefore his leadership. The  Governor-General did not meet our quality expectations. In the eyes of Australians, he  doesn't compare favourably with other Governor-Generals, eg Sir William Deane. He did  not deliver on Australia's quality expectations for honesty, ethics, and moral and ethical  leadership of the highest quality. He's proven himself stubborn, and not open to reasoning.  The Governor-General was perceived as seeing himself as quality, above that of the  population - there was a Tall Poppy problem. 

  Value expectations - This Governor-General made people question the 'waste of money' -  value for money provided by the Governor-General and how he got the job - for over  $360,000 per annum and a life pension of $180,000 a year, couldn't we have got a better  person? 

  Life satisfaction - The Governor-General was seen as selfish, arrogant, aristocracy. "He  just doesn't show human empathy". Undignified, aloof and lacking understanding. "Need  to feel more secure, and happy with the person in the role." 

  GonservatisdInnovation - Australians expect tradition from the Governor-General -  recognising the role as representing the Queen, and as a balancing/final review. However,  the Governor-General was seen as extremely cautious/traditional - to the point of being "out  of touch with what goes on - living in the old world, still has the attitude - children should  be seen and not heard". 

  In terms of innovation, the Republic vs Monarchy issue emerged again, in relation to Dr  Hollingworth being seen as not significant, not doing a real job; Australians want someone  to be Head of State. 

  Progressive - As one respondent put it, "the Governor-General should be like a conscience  asking the question, what is being done about the poor or the environment". On the social  equity dimension, Dr Hollingworth was recalled for his good work at the Brotherhood of St  Lawrence, and thus seen as progressive by those who were aware of this background. 

  10 

  However, his demeanour and style gave nothing away to those "not in the know" about his  social equity values and views. Dr Hollingworth was not seen to be "understanding" so  couldn't be progressive. 

  He was seen to be run by spin doctors. When it became public that Prime Minister Howard  knew six months earlier about the rape allegation, and the secret suppression order, that was  the end. 

  Corporate Australia 

  In the Corporate arena, it is the collapses and the unfair payouts to failed senior executives that  appear to be top of mind for Australia. 

  The companies Australians are most likely to recall seeing or hearing about are the embattled  AMP (37%), Pan Pharmaceuticals (32%) and HIH (14%). These are all ahead of the majors  like Telstra and BHP Billiton (lo%), Dick Smith (9%), Coles Myer (7%), Arnotts (6%),  Holden and Qantas (5%), and Commonwealth Bank (4%) (www.rovinorgan.com Morgan Poll  Finding No. TBA). 

  "Which companies, if any, can you recall seeing or hearing  anything about recently?" 

  AMP 

  Pan Pharmaceuticals 

  HIH 

  Telstra 

  BHP Billiton 

  Dick Smith 

  Coles Myer 

  Arnotts 

  Holden 

  Qantas 

  Commonwealth Bank 

  0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 

  When specifically asked about AMP, 78% recalled seeing or hearing something about the  company recently. Most (70%) were aware that over the last few years AMP has had major  difficulties in the UK, which have seen its share price fall by more than 50%. 

  When specifically asked about HIH, 60% recalled seeing or hearing something about it  recently. Most (75%) were aware of the Royal Commission into the $5.3 billion collapse of  HIH Insurance, and that the primary reasons for the collapse were mismanagement and a  failure to provide properly for claims, as well as inadequately responding to pressure in the  international industry. 

  11 

  Almost every Australian (94%) had seen or heard about Pan Pharmaceuticals recently. Most  (86%) were aware of the recall by the Therapeutic Goods Administration of all vitamin and  herbal supplements manufactured by Pan Pharmaceuticals after an investigation uncovered  substitution of ingredients, manipulated test results and substandard manufacturing processes. 

  I I AMP Pan Pharmaceuticals I Issue awareness Over the last few years, AMP has had major difficulties in the UK, which have seen its share price fall more than 50%. Before today were you aware of this? In mid-April, the Royal Commission into the $5.3 billion collapse of HIH Insurance in March 2001 was released. It found that the primary reasons for the collapse were mismanagement and a failure to provide properly for claims, as well as inadequately responding to pressure in the international insurance industry. Before today were you aware of this? In late April, the Therapeutic Goods Administration recalled all vitamin and herbal supplements manufactured by Pan Pharmaceuticals after an investigation uncovered substitution of ingredients, manipulated test results and substandard manufacturing processes. Before today were you aware of this? 70% 75% 86% Looking first at AMP. Roy Morgan Qualitative Research identified serious concerns about AMP and their corporate responsibility. There were concerns voiced about the size of the shareholder losses and superannuation losses, described as people's life savings, and for many, it was their own superannuation or someone in their family: "The shareholders have lost a lot of money. 'I "It's hurt a lot of Australians who have shares." "I have relatives with superannuation with AMP, would not want to see them lose it." "People with shares will lose their money." "My parents had shares with AMP." "My super is there." The impact on the Australian economy and job losses was also mentioned: "Not good for Australia. "Concerned to protect the future of Australia, seeing as they're such a large company." "They were one of Australia's largest companies - we are losing shares in the Australian "There will be a lot of job losses." stock market." Also, the broader issue of the impact on the insurance everywhere and the domino effect on other companies: "The whole of the insurance industry, sporting places and clubs and everything is going under. Doctors are not delivering babies because of the insurance factor. 'I 12 

  However, the real issues emerged in relation to AMP's corporate responsibility - poor  management combined with excessive payouts and lack of accountability: 

  "Payouts have been exhorbitant. "  "Executives get paid and were not accountable. 'I  "They're still paying o f  their CEOs. "  "It's the lifestyle they're living that annoys you."  "Too much payout for the people high up."  "There should be an inquiry into the share price loss."  "Accountability f o r  their money lost."  "Poor management., .. No accountability."  "Their strategy f o r  the UK was clearly misjudged."  "Poor management - they get paid so much and do such a poor job."  "How can a CEO who gets paid that much make so many bad decisions."  "Corporate mismanagement.  "Failure of management to predict what was going to happen."  "Their inability to identify the UK pension and life industry problems of long standing." 

  Related to these was criticism of the lack of control by the Board, abrogation of their  responsibility: 

  "Inability of the Board to control their CEOs, and bring their packages down. ' I   "Just the complete abrogation of responsibility by the Board."  "The failure of accountability by the previous and current Directors." 

  and poor disclosure: 

  "That they allowed it to happen without letting anyone know. I'  "That they were not fully disclosed.  "They've been getting away with things for too long, they're not honest with their investors."  "It all seemed underhanded.  "They let it go too far before letting shareholders know." 

  "Less than open about telling the shareholders about their money."  ';1MP was always a company that was trusted - it's a shock to know it's not trustworthy." 

  For HIH, the issues were similar, but there was the added concern over the broad reaching  impact on other industries and activities of the "insurance" collapse. 

  13 

  There was also greater blame and anger over the mismanagement, cover-up, and failure or  inability of the relevant bodies to act (APRA, ASIC, and governmental control generally). 

  "The Directors are untouchable.  "The executives don't seem to be harmed by it - they walk away. 'I  "Dishonesty of the people in charge of the company and they legally get away with it."  "Corporate governance irregularities, lack of regulatory control, general arrogance of  senior business representations." 

  "It looks as though the main participant or causes will probably only be prosecuted on a 

  "The fact that this sort of thing goes on, and more companies are being very smart and 

  "The Government did nothing."  "The significance of how it can go so long, trading virtually in liquidation."  "Inability of the Government and the auditors to identify the problems."  "The fact that it could happen without detection by the appropriate authorities."  "Lack of regulators' control."  "There's not enough governmental control, it should have been picked up - something 

  diabolically wrong - before it happens - the watchdog is to blame."  "Inadequate support from APKA - should have picked it up earlier."  "Allowed to progress so far without Securities Commission intervention. 'I 

  civil basis rather than a criminal basis." 

  getting away with it." 

  For Pan Pharmaceuticals - there was the additional loss of faith because this corporate  mismanagement was related to the health of Australians: 

  "It takes your faith out of anything really" 

  And to get back to some hard numbers - when asked "Overall in the next few years would you  expect to see more or less problems like these with Australian companies", 58% of Australians  said more, 34% said less, and 8% couldn't say. 

  So what does all this mean - and especially what does it all mean for Non-Executive  Directors? 

  - Non-Executive Directors are people 

  - Non-Executive Directors are investors 

  - Non-Executive Directors are voters 

  As well as participating and experiencing events and situations, Non-Executive Directors are  expected to govern them - to be responsible for them. 

  14 

  How do we do it? Well, the Brave New World controller model, and the 1984 "thought  control" model haven't worked. Perhaps if there had been no corporate collapses, if the  weapons of mass destruction had been found.. ... but there were and they weren't. 

  So, what is the real answer? What do we have to do to restore faith in Corporate Australia?  Politicians are past it (Australians' expectations are so low now), regulators are not really on the  radar for most Australians, but 60% of Australians think the Heads of many large companies  can offer better leadership for the future than many of today's political leaders'. 

  I. Give people a little "unplugged reality" - somebody they can believe in. Somebody who 

  has a different perspective:  - who has access to all the information;  - who asks the hard questions;  - who is independent.  2 Independent polls (not media polls) - truly independent / presenting the views of the people 

  to the Australian decision makers. 

  3 Create the critical capacity to review all sides of the issue - trenddpatterns rather than  snapshots - every week trends (something to compare against). Huxley in "Brave New  World" knew the power of the big picture: 

  'I 'Just to give you a general idea! For of course some sort of general idea they 

  must have, if they were to do their work intelligently - though as little of one, if they  were to be good and happy members of society, as possible. For particulars, as  every one knows, make for virtue and happiness; generalities are intellectually  necessary evils." 

  Brave New World, Aldous Huxley (1932) 

  4 Facilitate and support educational programs like Australian Institute of Company Directors  (AICD) and business education in schools, media such as Media Watch, Andrew Denton's  Enough Rope, Four Corners, A Current Affair, and other programs which raise everyone's  ability to ask questions, analyse, and seek meaning, protect the public interest rather than 

  the interest of the public. (Recall the Ministry of Truth in 1984 - which concerned itself  with news, entertainment, education and the fine arts.) Obviously, the public had to be kept  "interested". But the "interest of the public" was of no concern. 

  5 ASIC, ASX and all regulators have to see themselves as restoring trust and faith in  institutions - rather than masking and hiding problems - where are the prosecutions? 

  ' Corporate Social Responsibility Monitor - Roy Morgan Research in conjunction with  Environics International 

  15 

  The Australian people must be able to "unplug" from the world's media - make our own  enquiries - Australia can have its own values. 

  All this means not remaining plugged into 1984, Brave New World, Big Brother, scenarios. 

  Our Boards need their own independent access to information "unplugged" like the  parliamentary library. 

  Boards need their own budget to do their job. (There has been much discussion about CEOs'  salaries, Non-executive Directors' salaries, but little, if any, discussion about appropriate costs  of the Board doing a good job.) 

  The model must be more like Ministers and their advisers who are not part of the day-to-day  management of their departments. 

  Non-executive irectors need to come out of the closed "loop of close friends" and the  organisational information into the "open loop'' of better information and the wider  values of society at large. 

  Shareholders need open and better information to do their job of holding Boards accountable. 

  Citizens should fight to maintain not only freedom of the press, but an "unplugged" reality  where truth still counts. 

  We need 2004 - not 198 - a new reality - an "unplugged" reality. 

  16 

