---
title: "No forced return of Iraqi refugees."
date: "2003-04-14"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Iraq"
  - "Repatriation"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Compensation"
  - "Visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211560369
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0W296%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats                                      

   April 14, 2003                        MEDIA RELEASE                           03/ 228                    

 No forced return of Iraqi Refugees   

 The Australian Democrats today called on the Howard Government to guarantee they would not  forcibly return any refugees from Iraq who are currently in Australia.     

 Democrats’ Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said the Government’s appalling treatment of refugees  who had fled the horrors of Saddam Hussein’s regime was beyond heartless.   

 “These people have already suffered enough and continue to live in torment not knowing whether  the Government will force them to return when their temporary protection visas expire,” Senator  Bartlett said.   

 “The very least these refugees deserve is control over their own future.  The Government should  assist them to return to Iraq if they wish, but if they wish to rebuild their lives in Australia, they  should be allowed to do so.  Nobody knows what the future will hold for Iraq - refugees should not  be made to live in limbo.”   

 The Democrats also called on the Government to compensate the hundreds of Iraqis who have had  to endure years of unnecessary detention in Australia.   

 “The Government should pay compensation for the illness these already damaged people have  suffered because of their treatment in Australia”, Senator Bartlett said.   

 “Mandatory detention has caused an epidemic of ill health. People are suffering from physical and  psychological illness which has arisen after they were detained.  These people were traumatised by  the regimes they were fleeing, but there is no doubt their health has suffered significantly since their  arrival here.   

 “Their health has been placed in crises by the policy of mandatory detention. They are suffering  conditions not brought on by their life in Iraq, but the life they fled to in Australia and this  Government with their policy of mandatory detention is responsible for that.   

 “If an independent medical study was done of detainees who have been in detention for up to three  years, I have no doubt they would find an outrageous proportion of suicidal and depressed people  whose physical health is breaking down along with their mental health.     

 “Detention has also caused a massive breakdown in families. Families have dissolved because of  the stress. These men, women and children are overwhelmed with a sense of hopelessness and a  lack of future.    

 

 For interview with Senator Bartlett, please call Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

