---
title: "Transcript of a doorstop interview: Parliament House, Perth: Monday 15 December 2003: Hunger strike Nauru; hunger strike Port Hedland; Port Hedland disturbance."
date: "2003-12-15"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen, (AIG)"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Pacific Solution"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Nauru"
  - "Hunger strike Nauru"
  - "hunger strike Port Hedland"
  - "Port Hedland disturbance."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262396
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A76B6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

 

 

 T02/03   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, PERTH  MONDAY 15 DECEMBER 2003   

 Subjects: Hunger strike Nauru; Hunger strike Port Hedland; Port Hedland  disturbance                                                                                

 

 

 JOURNALIST: Stephen what do you make of the situation in Nauru?   

 SMITH: Well we have obviously got a very serious and grave concern for what’s  occurring in Nauru.  I think things are now so serious and so grave that the Government  should call upon the good offices of the Immigration Detention Advisory Group (IDAG) and  use the good offices of that group to seek to resolve the issue in Nauru.  IDAG has the  credentials because this was the group that settled the hunger strike in Woomera in 2002.   

 I have called on the Minister for a full briefing on the situation in Nauru, just as I have called  on the Minister for a full briefing on the recent disturbance in Port Hedland and suggestions  that there are hunger strikes occurring at Port Hedland.  Regrettably to date I have not  received any such briefings.   

 Let me just make a couple of general points:     

 Labor says that the so called Pacific Solution should end.  One of the reasons we believe it  should end is because if the Government, if the Australian people, are responsible for the  detention of people, then we need to ensure that there is accountability and scrutiny.   

 The best way to ensure there is accountability, transparency and scrutiny of people in  detention is if they are held on Commonwealth territory by Commonwealth officers.  That’s  why we’ve said end the Pacific Solution.  That is why we have also said that the operation of  detention facilities on Commonwealth territory should be returned to the Commonwealth and  done by Commonwealth officers, not done by private companies.   

 We have also said that to ensure maximum scrutiny and accountability and to ensure that  there are appropriate conditions and standards, that the media should also have sensible  access to detention centres and there should independent professional medical access to the  people detained in those facilities.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Australians are surprised to learn there are still almost  300 people on Nauru?   

  1

 SMITH: Well we have got around 300 people in Nauru.  The vast bulk of those are  Afghanis.  The difficulty with the return of those Afghanis to Afghanistan are the  circumstances in Afghanistan and also because the Afghani government will not accept  forcible returnees.  They will only accept voluntary returnees.   

 One of the reasons I am calling on the Government to use the good offices of the  Immigration Detention Advisory Group is that not only have they in the past been successful  in resolving hunger strikes, they may also be able to give good advice to the Afghanis  currently in detention in Nauru to see whether voluntary return to Afghanistan is possible in  due course.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you fear that the detainees who are refusing to eat will die?   

 SMITH: Well obviously why I say there is serious and grave concern is because of the  reports of the hunger strikes and the apparent determination of the individuals concerned.  I  also note media reports that at least one and perhaps two detainees have been taken to  hospital and may well be on intravenous drips and I hope that that is the case.  But part of the  difficulty in these circumstances is that I can’t give you any more than what you yourself  have gleaned from media reports both Australian and International.   

 I haven’t received a briefing from the Government or the Department as requested and that  goes to an illustration of the need for accountability and for transparency.  The best way of  ensuring that people who are detained are detained in appropriate conditions and to  appropriate standards is by ensuring they’re detained on Commonwealth territory and that  detention is managed by Commonwealth officers.   

 We should also ensure, as I have said, that you have got sensible media access to those  facilities and sensible access for independent medical professionals.   

 JOURNALIST: Immigration Department is saying this morning that seven are now in  hospital.  Is the situation getting out of hand?   

 SMITH: Well I haven’t seen that report.  Again, one of the points I make is that we are  all dependent here on media reports both National and International.  If I was in the receipt  of an up-to-briefing by the Minister or the Department then I would be able to apprise you of  up-to-date events.  That is one of the difficulties we have when people are situated off  Australian territory, off shore in Nauru, and one of the reasons Labor has said that the Pacific  Solution, which has now cost the tax payer anywhere from about $450-500 million, one of  the reasons it has to end.   

 JOURNALIST: Why do you think you are not getting cooperation from the  Immigration Department and the Federal Government as your predecessor might have?   

 SMITH: I am not making too much of a point of it.   I am sure in due course I will get  the briefing.  The point I make is this - if the detention was in relation to a Commonwealth  operated facility on Commonwealth territory I am sure the briefing would be much easier to  give and much more effectively given.   

 I do make this point though: the day after I became Shadow Minister, Tuesday of last week, I  formally asked the Minister for a briefing on the disturbance at Port Hedland.  Since that  time I have up-dated that request for a briefing on the disturbance at Port Hedland and 

  2

 reports of  the hunger strikes at Port Hedland and for an urgent briefing on the reports of the  hunger strike at Nauru.  I have received nothing but a deafening silence.   

 JOURNALIST: If you were to end the Pacific Solution and shut down Nauru and other  outlying detention centres.  What do you do with the people?  We don’t have room for them  on the mainland.   

 SMITH: Well the two off-shore detention centres, non Australian territory detention  centres, are of course Nauru and Mannis Island.  Now we would be hopeful that by the time   we came to office in the second half of next year that the number of people held in Nauru  and Mannis Island would have reduced considerably.  One of the things that Mark Latham  the new Leader of the Party has asked me to do is to prepare for him advice as to how we  would end the Pacific Solution on day one of a new Labor administration.  So that is one of  the things that I am now going through in terms of the detail.  The Prime Minister has  indicated he expects the election to be in second half of next year.  That is my expectation.   By that time I would hope that a considerable number of the people currently being held in  Mannis Island and Nauru would have been returned to their nation states.   

 JOURNALIST: So you are not saying that Nauru should be closed down immediately?   

 SMITH: Nauru should be closed as soon as possible.  We would end Nauru.  The previous question made the point that you have now got some three to four hundred  people at Nauru.  Those people need to be handled.  The question I have been asked is how  we would end the Pacific Solution.  I have made the point that the new Leader Mark Latham  has asked me to provide him with advice as to how we would do that effectively on day one  of a new Labor Government.  That is the advice I will give him and that advice will certainly  be well and truly known by the Australian people in the run up to the next election.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you calling for the Federal Government to shut it down now?   

 SMITH: What we have said is that the Pacific Solution should end and the best way to  end the Pacific Solution is for the Government to stand up today and say yes we will end  Nauru and then to put into place the transitional arrangements necessary to close that facility  and to close the facility at Mannis Island.   

 JOURNALIST: Does that extend to an end to mandatory detention all around.   

 SMITH: No.  Labor’s policy, and I am a strong supporter of it, is that when people  come to Australia, how ever they come to Australia, whether they come by boat or plane or  through a port, if we don’t know their status, if we don’t know their standing then they are  detained and they are detained manditorially.  They are detained in that way so as to ensure  that the necessary health, quarantine, security and character checks can be made.  I have also  make the point that I believe that 90% of those assessments can be done within 90 days and  under our approach the other 10% would be scrutinised by an independent committee to  oversight so as to ensure that people don’t know where they stand for long periods of time.   

 I think one of the most difficult problems we have at the moment is that we don’t have an  immigration system of integrity.  We don’t have a system that the public have confidence in  or that individual applicants believe they are being treated fairly.  The best way of ensuring  we have got a system of integrity is to make sure that the screening processes, whether  they’re for tourist visas or for refugee applications, that the screening procedures are done 

  3

  4

 rigorously so far as security, character, quarantine and health is concerned, but also  individual applicants know where they stand sooner rather than later.   

 A substantial part of the problem we have now, both in terms of a view about the fairness of  the system and length of detention, is that people don’t know where they stand over long  periods of time.   We believe that if you have faster processing that people will regard the  system as one of integrity and one that is fair.  That is why I say we believe 90% of the  applications in whatever category in our view can be done within 90 days. 

 

 JOURNALIST:  As of yesterday I think there are still 12 people in the Juliette Block at Port  Hedland and I think five of them are on hunger strikes.  Have they been released from  isolation?   

 SMITH: Well again I said I have asked for a report, a briefing from the Minister and  the Department on that point.  I asked for that Tuesday of last week on the disturbance at  Port Hedland and up-dated that for a request on the hunger strike situation.  I have received  no advice but my urging of the Government to call upon the good offices of the Immigration  Detention Advisory Group is not restricted to Nauru.  If there is on-going hunger strike 

 difficulty in Port Hedland, and that seems to be one of the cases for concern so far as the  reports are concerned about Port Hedland, then the independent advisory group should also  be utilised to seek to resolve difficulties in Port Hedland.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you going up there?  Are you planning a trip?   

 SMITH: I have in the usual way, requested the Minister’s approval to visit all of the  on-shore and off-shore facilities.   I have made it clear to the Minister that my priorities are  Port Hedland and Port Augusta and Baxter.  I have also made it clear to the Minister that I  would like to visit the off-shore or the off-Commonwealth territory facilities Mannis Island  and Nauru, and I have made it clear to the Minister that if she is proposing herself to visit  Nauru and Mannis Island that I would like to accompany her.   When those visits take place  is of course something that will be determined and agreed between me and the Minister in  due course. 

 

 Thanks you.   

 End   

 Contact: Stephen Smith MP - Telephone: 08 9375 9855 

 

