---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: Wednesday, 5 November 2003: Melville Island."
date: "2003-11-05"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "Territorial waters"
  - "Melville Island"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Legislative instruments"
  - "Coastal surveillance"
  - "Melville Island."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260954
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M4TA6%22
---

 

 Nicola Roxon MP   Shadow Minister for Population and  Immigration   

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2003 - 8.20am  SUBJECT: MELVILLE ISLAND   

 ROXON:  Labor is very concerned about the actions that the Government has taken following  the arrival of a number of people off the coast of Melville Island. We think this is a massive overreaction.  The Government, it seems to us, basically wants to change the law any time something mucks up for  them.    

 We don’t believe that you need to change the law. We think that they should actually use the powers  they’ve got, make sure that their border control system is working more effectively rather than giving  away thousands of islands as their response to this. It seems with the Willy Brigitte matter the problem  was our immigration system. The Government shouldn’t have granted a tourist visa to Willy Brigitte.    

 But now they want to change the ASIO laws as if that would somehow fix the problem instead of  concentrating on our immigration system. Again, we see with a boat arrival on Melville Island the  Government’s border control system hasn’t worked. But instead the Government now wants to patch it up  by excising all of these islands. We don’t think that is necessary. We think that it is a panicked reaction  and we really do believe that this can be dealt with much more sensibly than the way the Government is  currently handling it.    

 JOURNALIST:  If you accuse the Government of overreacting. Aren’t you overreacting and  overplaying it by saying they have given away the islands. It’s for migration purposes and they’re not  giving away the islands.    

 ROXON: It’s a quite unnecessary approach. And what really makes my point on this, they’re  not introducing some regulation for Melville Islands, they’re introducing a regulation that covers islands  that go as far south down the Queensland coast as Mackay. So clearly they have just been waiting for any  opportunity to try this on again. Labor isn’t going to buy it and I don’t think the public will either.    

 JOURNALIST:  Is it just the migration…[inaudible]?    

 ROXON: What matters is that the Government thinks that they can distract attention from the  fact that they need to actually administer their border control system properly or their immigration system  properly.  Jumping to some legislative change so that all the focus is on that actually detracts from the  real issue. This is ten or eleven or fourteen people I think the Minister said this morning. We have a  migration system that works well. We can use those processes. We don’t need to go and change the law to  do it.    

 JOURNALIST:  Where does Labor say these people should be processed?    

 

 

 For more information call:  Nicola Roxon or David Robinson on (03) 9687 7355 or 0427 519 394 

 

 Nicola Roxon MP   Shadow Minister for Population and  Immigration   

 ROXON: We’ve been given no information so far. We asked for an urgent briefing yesterday.  And in fact I was interested, Minister Vanstone even in her own press release and press conference said  that she didn’t know where these people were from, whether they were asylum seekers, whether they  were fishermen, whether they were World Cup tourists or anything else. And we think that we need some  more information before we could be expected to make any comments about those sorts of operational  issues. Obviously they are close to Darwin. They could be taken to Christmas Island. They are issues that  the Government hopefully will brief us on.    

 JOURNALIST:  What’s the logic of Labor having agreed to excise Christmas Island but not excising  other islands including Melville?    

 ROXON: The logic is that you would hope that - and if your system of border control was  working properly - you would hope that you would detect people on the high seas. They are more likely  to be in the vicinity of Christmas Island. It seems ludicrous if people arrive as we have seen for the last  two instances either at Port Hedland or at Melville Island close to Darwin to then transport people  hundreds of kilometres away to Christmas Island. But we don’t have information about what the  Government’s intentions are or whether these people are even seeking asylum. And we do urge the  Government to be a little bit more thoughtful and calm in their approach rather than jumping straight to  this.    

 JOURNALIST:  …[inaudible]…excise islands…   

 ROXON: Well we don’t know. It seems that the Government is prepared to do anything if they  think that it will send a message to the community in some way that they are trying to - either for politics  or something else. We don’t think it’s good policy we think it’s a stupid idea. We also think it’s  unnecessary. And really, we should be able to deal with the approach of ten or eleven people without  giving away two or three thousand Australian islands.    

 JOURNALIST:  …[inaudible]…should be allowed to come in…?    

 ROXON: I think what that highlights is a misunderstanding about our existing system. We can  process ten or eleven or twelve people quickly. We should be able to process people quickly. If they’re  not legitimate refugees they should be returned quickly and if they are they should be granted asylum and  settled quickly. The Government is overreacting for ten or eleven people and we think it is really  unnecessary that they are doing this.    

 JOURNALIST:  So not turn them away but just get them here quickly and deal with it?    

 ROXON:  Labor’s plan to have a Coastguard would hope that we identify people well and truly  before they get anywhere near Melville Island or Port Hedland or elsewhere. The Government’s border  control system is not doing that. It isn’t detecting people. But if people do arrive - and some people arrive  by plane, they arrive in all sorts of other ways - we must process their claims. That’s an obligation that  we have. But it is ridiculous to suggest that we can’t cope with ten or eleven people through our current 

 

 

 For more information call:  Nicola Roxon or David Robinson on (03) 9687 7355 or 0427 519 394 

 

 Nicola Roxon MP   Shadow Minister for Population and  Immigration   

 

 

 For more information call:  Nicola Roxon or David Robinson on (03) 9687 7355 or 0427 519 394 

 system. The Government seems to be just throwing up the white flag and saying we’ve got to change the  laws rather than use our existing process. And we don’t think that is necessary.    

 JOURNALIST:  Just on that point with the Coastguard, what would the Coastguard do if it did find a  boat with say, fourteen people on it?    

 ROXON:  Our intention with the Coastguard is that people would be detected well and truly  before they are any where near Australia’s mainland. And Labor has said that we would process asylum  seekers on Christmas Island where it can be done quickly and fairly and where people can be either 

 returned to their home country or if they have a claim which is justified they would be able to be settled in  Australia or in other countries. Now, that’s not happening. The Government isn’t detecting these boats at  the right time and then it is rushing in some sort of bandaid way to try to fix up their mistakes rather than  acknowledging that they could have used their existing powers. They don’t need to hand away Australian  territory and we won’t support them doing that.    

 (ENDS)    

 

