---
title: "Permanent residency for East Timorese overdue."
date: "2003-06-03"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "East Timor"
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
  - "RUDDOCK, Philip, MP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211563134
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OPI96%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  June 3, 2003                         MEDIA RELEASE                                    03/397                      

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

 

 Permanent Residency for East Timorese Overdue 

 

 The Australian Democrats welcome the decision by Philip Ruddock to grant 379 East Timorese  asylum seekers permanent residency, but claim it highlights a breakdown in Australia’s refugee  regime.    

 Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said Mr Ruddock’s refusal to introduce a visa  class for East Timorese meant hundreds of refugees in Australia on temporary protection visas had suffered  an uncertain future for nearly a decade.   

 Making the East Timorese asylum seekers go through the complex and lengthy process of the Refugee  Review Tribunal twice - stalling the process by as much as eight years - has also cost Australian taxpayers  hugely, Senator Bartlett said.   

  “Senate Estimates revealed that of the 1900 East Timorese who had began the process of applying for  permanent protection, 80 were still waiting a primary decision and 587 had gone through the process and  completed the Refugee Review Tribunal decisions,” Senator Bartlett said.   

 “Every one of these 587 cases was refused and every case was referred to the Minister for his discretion.    

 “Mr Ruddock has another 200 decisions to make.  But that’s not the end of the story.  There’s another 1400  East Timorese waiting in the queue, still waiting to find out about their future.   

 “The reality is that these people began the process in 1994 and the Australian Government deliberately froze  their applications for eight years.    

 “The Government did not begin formally processing refugee claims again until June last year - eight years  after the first claims were made.     

 “People have lived here for almost ten years, there is no doubt that they were refugees when they arrived and  they have since formed strong links with Australia. It would be criminal for the Minister to do anything other  than grant them permanent residency in this situation.    

 “The Minister’s refusal to establish a visa class for the East Timorese has meant more costs to the Australian  public as people resume a process deliberately stalled for eight years.    

 “Mr Ruddock could have saved Australia millions of dollars and prevented a terrible amount of stress to the  asylum seekers.   

 “Instead he has made them go through a system which he knows cannot assist these people and which relies  on his non-compellable personal power to ensure that justice is granted.”    

 For interview with Senator Bartlett contact Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649   

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  June 3, 2003                         MEDIA RELEASE                                    03/397                      

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

 

 

 

 

