---
title: "Government must provide legal access for Nauru asylum seekers."
date: "2003-12-22"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Reynolds, Kate"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Demonstrations and protest movements"
  - "Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262641
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y9AB6%22
---

 

 Senator Lyn Allison Kate Reynolds  

 Australian Democrats    Australian Democrats 

 Acting Leader Member of the SA Legislative Council 

 22 December 2003                  MEDIA RELEASE                                 03/904 

 

 Government Must Provide Legal Access for Nauru Asylum Seekers   

 The  Australian  Democrats  have  welcomed  news  that  a  government  delegation  will  visit  hunger   strikers on Nauru, but have again condemned the Federal Government’s continuing refusal to allow  the asylum seekers access to the Australian legal system. 

 Democrats’  Refugee  spokesperson  Kate  Reynolds  MLC  said  she  was  heartened  that  Federal   Immigration Minister Amanda Vanstone had acknowledged there was a ‘problem’ on Nauru, where  35 men have been refusing food and water for almost two weeks.  

 Eight people have been hospitalised since the strike started, with some admitted more than once to  receive intravenous fluids.  

 Ms  Reynolds  said  the  Government  had  tried  to  ignore  the  severity  of  the  situation  on  Nauru,  but   was then forced to appoint a delegation to talk with the hunger strikers. 

 “As well as its own representatives, the Government should be sending Independent Human Rights  Monitors to speak with the hunger strikers, to try to talk them into accepting food and water, and to  start  the  process  of  bringing  these  people  to  the  Australian  mainland,  where  they  can  access  our   legal system,” she said. 

 “The  Government  can’t  pretend  to  respect  the  rule  of  law,  and  then  use  legal  trickery  and  media   spin to deny people access to lawyers and the Australian legal system to lodge a claim for asylum.   

 “These people have committed no crime but are being treated as criminals.  It is no wonder they are  at the limit of their endurance. 

 “Instead  these  people  are  kept  locked  away  on  an  impoverished  island,  far  from  the  gaze  of  the   Australian public and media, while the Government hopes that people will forget that these asylum  seekers were involved with the Tampa debacle and have been wasting away on Nauru for more than  two years.” 

 Ms Reynolds said, “The Democrats renew their call for the Nauru Processing Centre to be closed,  and for all those imprisoned there, including 93 children, to be brought to Australia where they can  lodge proper refugee claims in a transparent and open process. 

 “The Government has repeatedly refused to heed calls by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR)  to  treat  the  asylum  seekers  with  humanity  and  to  find  a  solution  that  does  not  involve   prolonged detention in harsh conditions, especially in relation to children. 

 “Will it actually take the death of one of these desperate asylum seekers on the island of Nauru to  make the Government allow these people their rights under international law?   

 “That could be sooner rather than later, according to the latest reports from the island, with people  collapsing, lapsing into unconsciousness, and urinating blood,” Ms Reynolds concluded. 

 

 Media Contact:     0412 637 387   08 8237 9474   

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

