---
title: "Govt and ALP combine to slug international students."
date: "2003-06-26"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
  - "Visas"
  - "Overseas students"
  - "Prices and charges"
  - "Budget, 2003-04"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211254799
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H4Q96%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs   

 TRANSCRIPT OF AM - 27 June 2003   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:  United  Nations  

 

 

 LINDA  MOTTRAM:  Labor  and  the  government  are  at  odds  over  Mr  Downer's   approach  to  the  UN,  with  Labor's  Foreign  Affairs  spokesman,  Kevin  Rudd,  saying   that Australia should not abandon the UN. There are also some differences between  the  two  sides  over  the  Government's  announcement  that  it  will  intervene  in  the   troubled Solomon Islands with a plan to send up to 2,000 troops to the South Pacific  state as part of a cooperative effort with other nations to restore law and order there.  Louise Yaxley reports.   

 KEVIN  RUDD:  Mr  Downer,  it  seems,  has  been  very  quick  to  pan  the  United   Nations.  He  seems  to  have  amnesia.  He  forgets  the  role  of  the  United  Nations   Security Council only a couple of years ago in resolving the problem that we faced in  this  country  with  East  Timor.  He  also  forgets  the  role  of  the  United  Nations  in  the   resolution of Cambodia, and he forgets the role of the United Nations in taking a lot  of  burden  away  from  Australia  on  the  question  of  the  global  movement  of  asylum   seekers and refugees through the UNHCR. This is a highly selective comment by the  Foreign Minister.   

 LOUISE YAXLEY: He says that if you wait for the UN to act then the time can be lost  and that you can really miss the chance to act in some places.   

 KEVIN  RUDD:  Mr  Downer  has  chosen  an  example,  namely  the  Solomons,  which   simply  doesn't  fit  the  normal  set  of  circumstances.  The  reason  for  that  is  that  the   Solomon  Islands  doesn't  happen  to  have  diplomatic  relations  with  China—it  has  it   with  Taiwan—and  as  a  consequence  that  uniquely  recreates  problems  as  far  as  the   Security Council is concerned. So for Mr Downer to generalise from this specific set  of circumstances, frankly, is absurd.   

 LOUISE YAXLEY: So should Australia have sought UN protection before taking this  action?   

 

 

  2

 

 KEVIN RUDD: The key question here is whether a sovereign government makes a  request of others to assist in a domestic policing operation; hence why Labor has said  consistently, so long as this is constructed as a policing operation, with appropriate  support  for  those  police  in  the  field,  then  the  conditions  of  international  law  are   broadly met. What we need to ensure, however, is that when it comes to other forms  of  international  military  activity  of  the  type  which  Mr  Downer  engaged  in  in  Iraq,   then,  under  those  circumstances,  plainly  the  agency  of  the  United  Nations  Security   Council is of fundamental importance.   

 LINDA MOTTRAM: That was Labor's Foreign Affairs spokesman, Kevin Rudd,  speaking to Louise Yaxley in Canberra. And we haven't been able to contact  Alexander Downer this morning.   

 Ends.    

 

 

 

 

 

 Further information: Kevin Rudd, MP 0418 796 931 or Alister Jordan 0417 605 823   

