---
title: "Minister calls for Queenslanders to mark Harmony Day."
date: "2003-03-20"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Harmony Day"
  - "Queensland"
  - "Day, year and decade programs"
  - "Multiculturalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253864
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XNV86%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H35/2003 - 20 March 2003

 

 Minister Calls for Queenslanders to Mark Harmony Day

 The Minister for Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship, Gary Hardgrave, said today that  Australia's greatest form of national security in this time of international conflict was a  harmonious society.

 'In this current environment it is critical that community harmony is maintained and that  Australians continue to talk things through, not fight among ourselves,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Mr Hardgrave asked all Australians not to let this international conflict disrupt the Australian  community.

 'There has never been a more important time for Australians to turn to each other, not  against each other. Harmony Day is the ideal time to recognise the importance of cultural  harmony.'

 Mr Hardgrave said over 430 organisations throughout the State had requested Harmony  Day information to help them share their experiences and say 'no' to racism and prejudice in  the workplace, playground or office. 

 Queenslanders held 100 Harmony Day events. 

 Among these 41 Indigenous radio stations hooked up for a simultaneous Harmony Day  broadcast, Queensland Cricket introduced regional coordinators to its multicultural youth  project and a Brisbane seminar focused on managing diversity in local communities. 

 Mr Hardgrave noted that through the Commonwealth Government's Living in Harmony  initiative, Queensland will also host the following innovative projects to promote community  harmony: 

 ●     The Darling Downs Toastmasters Club will develop a mentor 

 program to promote public speaking skills to indigenous  communities. ●     The Mount Gravatt Training Centre will hold forums to promote 

 greater acceptance of difference among young people and their  families. ●     The St. Vincent de Paul Society will chronicle stories of young 

 indigenous people, refugees and migrants for a booklet that will  help break down stereotypes. Later this year, the booklet will go  to schools, churches and community groups around the State.

 Harmony Day, on 21 March, is part of the Commonwealth Government's Living in Harmony  initiative. It provides Australians with an opportunity to get to know each other better by  promoting our community's success as a multicultural society.

 Visit www.immi.gov.au/multicultural/harmonyday/events.htm for more information about  Harmony Day events in Queensland. 

 For further information on Harmony Day activities: Bob Crawshaw 0401 718 863 

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

