---
title: "Minister launches national body for migrant resource centres."
date: "2003-07-11"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Migrant Resource Centre ProgramNational Council of Migrant Resource and Settlement Agencies"
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211255348
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/84V96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H85/2003 - 11 July 2003

 

 Minister Launches National Body For Migrant Resource Centres

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today launched the  National Council of Migrant Resource and Settlement Agencies in Preston.

 Minister Hardgrave welcomed the initiative. 'The overall aim of the National Council is to  represent, promote and coordinate the efforts of MRCs at the national level,' Mr Hardgrave  said. 

 'The Council is a timely development, which provides opportunities for constructive  engagement with the MRC/MSA sector following the recent release of the Federal  Government's Settlement Services Review. 

 'This organisation is well placed to highlight settlement issues and concerns and contribute  to raising community awareness of the services available to migrants,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Mr Hardgrave added that MRCs and Settlement Agencies had provided valuable feedback  on the review and further consultation with the sector on the way forward for settlement  service delivery will be taking place around Australia.

 Mr Hardgrave said that the network of Migrant Resource Centres and Settlement Agencies  had been delivering high quality settlement services to recently arrived migrants and  refugees for many years.

 'The expertise of these years should ensure the Council will be able to effectively represent  migrants' interests in policy development, service planning and decision making,' he said.

 Mr Hardgrave was optimistic that core membership of the National Council would continue to  grow and would become inclusive of a wider range of community sector providers of  settlement services. 

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

