---
title: "Terms of reference for Senate inquiry as Prime Minister continues to mislead."
date: "2003-11-14"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Kurds"
  - "Melville Island"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Turkey"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261324
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RVWA6%22
---

 Sen Bob Brown   

 

 Press Release   

 Friday, 14 November 2003   

 

 Terms of Reference for Senate Inquiry as Prime  Minister Continues to Mislead   

 

 Greens Senator Bob Brown today released proposed terms of reference for a  Senate inquiry into the Melville Island affair as the Prime Minister continues to  mislead the Australian public.   

 "The Prime Minister's statements on ABC's AM program this morning that it is  'irrelevant' the asylum seekers claimed refugee status is wrong. Under the  Refugee Convention, to which Australia is bound, asylum seekers have the right 

 to have that claim honoured," Senator Brown said.   

 "The Prime Minister's further statement that 'At the time any so-called application  for asylum might have been made, the islands had been excised' is also a  massive deception.  The islands were only excised retrospectively after the  arrival of the 14 Kurds.   

 "The Greens will move for an inquiry when the Senate next sits on Monday  November 24th and we look forward to discussing the terms of reference with the  other opposition parties in the lead up to the Senate's return," Senator Brown  said. Proposed Terms of Reference That the following matters, related to the  entry into Australian territory, including Melville Island, of asylum seekers in  November, be referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional References  Committee for inquiry and report.   

  a) the propriety and legality of the treatment of the asylum seekers  while in effective Australian custody.    

  b) how and why Government ministers misled the Australian people  about the asylum seekers' claiming refugee status.    

  c) whether the regulations excising the islands were legally in force for  the entire time the 14 asylum seekers were in Australian territory.    

  d) whether international law was upheld by the Government's actions  in returning the asylum seekers to Indonesia and refusing to hear their claim for  refuge status.   

  e) the legality of the Government's decision to retrospectively excise  various islands from the migration zone.   

  f) any other related matters. 

 

 More Information: Ben Oquist 02 62773170 or 0419 704095 

