---
title: "Review of settlement services focuses on support for refugees."
date: "2003-05-27"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Welfare measures"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211562813
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L6G96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H72/2003 - 27 May 2003

 

 Review of Settlement Services Focuses on Support for Refugees

 Releasing the report of the Review of Settlement Services for Migrants and Humanitarian  Entrants, the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, said that  Australia's settlement services must focus on helping those most in need if the nation-building benefits of Australia's migration and humanitarian programs are to be maximised. 

 "Australia's settlement services are advanced by world standards - but we can do better. We  must focus more strongly on helping recently arrived refugees and humanitarian entrants, as  well as family stream migrants with lower levels of English proficiency," Mr Hardgrave said.

 The Minister said that while these groups ultimately made substantial contributions to  Australian society, they needed an initial investment to provide a helping hand to settle into  the country.

 The Review found that higher levels of disadvantage within recent humanitarian intakes and  the increasing diversity of the Australian population posed significant challenges for service  providers.

 "Mainstream services have come a long way in 30 years of multicultural policy, with  significant advances in implementing access and equity," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "The Government's commitment to effective service delivery is reflected in its decision to  establish a high level task force, chaired by the Department of the Prime Minister and  Cabinet, to progress aspects of the report that require a whole-of-government response."

 "These include recommendations relating to mainstream services, assistance for newly  arrived children and youth and strategies for helping established migrant communities to  address their particular needs." 

 The Minister said that he looked forward to more positive outcomes for humanitarian clients  of Job Network services following the start of new service arrangements that promise  greater flexibility in assisting job seekers who need Australian work experience and  language training as part of their search for work. 

 "The government is committed to the continuing development of a strong and effective  network of settlement service providers," Mr Hardgrave said.

 He said the report's emphasis on stronger needs-based planning and the introduction of  greater contestability for community grants would lead to further improvements in service  delivery and outcomes for clients. 

 Combining the current Migrant Resource Centre and Community Settlement Service 

 Scheme grants programs would provide greater flexibility within the network, increased  responsiveness, incentives for good performance, and the potential for funding to better  reflect the cost of delivering work programs. 

 "These long-established programs have supported many new arrivals to Australia over the  years and the changes we are making will ensure that the community sector continues to  play a vital role in supporting the settlement process," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "The Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Scheme (IHSS) has  delivered greater certainty and professionalism in on-arrival services  for refugees," Mr Hardgrave said. 

 "However, the review also recognises a number of areas for improvement, including the  need for better case management and service coordination, and increased assistance for  refugees moving in to long term accommodation and setting up house." The Minister also  said that he wanted to do more to better integrate volunteer involvement with other  humanitarian settlement services.

 The Minister will be seeking to pilot pre-arrival cultural orientation courses to help  humanitarian entrants to make the transition from rural Africa to life in suburban Australia.

 "I look forward to further dialogue with the community about how best to implement the  directions set by this important review. I will be holding consultations in States and  Territories in July."

 For further information, and for a full copy of the report, visit DIMIA's web site at  www.immi.gov.au/settle/settle_review.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

