---
title: "Immigrant crime in Europe and Australia: rational and racialised responses? Paper presented at the Challenges of Immigration and Integration in the European Union and Australia Conference, 18-20 February 2003, University of Sydney."
date: "2003-02-18"
creators:
  - "Collins, Jock"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Crime"
  - "European Union"
  - "Ethnic groups"
  - "Immigration"
  - "Juvenile delinquency"
  - "Sydney"
  - "Surveys"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253212
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2L096%22
---

 

 1  COLLINS, Jock  

 Immigrant Crime in Europe and Australia:  

 Rational or Racialised Responses?   

 

 

 JOCK COLLINS 

 Professor of Economics, 

 University of Technology, Sydney 

 

 

 

 National Europe Centre Paper No. 80   

 

 

 

 

 Paper presented to conference entitled   The Challenges of Immigration and Integration in the  European Union and Australia,   18-20 February 2003, University of Sydney 

 

 

 

 

 2  COLLINS, Jock  

 Abstract: In  Australia  and  the  European  Union  today  there  is  a  very  negative  

 immigration  discourse  linked  to  the  (alleged)  criminality  of  immigrant  minorities  -  

 particularly those from Asia and the Middle East - and the existence of ethnic criminal 

 gangs. The issue of immigrant crime - linked to the issue of undocumented migrants 

 and  refugees  - is  driving much of the political  agenda in  Australia and  Europe.  This  

 paper first reviews the recent European and Australian experience of immigrant crime 

 and the politicisation and racialisation of the immigrant crime issue. It then draws on 

 the  findings  from  a  two-year  research  project  into  Youth,  Ethnicity  and  Crime  in  

 Sydney  -  funded  by  the  Australian  Research  Council,  the  Australian  Department  of  

 Immigration  and  Multicultural  Affairs  and  25  industry  partners,  including  10  local  

 government authorities and 10 ethnic community organizations in Sydney - to explore 

 the  myths  and  realities  of  immigrant  crime  in  Sydney,  including gender  dimensions.  

 The  paper  then  critically  analyses  media  portrayals  of  such  crime  and  investigates  

 appropriate policy responses at federal, provincial and local government level. Finally, 

 the  implications  of  the  immigrant  crime  debate  for  immigration  and  settlement  

 policies in Australia and Europe are discussed. 

 

 

 3  COLLINS, Jock  

 Introduction 

 

 Europe  and  Australia  today  have  one  important  common  feature:  the  impact  of  immigration  and  

 immigrants  on  their  economy,  society,  polity  and  culture.  In  Australian  and  established  and  new  

 European Union countries increasingly diverse patterns of immigration been a key consequence of, and 

 at the same time a dimension of, globalisation. The increasing internationalisation of capital has, as its 

 globalisation counterpart, the increasing internationalisation of labour in its increasingly diverse forms: 

 refugee  and  ‘undocumented’  immigrant  flows,  permanent  and  temporary  movements.  The  key  

 difference is that while many European countries have only recently became - or admitted to becoming 

 - countries of immigration, Australia has a long history of settler immigration (Collins 1991). With the 

 USA, Canada and New Zealand, Australia introduced a large-scale settler immigration program in the 

 last  half  of  the  twentieth  century.  Indeed,  Australia  has,  in  relative  terms,  more  first  generation  

 immigrants than most other western countries, including Canada, the USA and countries in Europe, as 

 Table 1 shows.  

 

 Table 1. 

 First Generation Immigrants in Europe, Australia and other major western countries 1996 

 (Numbers and %) 

 Country Foreign born (Nos) Foreign Born (% of pop) 

 Australia  3,908,000  21.1  

 Canada  4,  971,000  17.4  

 USA  24,600,000  9.3  

 Belgium  912,000  9.0  

 Denmark  238,000  4.7  

 France  3,597,000  6.3  

 Germany  7,314,000  8.9  

 Italy  1,096,000  2.0  

 Luxembourg  143,000  34.1  

 Netherlands  680,000  4.4  

 Spain  539,000  1.3  

 Sweden  527,000  6.0  

 Switzerland  1,338,000  19.0  

 UK  1,972,000  3.4  

 

 Source: SOPEMI, Trends in International Migration, Annual Report, p. 31. (OECD, Paris, 1998). 

 

 Today,  Australia  is  a  very culturally diverse  society,  with  the  more  than  half  of  the  population  of  the  

 major  cities  of  Australia  comprising  of  first  and  generation  immigrants  (Burnley  2001).  Moreover,  

 despite  the  focus  of  Australian  immigration  policy for  the  first  three-quarters  of  the  twentieth  century 

 

 4  COLLINS, Jock  

 on  racial  exclusion  of  non-whites  (Markus  1994)  and  the  explicit  preference  for  British  and  Irish  

 immigrants  (Collins  1991:  19-26),  Australia’s  immigrants  come  from  all  over  the  globe,  at  Table  2  

 shows. 

 

 

 5  COLLINS, Jock  

 TABLE 2: 

 Australia: Immigrant population by birthplace, (thousands) 

 

 Country of birth 1971 1981 1991 1996 2001 

 Europe 2 197 2 233 2 300 2 217  

 UK & Ireland 1 088 1 133 1 175 1 124  

 Italy  290  276  255  238   

 Former  Yugoslavia  130  149  161  n.a.   

 Greece  160  147  136  127   

 Germany  111  111  115  110   

 Other  Europe  418  418  457  618   

 Asia (incl. Middle East) 167 372 822 1 007  

 New  Zealand  81  177  276  291   

 Africa  62  90  132  147   

 America  56  96  147  151   

 Other and not stated 18 36 75 95  

 Total 2 581 3 005 3 751 3 908  

 

 Sources: Castles and Zappala 2001 and 2001 Census 

 

 Australia and European Union countries also share another common feature that relates directly to the 

 increasing  cultural  diversity  that  is  a  product  of  contemporary  immigration  flows:  the  increasing  

 concern about, and controversy related to, immigrant crime.  

 

 Concern  about  crime  and  fear  of  crime  appear  to  be  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the  age,  not  just  in  

 Australia but also in all western societies. As Findlay (1999: 1) recently put it: ‘Crime has been a silent 

 partner  in  modernization…  Globalisation  creates  new  and  favourable  contexts  for  crime’.  This  is  

 particularly the case in the cities of the western world. Reviewing the crime issue in the UK and USA, 

 Schneider and Kitchen (2002: 25) state that: ‘Crime and fear of crime are major issues in British and 

 American  Societies  that  help  mould  our  cities  and  influence  the  qualities  of  life  in  both  nations’.  

 Similarly, McCord, Widom and Crowell (2001: 1) argue that in the United States ‘[j]uvenile crime is 

 one  of  the  nation’s  serious  problems.  Concern  about  it  is  widely  shared  by  federal,  state  and  local  

 government officials and by the public’. 

 

 The issue of crime and its link to immigrants and ethnic groups and ethnic gangs is one of the hottest 

 topics  around  the  globe  today.  Indeed,  it  could  be  argued  that  immigrant  crime  is  one  of  the  greatest  

 challenges  facing  the  social  cohesion  of  Australia  and  European  Union  countries  today.  This  is  

 particularly  true  of  Sydney  and  New  South  Wales,  where  concerns  about  immigrant  or  ethnic  crime  

 have featured largely in State politics since 1998 (Collins et al 2000) and in the guise of concern for law 

 and order have dominated run up  to  the NSW elections set for March 2003. Labor Premier Bob Carr 

 

 6  COLLINS, Jock  

 and conservative Opposition leader John Brogden are already engaged in an auction to appear toughest 

 on crime, particularly with the introduction of mandatory minimum sentences for a range of crimes.  

 

 But it is also true that the issue of immigrant crime dominates politics throughout Europe today linked, 

 like  in  post-Tampa  Australia,  to  refugee  claimants,  undocumented  immigrants  or  ‘illegals’  as  the  

 Australian Minister for Immigration, Phillip Ruddock, likes to describe them. The collapse of the Berlin 

 Wall  in  the  late  1980s  and  the  collapse  of the  Soviet  Union  led  to  very large  flows  of refugees  from 

 Eastern Europe to most western European countries (Castles and Miller 1998) in numbers way beyond 

 those,  in  relative  terms,  that  Australia  takes  with  such  controversy.  Controversy  related  to  the  link  

 between crime, immigration and ethnic diversity has led to a resurgence of the Right in places such as 

 France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark and drives much of the political agenda in Tony Blair’s 

 New Labour Britain. Across the ‘pond’, as Europeans call the Atlantic Ocean, the recent anniversary of 

 September  11  ensures  that  an  extreme  offshoot  of  the  ethnic  crime  debate  -  ethnic  terrorism -  drives  

 much of US politics and preoccupations.  

 

 In  Europe,  North  America  and  Australia  the  ethnic  crime  debate  overlaps  with,  and  is  fanned  by,  the  

 controversial  issue  of  refugee  and  undocumented  immigrants.  This  is  true  in  two  senses.  First,  

 opposition  to  and  suspicion  of  refugees  and  so-called  illegals has been a dominant theme in the anti-immigrant  discourse  in  all  these  regions  and  particularly  in  Australia  and  Europe.  The  Howard  

 Government’s decision to turn back the MS Tampa and subsequent sea craft carrying ‘boatpeople” and 

 to refuse asylum applicants aboard them an opportunity to land on Australian soil was a decisive factor 

 in its re-election in late 2001. Similarly, governments and political parties in the European Union have 

 taken strong anti-refugee stances to tap into public concern about being swamped by refugees. In both 

 cases, strong antagonism towards refugees and asylum seekers resonates with increased concern about 

 immigrant crime in countries in the European Union and Australia. 

 

 Second, the flows of undocumented peoples have become a new growth area of immigrant crime, with 

 so-called snakeheads and others engaged in the organized and profitable crime of people smuggling. Of 

 course,  the  criminal  ethnic  gangs  that  are  involved  in  people  smuggling  or  in  large  scale  drug  

 smuggling are a very different phenomena from the groups of young immigrants or ‘ethnics’ who hang 

 out on street corners and shopping malls in Sydney, Paris, Brussles or London. Yet the immigrant crime 

 discourse in Australia and Europe, fanned by a seemingly inexhaustible supply of sensationalist media 

 editors, throws a blanket across these two extremes of immigrant crime and all points in between.  This 

 leads  to  a  moral  panic  about  crime  that  politicians  of  most  sides  of  the  political  spectrum  find  

 irresistible to exploit in an opportunist, though dangerously myopic, way. It also leads to an excessive 

 focus  on  the  cultural,  rather  than  socio-economic,  dimensions  of  crime  and  thus  often  diverts  policy  

 responses  to  immigrant  crime  away  from  employment,  education,  housing  and  urban  renewal  and  

 concentrates on religion - especially Islam following September 11, 2001 - and cultural traits. Just as 

 such  a  blanket,  sensationalist  approach  to  immigrant  crime  blurs  important  boundaries  and  complex  

 differences in the dynamics of contemporary immigrant crime in Australia and the European Union, so 

 

 7  COLLINS, Jock  

 to does it reproduce (mostly negative) cultural stereotypes towards immigrant minorities, extending by 

 implication or accusation the criminal activities of the few to the cultural traits of the many. 

 

 This paper explores some of the recent dynamics of the immigrant or ethnic crime debate in countries 

 in the European Union and compares this with the Australian experience in order make the case that the 

 responses  to  the  immigrant  crime  issue  in  political  and  media  discourses  and  the  resulting  public  

 responses  to  it  are  shaped  more  by  racialised  than  rational  discourses,  or,  more  correctly,  are  in  fact  

 shaped overwhelmingly by racialised discourses dressed in the clothes of rational common sense. If this 

 argument  is  correct,  the  responses  so  far  to  the  immigrant  crime  issue  in  the  European  Union  and  

 Australia appear to be more effective in undermining social cohesion in increasingly culturally-diverse 

 societies  by  reinforcing  racial  stereotyping  than  in  developing  a  sensitive  and  workable  policy  

 responses to the realities of immigrant crime. One corollary of this is that in Australia and Europe racist 

 community  attitudes  and  practices  are  reinforced  and  reproduced  by  this  racialised  discourse  on  

 immigrant  crime,  creating  a  moral  panic  about  how  increasing  cultural  diversity  is  undermining  

 community  safety.  This  has  a  political  expression  not  only  in  the  emergence  of  anti-immigrant  right  

 wing  minority  parties  in  Australia  and  Europe  but  also  in  the  embracing  of  these  anti-immigrant  

 attitudes within the policy framework and  political discourses of ostensibly non-conservative majority 

 political  parties  such  as  the  Carr  Labor  Government  in  NSW  and  the  Blair  Labour  Government  in  

 Britain.  

 

 The structure of this paper is as follows. First, a brief overview of the immigrant crime issue and the 

 way that it has shaped politics and immigration discourses in Europe is presented. Next the paper then 

 presents  some  of  the  key  findings  of  some  recent  research  about  perceptions  and  experiences  of  the  

 relationship  between  ethnicity  and  crime  in  Sydney  before  a  consideration  of  the  direct  and  indirect  

 policy implications of the immigrant crime issue in Australia and Europe.  

 

 

 1. Immigration, Crime and the Rise of the right in Europe. 

 

 The list of European right-wing political parties, albeit generally not in government and with minority 

 support, whose main political message is anti immigration and anti immigrant crime has grown through 

 the past decade. They include: Carl Ivar Hagen’s Progress Party which won over 15 per cent of votes 

 in Norway in 1997; the Swiss Centre Democratic Union which, under Christoph Blocher won 22.6 per 

 cent  of  the  vote  in  1999;  Pia  Kjaersgaard’s  Danske  Folkeparti,  which  currently  holds  the  balance  of  

 power in the Danish parliament; Jorg Haider’s Freedom Party in Austria, which endured such venom 

 from  the  European  Community  that  Haider  took  a  back  seat,  though  no  less  important,  role;  the  

 Alleanza  Nationale  party  in  Italy,  which  is  playing  a  key  role  in  the  government  of  billionaire  right-winger  and  media  and  soccer  magnate,  Silvio  Berlesconi;  the  Viaams  Blok  party  in  the  Belgium’s  

 Flemish-speaking  region  of  Flanders;  and  in  Britain  the  British  National  Party,  BNP,  a  new  look  

 version of the National Front whose leader, Nick Griffin, promotes a more tolerant anti-immigrant line, 

 

 8  COLLINS, Jock  

 at  least  in  public  discourses  if  not  behind  closed  doors,  to  appeal  to  the  common-sense  voter  (Neal  

 Ascherson, ‘The warning shot’, The Observer, Sunday 12 May 2002 Review p. 1). The party hoping to 

 capitalise  on  last  years  riots  between  Asian  immigrants  and  white  British  youth  in  towns  such  as  

 Burnley  in  Lancashire  and  Oldham  in  Greater  Manchester.  The  BNP  fielded  candidates  in  13  of  

 Burnley’s  15  wards  and  five  candidates  in  Oldham  the  May  2002  local  government  elections  (David  

 Ward, ‘BNP targets town at center of riots last year’, The Guardian Weekly, April 11-17, 2002, p. 8).  

 

 In  France,  old  stager,  Jean-Marie  Le  Pen,  staged  a  remarkable  comeback  from  apparent  political  

 oblivion to edge out Socialist Prime minister Lionel Jospin in the first round of the French election in 

 May 2002. His comments on immigrant crime rang loud and often prior to the his first round success - 

 when he secured a vote a mere three percentage points behind front runner Jacques Chirac in a multi-candidate election - and prior to his humiliating defeat in the second round, when conservatives and the 

 left in France united to secure 82% vote for Chirac (‘Jacques Chirac wins by default’, The Economist, 

 May 11 2002, p. 34).  

 

 In the Netherlands, Pym Fortuyn’s rapid rise into the Dutch political limelight, which started with 38% 

 of votes for his 17 elected Livable Rotterdam candidates in the Rotterdam local elections in month year, 

 ended with has assassination on May 6, just nine days before he could test national support for his List 

 Fortuyn  party  in  the  Dutch  elections.  According  to  one  List  Fortuyn  candidate,  Fortuyn  dared  to  say  

 that  90  per  cent  of  street  crime  in  Rotterdam  was  committed  by  Moroccan  and  other  immigrants  

 (Andrew  Osborn,  ‘Dutch  fall  for  gay  Mr  Right’,  The  Observer,  April  14  2002  p.  21).  In  2001  the  

 Netherlands had an ethnic minority population of 1.5 million, or 9% of the population (‘The political 

 legacy of Pim Fortuyn’, The Economist, May 11 2002, p. 31). But the Netherlands also has the lowest 

 unemployment rate in Europe, at around 2%, so that the anti-immigrant stance could not be leveraged 

 on  the  argument  that  immigrants  take  the  jobs  of  nationals  as  anti-immigrant  critics  such  as  historian  

 Geoffrey Blainey claimed  in  Australia  after  the  1981-82  economic  recession  (Blainey 1984).  Fortuyn  

 was not at all comfortable with being put in the same camp as Le Pen, stressing the reasonableness of 

 his  anti-immigrant  (and  particularly  anti-Muslim  immigrant)  stance.  His  open  homosexuality  and  his  

 criticisms of other European anti-immigrant leaders and their political parties promoted a different spin 

 on  the  anti-immigrant  stance.  Part  of  Fortuyn’s  opposition  to  Muslim  immigrants  -  he  wrote  a  book  

 titled Against the Islamicisation of Our Culture - is their lack of tolerance to homosexuality. He asked 

 ‘In Holland, homosexuality is treated in the same way as heterosexuality. In what Islamic country does 

 this happen?’ (Andrew Osborn, ‘Dutch fall for gay Mr Right’, The Observer, April 14 2002 p. 21).  

 

 This served to cement the reasonableness of his position compared to his European counterparts while 

 being in essence no  different from them to  the extent that his whole political rationale stemmed  from 

 his opposition to immigrants. He argued that he was just voicing the concerns and fears of the ordinary 

 Dutch people, who were fed up that their nation was being overcrowded because of immigrants and fed 

 up  with  being  victims,  or  fearing,  immigrant  crime.  His  spin,  much  like  the  Australian  right-wing  

 counterpart  to  these  European  leaders,  Pauline  Hanson  and  her  One  Nation  party, was that he was 

 

 9  COLLINS, Jock  

 saying the things that people felt but were afraid  to  say because of the political correctness that ruled  

 the  public  estate.  After  his  assassination,  the  support  for  Fortuyn  increased  dramatically,  leading  to  

 significant political gains for List Pym Fortune in the following Dutch national elections in 2002. The 

 analogies  between  List  Pym  Fortune  and  Australia’s  One  Nation  do  not  finish  there.  In  both  cases,  a  

 short-lived period of shooting-star political attention and voter support gave way to political infighting 

 and the collapse of voter support. In the Dutch elections in last January 2003, the number of successful 

 LPF candidates was cut in one third, from 25 to 8. In the Australian national elections in late 2001 voter 

 support  for  One  Nation  collapsed  spectacularly.  In  both  countries,  this  fall  in  voter  support  for  anti-immigrant  parties  was  partly  due  to  the  ineptitude  of  the  new right  politicians  and  the  narrowness  of  

 their political vision and partly by the fact that the mainstream parties took on the right wing agenda. In 

 Australia’s  case  the  Howard-led  liberal  national  coalition  government  took  on  the  Hanson  policy  

 suggestion to use the Australian navy to stop boatloads of refugees landing on Australian shores to gain 

 widespread  political  support  while  in  the  Netherlands  both  Christian  Democrats  and  Labour  took  on  

 board criticism of immigration and immigrant crime. 

 

 Despite variations, there is a common denominator to these new Right parties throughout Europe: their 

 anti-immigration  stance  and  the  association  of  immigrants  and  immigration  with  crime.  This  is  then  

 wrapped up  in a populist spin, which leads to  a discourse about how only they - the right wing party 

 leaders - have the guts to challenge the pervading powerful political correctness to echo what is in the 

 minds  of  ordinary  people.  This  populist  discourse  is  generally  also  wrapped  up  in  an  anti-politician  

 stance that mainstream parties cant be trusted to understand the ordinary people, and also usually with 

 an anti globalisation. The latter is dressed in a xenophobic rhetoric that purports to defend the national 

 culture  from  incursion  by  outside  people  (immigrants)  and  the  nation  state  from  incursion  by  outside  

 governments and, in many instances, capital. All of these elements were present in the rise and fall of 

 Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party in Australia.   

 

 But  the  concern  for  immigrant  crime  and  undocumented  immigrants  has  not  just  been  central  to  the  

 agenda  of  new  right  minority  parties  -  and,  in  Demark,  the  right  government  -   in  Europe.  Major  

 political  parties  of  the  so-called  Left,  such  as  Tony Blair’s  New Labour  (like  Bob  Carr’s  New South  

 Wales  Labor  Government)  have  responded  to  the  issues  of  immigrant  crime  in  ways  that  are  often  

 barely distinguishable from parties of the New Right. Tony Blair strongly campaigned on a strong law 

 and order, anti-crime platform in his successful election campaign that wrestled Britain from decades of 

 Conservative Government. As British Prime Minister with a massive electoral majority and a successful 

 re-lection  the  Blair  government  continues  today  to  give  high  priority  to  the  immigrant/youth  crime  

 issue,  introducing  policies  that  would  satisfy most  of  the  right  wing  anti-immigrant  ideologues  across  

 Europe.  

 

 British Home Secretary, David Blunkett, has developed an amazingly reactionary policy response and 

 discourse on youth crime and immigration. One response by David Blunkett to youth crime in Britain 

 has been to fall back on the incarceration option. In a strong-arm, zero tolerance stance on youth crime, 

 

 10  COLLINS, Jock  

 Blunkett announced plans that would put more youth in to Prison Service custody than ever before. His 

 government introduced new powers to remand youth who, in Blunkett’s words, “believe that their age 

 makes them untouchables”. As he put it to  a youth crime conference in April 2002: “We are sending 

 out  a  clear  warning  to  youngsters  who  think  that  they are  above  the  law-  you  will  be  caught  and  you  

 will  be  punished.”  (David  Rose  ‘Victims  of  Blunkett’s  lethal  war  on  crime’,  The  Observer,  12  May  

 2002, page 29). 

 

 Another response by Blunkett has been to gives his ‘whole-hearted backing’ to new and controversial 

 police  powers  to  stop  and  search,  and  record  the  ethnicity  of,  people  suspected  of  being  involved  in  

 crime. Police will now have to fill out a report card about each incident, giving his name and the reason 

 for stopping someone. People stopped will be asked their names and a description of their ‘ethnicity’, 

 although they will be able to refuse to give the details. This represents a change in direction in terms of 

 policies  related  to  the  policing  of  racial  minorities.  Following  the  1999  Macpherson  report  into  the  

 death  of  Stephen  Lawrence,  the  number  of  stop  and  searches  declined  by  up  to  40  per  cent  in  some  

 police  force  areas.  In  Britain  the  number  of  stop  and  searches  dropped  by  17  per  cent  from  2000  to  

 2001,  though  it  dropped  only  6%  in  London  and  has  risen  in  areas  such  as  Nottinghamshire.  Young 

 black  men  are  five  times  more  likely  to  be  stopped  than  white  people  (Kamal  Ahmed  and  Gaby  

 Hinsliff, ‘Race row as Blunkett backs ‘stop and search’ The Observer, Sunday March 10, 2002). 

 

 Another  policy  response  by  the  Blair  government  deals  with  the  link  between  schooling  and  crime.  

 Each  day some  50,000  British  school  children  wag  school.  Police  data  suggests  that  ‘of  all  the  many 

 crimes committed by young people aged from 10 to 16, a large proportion occur during school hours - 

 in  all,  25%  of  their  burglaries,  30%  of  car  thefts,  40%  of  street  robberies’  (‘No  place  for  a  Mother’,  

 editorial, The Guardian, May 15 2002 p. 9). The response by education secretary, Estelle Morris, had 

 been  to  jail  for  60  days  a  mother  of  two  truant  schoolgirls  aged  13  and  15.  The  fact  that  this  would  

 deprive the girls of any supervision at all for 60 days seems to have gone unnoticed by the Education 

 Secretary, whose response to youth crime seems straight out of the ‘blame the victims’ handbook.  

 

 Another  policy  response,  apparently  from  the  same  planet,  was  the  idea,  mooted  by  the  Blair  

 Government, for parents of persistent truants and youth who persistently commit crimes to forfeit their 

 child benefits. Once again, parents are not only blamed for their children’s truancy and criminality, but 

 they are punished socio-economically when socio-economic disadvantage is often a root cause of youth 

 crime. As The Guardian editorialized (April 29 2002 p. 13), this policy response is nothing but a form 

 of punitive populism and deducting benefits will not solve crime: ‘Like many moves prompted by gut 

 instinct,  the  proposal  has  a  superficial  populist  attraction.  But  the  gut  was  not  designed  to  produce  

 thoughtful responses. What is proposed is unnecessary, unworkable and wrong’. A letter to the editor of 

 The Guardian responding to these initiatives put the problem of such a policy response very succinctly:  

 

 11  COLLINS, Jock  

 ‘I had understood that Tony Blair’s pledge to abolish child poverty in a generation was linked, 

 among  other  things,  to  New Labour’s  determination  to  be  tough  on  the  causes  of  youth  crime.  

 His  latest  suggestion  -  that  child  benefit  might  be  withdrawn  from  the  families  of  persistent  

 young offenders - suggests that Labour may now seek to tackle youth crime by increasing child 

 poverty’ (Hartley Dean, Letters, The Guardian, April 29, p. 13). 

 

 One strategy developed by the Blair government to response to the issue of youth gangs is to announce 

 plan to attach police officers to schools in troubled areas. Full-time police officers will be placed in as 

 many as 400 schools, Education Secretary Estelle Morris announced, in a voluntary program designed 

 to  develop  stronger links between police and  schools in the hope  that stronger links would  help  local 

 communities beat truancy and crime. This move has the support of Police, with Steve Pilkington, Chief 

 Constable of Avon and Somerset Police and a leader on youth issues for the Association of Chief Police 

 Officers’ agreeing with the move and saying that ‘More effort must be put into preventing youth crime 

 by working in schools and seeking to intervene earlier in the lives of young people who are at high risk 

 of  turning  to  crime’  (Rebecca  Smithers  ‘Police  to  be  based  in  schools  blighted  by  truancy’,  The 

 Guardian, April 30 2002, p. 4). According to The Economist (‘Gangs: Wild things’ May 4 2002 p. 36) 

 these  policies  have  their  roots  in  an  American  anti-gang  initiative  known  as  GREAT,  which  began  in  

 Phoenix,  Arizona,  in  1992  and  citing  Dan  Grant,  the  police  chief  of  Brownstone,  Michigan,  as  

 attributing a reduction in drive by shootings and the strangling of gang recruitment to the introduction 

 of the GREAT program and the placing of police in schools.  

 

 Moreover, the Blair government makes it clear that it sees law and order in general, and youth crime in 

 particular,  as  key  planks  of  their  strategy  for  election  to  a  third  term.  New  Labor  ideologue  and  

 prominent sociologist, Anthony Giddens, has put this rationale clearly. Writing in The Guardian (‘The 

 third way can beat the far right’ May 3 2002 p.8) Giddens argued that a two-prong strategy is needed to 

 redress  the  tide  of  growing  right-wing  politics  in  Europe:  ‘reform  of  labour  markets  and  welfare  

 systems, to place an emphasis on job creation; and the need to address issues traditionally dominated by 

 the  right,  such  as  crime  and  immigration’.  Elaborating  on  the  latter,  immigration,  issue  -  which  he  

 concedes  is  perhaps  the  most  testing  of  all  for  left-of-centre  parties’,  Giddens  paraphrases  the  recent  

 and  oft-repeated  calls  by  the  Blair  government  to  be  “tough  on  crime  and  tough  on  the  causes  of  

 crime”.  He  argues  that  for  the  third  way  ‘it  is  no  use  merely  proclaiming  that  EU  countries  need  

 immigrants (they do). Policies have to be developed which are ‘tough on immigration, but tough on the 

 causes  of  hostility to  immigrants”‘  (The Guardian ‘The third way can beat the far right’ May 3 2002 

 p.8).   

 

 To  mix  the  third  way slogans  together,  Giddens  seems  that  in  saying  there  is  a  need  to  be  “tough  on  

 immigrant  crime  and  tough on the  causes of immigrant  crime”.  By this  argument,  Giddens appears to  

 argue  that the only way for non-conservative European parties -  the third  way -  to  resist the growing 

 tide  of  right  wing  anti-immigrant  politics  is  to  tackle  head  on  the  immigrant  crime  issue.  Put  in  the  

 context of New Labour’s successful political strategy of exploiting the political advantages of a tough 

 

 12  COLLINS, Jock  

 law and order stance, the suggestion is clear: New Labour needs to be tougher on immigrant crime than 

 their opponents, stealing their thunder and robbing their political advantage on the issue.  But surely the 

 consequences of such an approach is to give Labour’s imprimatur and legitimacy to the concerns about 

 immigrant  crime  that  has  been  the  hallmark  of  new  right  politics,  not  only  in  Europe  but  also  in  

 Australasia  and  North  America.  Surely  this  is  to  collapse  behind  the  racism  that  is  the  -  unspoken  -  

 basis of the populist anxiety and moral panic immigrant crime.  

 

 Indeed,  this  is  the  argument  of  prominent  British  racism  scholars,  Les  Back,  Lisa  Schuster  and  John  

 Solomos, whose response to Giddens, in a letter to the Guardian, deserves to be quoted at length: 

 ‘Giddens  takes  the  popular  debate  for  granted  and  ignores  the  whole  history  of  racism  in  

 immigration  policy  over  the  past  50  years…Despite  New  Labour’s  gestures  towards  cultural  

 inclusion, its body politic bets to a rhythm of a white heart. It cannot mourn its imperial ghosts, 

 nor  embrace  a  democratic  and  truly  multicultural  future.  In  this  climate  it  is  incumbent  on  

 scholars  to  look  critically  at  what  is  happening  in  relation  to  both  immigration  and  racism  in  

 British society. Unfortunately Giddens says nothing of the scandalous behaviour of New Labour 

 on immigration and asylum over the past five years. Rather his call for New Labour to be ‘tough 

 on immigration’ simply apes the language of the right. It is hard to see how this strategy defeats 

 the far right, since by and large it seems to accept the argument that immigrants are the problem’ 

 (Letters, The Guardian, May 6 2002 p. 13) 

 

 The  roots  of  these  policies  appear  to  lie  in  an  attempt  to  tap  rather  than  to  challenge  anti-immigrant  

 sentiment  in  Britain,  which  is  paradoxically  stronger  in  immigrant  communities  thatn  in  the  white  

 population. Recent surveys have suggested that almost half of Britain’s ethnic minorities and one third 

 of  whites  think  that  there  are  too  many  immigrants  in  Britain.  This  is  linked  to  an  overestimation  in  

 public minds about the number of immigrants in Britain: opinion polls reveal that the mean estimation 

 of the proportion of immigrants is 23%, when the actual figure is around 4% (Gary Younge, ‘At ease 

 with our Diversity’ The Guardian, May 13 2002 p. 11).  

 

 It is clear from this brief and incomplete overview of recent political and media responses to immigrant 

 crime in many of the countries in the European Union in the last few years that political parties of all 

 persuasions  and  size  have  embraced  the  irresistible  political  bait  of  the  racialised  interpretation  of  

 immigrant  law and  order  issue  dressed  up  as  a  rational  response  to  cultural  diversity.   The  only  firm  

 conclusion  that  can  be  made  is  that  this  response  -  from  minority  right  wing  parties  and  majority  

 ‘progressive  parties  such  as  Blair’s  New  Labour  -  is  more  likely  to  be  successful  in  undermining  

 community  relations  and  destabilizing  social  cohesion  than  in  successfully  reducing  the  incidence  of  

 immigrant crime. 

 

 

 

 13  COLLINS, Jock  

 3. Gangs, Crime and Community Safety: Perceptions and Experiences in Multicultural Sydney. 

 Sydney Survey on Perceptions and Experiences of Ethnic Crime 

 In  this  section  I  report  on  the  findings  from  fieldwork  on  the  ethnic  crime  conducted  in  Sydney’s  

 Western and Southwestern suburbs in 2000 and 2001. A questionnaire on many aspects related to the 

 perceptions  and  experiences  of  immigrant  crime  was  completed  by  825  people  (380  adults  and  445  

 youth).  The  survey  was  conducted  mainly  in  Hurstville,  Bankstown,  Fairfield,  Rockdale,  Liverpool,  

 Auburn, and Bankstown LGAs in 2001 after a pilot survey in late 2000 in the Canterbury LGA. These 

 are  municipalities  in  south-western  Sydney,  the  region  where  most  of  Sydney’s  immigrant  minorities  

 live (Burnley 2000; Collins and Poynting eds, 2000) and where most of the concern about ethnic crime 

 in Sydney ahs been located. A control sample was also taken of people living in north shore LGAs. It 

 was finalised before September 11 2001. The survey was designed to  get 80% of respondents from a 

 non-English speaking background, about half adults and half youth, half male and half female. Adults 

 from 21 different birthplace groups were surveyed, as were youth from 24 different birthplace groups. 

 A  control  sample  of  about  20%  of  third  or  later  generation  Australians  and  immigrant  from  and  

 English-speaking background  was also  included. A snowballing or networking methodology was used 

 rather than a random sample. The sample was stratified to include a large range of immigrant voices, as 

 Table 3 shows. Most of the interviews with adults were conducted in languages other than English. This 

 was  in  order  to  tap  the  views  of  immigrant  Sydney-siders  who  are  at  the  centre  of  this  ethnic  crime  

 storm yet whose voices go unnoticed in most English-based opinion poll and other surveying. 

 

 

 14  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 3 

 Country of  Birth of Adults and Youth in Sydney Ethnic Crime Survey 

 Country of Birth Youth Adults 

 Australia  241  63  

 China  9  20  

 Egypt  2  21  

 Greece  3  25  

 Hong Kong 6 3 

 India  3  6  

 Italy  0  9  

 Korea  7  8  

 Lebanon  19  45 

 Macedonia  13  23 

 New Zealand 28 3 

 Philippines  5  14 

 Samoa  6  11 

 Sri Lanka 8 7 

 Tonga  2  9 

 United Kingdom 3 5 

 Vietnam  29  41 

 Croatia  2  3 

 South Africa 3 0 

 Fiji  8  8 

 Poland  2  8 

 Turkey  2  0 

 Iraq  3  6 

 Cambodia  6  3 

 Laos  0  8 

 Chile  2  0 

 Thailand  8  0 

 Other  25 22 

 Not Stated  2 

 Total  445  380 

 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 4-6) 

 

 15  COLLINS, Jock  

 Fear of Crime in Sydney 

 This concern about crime is also manifest in Australian cities. Lupton (1999) found strong evidence of 

 fear of crime among those that she surveyed in 1997 in Sydney, Bathurst and Wollongong in NSW and 

 Hobart in Tasmania. This fear seems to be linked to increasing globalisation, persistent unemployment 

 and job insecurity as well as uncertainty following rapid technological, economic and social change that 

 has characterised Australian society in the past decade. As Collins, Noble, Poynting and Tabar (2000: 

 69) argued:  

 Fear of crime is widely reported in Australian cities and towns. It appears to be part of the fabric 

 of  the  current  age  of  uncertainty  that  has  emerged  in  the  last  few  decades  in  Australia,  

 characterised  by  increasing  globalisation,  rising  unemployment  and  growing  economic  

 insecurity.  

 

 This  fear  of  crime  is  particularly  associated  with  youth  crime.  This  is  evident  in  the  United  States,  

 according to the latest review of juvenile crime and juvenile justice there. As the recent report Juvenile 

 Crime, Juvenile Justice (McCord, Widom and Crowell, 2001: 25) put it:  

 Since the late 1980s, there has been growing concern about crimes committed by young people. 

 New  accounts  of  serious  crimes  committed  by  children  and  adolescents  and  criminologists’  

 warnings of a coming tide of vicious juveniles… have encouraged the belief that young people 

 are increasingly violent and uncontrollable and that the response to juvenile justice system has 

 been inadequate. 

 

 This is also the case in Australia. For example, Lawlink NSW (1999: 5) reported the results of a survey 

 on Perceptions  of  Crime  or  Public  Nuisance  Problems  in  the  Neighbourhood,  conducted  in  NSW  in  

 April 1995. The findings suggested that youth and youth gangs were thought to be a problem for one in 

 five  people  surveyed.  In  the  last  few years,  concern  about  youth  crimes  and  youth  gangs,  particularly 

 those related to immigrant youth, has escalated to near fever pitch in Sydney (Collins et al. 2000).  

 

 Responses to the questionnaire reveal that fear of crime is very high among Sydney’s adults and youth. 

 Two  out  of  three  (63%)  of  the  adults  surveyed  were  very  concerned  about  crime,  with  another  25%  

 concerned.  Only  12  per  cent  of  those  adults  surveyed  were  mildly  concerned  or  not  concerned  at  all  

 about  crime.  In  contrast,  only  one  in  five  youth  (21%)  reported  that  they  were  very  concerned  about  

 crime, though another 41% were concerned. Overall, females appear to be more concerned about crime 

 than males, as Table 4 shows. 

 

 16  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 4 

 Concern About Crime (by Gender) 

 Concern  About  

 Crime 

 Males 

 (Number) 

 Male 

 (%) 

 Female 

 (Number) 

 Female 

 (%) 

 Very Concerned 135 34.4 194 45.4 

 Concerned 133 33.8 144 33.7 

 Mildly Concerned 95 24.2 71 16.6 

 Not Concerned 30 7.6 18 4.2 

 TOTAL  393 100 427 100 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 19) 

 

 This fear of crime is linked to the firm impression that crime is on the increase in Sydney, a view held 

 by nearly three-quarters  (72%)  of adults  surveyed  and  two  thirds  of youth.  This  seems  to  support  the  

 findings  of  a  recent  report  by  Don  Weatherburn,  director  of  the  NSW  Institute  of  Criminology,  that  

 “Australia  has  a  serious  and  growing  problem  with  both  property  and  violent  crime”.  However,  

 criminological  data  in  Australia  is  very  inadequate  and  ambiguous,  leading  Weatherburn  (2002)  to  

 reject the notion of a ‘crime wave’ in Australia today.  

 

 The  research  also  probed  the  sorts  of  crime  that  were  of  most  concern  to  the  people  of  Sydney.  It  

 revealed  that  crimes  related  to  drugs  were  perceived  as  the  biggest  problem,  followed  by  burglary,  

 violent  assault  and  street  theft.   Fear  of  sexual  assault  was  four  times  more  prevalent  among  females  

 surveyed  than  among  males.  Once  again,  publicity  given  to  the  ‘race-rape’  case  can  only  have  

 exacerbated this. 

 

 But concern about crime also has its root in the realities of crime in Sydney. Nearly one in two (44%) 

 of adults surveyed reported that had been victims of burglary, 32% had their car stolen, 12% had been 

 victims  of  street  theft  and  10%  victims  of  violent  assault.  One  in  three  youth  reported  that  they  had  

 been victims of burglary, one in five victims of car theft, 14% victims of street theft.  Moreover, 17% of 

 youth  surveyed  reported  that  they  were  victims  of  violent  assault  and  14%  (mainly  girls)  victims  of  

 sexual assault. 

 

 The survey was structured to give a voice on the issue of ethnic crime to Sydney’s ethnic community 

 itself. Over eighty per cent of those surveyed were from a non-English speaking background who lived 

 in south-western Sydney. This is important, since more than half of those who live in Sydney today are 

 first  or  second  generation  immigrants,  with  an  increasing  number  from  a  non-English  speaking  

 background (NESB). Most of the adults were surveyed in a language other than English. Their voices 

 are often ignored in the English-language based telephone opinion polling that dominates contemporary 

 Australian politics.  

 

 17  COLLINS, Jock  

 

 The survey gives a clear message, absent from recent media coverage and political point-scoring, that 

 Sydney’s  NESB  immigrants  are  much  more  likely  to  be  victims  of  crime  than  perpetrators  of  crime.  

 This is particularly the case of ethnic youth in Sydney who are more often labeled as criminals than as 

 victims of crime. 

 

 Community Safety in Sydney 

 We live an age of insecurity and flux. Well before the events of September 11 Pauline Hanson tapped 

 into  this  insecurity  resulting  from  globalisation,  economic  restructuring  rising  unemployment,  the  

 casualisation of work and  the decline of rural Australia. Her trump  card  was to  link this insecurity to  

 ethnic and indigenous minorities. One dimension of insecurity, as we have seen, is concern for crime.  

 Community  safety  is  the  other  side  of  the  coin  to  fear  of  crime.  But  the  research  reported  here  also  

 reveals an important paradox in regard to community safety in Sydney. The same people who revealed 

 the extent of their concern about crime also thought that their local area was a safe place to live in. This 

 finding is all the more startling since most of those surveyed lived in Sydney’s south-Western LGA’s, 

 the very suburbs that are regularly reported as being at the heart of crime-ridden Sydney. Overall, two 

 in every three people surveyed (71.7%) reported that they felt safe in their own area. Males in Sydney 

 feel safer living in their suburbs (77.7%) than do females (65%), with youth generally feeling safer in 

 their local area than adults. 

 

 As Table 5 shows, eight out of ten adults and youth living in the Hurstville LGA felt safe living there, 

 as  did  three  quarters  of  those  living  in  the  Canterbury  Rockdale,  Liverpool  and  Auburn  LGA’s.  

 Feelings  of  safety  were  lowest  in  the  Fairfield  and  Bankstown  LGAs,  where  around  55%  of  those  

 surveyed felt safe living there. In all LGAs, males felt safer than females. 

 

 Table 5 

 Do You feel Safe in your Own Area (% Yes by LGA and Gender) 

 

 Local Government Area Safe in own  

 area Auburn  Bankstown  Canterbury  Fairfield  Hurstville  Liverpool  Rockdale  Total 

 Male  85.7  58.3  79.6  60.7  84.7  86  88.4  77.7 

 Female  57.6  53.3  72.2  45.2  76.7  59.3  66.7  65 

 Total  73.3  55.3  75.7  54  81.2  72.1  75.5  71.1 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 33) 

 

 Local streets in Sydney were found to be very safe: only two adults and 21 youth were concerned for 

 their safety on local streets. This finding seems inconsistent with earlier findings about fear of crime. It 

 appears that that the sensationalist media coverage of crime in south-western Sydney suburbs has led to 

 an exaggeration of the concern for crime in the minds of Sydneysiders. A similar survey taken today,  

 

 18  COLLINS, Jock  

 when  September  11  ,  the  ‘race-rape’  case  and  the  law  and  order  election  campaign  are  fresh  in  the  

 minds of Sydney-siders, might well reveal a diminution of community safety in Sydney.  

 

 The research findings identify the public spaces in Sydney where many youth and adults do feel unsafe. 

 South-Western  Sydney’s  unsafe  places  are  mostly  pubic  transport  nodes  at  night:  the  railway  station,  

 the car park and the bus stop. Two out of every three Sydneysiders surveyed only felt safe using pubic 

 transport during the day. Only three out of every ten surveyed felt safe using Sydney’s public transport 

 at any time, with youth feeling safer on pubic transport than adults. Parks and recreation areas were also 

 felt to be dangerous at night. The local shopping centre can also be a place where adults in particular 

 can  feel  unsafe:  30%  of  adults  surveyed  felt  unsafe  in  the  local  shopping  center,  compared  to  12  per  

 cent of youth surveyed.  

 

 There  are  lessons  here  for  state  government  and  local  government  authorities,  particularly  relating  to  

 the  design  and  lighting  of  public  spaces  like  railway  and  bus  stations,  car  parks  and  public  parks.  In  

 many  of  the  south-western  suburbs  where  this  research  was  mostly  carried  out,  such  as  Campsie,  

 railway  station  improvements  currently  under  construction  or  completed  since  our  research  may  well  

 help  to  redress  some  of  these  fears.  There  is  no  point,  though,  in  undergoing  such  infrastructure  

 investment if the stations are not adequately staffed,  a point made  by railway unions in their threat to  

 refuse to stop trains at stations that are dangerously understaffed.  

 

 There are also lessons from this research for private enterprise who build shopping malls and redevelop 

 shopping  centres:  think  about  designs  and  provisions  that  will  increase  users  feelings  of  safety,  

 including young people. Youth and adults share public and commercial spaces in our suburbs and city 

 centers, though often uneasily. About one half of the youth we surveyed reported that they did hang out 

 with  groups  of  friends  in  the  streets  or  in  public  places.  This  finding  doesn’t  vary  by  gender.  The  

 shopping  centre  was  clearly  the  most  common  public  space  where  youth  gathered  with  their  friends,  

 followed  by  the  movie  theatres  and  amusement  centres.  The  next  in  the  list  are  pubic  parks  and  

 transport nodes, the railway station, bus stops and car parks. 

 

 Our  research  revealed  that  there  was  tension  between  youth  and  adults  with  respect  to  use  of  these  

 public spaces in Sydney. The youth surveyed ranked conflict with police highest, followed by conflict 

 with  adult  residents,  shopkeepers  and  security  guards.  This  highlights  a  critical  issue  to  community  

 safety in Sydney. Many youth do hang out in groups in, and have a right to share in, Sydney’s public 

 spaces, but many feel unwelcome and are unwelcome in these spaces. In the design of shopping malls 

 that increasingly shape Sydney’s metropolitan landscape there is often little attention given to the way 

 in which youth might be accommodated in a way that would acknowledge their desire to, and right to, 

 access these spaces and at the same time minimise conflict with adults and fear of safety of adults. It is 

 not sufficient to  just invest in bigger and  angrier security guards with the intention just to  evict youth 

 from these spaces.  

 

 

 19  COLLINS, Jock  

 Criminal Gangs and Youth Gangs in Sydney 

 One  of  the  most  controversial  issues  relating  to  crime  in  Sydney today relates  to  the  role  of  gangs  in  

 general,  and  ethnic  gangs  in  particular.  In  our  book,  Kebabs,  Kids,  Cops  and  Crime  (Collins  et  al., 

 2000)  we  argued  that  there  was  a  need  to  investigate  the  issue  of  criminal  gangs  with  a  degree  of  

 complexity that is often missing in media coverage. First, we need to separate what constitutes gangs of 

 organised  crime  from gangs of youth.  Second,  we  really need  to  interrogate  the  issue  of youth gangs.  

 Are they just friendship groups of kids hanging out mainly in public spaces who occasionally engage in 

 criminal  or  anti-social  behaviour?  Or  are  they  gangs  in  the  sense  that  they  have  membership  rituals,  

 hierarchal  structure  of  power  and  patterns  of  systematic  criminal  activities?  In  this  section  we  first  

 inquire into adult and youth perceptions and experience of organised criminals. We then probe further 

 into the controversial issue of youth gangs in the Sydney LGAs, including probing into the ethnicity of 

 youth gangs. 

 

 Criminal gangs are part of the history of crime in Australia and other countries (McCorkle and Miethe, 

 2002; Curry, David and Decker, 1998; Grennan, Britz, Rush and Barker, 2000; Ryan and Rush, 1997). 

 Certainly,  gangs have  a  long history in Australia.  The  first  criminal  gangs in Australia  were  probably 

 the  bushrangers,  with  the  Ned  Kelly  Gang  being  the  most  famous.  There  are  many  ways  to  define  a  

 criminal  gang.  Goldstein  (1991)  offers  fourteen  different  definitions  of  what  constitutes  a  gang.  

 Grennan et  al.,  2000:  9-10)  offer  a  consensus  view  of  six  key  features  that  comprise  a  gang:  being  

 organized;  having  identifiable  leadership;  identifying  with  a  territory;  continual  association;  having  a  

 specific purpose; and engaging in illegal activities.  

 

 How  afraid  should  the  public  be  of  gangs?  Do  the  images  and  rhetoric  surrounding  street  gangs  

 accurately  reflect  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  threat?  Has  the  response  to  gangs  been  commensurate  

 with the actual threat posed by these bands of young males? 

 Organised Criminal Gangs 

 It is not surprising, given the strong media coverage about ethnic crime gangs in Sydney that, about two 

 thirds of the youth and adults surveyed did think that organized crime was a problem in their local area 

 in Sydney, as Table 6 shows. 

 

 20  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 6 

 Do you Believe there is Organised Crime Locally? (numbers and %) 

 Is  there  Organised  

 Crime Locally 

 Youth  Adults  Total  

 %Yes  62.6  61.2  62  

 % No 37.4 33.8 38.0 

 Numbers Yes 276 221 497 

 Numbers No 165 140 305 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 41) 

 

 

 Perhaps the most remarkable feature of Table 6 is that four out of every ten youth and adults surveyed 

 in the Fairfield LGA—where Cabramatta is located and the place attached to much of the media moral 

 panic  about  ethnic  gangs  in  Sydney  (Castillo  and  Hirst  2000;  Dreher  2000)—did  not  think  that  there  

 was organised crime in the area. Together with Hurstville and Rockdale, Fairfield had the most people 

 who  did  not  think  that  there  was  organised  crime  in  the  area.  Bankstown  (three  quarters  of  those  

 surveyed)  and  Auburn (seven out  of every ten)  were  the  LGAs  that  most  respondents thought  was an 

 area where organised crime was present. The finding with regard to Bankstown is not surprising, since 

 Bankstown has often been mentioned in media headlines about Lebanese and Middle Eastern crime (de 

 Freitas 2000), and the Bankstown suburb of Punchbowl was where Edward Lee was stabbed to death in 

 October 1998, an event that triggered much of the Sydney ethnic crime debate that followed (Collins et 

 al., 2000: 1).  

 

 Youth Gangs 

 One of the big issues in the current discourse about crime in Sydney is that of youth gangs, particularly 

 ethnic  youth  gangs.  Youth  gangs  have  captured  many  a  media  headline  in  Sydney  over  the  past  four  

 years.  It is not surprising then that two out of three (64%) of adults surveyed agreed that there was a 

 problem with youth gangs. Youth seem more ambivalent on this issue, with 55% agreeing that there is 

 a problem with youth gangs in the Sydney area and 45% disagreeing. As Table 7 shows, two in three of 

 those surveyed agreed that there was a problem of youth gangs in their local area. 

 

 21  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 7 

 Is there a Problem with Youth Gangs in Area? (by LGA) 

 Local Government Area Problem  with  

 Youth  Gangs  

 in the Area 

 Auburn 

 Banks-town 

 Canter-bury 

 Fair-field  Hurst-ville  Liver-pool  Rock-dale  Total  

 Yes  68.0  72.7  76.2  58.2  51.9  51.4  48.6  60.7  

 No  32.0  27.3  23.8  41.8  48.1  48.6  51.4  39.3  

 Total  100  100  100  100  100  100  100  100  

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 44). 

 

 But how prevalent are youth gangs in Sydney?  The central issue here is the distinction between youth 

 gangs and friendship groups of youth who gather together in public places. The international literature 

 stresses  the  formality  of  youth  gangs,  with  initiation  rights  and  procedures,  hierarchies  and  uniforms  

 being characteristic features of youth gangs in the US.  The Sydney research suggests that the concern 

 over youth gangs may be greatly exaggerated. While one half of youth surveyed reported that they do 

 hang out with friends in pubic spaces in Sydney (Table 8), only 10% of these youth answered yes to the 

 question: "Is this group a gang?", as Figure 1 shows. The common link between these groups of youth 

 is not organized crime, but a shared school, interest in music, sport or other youth interests and, in some 

 cases, shared ethnicity. 

 

 Table 8 

 Do You Belong to a Group that Hangs Around in Streets or Public Places? 

  Males  Females  Total  

 Yes (Nos.) 118 96 214 

 Yes (%) 48.6% 48.2% 48.4% 

 No (Nos.) 125 103 228 

 No (%) 51.4% 51.8% 51.6% 

 Total Nos 243 199 442 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 55). 

 

 

 Figure 1. 

 Do You Consider your Group to be a Gang? 

 

 

 22  COLLINS, Jock  

 yes

 no

 Group Considered a Gang

 10.00% 25.0

 90.00% 225.0

 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 59). 

 

 Ethnicity and Crime in Sydney 

 One  of  the  critical  issues  in  the  Sydney  crime  controversy  relates  to  the  links  between  ethnicity  and  

 crime. The Premier and the Police have been come in for criticism from some quarters about their racial 

 profiling  and  eagerness  to  link  criminal  activity  to  particular  ethnic  groups  in  Sydney,  particularly  

 Lebanese and Middle Eastern immigrants and Asian immigrants. The criticism is leveled at the way in 

 which criminality is shifted  from individuals to  cultures via this public and  political discourse and  its 

 eager amplification in sensationalist elements of the Sydney media.  

 

 Today  in  Sydney  the  words  ‘‘ethnicity’’  and  ‘‘crime’’  go  together,  a  heroic  couplet  for  the  new  

 Millennium it appears, so often are they used together in the current media discourse. We investigated 

 this link between ethnicity and  youth gangs in the minds of the multicultural public in South-Western 

 Sydney that we surveyed. They were asked whether youth gang  and whether organized criminal gangs 

 in  Sydney  were  linked  to  individuals  of  particular  cultural  backgrounds.  We  then  asked  those  who  

 thought that crime gangs were linked to particular cultural groups to identify those groups.  

 

 Perhaps surprisingly, the majority (albeit a slight majority only) did not link youth gangs with particular 

 cultural backgrounds, as Table 9 shows. Those that did so were more likely to living in the Canterbury, 

 Rockdale and Hurstville  LGAs than in the Fairfield, Auburn, Liverpool and Bankstown LGAs. Clearly 

 if the  survey were  taken today the  publicity about  the  gang rapes leading to  long jail  terms for  young 

 Lebanese males the results would very likely be higher overall and higher in particular for Bankstown. 

 

 23  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 9: 

 Are Youth Gangs from Particular Cultural Backgrounds? (by gender) 

 Youth  Gangs  linked  with  

 cultural background 

 Males  Females  

 Yes % 61.4% 54.9% 

 No % 38.6% 42% 

 total of responses 381 408 

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 47). 

 

 When asked, those who did link criminal and youth gangs to particular cultural groups names to name 

 these  groups,  about  half  of  the  adult  respondents  thought  that  there  was  a  link,  mentioning  many  

 combinations of Lebanese and others from the Middle East; Asian, including specifically Chinese and 

 Vietnamese,  Pacific  Islanders,  Samoans  and  Maoris.  This  question  was  also  put  to  youth.  The  most  

 frequent  responses  identified  those  involved  in  youth  gangs  to  be  of  a  Lebanese  (155  responses),  

 Middle  Eastern  (31),  and  Arabic  (14)  background.  The  other  two  groups  most  often  mentioned  were  

 from  Asia—Asian  (136),  Chinese  (30),  Korean  (10)  and  Vietnamese  (31)—or  the  Pacific  Islands—

 Pacific Islanders (30), Tongan (10). Only 17 youth thought that youth gangs were of Australian cultural 

 background. 

 

 The  most  common  cultural  groups  linked  to  organized  crime  gangs  by  both  adult  and  youth  

 respondents were very identical to  those cultural groups linked  to  youth gangs: ‘‘Lebanese", ‘‘Middle 

 eastern"  and  ‘‘Arabic’’  or  "Ãsian",  "Chinese’’  and  ‘‘Vietnamese".  Other  groups  mentioned  were  

 Islanders, Tongans, Korean, Assyrian, Korean, Italian, Greek, Iraqui, Indian, Turkish, and Macedonian. 

 Five youth mentioned ‘wogs’’ while another 4 mentioned ‘‘Fobs’’ in this regard.  Interestingly, only 8 

 adults and 10 youth identified ‘‘Australians" as the cultural group linked to organized criminal gangs in 

 Sydney. Those who linked youth gangs to particular cultural backgrounds gave a similar profile.  

 

 What emerges strongly here is that the memories of Lennie McPherson and Abe Saffron - Sydney’s Mr 

 Bigs of crime a decade or so ago - and people like Neddie Smith, disgraced policeman Roger Rogerson 

 or sexual murderers the Murphy brothers (vicious killers of Anita Cobby) do not appear to linger on the 

 criminal  imagination  on  those  surveyed,  despite  their  regular  mention  in  the  Sydney  media  for  many  

 years.  It is clear that crime and criminal gangs have been reconstituted as an ethnic, that is, as a non-Anglo Celtic phenomenon in Sydney, despite criminal statistics and histories to the contrary. And while 

 we did not investigate this pint further, it is clear that the media and political preoccupation with ethnic 

 crime has been the prime movers in this dramatic mind shift.  

 Policing in NSW 

 Another controversial issue in the crime debate relates to policing. A very public change at the top of 

 the NSW police force - the names of Alan Jones and Peter Ryan linked in a media dominated power 

 

 24  COLLINS, Jock  

 struggle over law and order in NSW - and the installation of yet another Minister for Police has ensured 

 that policing will be one of the key election issues. The survey contains good and bad news for the new 

 police commissioner and his minister.  

 

 The  good  news  is  that  most  adults  rank  police  handling  of  youth  and  criminal  gangs  highly,  though 

 community attitudes on policing are clearly polarized and youth are not so praiseworthy of the Sydney 

 police.  About  six  out  of  ten  adults  adults  surveyed  thought  that  the  Police  were  handling  organised  

 crime and youth gangs in Sydney ‘very well’ or ‘well’. On the other hand four out of ten ranked police 

 poorly or very poorly on this score.   

 

 However,  the  bad  new is  that  youth  were  not  as  positive  as  adults  about  police:  six  out  of  every  ten  

 youth surveyed rated police handling of organized crime and youth gangs in their area as poor or very 

 poor. The LGA’s where over 50% of respondents rated police handling of youth gangs as ‘very well’ or 

 ‘well’ are Rockdale (53.7%), Canterbury (52%) and Fairfield (53.2%). Police rates lowest on the youth 

 gang front in Auburn, Bankstown and Liverpool, as Table 10shows. 

 

 25  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 10 

 How Well the Police are Handling Organised Crime (by LGA) 

 Local Government Area Police 

 Handling  of  

 Crime 

 Auburn 

 Banks-town 

 Canter-bury 

 Fair-field  Hurstville  Liverpool  

 Rock-dale 

 Total 

 Very  well  4.2  4.7  12.1  19.6  12.3  5.3  7.0  9.4  

 Well  33.3  34.4  54.5  31.5  38.5  38.9  49.0  40.1  

 Poorly  43.1  39.8  21.2  35.9  34.6  42.1  28.0  34.8  

 Very 

 poorly 

 19.4  21.1  12.1  13.0  14.6  13.7  16.0  15.8  

 Total  100  100  100  100  100  100  100  100  

 *Figures expressed as percentages. Source: Collins et al (2002: 63). 

 

 Two out of three adults ranked police were handling of young people - as distinct from youth gangs - 

 as  ‘very  good’  or  ‘good’.  But  young  people  were  not  so  enthusiastic,  with  over  half  (55%)  of  youth  

 rating police handling of youth in general as ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’. When considering these results by 

 LGA,  pattern  emerges  similar  to  other  questions  about  police  action:  they  were  ranked  highest  in  

 Canterbury Rockdale and Hurstville and lowest in Auburn, Bankstown and Liverpool.  

 

 Adults surveyed overwhelmingly (86.4%) with the proposition that police should be tougher on youth 

 gangs.  It  is  interesting  that  three  out  of  four  youth  surveyed  (75.5%)  also  agreed  to  this  proposition.  

 This  highlights  the  need  to  view  youth  as  victims  of  youth  crime  in  general  and  youth  gangs  in  

 particular, not just as the perpetrators of crime.  

 

 We wanted to investigate how our respondents felt about the relations between police and youth from 

 ethnic  minorities so  we  asked  if those  youth and  adults thought that  police  picked  on some  groups of 

 young people, and if so, to identify these groups.  

 Table 11. 

 Do Police Pick on Groups of Young People (by gender and age %) 

  Yes  No  

 Males  56.5%  43.5%  

 Females  52.8%  47.2%  

 Youth  62.8%  37.2%  

 Adults  44.8%  55.2%  

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 66). 

 

 

 26  COLLINS, Jock  

 

 These results are shown in Table 11. Overall, a slight majority of those surveyed agreed that police did 

 pick  on  groups  of  young  people,  with  males  slightly  more  likely  to  agree  to  this  proposition  than  

 females.  When  age  of  respondents  is  considered,  it  is  clear  that  two  in  every  three  youth  surveyed  

 (62.8%) thought that police picked on groups of young people. There is also a spatial dimension to this 

 question  of  police  picking  on  youth  from  particular  backgrounds.  As  Table  12  shows,  two  in  three  

 people  who  live  in  Auburn,  Fairfield  and  Rockdale  LGAs  believe  that  police  do  pick  on  youth  from  

 particular  backgrounds,  as  do  more  than  half  of  those  who  live  in  Bankstown,  Hurstville  and  

 Canterbury LGAs. In Liverpool, only one third of the respondents thought that this was so. 

 

 27  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 12: 

 Do Police Pick on Groups of Young People (by LGA) 

 Local Government Area Yes Yes % 

 Auburn  45  62%  

 Bankstown  69  56%  

 North Shore 13 42% 

 Canterbury  53  51%  

 Fairfield  59  62%  

 Hurstville  74  57%  

 Liverpool  41  39%  

 Rockdale  61  62%  

 Miscellaneous  20  37%  

 Total  435  55%  

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 66). 

 

 Adults asked to identify these groups most often mentioned immigrants from Asia, the Middle East and 

 Lebanon,  with  Pacific  Islanders  also  mentioned.  Those  youth  surveyed,  named  Asian,  Lebanese,  

 Middle Eastern and Islander youth as those who they thought suffered police harassment in the Sydney 

 area. Most adults did not believe that police did harass ethnic groups of youth but those who disagreed 

 nominated youth from Asian, Chinese, Lebanese, Vietnamese and Pacific Islanders as victims of police 

 harassment in the area. 

 Immigrant Victims of Crime 

 Victim reports are another source of information about the extent of criminality in a society or city, and 

 are particularly important because of the problems, discussed above, of police records of arrest rates or 

 prison  data.  In  the  United  States,  a  National  Crime  Victimisation  Survey,  which  began  in  1973,  is  

 conducted  annually  and  reports  on  the  findings  of  a  survey  of  43,000  households  about  crimes  

 committed against people over 12 years of age (McCord, Widom and Crowell, 2001: 29).  

 

 

 28  COLLINS, Jock  

 There  is  a  very  big  inconsistency  between  fear  about  crime  and  the  actual  incidence  of  

 crime.  We  pressed  both  adults  and  youth  a  bit  further  on  this,  asking  them  about  their  

 personal  experiences  of  crime.  Burglary  (167  reports)  and  car  theft  (121  reports)  are  the  

 crimes of which most adults surveyed in Sydney had been victims.  These far outweigh the 

 other experiences of crime among adults surveyed: 47 adults had been victims of street theft, 

 38  were  victims  of  violent  assault,  while  eight  adults  reported  being  a  victim  of  sexual  

 assault.  We  asked  a  similar  question  of  the  youth  we  surveyed.  Youth  experience  matches  

 that of the adult sample in that burglary (145 reports) and car theft (87 reports) are the most 

 common  criminal  experiences  that  youth  interviewed  for  our  study  have  experienced  as  

 victims  of  crime.  Importantly,  however,  youth  also  reported  a  higher  incidence  of  being  

 victims  of  violent  assaults  (76  reports),  sexual  assault  (30  reports)  and  street  theft  (62  

 reports)  than  adults.  Moreover,  the  incidence  of  sexual  assault  is  much  higher  for  youth  

 (mainly  girls)  than  for  adults.  These  findings  indicate  that  a  surprisingly  high  number  of  

 respondents  had  personal  experiences  of  crime,  although  most  of  this  is  related  to  theft  of  

 cars or property. Thus, whilst youth are often portrayed as perpetrators of crimes, they are 

 the victims of violent assaults as well. 

 Self-reporting of crime in Sydney 

 Another  insight  into  crime  in  Sydney  comes  from  the  responses  to  questions  in  the  Sydney  survey  

 asking  adults  and  youth  about  the  crimes  that  they  have  committed  themselves.  Of  course,  this  data  

 source also has problems. There is a question about the accuracy of the information provided, although 

 research in the United  States suggests that the validity of self-reported  data tends to  vary by race and  

 gender. In particular, some studies have argued that black and minority youth in the USA are less likely 

 to  report  offences  that  are  already  known  to  officials  than  are  white  youth  (Tracy  1987).  But,  as  

 McCord, Widom and Crowell (2001: 31) argue: “It is not known whether the self-reports or the official 

 records  are  more  accurate…  Each  type  of  data  for  analyzing  crime  trends  has  advantages  and  

 disadvantages’. In the light of these qualifications, we asked those surveyed if they themselves had ever 

 been involved in committing a crime. Of course researchers would need annual survey that asked about 

 crime committed in the past year to construct an authoritative picture of the rate of crime. We did not 

 Aboriginal Arabic Asian

 Assyrian Chinese Ethnic Groups

 "Fobs" Greek Islander

 Korean Lebanese Macedonian

 Maori Middle Eastern Tongan

 Turkish Vietnamese "Wogs"

 Othe r

 Cultural Background

 25

 50

 75

 100

 125

 Count

 7

 19

 135

 13 

 10

 21

 6 4 28 4

 116

 3 5

 22

 3

 7

 15

 7

 24

 

 29  COLLINS, Jock  

 set out to do this. We also asked those surveyed if their friends had ever committed a crime to get a sort 

 of  self-reporting-once-removed  insight  into  the  crimes  of  youth  in  particular  in  our  survey.  The  logic  

 behind this question is that, as Warr (2002: 3) argues: 

 Criminal conduct is predominantly social behaviour. Most offenders are embedded in a network 

 of  friends  who  also  break  the  law,  and  the  single  strongest  predictor  of  criminal  behaviour  

 known to criminologists is the number of delinquent friends an individual has. 

 

 The Sydney survey revealed that 34.3% of the males had self-reported criminal activity in the past (no 

 time  period  was  specified  in  the  question),  only  15.4%  of  the  females  had  been  involved  in  criminal  

 activity,  as  Table  13  shows.  Although  no  time  period  was  specified  in  the  question,  this  finding  

 confirms that concerns about youth crime do have some foundation and is not just a figment of media 

 imagination.  

 

 Table 13: Youth in Sydney Survey Self-reporting Criminal Activity (Nos and %) 

  Male 

 (numbers) 

 Male  % Female 

 (numbers) 

 female  % Total 

 (numbers) 

 Total  % 

 Yes  82  34.3  30  15.4  112  25.8  

 No  157  65.7  165  84.6  322  74.2  

 Total  229   195   434   

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 29). 

 

 There  is  of  course  a  spatial  dimension  to  youth  crime  in  Sydney  because  crime  occurs  in  different  

 suburbs  at  different  rates.  Criminological  data  of  arrests  of  youth,  or  of  criminal  incidents  allegedly  

 involving youth in different LGAs, is one take on this spatial dimension of crime within the metropolis. 

 Table  14  shows  the  youth  respondents  who  admitted  to  criminal  activity  in  the  past  by  the  LGA  in  

 which  they  live.  This  shows  that,  of  those  surveyed,  the  highest  proportion  of  youth  who  reported  a  

 criminal  past  lived  in  the  Bankstown  LGA  (33%),  closely  followed  by  youth  who  lived  in  the  North  

 Shore  (29%),  Liverpool  (28%),  Rockdale  (28%)  and  Auburn  (27%)  LGAs.  The  lowest  proportion  of  

 youth who reported a criminal past lived in the Canterbury (24%), Hurstville (19%) and Fairfield (17%) 

 LGAs. Of course, the sample is not random, so that these figures are not necessarily representative of 

 all  youth  in  these  areas.  Nevertheless,  it  is  interesting  that  youth  surveyed  in  Sydney’s  North  Shore  

 LGA self-reported similar rates of criminality to those in the Liverpool, Rockdale and Auburn LGAs, 

 and  that  Fairfield  was  the  LGA  with  the  lowest  rate  of  self-reported  youth  criminality.  This  finding  

 upsets the stereotypes that generally represent the middle-class North Shore as a less criminal place that 

 Fairfield, particularly given the constant media depiction of Cabramattta—within the Fairfield LGA—

 as the heroin and crime capital of western Sydney (Dreher 2000; Castillo and Hirst 2000). 

 

 

 

 30  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 14: Youth Admitting Criminal Activity by the Sydney LGA in which they 

 Live 

 Local Government Area   

 Auburn 

 Banks-town 

 Canter-bury 

 Fairfield  Hurstville  Liverpool  Rockdale  

 North 

 Shore 

 Yes 17  22  9  9  11  19  15  7  

 No 44  45  28  34  47  49  39  17  

 % 

 yes 

 27  33  24  17  19  28  28  29  

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 30). 

 

 When  we  asked  the  youth  surveyed  in  Sydney  if  any  of  their  friends  had  ever  been  involved  in  

 committing  a  crime—that  is,  friend-reporting  of  youth  criminal  activity  in  Sydney—the  most  striking  

 finding was that the rates of criminality of youth were much higher that the self-reporting findings. As 

 Table  15  shows,  just  over  half  (51.7%)  of  youth  reported  that  they  had  friends  who  had  committed  

 crimes. Of course, these ‘criminal friends’ may be known to many of the youth surveyed, so this does 

 not necessarily give a clear picture of the rate of criminality per se. However, given the significance of 

 youth  crime  as  a  group  phenomenon  that  is  steeped  in  peer  group  behaviour,  networks  and  

 relationships,  this  finding  is  still  very  significant.  Moreover,  there  was  a  convergence  of  male  and  

 female experiences in this regard: nearly half of all female youth surveyed (44.6%) reported that they 

 had  friends  who  had  been  engaged  in  criminal  activities.  This  finding  suggests  that  criminal  activity  

 plays a greater part in the life of female peer groups and in the lives of young females in Sydney—at 

 least indirectly—than the well-worn clichÃ© that ‘crime is a masculine behaviour’ would imply.  

 Table 15: Youth in Sydney Survey Friend-reporting of Criminal Activity (Nos and %) 

  Male  

 (numbers) 

 Male  % Female 

 (numbers) 

 Female  % Total 

 (numbers) 

 Total   % 

 Yes  138  57.5  86  44.6  224  51.7  

 No  102  42.5  107  55.4  209  48.3  

 Total  240   193   433   

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 31). 

 

 As  Table  16  shows,  around  two  in  three  youth  surveyed  in  the  North  Shore,  Auburn  and  Rockdale  

 LGAs reported  that they had  friends who  had  engaged  in criminal activity, as did  about half of youth 

 who  lived  in  Liverpool,  Bankstown  and  Canterbury  LGAs.  In  contrast,  only  one  third  of  the  youth  

 surveyed  in the Hurstville LGA,  and  one fourth of the youth surveyed  in the Fairfield  LGA,  reported  

 that they had friends who had committed criminal acts. Again the picture emerging of Fairfield LGA in 

 particular is more benign with respect to youth crime than popular media stereotypes would lead us to 

 believe. 

 

 31  COLLINS, Jock  

 Table 16: Youth Admitting that they have Friends who have been involved in Criminal 

 Activity by the Sydney LGA in which they Live 

 Local Government Area 

 

 Auburn 

 Banks-town 

 Canter-bury 

 Fairfield  Hurstville  Liverpool  Rockdale  

 North 

 Shore 

 Yes  37  32  18  16  25  35  31  16  

 No  24  34  19  26  33  33  21  8  

 % 

 yes 

 61  48  49  38  43  51  60  66  

 Source: Collins et al (2002: 31). 

 

 2.  Conclusion  

 A number of important findings have emerged from this survey. First, there is clear evidence that there 

 is  widespread  concern  about  crime,  or  fear  of  crime,  among  Sydney’s  NESB  youth  and  adults.  Many 

 people surveyed attribute crime in Sydney to organised crime gangs and youth gangs. To about half of 

 those we surveyed, these gangs are associated with particular ethnic groups, particularly Asian, Middle-Eastern  and  Pacific  Islander  immigrants.  It  is  not  clear  from  our  research  how  much  of  this  fear  of  

 crime and the linking of crime to specific ethnic groups is a product of personal experience of crime per 

 se  or  of  reflected  ‘experiences’  read  about  in  what  has  become  a  very  vocal  and  persistent  media  

 coverage;  a  coverage  that  has  now been  loudly  broadcasting  this  link  between  crime  and  ethnicity  in  

 Sydney for the past three and a half years.  

 

 We also  know that many NESB  Sydney-siders feel most unsafe on public transport and at places like 

 railway stations, bus stations and car parks. Sydney’s youngest and oldest NESB immigrant populations 

 living in the South Western Sydney suburbs are much more likely to  rely on public transport. Yet we  

 found  that  most  of  those  people  who  live  in  the  suburbs  of  South  Western  Sydney  that  have  been  

 portrayed  by  the  Sydney  media  as  the  heart  of  ethnic  crime  actually  feel  very  safe  living  in  these  

 suburbs. This finding supports our view that much of the fear about crime in Sydney is, itself, in part a 

 product of a media beat-up compounded by the political opportunism of state politicians on all sides of 

 the political spectrum.  

 

 This is not to say that immigrant youth do not commit crimes, or that ethnic youth and criminal gangs 

 do not exist. In fact, our data on the self-reporting of crime by ethnic youth confirms that they do, as 

 does the recent police arrests of Middle Eastern immigrants involved in criminal gangs of organized car 

 stealers in Sydney during the last few months. Rather, the most important point is that the fear of ethnic 

 youth crime in Sydney appears to be far out of proportion to the realities of the scale of ethnic youth 

 crime  in  existence.  While  some  immigrant  youth  do  engage  in  criminal  behaviour,  this  is  probably  a  

 transitory  stage  for  many  youth  of  all  ethnic  backgrounds  in  Sydney  today.  From  earlier  research  

 (Collins et  al.,  2000)  we  have  established  that  only  a  minority  of  youth  in  Sydney  appear  to  be  the  

 

 32  COLLINS, Jock  

 perpetrators  of  serious  crime,  and  only  a  minority  continue  this  criminality  into  adult  life.  Perhaps  

 acceptance  of  the  normality  of  youth  crime  might  help  dissolve  some  of  the  moral  panic  and  fear  of  

 crime in our society. 

 

 The  Sydney  survey  also  reveals  that  most  of  the  NESB  youth  interviewed  hang  out  in  public  spaces  

 together, and that most of these youth do not consider these friendship groups to be ‘gangs’. This leads 

 us to the view that the fear of youth gangs in Sydney is being exaggerated by media coverage. This is 

 not to deny that there are youth gangs in Sydney and that some of them do have their basis in ethnic 

 solidarity. However, the media moral panic about ethnic youth gangs appears to be out of step with the 

 reality  and,  once  again,  is  a  major  contributing  factor  in  the  vast  insecurity  and  fear  of  crime  that  

 pervades Sydney today.  

 

 This  survey  does  confirm  strongly  that  youth  are  as  much  the  victims  of  crime  as  they  are  its  

 perpetrators. As such, they are deserving of our sympathy, help and understanding rather than just our 

 blame and suspicion. Youth of all ethnic backgrounds have a right to access Sydney’s public spaces, yet 

 they do not appear to be well served by urban planners and municipal and state authorities in terms of 

 the provision of safe public space, particularly at night and at public transport nodes. Moreover, there is 

 an apparent tension between youth and the owners of shopping malls and others who commodify public 

 space.  Once  again,  youth  have  a  right  to—and  will—access  these  private  commercial  venues,  even  

 though their  layout  and  design often fails to  come  to  grips with this  important  aspect  of social  design 

 for Sydney’s commercial spaces. 

 

 Police  actions  and  response  to  crime  and  police  handling  of  youth  and  criminal  gangs  are  clearly  

 controversial  issues  among  the  adults  and  youth  surveyed.  Not  surprisingly,  NESB  youth  are  less  

 supportive  of  police  actions  than  are  adults.  However,  even  here  there  seems  to  be  a  split  within  the  

 youth  and  the  adults  surveyed  about  how  they  view  police  responses  to  crime  in  Sydney.  

 Fundamentally,  the  question  remains:  is  this  high  concern  about  crime  by  those  living  in  Sydney’s  

 South Western suburbs based on their experiences of crime, or some media and political construction of 

 crime which have continually stamped these ethnic groups as criminal and the regions that they live in 

 as the “crime precincts” of Sydney? 

 

 What we do know is that fear of crime is disproportionate to experiences of actual crime. We also know 

 that it is only a minority of youth of Asian,  Middle-Eastern and Pacific Islander background  who are 

 involved in youth and criminal gangs, and that youth and criminal gangs are not the preserve of youth 

 of Asian, Middle-Eastern and Pacific Islander background. The great danger of the current moral panic 

 about ethnic crime in Sydney is that the criminality of a few begins to be portrayed as a criminality of a 

 culture. This leads to the negative stereotyping of many of Sydney’s diverse immigrant cultures. It also 

 leads to the possibility that we respond to, analyze and portray ethnic youth crime in Sydney in a very 

 different  way  to  that  response  we  have  to  crime  committed  by  youth  of  the  majority  Anglo-Celtic  

 background. This process leads inevitably to the racialisation of the youth crime problem in Sydney. If 

 

 33  COLLINS, Jock  

 this  is  the  case—and  there  is  strong  evidence  in  Sydney  that  this  has  been  the  case  for  the  past  four  

 years—then we put at risk an accurate understanding of the nature, extent and dynamics of the crime 

 issue  in  Sydney  and  also  put  at  risk  the  ability  of  policy  responses  to  deal  adequately  with  the  issue.  

 Even  more  alarmingly,  if  we  continue  to  reinforce  the  racialisation  of  the  youth  crime  issue  in  the  

 discourses,  policies  and  practices  of  Sydney’s  media,  police  and  governments,  the  social  cohesion  of  

 one of the world’s most cosmopolitan cities is put in jeopardy.  

 

 This  conclusion  also  seems  to  hold  for  European  responses  to  the  immigrant  crime  issue.  In  all  

 culturally-diverse  societies   -  including  Britain,  the  USA,  Canada  and  Australia,  there  have  been  

 problems of police racism. In all these countries there is an issue of the racialisation of crime. That is, 

 authorities react to, and  respond  to, issues of immigrant crime in a different, more dramatic way than 

 they respond to non-immigrant crime of the same dimensions. Invariably, the public discourses around 

 immigrant  crime  see  it  to  be  worse  than  non-immigrant  crime.  In  all  cases,  negative  stereotypes  are  

 drawn  in  the  official  discourses  of  authorities  as  well  as  in  the  public  discourses  in  newspapers;  talk  

 back  radio  and  televisions  coverage  and  reports.  This  recreates  negative  sentiments  about  immigrant  

 minorities,  fuels  xenophobia  and  appears  to  confirm the  fears  and  arguments  of  the  new Right.  In  all  

 cases this is overlaid by a negative discourse on immigration in general, and refugee and undocumented 

 immigration  in  particular.  The  main  worry  is  that  as  the  processes  of  globalisation  gradually  but  

 inexorably  increase  cultural  diversity  in  countries  in  Europe,  Australasian  and  Northern  America  the  

 racialised discourse on immigrant or ethnic crime can only undermine social cohesion and feelings of 

 community safety. This worry is further entrenched by the apparent inability of politicians from all ends 

 of  the  political  spectrum  to  avoid  opportunistic  point  scoring  on  the  law  and  order  issue  and  the  

 inability  of  sensationalist  media  from  irresponsibly  fanning  a  moral  panic  about  immigrant  crime  in  

 particular and the problems of an immigration-induced culturally diverse society in general. 

 

 In  culturally-diverse  societies,  criminals  will  be  culturally-diverse.  It  is  true,  at  least  in  Australia,  that  

 some youth from some immigrant minorities are over-represented in institutions of the criminal justice 

 system. Some youth do form gangs, while transnational organized crime often uses ethnic solidarity as 

 a  key leverage  of trust.  Immigrant crime  is a  reality in Europe  and  Australia,  though data  does not as 

 yet  allow  a  sufficiently  precise  image  of  this  relationship.  But  the  important  issue  here  is  how  to  

 respond to immigrant crime in a way that is sensitive to broader social cohesion of our towns, cities and 

 neighborhoods.  There  are  also  important  policy  implications  that  flow  from  this.  First,  in  relation  to  

 policy responses to  immigrant crime, a preoccupation with the cultural or ethnic dimensions of crime 

 will  lead  focus  away  from  socio-economic  and  social  class  dimensions  of  criminal  behaviour.  This  

 leads to an emphasis on policies to have more police with stronger powers, to develop ‘ethnic profiling’ 

 reports and statistics, to get ethnic community and religious leaders to deal with their troubled young. It 

 leads  away from a  policy response  rooted  in  improved  education  outcomes,  qualification  recognition,  

 employment-creation  and  local  area  community  development  strategies,  and  away  from  masculinity  

 and adolescence and away from an adequate emphasis on policing in a multicultural society.  

 

 34  COLLINS, Jock  

 Bibliography   

 Blainey, G. (1984) All For Australia, North Ryde: Methuen 

 Burnley,  Ian  (2001)  The  Impact  of  Immigration  on  Australia:  A  Demographic  Approach  (South  

 Melbourne, Oxford University Press). 

 Castillo,  A.  and  Hirst,  M.  (2000)  ‘Looking  Both  Ways:  Fairfield,  Cabramatta  and  the  Media.’  In  Jock  

 Collins and Scott Poynting (eds.) (2000) The Other Sydney: Communities, Identities and Inequalities in 

 Western Sydney. Melbourne: Common Ground. 

 Castles, S. and Miller, M. (1998), The Age of Migration, Macmillan, London, 2nd Edn.  

 Castles  and  Zappala  (2001)  “The  Rights  and  Obligations  of  Immigrant  Citizens and  Non-Citizens  in  

 Australia” in Atushi Kondo (ed.)  

 Collins, Jock (1991), Migrant Hands in a Distant Land: Australia’s Post-war Immigration, Pluto  

 Collins,  Jock,  Noble,  Greg,  Poynting,  Scott  and  Tabar,  Paul  (2000)  Kebabs,  Kids  Cops  and  Crime:  

 Youth Ethnicity and Crime, Pluto Press, Sydney. 

 Collins,  Jock  and  Poynting,  S.  (eds.)  (2000)  The  Other  Sydney:  Communities,  Identities  and  

 Inequalities in Western Sydney (Common Ground, Melbourne) 

 Collins,  Jock,  Noble,  Greg,  Poynting,  Scott  and  Tabar,  Paul  (2002)  Gangs,  Crime  and  Community  

 Safety:  Perceptions  and  Experiences  in  Multicultural  Australia,  (Broadway,  UTS  Centre  for  

 Transforming Culture and UTS School of Finance and Economics). 

 Curry, David G. and Decker, Scott H. (1998) Confronting Gangs: Crime and Community. Los Angeles, 

 California: Roxbury Publishing Company. 

 Dreher, Tanya (2000) ‘Cabramatta News Talk: Identity and Symbolic Power.’ In Jock Collins and Scott 

 Poynting (eds.) (2000) The Other Sydney: Communities, Identities and Inequalities in Western Sydney. 

 Melbourne: Common Ground. 

 Findlay, Mark (1999) Globalisation and Crime, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

 Goldstein,  A.P.  (1991)  Delinquent  Gangs:  A  Psychological  Perspective.  Champaign,  IL:  Research  

 Press. 

 Grennan,  Susan,  Britz,  Marjie,  Rush,  Jeffrey  and  Barker,  Thomas  (2000)  Gangs:  An  International  

 Approach. New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 

 Lupton, D. (1999) ‘Dangerous Places and the ‘Unpredictable Stranger’: Constructions of Fear of Crime.’ 

 Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology, 32, 1. 

 Markus, A. (1994) Australia’s Race Relations 1978-1993, Allen & Unwin, Sydney. 

 SOPEMI (1998) Trends in International Migration: Annual Report 1998, Paris: OECD. 

 McCord,  Joan,  Widom,  Cathy  Spatz  and  Crowell,  Nancy  A.  (eds.)  (2001)  Juvenile  Crime  Juvenile  

 Justice:  Panel  on  Juvenile  Crime:  Prevention,  Treatment  and  Control.  Washington  DC:  National  

 Academy Press. 

 McCorkle,  Richard  C.  and  Miethe,  Terance  D.  (2002)  Panic:  The  Social  Construction  of  the  Street  

 Gang Problem. Thousand Oakes, California: Sage Publications. 

 Ryan,  Patrick  J.  and  Rush,  George  E.  (eds.)  (1997)  Understanding  Organized  Crime  in  Global  

 Perspective. London: Sage Publications. 

 

 35  COLLINS, Jock  

 Schneider,  Richard  T.  and  Kitchen,  Ted  (2002)  Planning  For  Crime  Prevention:  A  TransAtlantic  

 Perspective. London: Routledge. 

 Tracy,  P.E.  (1987)  ‘Race  and  Class  Differences  in  Official  and  Self-reported  Delinquency.’  In  Don  

 Weatherburn  (2002)  Does  Australia  have  a  Law  and  Order  Problem?  Public  Lecture,  University  of  

 New South Wales, 21 May. 

