---
title: "Tasmanians commended for support of refugee settlers."
date: "2003-04-22"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Tasmania"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211561097
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YQ496%22
---

  The Hon Gary Hardgrave MP  Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Telephone: (02) 6277 7890  Facsimile: (02) 6273 0434 

  H 5 012 0 0 3 

  TASMANIANS COMMENDED FOR SUPPORT OF REFUGEE SETTLERS 

  The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave today commended the  Tasmanian community for the welcome they had given to refugees and other people in  humanitarian need who had settled in Tasmania. 

  Speaking at the launch of the Tasmanian Settlernenf Plan 2003-04 in Hobart, Mr Hardgrave said  that it was estimated that 380 refugee and humanitarian entrants would be settled in Tasmania this  financial year - a six-fold increase compared with 1999-2000. 

  “Refugee settlers in Tasmania have come from countries such as Sudan, Bosnia and Ethiopia -  countries which are culturally and linguistically different from Australia - and have settled mainly in  Hobart, Launceston, Devonport and Burnie”. 

  “The dedication and commitment of federal, state and local governments, service providers,  volunteers and the community in general, are invaluable when assisting new arrivals to participate  fully in the Australian community,” Mr Hardgrave said. 

  The Tasmanian Settlernenf Plan 2003 has been developed by the Tasmanian Immigration and  Settlement Committee (TISC), comprising of community and government sector representatives. 

  “Having a working guide helps to ensure that the work of community organisations and government  agencies is coordinated so that there is no duplication of effort, or omission of services,” Mr  Hardgrave said. 

  The Minister said the successful settlement of refugee and humanitarian entrants had been made  possible by a number of new Commonwealth strategies. These have included: 

  0 

  contracting out service provision in a way that supports the effort of community volunteers, a  process monitored by TISC  an enhanced focus of Commonwealth grants to support recent humanitarian entrants  developing better opportunities for newer settlers to obtain information and advice about living in  Tasmania. 

  “Australia’s settlement programs are renowned throughout the world. The Government sees these  programs as an important investment that contributes to each person’s ability to participate fully in  our multicultural society, realise their personal aspirations, and benefit Australia.” 

  “I commend the community and in particular the Committee for their excellent and effective  planning.’’ 

  22 April 2003 

  Media Contact: Mary Antoniou 0419 295 771 

  Note: Copies of the Settlement Plan are available from the Department of Immigration, Multicultural  and Indigenous Affairs in Hobart, which acts as secretariat to the Tasmanian Immigration and  Settlement Committee: tel. 03 6220 401 0. 

  Portfolio information is also available on the Internet: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/minister2/index. htm 

