---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 12 March 2003: agreement with Iranian Government, closure of Woomera IRPC, ATSIC review."
date: "2003-03-12"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Iran"
  - "Bilateral agreements"
  - "Iraq War"
  - "Repatriation"
  - "Work permits"
  - "Refugees"
  - "ATSIC"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211564823
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3VV86%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS 

 Press Conference - Agreement with Iranian Government, closure of  Woomera IRPC, ATSIC review

 Philip Ruddock: There are two matters that I wish to mention to you today. The first is in relation to an agreement that I have  signed with representatives of the Iranian Government who are here in Australia at this time.

 The agreement relates to a range of consular matters and if I can take you through them, one at a time. We do have a very  substantial movement of people to Australia from Iran. They come lawfully.

 I took out some figures, I think it was something in the order of 10,000 people in the last - the last five years. There are  students, there are people who come for commercial reasons, there are people who come as visitors.

 We wish to expand the range of opportunities for legitimate movement of people between Australia and Iran and one of the  opportunities that we have with many countries involves what we call working holiday arrangements. They are reciprocal,  they require opportunities for young people who meet certain criteria to be able to come on a temporary basis to work and  holiday as part of those arrangements and it applies to people who meet certain age criteria, certain levels of education. In the  case of Iran it will also include a language requirement, an ability to be able to speak a reasonable level of English. Those  matters are addressed in the agreement that we have signed. 

 At first instance the numbers of people who are able to participate as with the arrangement that we have with Hong Kong will  be numerically limited. We suspect in the first year it will be between 300 to 500 people with a target of 2000 people over a  four-year period.

 These arrangements will also permit young Australians to be able to access Iran and to be able to work, in the same way that  young Australians are able to participate in working holiday arrangements with other countries with whom we have reciprocal  arrangements. 

 The second matter relates to people who have come to Australia unlawfully. This agreement is intended to maximise the  opportunities for lawful movement but clearly you cannot have arrangements unless you effectively deal with illegal  migration.

 And I might say this is a precedent. It's the first time that Iran has concluded an agreement with another country that will  enable people to return home to Iran who have been in Australia without lawful authority and who are available for removal.

 We envisage that people should be able to return home with dignity and what that means is that we are making available a  package in much the same way that we have with Afghans, to facilitate return.

 However, if those opportunities are not availed, there will be arrangements that will ensure that people do go home and that is  part of the arrangements that we have concluded.

 I don't think there is anything further that I wish to add in relation to that matter.

 The second matter that I wanted brief you on is my intention to close the Woomera Immigration Reception and Processing  Centre, its formal name, and to do so before Easter.

 The centre now has some 77 detainees in it. We have kept it operational because it seemed to us that while we had the  residential housing project adjacent to it that it was preferable to have some detainees, particularly spouses of those in the  residential housing project, close by. 

 However, with the declining numbers, and I think we're at the point where we'll have something of the order of 300 people in  Baxter when the 77 at Woomera are moved, it seemed inappropriate, given the substantial budgetary costs, to continue with  Woomera and it will be mothballed. 

 I am anxious to get in place a residential housing project with a larger number of places in Port Augusta. As you know, we  have been involved in discussions with the Government of South Australia, the local council and the local community and  while we have not yet finalised those arrangements I'd certainly urge all those who are involved in the ongoing discussions  and consultations to facilitate an early resolution so that we can make some provision in Port Augusta which would be more  appropriately close to the Baxter facility.

 In the meantime, we are moving to ensure that people in Woomera are able to still access their partners although they may be  in Baxter. If people wish to move to Baxter and into the family accommodation there, they're entitled to do so but we will  ensure that there are frequent visits to Baxter facilitated from Woomera until we are able to get the alternative project in place. 

 We've also been wanting to maximise the utilisation of the existing program. At the moment we have some up to 25 places  available in the residential housing project. Fifteen participants are involved at the present time. We have not been able to get  the numbers up from Baxter but we are offering places to detainees elsewhere, particularly in Port Hedland, in order to ensure  that the maximum utilisation of the residential housing project is made and I just wanted to emphasise the importance of that. 

 Obviously this mothballing will have some impact in the Woomera community. The Woomera community has been very  supportive of the housing project as well as well as the detention facility itself. I've had some meetings with the community  over time and met with them and I want to extend my thanks to a supportive community for what they've done but the  declining numbers and the changes that we have been able to introduce in amenity at Baxter suggest that this move should  take place sooner rather than later.

 Are there any questions?

 Question: Is this an acknowledgment that conditions have been inappropriate and unsatisfactory at Woomera?

 Mr Ruddock: No, it's a logistic decision, as I just mentioned, and we are mothballing Woomera. It is certainly the case that  Baxter has a higher degree of amenity. I've made that clear all along and I'm not saying that Woomera was inappropriate or  would now be inappropriate if we had larger numbers of people that we had to maintain. 

 Obviously we try to treat people as humanely as possible. There are degrees in the nature of the accommodation but if you  have a need to be able to accommodate people who arrive without lawful authority, then those needs have to be addressed and  they were addressed through Woomera and I think very effectively.

 Question: Was Woomera everything that you wanted it to be?

 Mr Ruddock: I make the point that I think Baxter is a facility with a higher degree of amenity. There's no doubt about that  and we've made that clear all along.

 It was partly purpose-built. I think our facility at Christmas Island, when we eventually have it built, having been specifically  designed, will be more adequate again but you have to look at the practicalities of what you're able to do and understanding  the nature of the facilities at a particular point in time. Woomera served its purpose well. It was, let me remind you, brought  into operation at a time when we had weeks, not months, to be able to implement arrangements to hold very large numbers of  people who were arriving without lawful authority.

 Some people have said that these sorts of facilities should be close to population centres and I don't necessarily agree with that  but some people have argued that way. The only point I've made is that when it comes to siting these sorts of facilities - and  you can see with the problems we've been having with the Port Augusta community in relation to the alternative residential  model - they're not matters that are addressed easily. They do require consultation, they do require discussion over time and  the expectation that you're able to implement those matters quickly can quickly come to nought in a community that wants to  be involved in those matters.

 Woomera lent itself to being able to deal with issues quickly and promptly at a time when we were under very significant  pressure.

 Question: Are there lessons therefore that you've learnt from Woomera?

 Mr Ruddock: There are facilities that have been provided at Woomera over time that are, I think, of a very high order. I  mean, one of the interesting aspects of Woomera is that the medical centre that was built there is regarded, I understand, by  many professionals as a benchmark facility and it's interesting that I am now receiving requests from some groups who work  amongst indigenous people that we might look at allowing them access to that facility to meet community needs. 

 I haven't yet come to a view on those matters but I am going to treat the request seriously.

 The idea that the Woomera facility is without amenity or inappropriate for its purpose flies in the face, I think, of the degree of  interest that has been expressed in it by groups who are Australian and who, looking at those sorts of facilities, are saying  wouldn't it be nice to deal with particular problems that we face, being able to utilise it.

 Question: There are many who would argue it was a benchmark in the very worst possible sense for- -

 Mr Ruddock: Look, there are some people who have been about wanting to undermine detention policy who will  characterise it in a way which was designed to bring it into disrepute and I have no qualms about saying that. I mean, there are  a range of people who don't like mandatory detention and if they could use the arguments relating to its general isolation and,  I think, very often - I don't know how many of you have visited Woomera or seen it first hand, but we did have many visits  arranged for the media but I think a lot of people have commented about it from time to time having never visited.

 I notice a former Prime Minister called it a hellhole and he'd never been there. There were a lot of people quick to judgment.

 Question: How is Baxter better than Woomera?

 Mr Ruddock: There are a number of aspects to it. One is that the accommodation provides a greater degree of personal  privacy for detainees. In fact, I don't think many people realise that each living unit has an en suite attached to it which wasn't  the case at Woomera. I'm not saying that you have to have en suites in individual accommodation for each detainee but as an  ideal - I mean, the reason we have it at Baxter is that we purchased what had, in fact, been a mining township and we were  able to get it for a reasonable price.

 It wasn't purpose-built or designed but it did increase the overall level of amenity. And we were able to build into it some  additional features that made management easier as well. The extent to which you were able to separate some groups for  management purposes was also a useful development at Baxter.

 I mean, they're the primary differences which I think make it a very much more useful facility from our point of view.

 Question: How many Iranian detainees would you estimate this package will be offered to?

 Mr Ruddock: I know the figure that it will offered to immediately is 202. 

 Question: Is it voluntary?

 Mr Ruddock: The acceptance of the package is voluntary, yes, but if I can just make the point, we want people to be able to 

 return home with dignity and that means that ourselves and the Iranian Government will encourage people to return with the  acceptance of the package. 

 But the fact is that it's not voluntary in the sense that people can say, "We have no intention of returning home and never will."  Unless they have another residency entitlement, acceptance of this package will ensure that they can go home with some  financial support. If they don't accept the package there will come a time when that return will inevitably occur. 

 Question: The Iranian Government has previously said they were very concerned that they didn't want to accept this - they  didn't want to accept their nationals coming back home because of the effect it might have on other nationals in Germany and  the Netherlands. That could be tens of thousands of Iranians returning. How have you been able to allay their fears about that  particular issue?

 Mr Ruddock: In my initial remarks, I said to you that my interlocutors see this is as a model and it is a package and the  package does provide for a wider range of opportunities for Iranians to travel lawfully. It also provides for arrangements for  them to return home if they participate in those arrangements and, in that sense, it creates a wider range of opportunities that I  think Iran - and I don't want to speak for them - but I think Iran believes it may interest other governments as well.

 Their concern has always been that if a large cohort of their nationals was returned without some of the issues that have been  addressed here, that it may occasion domestically some criticism. I think they believe that the arrangements in total will not  expose them to that criticism and that's why they've been prepared to conclude this arrangement.

 Question: Do you envisage that Australia may have to adjust its migrant intake from the Middle East if there is a war in Iraq?

 Mr Ruddock: What I've said is that it's important in relation to whatever may happen and, let me just say, I emphasise the  word "may". There is no certainty at the moment about what may or may not happen but if you look at what has happened in  the past, whatever outflow of people from Iraq occurred, occurred over a fairly short time frame and the majority of people  returned home quickly thereafter.

 And I've got no reason to believe that you would not see the same situation again if there were hostilities. 

 My expectation, and I think the international community that has been planning in relation to this potential issue, is that  people should be supported largely in situ and I understand there have been discussions with governments in the region about  how that would occur and Australia has made a financial contribution to the UNHCR in the event that this is needed. 

 If you look at Afghanistan, the resolution of the situation in Afghanistan has led to the return home of nearly two million  people and I suspect that a far greater impact on the international community would occur if this situation remains unresolved,  in other words, as a regime like Saddam's that has been so oppressive domestically felt emboldened by whatever the outcome  might be, I suggest that people would still be fleeing and the longer term outcome would be a greater humanitarian crisis.

 That's my personal view as to what would happen but we have made it clear all along - and I just say this - that while our  expectations are if there are hostilities the issues would be resolved fairly quickly and in all likelihood people would be going  back who had not been previously contemplating that, we nevertheless remain willing, if things do not work out that way, to  continue to assist. I mean, as long as there are displaced- -

 Let me just say this because there is a lot of misinformation about in terms of Iraqis. We wanted people to come to Australia  lawfully. That's always been our view. Australia has never, ever rejected bona fide asylum seekers. That is, we do not return  refugees to situations of persecution. 

 I mean, that's the bottom line. It doesn't matter whether people have arrived lawfully or unlawfully. If they are going to face  persecution if returned, they are not returned. 

 There are different outcomes. We want people to come lawfully, we don't want people to come unlawfully. There are different  outcomes. We've given different forms of visas, we've had detention for ensuring that people's claims were processed, we've  had people processed offshore to ensure that their claims are properly addressed, processed - I mean, that's what a processing  centre is, they are processed. If they're refugees they are not being returned but if they are not refugees, they are going to go  back and that's the same here. 

 Now, in the last four years we've taken something like 4000 people on temporary protection visas. There are a small number  of Iraqis, maybe 80 or 90, who were found not to be refugees because they had, in the main, prior protection, they were  entitled to go somewhere else where they would have been safe. They're the sorts of people that we've been removing. 

 I'll just finish this. At the same time that we were protecting those who came unlawfully, we continued to resettle Iraqis in the  normal refugee program and over that same time frame we probably took close to 5000 people. That's over a four year period  we took close to or more than 5000 people, Iraqis, from refugee camps in Saudi Arabia, in Iran, out of Syria, out of Jordan.

 Australia has been responding to the people who had fled Saddam but our preference has always been that those that we  accommodated should have come through the front door rather than through the back door or the window. And it's in that  context that I make this point. If there is to be a conflict, and I don't know whether that's going to occur, you are more likely to  see situations in which more people are able to go home than if you have a continuation of a regime that is as oppressive as  Saddam's regime has been.

 Question: If there is a war, does that mean - can I just clarify - that there are plans in place by the Australian Government to  accept those Iraqis fleeing Saddam's regime?

 Mr Ruddock: No, I made the point, and I'd make it again. We respond to those situations in an international context where  most people will be supported fairly close to home because in prospect people will be more likely to return home in a fairly  short period of time, in prospect.

 Refugee resettlement is about looking after those people who have no prospect of being able to return home. 

 Now, if you look at the examples we've had in recent years - it's important to have an understanding of this - the only other  time where this sort of issue was in relation to Kosovo. It took 12 months before a decision was reached by the international  community that people who were in Macedonia should be sent further afield in order that there be more effective burden  sharing.

 But, you know, we're not talking about a situation where you might be looking at these things 12 months down the track. I  suspect if it was like Afghanistan, 12 months down the track you would be looking at a situation where many hundreds of  thousands of people would have probably already gone back.

 Question: What happens if the war, if it occurs, is a very long war?

 Mr Ruddock: I'm simply saying that we have made it very clear that if there is to be an international response requested over  a long time frame in which we have to play a part, we would. We've made that clear. The Prime Minister made that clear. But  we see that as being, if you were looking in terms of possibilities of likelihood, quite remote, but we stand ready to do that but  in terms of likelihood, quite remote.

 All right? Thank you very much.

 Question: Do you have any comments to make about Chris Pyne's criticism of ATSIC?

 Mr Ruddock: The only comments I'd make were those that I offered publicly a day or so ago. I have set up a review. John  Hannaford, who is a former New South Wales Attorney-General and Bob Collins who is a former Senator from the Northern  Territory and Jackie Huggins who is the co-chair - an outstanding indigenous academic, Jackie Huggins, co-chair of  Reconciliation Australia - as the reviewers. They will be producing a paper in the next couple of months setting out a range of  options that we can consider in relation to ATSIC. 

 There is no doubt that this review was necessary. It's 10 years down the track, there are, of course, the range of criticisms that  we've heard but if you're going to respond to those matters you need to do so in a considered way and we are doing just that. 

 I have a great deal of confidence in the reviewers. I think they are people appropriate for the task and the only point I'd make  is that indigenous people often complain about the extent to which they are the subject of scrutiny, review. 

 I think it is important to have reviews, it is important to have scrutiny but it's also important to keep it in context and we're  dealing with a group of people who have a lot to learn about institutional arrangements, how they should operate.

 ATSIC has some problems of functionality. There is no doubt about that. I've made it clear that I thought that organisationally  it had some dysfunctional aspects to it. I have addressed a number of those matters in relation to misbehaviour and in relation  to funding organisations where there are perceptions of conflict of interest but ATSIC also has been an organisation which has  been audited frequently and in terms of its compliance with just basic accounting principles has not been - people have not  been caught with their fingers in the till. There's not been, in relation to ATSIC itself, evidence of fraud in the way in which it  carries out its tasks.

 I mean there have been questions raised from time to time in relation to bodies that it may fund but, given that, I think it is  appropriate to have a review which can bring forward considered recommendations which I can talk to the Opposition about,  which I can try and garner support for implementation and my preference is to deal with those issues in that way. 

 And I confirm what I've said before. I mean, Mr Pyne is entitled to make speeches. He's a good friend of mine. He was once  my parliamentary secretary but he didn't seek to speak to me about this issue before he made the speech. It's all his own work  and I'll leave it at that. My view is the considered review is the appropriate route to take and I am proceeding with that. 

 Question: Minister, how many people were at Woomera?

 Mr Ruddock: What was there? Fifteen hundred? We've done very well, when you think about the numbers of people who  have been processed, unauthorised boat arrivals. I think we have now around about 480.

 When you look at the offshore processing, they've processed about 1515 and I think we've got under 480 now in offshore  processing and I was looking at the figures there. We've still got about another 200 under voluntary arrangements who have  accepted packages to go home, so processing is achieving outcomes.

 12 March 2003

