---
title: "East Timorese stripped of all support."
date: "2003-02-27"
creators:
  - "Crossin, Trish"
  - "Snowdon, Warren"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, TRANSPORT, INFRASTRUCTURE AND TOURISM NORTHERN AUSTRALIA AND THE TERRITORIES"
subjects:
  - "Asylum Seekers Assistance Scheme (ASAS)"
  - "Humanitarian aid"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Red Cross"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253581
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HMN86%22
---

 The Hon Warren Snowdon MP  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Northern     Australia and the Territories  Member for Lingiari 

 

 

 Senator Trish Crossin   

 Deputy Opposition Whip  Senator for the Northern Terriotry

 

 

 

 

 Contact:  Warren Snowdon: 0419 626 601 or Trish Crossin: 0418 818 149 

 27 February 2003 

 

 East Timorese stripped of all support   

 The Department of Immigration is beginning to cut off financial and medical support to  Darwin’s East Timorese asylum seekers, Labor’s two Federal representatives revealed  today.   

 Warren Snowdon and Trish Crossin said that the Government’s instruction to the Red  Cross yesterday to stop Asylum Seeker Assistance Scheme payments to an elderly couple  was the beginning of a potential humanitarian crisis in the community.   

 “In most cases, these people have already endured ten years of uncertainty,” Mr Snowdon,  the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Northern Australia, said.   

 “But now the Government is taking the very bread from their tables.   

 “From the beginning, this Government has shown no concern for the trauma and cost of  this process on these families.   

 “The people affected by this latest attack are mostly children and the elderly.   

 “Removing their medical benefits and their threadbare ASAS allowance is utterly inhumane.   

 “Australians will not forgive this treachery.”   

 Yesterday’s instruction to cut off ASAS payments to one couple follows the rejection of their  appeal to the Refugee Review Tribunal last Friday, a process which cost them $1,000.   

 The appeal was the first of the Territory’s East Timorese asylum seekers to be rejected.  It  is likely that the remaining appeals will be rejected in the coming weeks.   

 ASAS provides basic financial and pharmaceutical support to approximately 50 NT East  Timorese, mostly children, the elderly and working parents on very low incomes.   

 Senator Crossin said the toll of the extracted and costly process on the community was  beginning to show.   

 “How are these people expected to survive - on the goodwill of the Northern Territory  community?” Senator Crossin said.   

 “The Government’s treatment of these asylum seekers has been nothing less than  shameless.   

 “It was Government neglect that created this situation; it’s now the Government’s  responsibility to fix it.   

 “There is only one acceptable outcome for these people - the Minister must create a  special humanitarian visa class that will allow all of them to stay.   

 “These people are Australian; they belong here.” 

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

