---
title: "Pacific Strategy a wasteful humanitarian disaster."
date: "2003-07-30"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Pacific Solution"
  - "Nauru"
  - "Visits from Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211256007
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VTZ96%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Spokesperson  30 July 2003                         MEDIA RELEASE                                    03/546                

 

 

 Pacific Strategy a wasteful humanitarian disaster   

 Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett, has returned from Nauru to condemn  the Federal Government’s so-called Pacific Strategy as a human and financial disaster.   

 “Two years of internment for hundreds of men, women and children has created an ocean of despair  on a tiny island thousands of miles from Australia,” said Senator Bartlett.   

 “The conditions in the Camps on Nauru are below the standard of those in Australia, which is not  surprising given that the services and facilities for the entire island community are much more  limited than in Australia.   

 “But it is the lack of hope, the separation from families, the children with an uncertain future that is  creating the torment for the 400 people still on Nauru.   

 “The ultimate outrage is the nine women with their children whose husbands are in Australia as  refugees, but who are being prevented from joining them and are being pressured to return to the  places where their husbands were persecuted.   

 “The entire community of Nauru needs assistance and there is no doubt the Camps provide some  much-needed economic revenue for the nation.  But that assistance should be provided by Australia  directly to the Nauruan community, not as a by-product of an inhuman policy.   

 “The fact that the Government has renamed the Pacific Solution as the ‘Pacific Strategy’ is a dead  giveaway.  The Government knows the hundreds of millions of dollars spent has not been a solution  - it has been a strategy aimed at maximising human misery in an attempt to provide a deterrent.   

 “No policy that steals the futures of children, forces people to return to unsafe places and forcibly  keeps families apart could seriously be called a success, regardless of what other outcomes it may  have achieved,” concluded Senator Bartlett.   

 

 Senator Bartlett will hold a doorstop in Brisbane today to comment on the conditions he saw in the  “Topside” Nauru detention camp.  1.30pm  Suite 14 B1, 7/421 Brunswick Street, Fortitude Valley   

 

 For media inquiries please contact Serena Rogers on 0419 833 571   

 

 

 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

