---
title: "Community youth programs saved by federal minister who listens!"
date: "2003-02-12"
creators:
  - "YWCA of Australia"
source: "YWCA"
subjects:
  - "Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA)"
  - "Womens organisations"
  - "Labour market programs"
  - "Youth"
  - "ANTHONY, Larry"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211252975
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5CK86%22
---

  ia Release - edia Release 

  For immediate distribution 12 Febniary 2002 

  ‘The Jobs Placement E.ducatioii & Training (JPE‘rj Kei-ien* 

  Recommendatioris released 1-es terd;\.i- aniiounceci a re?-ersal o f  preF-ious  Departmeii t of Family c9( Communin- Sen-ices (FaCS) decisioiis to  discontinue Eunditig to liiglilv successful and iiinowtk-e jPET progains  across the nation,’ said 11s Fiom JoUv President \lYCA of Australia 

  pIT-C-1) * 

  U s  Jolly said, ‘After exterisiw lobbs-big and consultation we are pleased that  hfbiister Antlion)- and tlie Department have heard tlie concerns of tlie L-outli  sector. As a result of the review bj- FaCS the Department has rexrsed its  initial decisions resulting from a p o o r l ~  coriceived tender process that failed to  recognize excellence U i  sen-ice provision arid jeopardized T-ouiig people at  risk.‘ 

  ‘The YKCA is particularly pleased as the continued funding eiisures that tlie  YK‘C-Ys of Victoria, Adeiaide and Albur!-/IXodonp wll coli time to provide  their services until at least June 2004.’ 

  ‘\11v’CA services play an important role in tlie youth sector hi ensuring that  there are specialist ~~c‘ome11’s semices a d a b l e .  111 particular the continuation  of the YKCA of Victoria sein-ice wd p r e s e i x  the only women specific jPET  progarn in the countix 

  < p  

  rhe campaign to overturn the previous furidbig decisions has been strongly  argued by the youth sector to tlie h h i s t e r  for Children and I-outli Affaxs, tlie  Won. Larry ant lion^-. The \lXCA looks foiward to continuing to build strong  partnerships between the communin- sector and the government, that build 

  on die detailed uiiderstaiidllig that communih- orpnizations have of tlie  gassroots issues faced by their service users. 

  For interview please contact:  Fiona Jollj-  Presideri t  YITC-I of Australia 

  0411 212 276 

  For information please contact:  Erica. Lxwis  Po1ic.i- and Research  YV -C A of &.ius tralia  \v 02 6230 3 150 

  m 0412 409 514 

  /following brief about JPET and the \\T*C-I. 

  F3csimile  61 2 62305156 

  Email  n a to ff 1 c c 0 y w c a. o rg . au 

  We bsi t t‘  www.yu.ca.org.au 

  Briefing Paper about JPET and the rVCICA 

  The JPET client group covers disadvantaged \mung people who are: 

  0 

  e 

  e 

  Students and homeless or at risk of homelessness;  Kot in regular emplovnent and homeless or" at risk of homelessness;  Children in care/nwds of the State and mung people exiting n.ardship;  Refugees, who are not necessarili- homeless;  Ex-offenders, who are not necessarily homeless; and  e Mutual obligation clients aged 18 - 21 years. 

  W C A  ]PET Sen-ices  0 YKCA of Sydney - BOITW~ 

  Y l K A  of Sydney - h ' o n ~ a   0 YYT'CA of Victoria - Melbourne 

  YYTCA of rilbuq-/Todonga - JX'odonga  0 YWCA of Adelaide - Onkaparinga 

  YWCA of Adelaide - Victor Harbor  The YKCA of SydneT has had places moved from Bowral to No1~7ra.  The semices of the YKCA's of Victoria; Abut-v/\'i-odonga and Adelaide had all been  informed that they x7ere unsuccessful in their applications. 

  Process Concerns'  0 The tender process was not clearly communicated to communitv agencies; 

  0 Local linkages built up OTW a long period do not appear to have been considered; 

  0 Due to the scant information requested and the limited space allowed in the application 

  form services do not think that the specialist features of their seivice were  a c k n o ~ l e  dge d;  0 The selection panel process m7as not transparent. 

  YYVCA specific concerns  0 YWCA JPETs have a strong record of 11-orking specificall-c- with young women at risk. 

  Young women who identify that part of the reason the) use I T C A  senices are because  of issues of safetv both emotional and physical and because they know that the k T 7 C A   is a n7oman focused sewice. 

  The YCT'CA of Victoria has been operating the nations only women specific JPET  program, both the Tk'\T'CA's of Adelaide and Albun-/T'odonga have operated women  focussed sections of their programs. 

  0 

  1 These colicenis are shared by many of the senice providers 1.i-110 were iiir-olred 111 the applicahon process. 

  * Within all aspects of Y K C A  vouth services there is of course a specific awareness of the  needs of young women m d  the additional factors that may contribute to their being at  risk such sesual abuse. 

  YWCiis offer unique opportunities for young women at risk to not onlv be im-olved in  JPET programs but to participate in manj- o f  the youth development activities offered  by Yb'Cri's. For example a preT-ious JPET client o f  the Y K C A  o f  A l b ~ i ~ - / l T ~ o d o n g a   now serves as a member of their board. 

  * 

  Review  W e  acknowledge the prompt response by the Department to the concerns raised by many  and made formal submission to that process. 

  The YYVCA of Australia  T h e  YWCA is represented in more than 1 O O  countries, with a membership of 25 million  worldwide. In Australia, the Y K C A  is represented in oT'er 30 locations in a11 States and  Territories, and currently delivers services to more than a quarter of a million women, men 

  and children each year, throughout rural, regional and metropolitan Australia. T h e  YTFCA's  of Australia provide sersices in youth; childcare; health; housing; emergency 

  acco mmo dation and travel acc o mmo dation. 

  T h e  YWCA of Australia also acts as the secretariat to a network of 23 women's 

  organisations and organisations with a specific interest in the impact of policies and services  on women and grls. 

  Further information  More information is available about the specific programs run by the YKCAs who run  JPET programs. 

  If you would like more information please feel free to contact Erica Lewis o n  0412 409 514  o r  yga&i?&vca.orw 

