---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 30 August 2003: Jim Foo's departure and arrest, donations from Dante Tan."
date: "2003-08-30"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "FOO, JimKISRWANI, Karim"
  - "Ministerial discretion"
  - "Berowra (Electorate)"
  - "Party funds"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Senate Select Committee on Ministerial Discretion in Migration Matters"
  - "Arrest"
  - "Singapore"
  - "Jim Foo's departure and arrest"
  - "donations from Dante Tan."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211257866
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2FBA6%22
---

 Philip Ruddock MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Transcripts

 Doorstop interview, Canberra, 30 August 2003 

 Jim Foo's departure and arrest, donations from Dante Tan

 (Note: Prior questions and answers relating to indigenous matters not included.)

 Question: What details can you give us of Jim Foo's arrest in Singapore?

 Mr Ruddock: I can't tell you. I didn't know he had been.

 Question: So you don't know whether Australia had any role in his arrest?

 Mr Ruddock: No look, the situation is this. He was an unlawful non-citizen in Australia. There was no request for extradition in relation to him.  He had to return to his country of birth or country of origin where he has a citizenship entitlement. When he was able to get his documentation…  valid documentation, we arranged for him to be able to leave.

 On the other matters… the matters are in the hands of the government of the country of which his is from.

 Question: On another point. Karim Kisrwani said the other night that he told you who made political donations and when they were made. What  do you have to say to that?

 Mr Ruddock: Well I've seen some comment. You must be from the ABC.

 Question: No I'm from Seven.

 Mr Ruddock: You're from Seven. Ah well, it's usually the ABC that's been monitoring. Oh no I think you did mention it on Sunrise.

 Question: I didn't do that sir…

 Mr Ruddock: I think Sunrise did. Look. I mean this is a question about whether or not my recollection is faulty. I had no recollection of any  mention being made to me of donations by Mr Tan. I made that clear. And I said that my party organisation handles those matters and they do. The  party organisation discloses donations when they're in excess of 15-hundred dollars… and the only reason you know that there is a donation from  Mr Tan to my party organisation is that my party organisation disclosed it. They did what they were required to do in accordance with law.

 Now Mr Kisrwani has been a supporter over a long period of time. I made that know to the Parliament. He came to the opening of my campaign  launch on the 13th of October in 2001. And he suggests that he may have mentioned something to me then, that I don't recall.

 Now let me just say, that I have checked with my party organisation and I received advice last night, that the donation on behalf of Mr Tan was not  made until four months later… January. So he was either very percipient… knowing that somebody was intending to make a donation and  mentioned that… and I don't think he did… or his recollection is faulty and mine is to be preferred. That is, it wasn't mentioned. That's the reality.

 But I'll be releasing a formal statement later today which will give the dates that I've been provided by the treasurer of the Berowra FEC about  when the donation was received.

 Question: Are you still remaining in contact with Mr Kisrwani?

 Mr Ruddock: I don't. I took the view and I said in the Parliament I've studiously avoided speaking to him. I think I spoke to him on one occasion  when I was abroad, when he was first admitted to hospital and my office said he wanted to speak to me. And I rang him to wish him a speedy  recovery. He's been in hospital for something like six weeks, I gather.

 Question: Are you worried about the prospect of a Senate inquiry into this?

 Mr Ruddock: Well, I don't know what a Senate inquiry would seek to look at. But, essentially as I understand it, there is a Senate inquiry that has  terms of reference to look at whether or not the personal discretion of a Minister is something that should be looked at again. But I suspect if in  relation to the discretion which is quite significantly constrained in how it might operate… and that was in Legislation passed in 1989 under the  former Labor Government… governments of the day did not have the opportunity to look at individual cases which were not covered by the strict  enactment… that is statute and regulation… that you would have to have another way of dealing with those issues. And the reason that the non-compellable discretion route was chosen, was to make sure that the governments of the day could continue to manage it in size and composition.

 We know that when broad provisions were put in enactments to look at compassionate circumstances... compelling circumstances… those that  were not covered by statute, the former government had something like 14,000 applications that it was going to have to implement, when it had had  judicial advice as to how the provisions should be interpreted. And the reason that a minister was given a non-compellable power was to enable the  government of the day to have a handle on it… to know what is happening when you're dealing with those sorts of numbers.

 In fact if you look at the decisions that have been made by me and the proportion of decisions made by my predecessors, they haven't changed. I  mean when Gerry Hand was doing it… when Nick Bolkus was doing it, roughly the same proportion of interventions were made by ministers as  have been made by me. Over a period of some seven years I've made something like 19-hundred interventions. Mostly in relation to a spouse…  frequently with children. I think something like 30% involve a spouse who is barred from lodging a valid application on-shore and where the  judgement is formed that it is undesirable to force them abroad to apply to come back. And I don't think that most people would disagree with those  sorts on interventions in that sort of circumstances is inappropriate. In fact I get asked to intervene in... you know... tens of thousands of cases. So I  think that there is a broad view that power of that sort is necessary.

 The question of how I use it…. If anybody thinks there is evidence about that I have made decisions improperly and have been influenced by party  donations, they're going to be sorely disappointed, because I haven't been and there are no such connections. And they won't find any.

