---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Claridge's Hotel, London: 8 November 2003:\nInternational security relationships; Australian War Memorial dedication; Indonesian fishing boat."
date: "2003-11-08"
creators:
  - "Howard, John"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "International cooperation"
  - "Melville Island"
  - "Australian War Memorial"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Great Britain"
  - "Refugees"
  - "\nInternational security relationships"
  - "Australian War Memorial dedication"
  - "Indonesian fishing boat."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261110
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZLUA6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 PRIME MINISTER 

 

 8 November 2003   

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CLARIDGE’S HOTEL, LONDON   

 

 Subjects:  International security relationships; Australian War Memorial   dedication; Indonesian fishing boat.    

 E&OE…………………………………………………………………………………….   

 JOURNALIST:   

 Prime Minister, there has been a call by the Opposition for an inquiry into   our security relationships with other countries.  What is you reaction to   that?   

 PRIME MINISTER:   

 Well our security relationships with other countries, particularly with the   United Kingdom and the United States, couldn’t be better.   

 JOURNALIST:   

 I think he’s concerned more about the relationship with the French.   

 PRIME MINISTER:   

 Well the relationship between Australia and France is very good.  It’s   obviously not as intimate as it is between Australia and Britain and   Australia and the United States, but if there’s a contemplation in relation   to Mr Brigitte in that question, then if there was a communications   breakdown, it was between certain agencies in the French Government, not   between Australia and France.   

 JOURNALIST:   

 What’s the significance of the war memorial that will be dedicated on  

 www.pm.gov.au 

 

  2

 Tuesday?  We can look forward to that.   

 PRIME MINISTER:   

 Well it’s a very symbolic and I think moving reminder of the shared   sacrifice of Australia and Britain and their common defence of liberty over   a long period of time in World War I and also in World War II when there   weren’t many countries standing at one stage against Nazi Germany except   Britain, Australia and a few other countries.  And we will always be part of   that and I think it will become a focal point for Anzac Day celebrations in   London.  It’s a long overdue tribute to those tens of thousands of   Australians who died fighting alongside British forces, particularly in two   World Wars.   

 JOURNALIST:   

 Is it important in that regard to re-establish the Australian relationship   with Britain in light with the growing…   

 PRIME MINISTER:   

 I don’t think the relationship needs to be re-established.  It’s never been   broken.  It’s a contemporary relationship, as well as being a relationship   built on history and sentiment and shared values and shared traditions.    Nothing will ever break the relationship.  It will obviously change and   respond to modern circumstances, but it’s an extremely contemporary   relationship and I think one of the values of the leadership dialogue which   Mr Blair and I will launch during the time I’m here will be to emphasise   that although our relationship is rich in history, it’s also a very modern   relationship and we share a lot of similar views about the modern world.   

 JOURNALIST:   

 Prime Minister, where is the Indonesian fishing boat which attempted to land   at Melville Island?   

 PRIME MINISTER:   

 Well I think the best thing I can say in relation to that is that I’ve been   in the air for 23 or 24 hours, and I’ll leave it to either the Foreign   Minister or the Immigration Minister, as appropriate, to respond to that   question back in Australia.  Thank you.   

 

 [ends]   

