---
title: "Senate to challenge new attacks on refugee rights."
date: "2003-04-20"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211561071
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BP496%22
---

  Senator Andrew Bartlett  Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson on Immigration 

  Senate to Challenge New Attacks-on Refugee Rights  The Australian Democrats today vowed to challenge Howard Government plans to introduce new laws to  bullet proof their heartless detention policy. 

  Democrats’ Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said the Democrats would attempt to block in the Senate any  Government legislation aimed at undermining the ruling of the h l l  Federal Court last week that found it was  illegal to indefinitely detain asylum seekers who had exhausted their refugee claims but could not return  home. 

  “We will not let the Howard Government bullet proof their heartless refugee policy,” Senator Bartlett said. 

  “John Howard and Philip Ruddock are suggesting new laws only because they are not prepared to behave in  a humane and legally acceptable manner. 

  “The Federal Court decision was based on the fbndamental legal principle that people cannot be detained  indefinitely without trial or charge. It is a basic legal right that the Government wants to tamper with.” 

  Senator Bartlett said the full Federal Court decision, ruling the detention of Palestinian asylum seeker Akram  a1 Masri unlawful, undermined the Government’s practice of deliberately keeping people in mandatory  detention as a warning for other overseas asylum seekers. 

  “There is little chance the Senate will allow this Government to change the law just because it loses in the  courts. 

  “The Democrats have been very disappointed at the lack of commitment by Labor on t h s  issue in the past,  but we are fully prepared to maintain our leadership in fighting to ensure this Government treats asylum  seekers in Australia humanely and legally,” he said. 

  “What we are working against is Phlip Ruddock and John Howard’s gulag mentality whereby every asylum  seeker is treated as a criminal.” 

  Senator Bartlett said protests at Baxter Detention Centre at the weekend would have been better taken to Mr  Ruddock’s front door. 

  “The protests near Baxter actually allowed Mr Ruddock to lock as many as 10 people in solitary confinement  for Easter,” Senator Bartlett said. 

  “Mr Ruddock claims solitary confinement is the best way to manage people in detention, including those  with psychological illness. Last week I visited the detainees and saw and heard of the horrendous suffering  they were enduring in prison-like conditions. Mr Ruddock’s callous attitude could be sustained by only the  most stony-hearted politician. 

  “It appears Mr Ruddock is more worried about the cost of an overreaction by the police in dealing with the  weekend protests than the humane treatment of people who have fled the absolute atrocities suffered in  countries such as Saddam Hussein’s Iraq.” 

  For interview with Senator Bartlett, please call Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649 

  http ://www.democrats.org.au/ 

