---
title: "Govt must end uncertainty over Sammaki children immediately."
date: "2003-11-05"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
  - "Sammaki family"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Visas"
  - "Children"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Bali bombings 2002"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260963
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PKTA6%22
---

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja   Australian Democrats, Senator for South Australia 

 Kate Reynolds MLC  Australian Democrats, Member of the Legislative Council  5              03/799                November 2003                    MEDIA RELEASE                    

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

 

 ediately 

 The Australian Democrats today welcomed suggestions that the Immigration Minister will make a statement 

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja and Kate Reynolds MLC, who applied to sponsor visiting visas for the two  ildren’s case 

 ow also been 

  their mother for more than 12 months, after she was killed in the Bali bombing,” said Senator Stott  Despoja. 

 e able to visit their father in 

 “In Senate Estimates yesterday, Minister Vanstone fuelled this uncertainty by firstly stating that she could  alised. 

  the case later this 

 Ms Reynolds said: “When I spoke to Mr Sammaki today he asked everyone to continue pleading with the  s his children   to still be separated on his son’s birthday. 

 e ‘I just want to be somewhere safe with my children so we can be together as a  family’. 

  Deane who has 

 father in Australia. 

 ho lost their mother in tragic circumstances a year ago don’t understand why they 

 nd laughed and joked with   to talk, laugh, 

 with their only surviving parent,” said Ms Reynolds.   

  prove it,” 

 concluded Senator Stott Despoja.   

 Senator Stott Despoja and Kate Reynolds MLC, with the support of Magistrate Brian Deegan, applied to  sponsor two-week visiting visas for the children on 26 May 2003. Their application was rejected on 6 June  2003. They are now appealing this decision through the Migration Review Tribunal. The hearing is  scheduled for December 5.  Following refusal of his application, Magistrate Deegan’s Federal Court appeal  is set for 14th November. 

 For media inquiries for Senator Stott Despoja please contact Serena Rogers on 0419 833 571  For media inquiries for Kate Reynolds please contact Lechelle Earl Holland on 0403 006 375 

 Govt must end uncertainty over Sammaki children imm  

 regarding the Sammaki children later this week.   

 children more than six months ago, urged the Minister to make a decision about the ch immediately.   

 “These children have been separated from their father for more than two years, and have n without

 

 “The Government must end the uncertainty over whether Sara and Sabda will b Australia.   

 not intervene in the case until our appeal through the Migration Review Tribunal was fin  

 “The Minister then went on to state that it was likely that she would make a decision about week,” said Senator Stott Despoja.   

 Minister to do everything in her power to bring the children to Australia because he misse desperately and we know they miss him.  It was very hard for him  

 “Mr Sammaki told m

 

 “He also asked that we pass on his gratitude to the former Governor General Sir William supported the call for the children to be reunited with their   

 “These two small children w still can’t see their father.   

 “Perhaps now that our Prime Minister has met the children, held their hands, talked a them, he will allow them to be entrusted to the care of two parliamentarians and a magistrate, joke and share tears 

 “If the Government is capable of compassion in relation to this matter, now is the time to

