---
title: "Terror and freedom of the press: paper presented to National Forum on the War on Terrorism and the Rule of Law."
date: "2003-11-10"
creators:
  - "Gawenda, Michael"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Children overboard affair"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "Freedom of the press"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261123
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0XYA6%22
---

  Paper by Michael Gawenda, Editor-in-Chief, The Age 

  Gilbert & Tobin Centre of Public Law 

  National Forum on The War on Terrorism and the Rule of Law 

  10 November 2003 

  Terror and Freedom of the Press 

  It has now become a clichC to say that the world changed on September 1 1 2001, but of course  the fact that it is a clichC does not make it less true. There is no need for me to detail those  changes and the consequences here - the war in Afghanistan, in Iraq and the ongoing  consequences of that war, the Bali bombings, the other terrorist attacks around the world. We  live in tumultuous times, in dangerous times, in times when many people feel threatened and  insecure, when it is easy to overstate the threats and in a sense, just as easy to understate them. 

  In such an environment, what are the challenges facing the media in liberal democracies such  as ours? What are our responsibilities and what is our role? What are the limits - if any - to  what we report and how we report? What should our response be to government moves to give  more powers to our intelligence agencies and our police forces in order to more effectively, in  their view, combat the threat of terrorism? 

  Our Government, along with the U S administration and others, has declared that in response  to September 1 1 2001, we are at war with terrorists. Our response to the threat of  terrorism has not been merely to mount police and intelligence operations against those who  commit terrorist acts, but to declare war on them. Terrorism, they argue, is not just about acts  of terror where those who perpetrate such crimes are hunted down by intelligence services and  police forces, and brought to justice, but a battle between liberal democratic values and the  totalitarian values of Islamists whose foot soldiers are growing in number and  who are prepared to massacre large numbers of civilians for their cause. 

  That cause is the establishment in Islamic countries - and ultimately everywhere - of  totalitarian radical Islamic regimes. Their goal is the defeat of liberal secular democracy. The  Islamists are totalitarians in the same way as the Fascist regimes of the 1930s and the  Communist regimes of the 20th century were totalitarian. But unlike the cold war, this is a hot  war. Afghanistan and Iraq were, to some, just the first battles in a war that could last for  decades. 

  I am not here today to give you my view about whether this take , this response to and reading  of the threat of terrorism is sensible, but the consequences of it are real and important for the  media. For instance, in my view, Tampa, the children overboard affair, the AS10 Bill, the fact  that two Australians have been held without charge for so long at Guantamono Bay, the fact  that the new Attorney General is talking about, four months after it was passed, significantly 

  strengthening the AS10 legislation - all of this to a greater or lesser extent, is about our  Government's response to the threat of terrorism. 

  Let me just briefly look at Tampa and the Children Overboard affair. At first blush, these  events do not seem connected with the War on Terror. They were part of the Government's  policy of being tough and getting even tougher on those who would flout our immigration  rules and pay people smugglers to bring them illegally to Australia. They came in rickety  boats where they would, if they survived the journey - and hundreds of course didn't - end up 

  in detention centres, most of which were in the middle of nowhere, where they would be  treated more like criminals than asylum seekers and where they would spend years waiting for  their applications for refugee status to be assessed. 

  With Tampa, the Government decided that such asylum seekers would no-longer be allowed  to land on Australian soil. They would, instead, be transported by the Navy to Nauru and PNG  where they would be detained and processed. This was a move, according to the Government,  designed to further deter people smugglers and to make it clear to the world that we, we  Australians, will decide who shall enter Australia. 

  So what did this have to do with the War on Terror? Well, had it not been for September 11, I  do not believe the Government's policy shift with Tampa would have resonated as much as it  did with the Australian community. I do not believe the Labor Party would have been as  confused, as timid, as contradictory as it was in response to this policy. Further, had the 

  asylum seekers aboard the Tampa not come from that part of the world where the Islamists  were strongest and from where the terrorist foot soldiers mostly came, I do not believe that the  Australian community would have been as supportive of the Government's position. The  suggestion from some Government ministers that there may have been terrorists amongst the 

  asylum seeks - though there was absolutely no proof of this - directly and, in my view,  cynically, linked the War on Terror with Government policy on asylum seekers. 

  The same was true during the children overboard affair, a disgraceful. episode in the history of  this Government and one which I believe will be seen by historians of the future, as a low  point of this Government's time in office. And I believe the Government got away with this  shabby and deceitful episode because the War on terror had unsettled and frightened many  Australians who were prepared to overlook what the Government had done as long as they  believed the Government was doing everything possible to keep them safe. And keeping them 

  safe meant doing everything possible to keep asylum seekers out of the country. 

  For the media, the government's treatment of asylum seekers, the Tampa - driven policy shift  to the pacific solution, and the children overboard affair - was difficult to cover for two main  reasons. Firstly, we knew that there was overwhelming support for the government's policies  and so getting any traction on the issue was difficult. There was just no great response to the  many asylum seeker stories we ran. People felt unsafe, threatened, at war even. And the 

  Government made it impossible for us to make the asylum seekers human, to tell their stories,  to show that they were individual human beings with the same hopes and dreams and  aspirations as the rest of us. W e were not allowed into the detention centres, despite repeated  requests. W e were not allowed onto the Tampa. We were not allowed into the detention 

  centres on Nauru and PNG. We could not get to the people who had been accused of being 

  less than human for throwing their children into the ocean to see for ourselves whether they  were human or not. We made endless requests and demands. We failed. 

  In a sense, the asylum seekers were and are victims of the War on terror. The new  Immigration Minister, Senator Amanda Vanstone, last week granted a visa to Mr Ebrahim.  Sammaki on humanitarian grounds so that he could travel to Indonesia and bring his two  children aged eight and four back to Australia. But it took a freak accident of time and  place for this to happen. The Prime Minister was - inadvertently - photographed with the two 

  children when he was in Bali for the ceremony marking the anniversary of the Bali bombings.  The children's mother had died in those bombings and for 12 months, with Mr Sammaki held  at the Baxter detention centre, the children were not allowed to come to Australia to be with  their father and Mr Sammaki was refused a visa to visit his children. All of this was part  of the consequence of the War on Terror. And because this was a war, protest about this was  muted - the Labor Party hardly raised the issue in parliament. And protest about the excision  of Melville Island and other islands from the Australian immigration zone last week because  of the threat of 14 Turkish Kurds in a small fishing boat, is also likely to be muted, despite the  fact that the Labor Party will join the Greens and the Democrats in the Senate to disallow the  regulations gazetted by the government last week. 

  Without the terror attacks on New York and Washington on September 11 2001 and the Bali  Bombings a little over a year ago, I do not believe the Pacific Solution, the children overboard  affair, the continuing incarceration of children in detention centres, would have been greeted  with either indifference by many Australians or strong support by many others. And the media  despite the best efforts of a number of journalists to keep these issues before the public,  has basically failed in what, on any reckoning, is one of its most important roles. We have, in  the main, failed to tell the story of the asylum seekers - and they clearly have stories to tell -  and we have failed to hold to account those who made cynical and shabby decisions during the  Tampa affair and more particularly, during the children overboard saga. 

  In a sense the two Australian detained at Guantanomo Bayare also victims of the War on  Terror. In the War on Terror, they are prisoners of war, but without the rights accorded  prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions. Most Australians, me included, hold no brief  for these two who, it seems, at best were extremely foolish and at worst, were involved with 

  groups that either gave succour to terrorists or were terrorists themselves. But we don't know:  We have to take the word of our American allies about why they are being held and how they  are to be treated. But they are Australian citizens who, no matter what they are accused of  doing, should be treated as citizens. The government should be vitally concerned about their  welfare. The government should do everything possible to ensure that they have proper legal  representation. The government should do everything possible to make it possible for them to  be tried, for whatever crimes they are alleged to have committed, in Australia. Is the 

  Government doing all this? No it isn't and it isn't because of the War on Terror. In wartime,  certain rights that we take for granted in a Liberal democracy have to be curtailed. And  because people have been fearful and uncertain and insecure, they go along with this  curtailment of rights. 

  The media, again, has covered this issue as thoroughly as it can, but without much response  from the Australian community and certainly without much response from the government.  We cannot get to speak to the two men - nor can any other media get into Guantanamo Bay of  course to speak to inmates - and thus they remain virtually anonymous and anonymous people 

  . . . well it's pretty hard to feel any sympathy for them. More importantly, it's hard to feel they  have any rights at all. 

  Of course, the two Australians held at Guantanamo Bay are only two of more than 600  prisoners - illegal combatants according to the US - held there, now for almost two years  since the war in Afghanistan ended. It is pretty clear that among them are few if any leaders of  Al-Qaida or even the Taliban. Yet their fate remains far from clear and it is still possible that  they will be judged by special military tribunals whose hearings will be held in secret and  which could lead to execution for some of the prisoners. This too is a consequence of the  declared war on Terror. 

  Let me come to the AS10 legislation that Philip Ruddock now wants to strengthen. I am not  here to speak about the AS10 legislation in general - that is for others to do. The point I want  to make is that, in general, the media in Australia tamely accepted those provisions of the  legislation that could have a serious impact on the way journalists operate in Australia. The  fact that the legislation makes it possible for journalists to be detained for up to 7 days on the  basis that they might have information about terrorist activity in Australia seems to me to be 

  outrageous. Under the legislation, journalists detained for questioning must show that they do  not have information of interest to AS10 - in other words, they have to prove a negative in  order to avoid sanction under the law. This is just ridiculous. And under the legislation, with  journalists compelled to divulge information and sources, with journalists held and questioned 

  without legal representation, the potential for journalists ending up in jail for refising to reveal  sources is real and ever-present. 

  I represented the Fairfax papers at a hearing of the Senate Committee looking into this  legislation earlier in the year and argued that the proposed legislation was too draconian,  that it would severely limit then freedom of journalists to do their job, that it could easily lead  to the jailing ofjournalists, that it could lead to journalists being held in detention for 

  questioning without their families or their employers knowing where they are. As far as I  know, I was the only editor or media manager to appear before the committee. Indeed, without  naming media organisations, some organisations which we approached for support for  our position declined to be involved and indeed made it clear that they supported the  legislation. 

  Fairfax papers, in the main, also supported the need for legislative changes to give our security  services and our police wider powers to investigate potential terrorist threats. But we did not  believe those threats needed to be dealt with by legislation that seriously curtailed the ability  of the media to do its job properly. 

  And while the legislation was amended in minor ways in the Senate, the provisions affecting  journalists remain. The muted response by the media here to the AS10 legislation was similar  to the response of the media in the United States to the USA Patriot Bill passed weeks after the  September 11 attacks. Under that legislation, more than 2000 people, have been picked up and 

  are being held in detention without trial and without charges being laid against them. Just now,  for the first time, is the US media starting to focus on the consequences and operation of the  Patriot Bill. Just now is the mainstream media prepared to challenge the administration's view  that those who question this legislation and other moves that restrict civil liberties 

  are unpatriotic and put at risk the nation's war against international terror. 

  The fact is that the media both here and in the United States has, in the main, accepted that the  world changed after September 11, that there was a need to strengthen the legal framework, to  pass new legislation that might curtail some civil liberties in order to deal with the terrorist  threat. But 1 sense that the media here and in the United States is now, becoming more robust 

  in its examination of what Governments are proposing in terms of legislation and extra powers  to deal with terrorism - look at the response from most of the media commentators to Minister  Ruddock's suggestion that the ASJO Bill needs to be strengthened. Most saw it as a political  manouvre designed to make security a major issue at the next election and an attempt to  damage the Labor Party about which there has been a perception that it is all over the place on  the terrorist threat compared with the Coalition. 

  The fact that the intelligence on which we based our decision to go to war with the United  States and Britain in Iraq has proved, at best to be faulty, has had a major impact on the  media's attitude to Government claims about the War on Terror. Warnings about possible  attacks are treated more sceptically. There is more questioning of the long term strategy being  adopted by the US and its allies to combat international terrorism. There is more robust  analysis and questioning of government motives policies on asylum seekers. And as I said,  there is more questioning, more scepticism about any moves to further curtail civil liberties as  part of the War on Terror. 

  All this, in my view, is to the good. In my view, the media must not allow itself to be cowed  into becoming just another battalion in the War on Terror. It must remain in the business of  disclosing. It must remain sceptical. It must scrutinise what governments and intelligence  agencies and police forces and public officials do and what they say in this war as fearlessly as  possible. It must continue to provide Australians with as wide a range of informed analysis 

  and reporting on the War on Terror as possible and it must continue to question and analyse  and report on whether the war makes sense. It must continue the debate about whether what  we are involved in doing i s the best way to deal with the threat of terrorism, a threat most  people agree is real and growing. And we must do this as fairly and rigorously as we can, even 

  though we know that there will be times when we fail, when we slip up. And we must do all  this while accepting that we are in business of disclosure and that sometimes, we will not be  thanked for this. We must not be cowed by accusations of being unpatriotic and at the same  time, we have to accept that there might be things we can't disclose because lives might  be at risk, because our national security might be compromised. These are difficult judgements 

  we have to make. We are part of the community we serve, but we are not an arm of  government. Getting that balance right - between serving the community and rigorously 

  scrutinising government - is our biggest challenge in the post September 1 1, post Bali world  in which we live. 

