---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Parliament House, Canberra: 9 September 2003: government's temporary protection visa regulations, Philip Ruddock's use of ministerial discretion, Iraq TPV holders' protest outside Parliament House."
date: "2003-09-09"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "RUDDOCK, Philip, MP"
  - "Ministerial discretion"
  - "Visas"
  - "Legislative instruments"
  - "Senate Select Committee on Ministerial Discretion in Migration Matters"
  - "Refugees"
  - "government's temporary protection visa regulations"
  - "Philip Ruddock's use of ministerial discretion"
  - "Iraq TPV holders' protest outside Parliament House."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211258253
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AYCA6%22
---

 

 Nicola Roxon MP   Shadow Minister for Population and Immigration  Shadow Minister Assisting the Leader on the Status of Women   

 

 T R A N S C R I P T   M E D I A  R E L E A S E   T R A N S C R I P T  

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  9 SEPTEMBER 2003   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects: GOVERNMENT’S TEMPORARY PROTECTION VISA  REGULATIONS, PHILIP RUDDOCK’S USE OF  MINISTERIAL DISCRETION, IRAQ TPV HOLDERS’  PROTEST OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT HOUSE   

 ROXON: Well today I have called this press conference to announce Labor’s  position in relation to some regulations that the Government tabled yesterday.  Minister  Ruddock, in the Parliament yesterday, tried to give himself an enormous amount of extra  power.  Labor has decided today that we will oppose those regulations.   

 We don’t believe that when the Minister’s current powers are under serious question that  he should be seeking to give himself even more power.  Labor is going to oppose these  regulations.     

 We think that this is absolutely red hot.  There is a Senate Inquiry in place at the moment  where the Minister’s discretionary powers are being looked at very seriously.  There  have been questions that have been raised about favouritism, influence and much more  and now he wants to extend these powers even further. Labor is just not going to have a 

 bar of that.   

 JOURNALIST: What sorts of powers is he seeking?   

 ROXON:  What he is seeking to do is to extend the existing temporary  protection visa system to a bigger group of people and he as the Minister will be the only  person who will be able to grant this new category of people with permanent protection.   He is also giving himself more power to vary the times of visas that people are granted  with.     

 We think that this Minister has more power than any other Minister. He has a complete  discretion, which is exercised in secret.  He has used it nearly 2000 times since he has  been in Government and we don’t think that he should have any more powers while  those powers are being brought into serious question.   

 JOURNALIST: Is that your only concern, or are you concerned about extending  the TPV system to on-shore arrivals as well? 

 

 

 

 ROXON:  That is a significant concern of ours.  The Temporary Protection Visa system that  he is seeking to extend is fundamentally flawed.  This Government has set up a rolling Temporary  Protection Visa system.  We think that it is very cruel to have people in a permanent state of limbo, in fact  some of you may have seen the Iraqi protest out the front today.  These are people on Temporary  Protection Visas who have been waiting for months and months and months and don’t even know from  this Minister when he is going to process their claims.     

 We don’t want to extend the difficult circumstances that those people are in to a whole other group of  people.     

 There are some positive parts to these regulations and we will be asking the Government to separate out  those parts of the regulations, but it is interesting that even the Iraqis that are out the front of Parliament  House today, who might benefit from those positive changes, do not support these regulations because  they see that it catches more people in the future in the very trap that they are in.   

 JOURNALIST: What are the positive parts?   

 ROXON:  The positive part is that the Government is seeking to remove a seven-day rule  which was introduced several years ago, which meant that if people seeking to come to Australia spent  more than seven days in another country along the way, that they wouldn’t be able to make a claim here.     

 The Minister’s regulations change that for about 2,500 people, but they keep it in place for everybody else  and everyone else in the future.  We don’t support that part of the regulation and we are going to be  moving to disallow the entire regulation.     

 JOURNALIST: If the Government refuses to separate out those two bits, what is your position then  going to be?   

 ROXON:  Our position is to oppose the regulations.  We believe that these regulations have  been specifically designed to give the Minister even more power.  We think that it is incredible - when  his personal powers are being questioned - that he would seek to just have more and more power.  I  mean, we are entitled to say, ‘When will this stop?’  There should be a system that is accountable so that  all of the public can see how the Minister makes his decisions and we are not going to give him any more  power while we are disputing those issues.   

 JOURNALIST: And so you would disallow it, even if it would have an impact on those 2,500 TPV  holders?   

 ROXON:  Yes, we would and the refugee advocacy groups and many of the individuals  affected have supported our position to do that.  They know that they are caught in a trap.  They don’t  want people in the future to be caught in a trap and they are being used as a bargaining chip.  We call on  the Government to make separate regulations that will affect the seven-day rule - they can do that if they  choose to.  But the Government is specifically using them as some tool and we will not be bullied into  giving the Minister more power, when we question the way he uses his current powers.     

 JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)  

 

 ROXON:  The Minister is quite free to separate out the different provisions of these  regulations and if he wants to - and we would urge him to - move regulations that would affect those  2,500 people.  The reality is that this is a tidying up act on behalf of the Government.  It is a mistake that  they made.  They can correct it and they don’t need to tie it with incredibly damaging provisions for the 

 

 

 future of our whole refugee program.  We will not give the Minister more power just because he is using  those people as a bargaining chip.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you support regulations to look after those people?   

 ROXON:  If the Government were persuaded to - and we will certainly be seeking to  negotiate with them to put forward a separate regulation just for those 2,500 people.  We think that it is  very cruel for these people to be held in limbo year after year after year.     

 Labor’s policy is that if you are given a Temporary Protection Visa, you should only be given one once,  and after that you should be assessed as either being entitled to permanent protection or being able to be  returned home.  The Government is not doing that.  At the moment, in fact, for the Iraqis out the front of  Parliament House, they are not even processing their claims.  The Minister can’t leave them in limbo and  he can’t use these sorts of distractions to get away with making decisions in the area that he really needs  to make.     

 JOURNALIST: Why didn’t you speak yesterday at the protest outside Parliament House?   

 ROXON:  There is a range of things that we need to do here in Parliament. We are not always  able to be at each of them and I was conscious that the position that Labor has taken needed to go to our  Caucus this morning.  That has now happened.  My office has met with a number of the people involved.   And we are very concerned that they should have their claims processed and should get some security  about how their matters will be handled.  The Minister is not giving them that and we urge him to do so.     

 JOURNALIST: In terms of the timing, when would this disallowance motion come on, and would  you be negotiating with the Government first to try to separate these two regulations?   

 ROXON:  We will be lodging our notice of intention to disallow today.  We think that it is  very important to send a message that the Minister cannot just seek to extend his powers time and time  again and go by unchecked by the Opposition or by the public.  We will be doing that straight away, but  there then is period before it is listed and we will be negotiating with the Government then.   

 

 JOURNALIST: Just on that protest, do you believe that Carmen Lawrence is acting as a de facto  Shadow immigration spokesperson for Labor … (inaudible)?  Are you happy for her to continue on in  that role or do you think that she should come to her senses?   

 ROXON:  Well, I think that any member of our backbench is entitled to speak on whatever  issue in the community that they want to.  Many people feel strongly about this issue.  I am not seeking to  stop people being able to speak on this issue.  When we are talking about Labor’s position obviously I am  the spokesperson, but that doesn’t restrict any of our backbenchers from talking about whatever issues  they choose to.   

 JOURNALIST: Nicola, can I clarify something.  You were saying that the Minister is seeking to  extend his discretionary powers.  Is he going to get extra discretionary powers over these new on-shore  arrivals that he doesn’t currently have over other TPV holders?   

 ROXON:  He is.  What the Minister is seeking to do with these new regulations is say that  everyone who makes an on-shore application can only ever have temporary protection.  If they want to  get permanent protection he will be the sole decider over whether someone will get the right to stay in  Australia or not.     

 

 

 We don’t think that the Minister should be the person that plays God.  We think that he already has too  much power and we question whether it is being used properly and fairly.  We are not going to give him  more power just at a time when those questions are being asked.     

 JOURNALIST: Should any changes be made to the actual visas themselves?  Some of the  protesters are saying that once they were in Australia - which they wanted to be - they cannot actually  leave again to visit their families.  Should changes be made in that respect?   

 ROXON:  Well, these are a lot of the serious issues that affect people are on Temporary  Protection Visas that the Minister has chosen not to deal with.  Instead he is seeking to extend those sorts  of provisions to more people and the same problems will exist for this new category of people that are  covered by them.  So we are worried that when those sorts of questions are not answered, where people  can’t actually visit their families sometimes for four or five years at a time, that you don’t want to extend  the system that is failing these people - and probably failing our international obligations - to a bigger  group of people.   

 ENDS   

 9 September 2003  (21/03)   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 For more information call:  Nicola Roxon or Matt Nurse on (03) 9687 7355 or 0417 386 535   

