---
title: "Govt refugee policy illegal and callous."
date: "2003-06-22"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Migration Amendment (Duration of Detention) Bill 2003"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Children"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Government policy"
  - "Bills"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211254619
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y0P96%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats     June 22, 2003                   MEDIA RELEASE                                    03/445                 

 

 Govt Refugee Policy Illegal and Callous  The Howard Government has to face up to the fact that keeping asylum seekers and their children  detained indefinitely is illegal, the Australian Democrats said today.   

 Democrats’ Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock constantly  refused to accept court rulings that the Government’s cruel detention policy of keeping children and  families locked up indefinitely is illegal.   

 “Philip Ruddock has to face up to the fact that the arbitrary detention of people is illegal under  international and Australian law,” Senator Bartlett said.   

 “Any moves to interfere with the Court’s ability to provide justice must be prevented.   

 “This Government has a history of appealing decisions by the court that it doesn’t like all the way to  the top - at taxpayers expense.  And when it loses there it tries to change the law.   

 “We cannot let that happen.  We cannot let Philip Ruddock and John Howard keep changing the  rules to suit their agenda, which is cold-hearted and, frankly, evil.”   

 Senator Bartlett said the Democrats would oppose the People Migration Amendment (Duration of  Detention) Bill 2003 when it comes before the Senate this week.    

 The Bill is aimed at making it easier to keep people locked up - people who are seeking justice  through the Courts or who may be facing an appeal from the Government.  If it passes it will  prevent the courts from ordering the release of the children covered by last week’s ruling whilst any  appeal is considered.   

 Senator Bartlett said Howard Government moves to keep children locked in detention also showed  just how far it would go to try to win political points.   

 “This heartless Government will go so far as to keep children locked behind razor wire to push their  divisive political agenda and strategy of creating fear in the community.   

 “It is a cynical political move to inflame people’s prejudices and fears about refugees fleeing the  horror and persecution of their homeland.   

 “But we are talking about children. This Government has done it before and they are doing it again:  they are trying to make political points out of children.     

 “They are destroying children’s lives.  There is no reason families could not be released from  detention into secure housing, rather than keeping them locked up.   

 “No policy can be justified if it leads to the suffering and damage of many innocent children.”   

 For interview with Senator Bartlett contact Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

