---
title: "Government committed to nurturing multicultural society."
date: "2003-05-23"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Multicultural Australia Project"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Government policy"
  - "Government expenditure"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211562622
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7HF96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H68/03 - 23 MAY 2003

 

 Government Committed to Nurturing Multicultural Society

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, said today that the  Government's commitment to Australia's multicultural and inclusive society has been  demonstrated by the Federal Budget's $3.3m financial commitment to a new multicultural  policy. 

 "The new policy, Multicultural Australia: United in Diversity, places increased emphasis on  the importance of community harmony, which is particularly important in the current  international climate," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "In this context, community harmony and social cohesion are pivotal elements in enabling  Australia to contribute effectively to the international effort to combat terrorism, and in  safeguarding Australians.

 "The Government believes firmly that Australian multicultural policy provides a framework of  national unity and a coherent ethos for a diverse Australia at a time of conflict, as well as in  times of peace. National security begins with domestic community harmony," Mr Hardgrave  said.

 Speaking at a media briefing in Melbourne on the Government's Multicultural Policy  Statement, Mr Hardgrave said the Government would continue to promote community  harmony and social cohesion through numerous avenues. 

 "We will work closely with a range of individuals, and community, business and government  organisations, in condemning actions and statements which threaten community harmony.

 "We will continue to promote acceptance and understanding among all Australians for all  Australians," Mr Hardgrave said.

 "Religious leaders should be commended for their positive example of working together to  promote intelligent and respectful discussion, through initiatives such as the Australian  National Dialogue of Christians, Muslims and Jews (ANDCMJ).

 "The Government is also committed to promoting the economic benefits that can be derived  by capitalising on Australia's wealth of cultural and linguistic skills, and through the social  and business networks of Australia's migrants," Mr Hardgrave said.

 The Minister said that the government had also made a multi-million dollar commitment to  targeted settlement services for new arrivals. These services include English language  tuition, interpreting and translating assistance, counselling, information and referral services  and targeted programs for refugees and humanitarian entrants.

 "Providing such services is a worthy investment in their successful future in Australia and  has contributed to our building of a strong, unified nation," Mr Hardgrave said.

 23 May 2003

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

