---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Tuesday 18 February 2003: Iraq, North Korea & Newspoll."
date: "2003-02-18"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Korea, North"
  - "Iraq"
  - "Asia, Southeast"
  - "CREAN, Simon, (former Member)"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "National security"
  - "Opinion surveys"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "DOWNER, Alexander"
  - "War casualties"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253210
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0YK86%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   

 TRANSCRIPT 

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs   

 TRANSCRIPT 0F DOORSTOP  BRISBANE, TUESDAY 18 FEBRUARY 2003 

 

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY 

 

 Subjects:  Iraq, North Korea & Newspoll   

 

 Rudd:   Prime Minister Howard has made some statements in the last 24 hours about  the Iraq war. He has indicated that as far as the Government is concerned, they do not see any  particular change in Australia’s terrorism threat status arising from Australian participation in  a non-UN sanctioned war against Iraq.   

 I have a very basic challenge for the Prime Minister, and that is for the Prime Minister to  produce for the Australian public the Government’s assessment of the threat assessment  against Australians in the event of Australia being in a war against Iraq without the UN’s  approval. It would for me be inexplicable for the Australian Government not to have  conducted such a security threat analysis. The Australian Security and Intelligence  Organisation is engaged and employed to conduct such assessments.    

 Therefore, it is my belief that the Australian Government possesses such an assessment and  despite repeated questioning from the Opposition in Parliament last week, the Government  has refused to release that assessment. Now, Mr Howard can put this question to bed once and  for all by simply releasing to the Australian public his Government’s formal assessment of the  threat assessment against Australia and Australians, in the event of his Government ordering  an attack against Iraq outside the framework of the United Nations.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:   We in the Opposition are not privy to the assessment which the Government  has access to. Therefore, we have asked the Government in Parliament to release this  assessment so that Australians in going into any war against Iraq outside the framework of the  United Nations will be going into such a war with their eyes wide open. Frankly, it’s  important that the Prime Minister take Australians into his confidence and be absolutely plain  about what change would occur to the threat assessment against Australians in the event of  such an attack.    

 The Opposition asked the Government three questions about this explicitly in Parliament last  week and on three occasions we were explicitly fobbed off by the Acting Prime Minister.  Today, we have the Prime Minister saying, Bob’s your uncle - no change in the threat  assessment. Well there is one way to get to the bottom of this and that is for John Howard to 

 

 

 

 release his Government’s formal assessment of the threat assessment against Australians and  Australia in the event of Australia being part of an attack on Iraq outside the framework of the  UN.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:  Australia in South East Asia has gone through something of a battering in  terms of its image and in terms of its standing, most particularly in Islamic South East Asia.  We’ve had statements from the Prime Minister a couple of years ago about Australia being  the ‘Deputy Sheriff’ of the United States in South East Asia. Last December, we had the  Prime Minister say that Australia reserved the right to attack the sovereign territory of our  neighbours in South East Asia in pursuit of terrorists.    

 I simply make this point: Australia’s standing and reputation in Islamic South East Asia has  been taken to an all-time low by other actions of this Government up until now. I think,  therefore, the Prime Minister has a responsibility to make plain to the Australian people what  his Government’s formal assessment is of the threat to Australia and Australians arising from  any decision by his Government to commit Australia to a war against Iraq without the support  of the United Nations.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:   We in the Opposition are sceptical about this because the Government on three  occasions has refused to answer our direct questions in Parliament. Parliament is the forum of  the nation from which to obtain information from the Government. If this Government is  planing to take Australia to war, I would have thought the straightforward thing for the  Government to do would be to release the assessment in the Government’s possession about  the threat to Australia arising from such an action.   

 

 Reporter:   [Inaudible]  

 

 Rudd:   Mr Downer has made two sets of statements in the last several days,  downplaying the potential for civilian loses in any war against Iraq. Some days ago,  Mr Downer said that because the United States now possessed what he described as precision  bombing, the likelihood of large-scale civilian losses was therefore limited. Yesterday he said  that any civilian losses, though small civilian losses, would be the result purely of the policies  of Saddam Hussein.    

 I would simply say this: Mr Downer has a responsibility to answer the calculation of the  United Nations. The United Nations said in a document of 10 December that a war in Iraq  would result in up to 900,000 refugees - potentially 1.4 million - and on top of that 100,000  of these would require immediate assistance and I assume what they mean by immediate  assistance is assistance made necessary by having become casualties to any military action in  Iraq. Mr Downer seems to have embarked upon a campaign to downplay likely civilian  losses. Mr Downer, therefore, has a responsibility to answer directly how the UN, in its  document of 10 December, has got these calculations so fundamentally wrong.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:   The UN document is not explicit on the question of deaths. It does, however,  say that between 900,000 and 1.4 million Iraqis would become refugees as a result of such a  war and that up to 100,000 of these would require immediate assistance. Therefore, it’s  reasonable to assume that what they mean by immediate assistance is those in immediate 

  2

 danger following such an attack on their lives. I think, therefore, Mr Downer has an obligation  to tell the world how the UN seems to be getting its calculations so fundamentally wrong.  And, furthermore, if Mr Downer is putting such enormous confidence in the accuracy of US  precision bombing, I think Mr Downer should reflect back on the impact of precision  bombing in other theatres of war over time.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:   Mr Downer’s comments are related to civilian casualties. He seems to have  embarked upon a campaign to downplay the impact of civilian casualties in any war against  Iraq. Frankly, at this stage, given the information available, I think such statements are  irresponsible. We simply do not know what the final civilian death toll would be or what the  civilian casualty load would be. What we have in our possession is a sober document from the  UN which says the civilian impact of this would be huge.   

 On North Korea if I could say this: Today the Government of North Korea has indicated it  would potentially suspend the Armistice Agreement of 1953. Half a century ago, this  agreement brought to a conclusion the war on the Korean Peninsula. This is a fundamentally  important document in terms of the security and stability of not just the Korean Peninsula, but  all of North East Asia, including Japan and China as well. In particular, the Armistice  Agreement established the demilitarised zone which separates North from South.    

 What, in effect, would occur if the Armistice Agreement was suspended is that you would see  undermined and eliminated the very existence of the Demilitarised Zone at Panmunjon. This  action of itself is fundamentally destabilising and my challenge to the Howard Government is,  while we hear nothing else from the Prime Minister other than his policy on Iraq and why it is  right and good for the Australian people, could I simply say this: Where is his policy on North  Korea - a threat to our own security, in our own region, our own neighbourhood and our  backyard? We have a Prime Minister who is hyperactive on Iraq. We have a Prime Minister  who is missing in action on North Korea.   

 Reporter:  What is Labor’s policy on North Korea?   

 Rudd:   Labor’s policy on North Korea has two fundamental points to it. First of all,  North Korea should be taken to the United Nations Security Council as a matter of urgency,  and the reason for that is that the problem represented by North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship  is a problem for the world, not just for the United States.    

 Furthermore, if you take North Korea to the UN Security Council you automatically require  the engagement of the Russian Federation and China. Historically, these two countries, as  neighbours of North Korea, have had close relations with Pyongyang and an ability to  influence that Government. Therefore, if it becomes a matter for a resolution before the UN  Security Council, then those countries must engage formally in the process and then bring  their leverage to bear in hopefully changing North Korean behaviour.    

 The second part of Labor’s policy on North Korea is that Mr Downer, as one of the longest  standing Foreign Ministers within APEC - that is the regional body of Foreign Ministers  within the Asia Pacific region - should convene an urgency meeting of APEC Foreign  Ministers to bring about a common regional diplomatic offensive against the regime in  Pyongyang because of their nuclear brinkmanship. This is a region-wide question, it is a  worldwide question and Australia, because its interests are so keenly at stake, should be  taking the lead, not just following up the rear.   

 Reporter:  Mr Rudd are you happy with the latest opinion polls? 

  3

 

 Rudd: National security policy for Australia and for the Australian Labor Party is  fundamental and it is non-negotiable. From our perspective it’s about doing the right thing for  Australia and our long term national security interests.  And, frankly, we don’t give a damn  what opinion polls have to say on a particular point about the Party or whether or not people  happen to support our position on this vital question for the country’s future.    

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:   Labor is concerned about delivering the right national security policy for  Australia. We think this Government’s national security policy formulation of Iraq is wrong,  that it’s not in Australia’s national security interests and that it creates new threats to our  security which did not exist before. For those reasons, we intend to stick to our guns. We  formed our policy on Iraq in April last year - more than nine months ago. We haven’t budged  an inch, we don’t intend to budge an inch, and whether that is reflected in opinion polls or  not, is frankly for us is a secondary question. We’re determined to pursue a principled  approach to national security policy directions for Australia, one which is anchored in our  support for the United Nations Security Council.   

 Reporter: So you’re not concerned by the latest polls?   

 Rudd:  Our concern as a Party is to have the right national security policy for  Australia. Within the debate on that security policy as it relates to Iraq today to argue for our  policy, to hold this Government accountable for the flaws in its own policy and for the new  dangers it exposes Australia to here in our own region, our own neighbourhood and our own  backyard. Frankly, whether or not that is popular, whether or not that is going to attract  opinion poll support must be, for any mainstream political party, a secondary consideration.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:  I think the Australian people are still working their way through the  information on Iraq. I think it will take some time for the Australian people to finally make up  their mind on the question of Iraq, but frankly, for us as a Party, whether or not we attract  opinion poll support is a secondary concern to the primary concern which is getting our policy  right.  We believe we got the policy right nine months ago, when frankly our policy was not  attracting much attention or support at all. Nine months later our policy hasn’t changed. We’ll  pursue this policy through to the conclusion of the Iraq debate.   

 Reporter:  So you don’t believe the Australian people have made up their minds about  Iraq?   

 Rudd:   The Australian people, a large number of them, have formed an opinion. A  large number of them have yet to form an opinion. Part of the reason why they have yet to  form an opinion is that we don’t see yet the content of the UN Security Council resolution.  But what I would say is this: when it comes to the increasing arrogance we see on the part of  John Howard and his handling of the entire Iraq debate, it is unprecedented to see a Prime  Minister’s poll ratings collapse by, I think, some 17 points in a matter of only three months. I  think it is very important to see this poll therefore in its context. What is emerging in terms of  the Australian view of ‘honest’ John Howard is John Howard becoming increasingly arrogant.  I think what the Australian people are somewhat shocked by is the increasing manifestation of  prime ministerial arrogance of the part of a man who has always sought to be at one with the  people.    

 Reporter:  [Inaudible] 

  4

  5

 

 Rudd:   At present what we have in the debate in Australia is some people who have  resolved their opinion on the question of Iraq and others who have not. This will take some  time to wash through. But when it comes to the verdict on the Prime Minister’s handling on  the Iraq matter we see increasing negative commentary. I think the other thing to say is this:  put the Prime Minister’s opinion poll standing in context. John Howard now, as an elected  Head of Government of Australia has, I’m advised, a lower opinion poll approval than any  other elected Premier of Australia at present.    

 Now I think it is important to put this into context, because when it comes to questions of  national security which are important for the nation, when it comes to the way in which the  Prime Minister has handled this matter, I think people will be beginning to ask themselves  these fundamental questions. For our part, as an Opposition, it’s to hold this Government  accountable. We don’t expect to attract some huge windfall of public opinion support simply  by holding the Government accountable - that will wash through in time. But I draw your  attention to where Mr Howard stands now and I think the emerging view of the Australian  people is that John Howard is showing an increasing degree of prime ministerial arrogance.   

 Reporter:  How do you rate Simon Crean’s performance?   

 Rudd:   Simon Crean has shown great and gutsy leadership of the question of Iraq last  year, great and gutsy leadership on the question of Iraq this year. This has been a difficult  debate for the nation. We took a policy on Iraq in April last year when everybody, frankly,  thought that our policy was way out to left field from where the Australian people were. We  stuck to that policy, under Simon’s leadership.  We are sticking to that policy now under  Simon’s leadership. He has been firm and resolute in adhering to the policy, and when it came 

 to putting that policy recently to peace rallies in Australia, he did not take a step backwards.  He was quite explicit in putting strongly Labor’s policy forward.   

 Reporter:  [Inaudible]   

 Rudd:  On the question of Iraq, on the question of foreign policy, on the question of  the general policy program of the Opposition, he has shown great and gutsy leadership  through a difficult time. The year 2002 was a difficult year for the Party internally where  Simon, showed great and gutsy leadership. 2003 is a difficult year for the country where again  we see Simon showing great and gutsy leadership. We don’t see that changing. He has,  through a difficult period - for the Party last year and for the country this year - shown strong  leadership, and will continue to do so.  

 

 

 Further information:  Kevin Rudd, MP 0418 796 931 or Alister Jordan 0417 605 823 

