---
title: "Cease support for hunger strike."
date: "2003-12-30"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "A Just Australia"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Demonstrations and protest movements"
  - "Nauru"
  - "Visas"
  - "Afghanistan"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262703
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B79B6%22
---

 Cease Support for Hunger Strike 

 VPS 020/2003 

 I call upon the patrons and Board of A Just Australia to immediately urge the hunger  strikers in Nauru to end their dangerous course of action.  

 I can't imagine that the patrons or Board members of A Just Australia would sit by and  allow one of their children or loved ones to pursue self-harm as a form of protest - no  responsible Australian would.  

 Claims by the National Director of A Just Australia, Mr Howard Glenn, that his  organisation does not support the hunger strike ignore the basic facts.  

 The proposed summit and memorandum of understanding put forward by Mr Glenn on  Boxing Day can have no other effect than to encourage the hunger strikers to believe that  voluntary self-harm will lead to the grant of visas to Australia.  

 It is important to note that the visa categories nominated by Mr Glenn include family re-union and other non-refugee visas. For the Government to participate in any such  discussions in good faith there would have to be a real chance that non-refugee visas  would be granted.  

 Mr Glenn is saying, in effect, that in return for the grant of visa of choice, the non-refugees on Nauru will end their hunger strike.  

 Whatever else he says, raising the possibility of non-refugee visas can only serve to  encourage the strikers to continue their dangerous protest.  

 Self-harm is not an appropriate bargaining chip to use in seeking changes to Government  policy.  

 The facts are simple:  

  z there have been no forced returns to Afghanistan 

  z the people in question have been found not to be refugees 

  I have already indicated the Australian Government will look at any new information  from the UNHCR on changed conditions in Afghanistan to examine the implications  for those cases on Nauru previously assessed by DIMIA. 

  I urge all members of A Just Australia to join with Ms Marion Le, who has been  acknowledged by A Just Australia as a representative for the hunger strikers, to 

  Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

  give an unambiguous message to hunger strikers in Nauru to stop their dangerous  protest.  

  30 December 2003 

