---
title: "Funding round for Settlement Service opens."
date: "2003-02-03"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Community Settlement Services Scheme"
  - "Grants"
  - "Community services"
  - "Immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211252701
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/N3H86%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H15/2003 - 3 February 2003

 

 Funding Round for Settlement Service Opens

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today announced the  opening of the 2003 funding round for grants under the Community Settlement Services  Scheme (CSSS). 

 The new round will extend and complement the existing network of services assisting  refugees, humanitarian entrants, and migrants to settle successfully in Australia.

 'Settlement programs contribute enormously to the successful adjustment of those who seek  to make Australia their home, by assisting them to become full and active participants in  Australia's democratic society.

 'I intend to give priority to projects which deliver services to recent arrivals whose  communities in Australia are small and emerging; to projects catering for refugee and  humanitarian entrants and to projects meeting the unique needs of new migrants in regional  areas,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 Outcomes from the Settlement Services Review, which will more effectively target and  maximise migrant services across agencies, will be announced later this year. Until then, the  national funding priorities remain the same.

 In 2003, funding is available for periods of nine or 21 months from 1 October 2003 in order  to align the scheme with the next financial year. The sector was advised of these  arrangements at the time of the 2002 grants announcement. To allow outcomes of the  Settlement Services Review to be advised to the sector in 2003, a third year of funding is not  available.

 Funding priority will be given to projects which: 

 ●     Facilitate client access to mainstream services,

 ●     Develop settlement planning and service delivery networks that 

 engage mainstream service providers to deliver culturally  appropriate services, and ●     Aim to be self-sustaining beyond the period of the grant.

 Organisations wishing to apply are encouraged to complete the  application form on DIMIA's web site at www.immi.gov.au/grants. 

 The web-based electronic application form is simple to complete and provides immediate  access to all applicant information via the Internet. It is completely secure - applicants 

 receive a unique log-on and password and all information is encrypted. 

 Advertisements inviting applications for funds will appear nationwide in newspapers on 8  February 2003. Applications close on 21 March 2003. 

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862

