---
title: "Protests must confront Minister with refugees' epidemic of despair."
date: "2003-04-09"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Demonstrations and protest movements"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Depression"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211559560
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PZ096%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats               Spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs  April 9, 2003                  03/215                                       MEDIA RELEASE                   

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

 inister with  r 

 ocrats today urged protesters planning Easter rallies against the Government’s  oor of Immigration 

 

 ing to join 

 e Baxter Detention Centre. 

 r due to protests 

 is not the best way to help these people,” Senator Bartlett said. 

 ing this issue right to 

 of detainees cannot 

 ven by the most stony-hearted politician.  We must constantly remind the  Government and Minister Ruddock of the misery being inflicted.”  

 y with South  n epidemic of 

 “I have seen the distress, hopelessness and despair of these people.  This epidemic of wretched  nd their policies. 

 g a new baby.   ck, they are 

 sitting there going crazy. 

  of an absolutely 

 “As a parent, what I saw made me feel so desperately for these people. Even prisoners who have  been re no rights, no relief. 

 

 “The actions of this Government are worse than heartless, they are bordering on criminal.”   

 Senator Bartlett said the situation facing Afghani, Iranian and Iraqi refugees could be relieved  immediately if the Government granted humanitarian visas to all temporary protection visa holders  in Australia.   

 For interview with Senator Bartlett, please call Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649 

 Protests Must Confront M Refugees’ Epidemic of Despai

 The Australian Dem inhumane treatment of refugees in detention to take their message right to the d Minister Philip Ruddock. 

 Democrats’ Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said he was concerned protesters plann Easter rallies would adversely affect detainees insid  

 “Detainees are living in such misery. Locking the detention centre down over Easte

 

 “I urge any protests to remain peaceful, but more importantly we should be tak the door of the Minister.   

 “This Government’s callous policy is causing immense suffering.  The plight  possibly be ignored e

 

 Speaking after visiting the Baxter Detention Centre in South Australia on Tuesda Australian Democrats’ MP Kate Reynolds, Senator Bartlett said he witnessed a despair within the facility.   

 misery and sickness is being deliberately inflicted by the Howard Government a  

 “I spoke with one Iranian couple - a dentist and a pharmacist - who are expectin They have spent three years locked up.  They can’t go forward and they can’t go ba

 

 “Their’s is a story evident 100 times over among refugees in detention. Stories appalling existence, of babies born in detention, knowing no freedom.   

  convicted of a crime have a release date.  But for these detainees there a

