---
title: "Iranian deal would betray asylum seekers."
date: "2003-03-12"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Iran"
  - "Visas"
  - "Repatriation"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211564843
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KZR86%22
---

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Immigration 

 12th March 2003 MEDIA RELEASE     03/138             

 

 Iranian deal would betray asylum seekers    

 The Australian Democrats have called on the Prime Minister to declare a moratorium on the forced  return of asylum seekers and to introduce the automatic renewal of temporary protection visas for  refugees.    

 Democrats’ Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said the Government is expected to announce soon a deal  with Iran to enable the Australian Government to forcibly return asylum seekers. Senator Bartlett said  any such agreement would be ‘shameful’.     

 “This would be a deplorable thing to do at any time given the human rights record of Iran and it being  in the cross-sights as a member of the ‘axis of evil’. Negotiating such an agreement on the eve of war in  the region highlights again the Government’s lack or regard for individual human suffering.      

 “Those who have qualified for refugee status from countries affected by this war on terrorism, and who  currently have temporary protection visas need to have these visas made permanent immediately.    

 “The easiest way to do this would be to declare an amnesty on temporary protection and create a  humanitarian category for those from Iraq and Iran. This would ensure that these people can settle  safely in Australia,” Senator Bartlett said.    

 “There are currently 268 Iranians in detention, and another 190 Iranian asylum seekers in Australia  would be affected by a deportation agreement with Iran,” Senator Bartlett said.    

 “Many of these people are in a terrible mental condition after years of detention. It has been the  Government’s practice to leave people in detention until they can no longer cope and agree to a  voluntary return to Iran.   

 “An agreement between Australia and Iran will impact on refugees on temporary protection visas who  will face the grim prospect of forced return to the regime they have fled.    

 “The Government is still encouraging Iraqi refugees to go home voluntarily whilst loudly telling the  Australian people of the barbaric regime they have left. It is time the Australian Government put some  reality in their rhetoric and took the claims they are making seriously.    

 “The majority of these people may have failed to meet the strict criteria for refugee status but would  have no trouble convincing the Department of their genuine need for protection on humanitarian  grounds if a visa category was opened to them,” concluded Senator Bartlett.     

 Next week the Democrats will table in the Senate an “Appeal for an Act of Grace” asking the  Government to grant permanent residence to all refugees currently on temporary protection visas who  have been law abiding, and authorise the immediate release into the community of all asylum seekers  who are not a health or a security concern. 

 To interview Senator Bartlett contact Daele Healy on 0419 867 649 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au 

