---
title: "Afghanistan rejects allegations on returnee killing."
date: "2003-12-29"
creators:
  - "Embassy of Afghanistan"
source: "EMBASSY OF AFGHANISTAN"
subjects:
  - "Repatriation"
  - "ANDREN, Peter"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262700
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FXDB6%22
---

 

 

 

 Embassy of Afghanistan - Canberra    

 PRESS RELEASE   29 December 2003    

 Afghanistan Rejects Allegations on Returnee Killing    

 In the wake of the continuous hunger strike and self harm of the asylum seekers in  Nauru, a number of individuals and non-government organizations have been  making irresponsibly false claims that Afghanistan is not secure for the return of the  refugees and asylum seekers.    

 The most outstanding claim came recently from Mr. Peter Andren, Federal Member  for Calare. According to the ABC Radio, last Tuesday Mr. Andren claimed that  between seven and ten of a group of asylum seekers, sent back home from Nauru  just over three weeks ago, have been killed. Mr. Andren said "there are suggestions  that some of those already sent back have been executed on their return".    

 The Government of Afghanistan has been investigating Mr. Andren's claim. This  morning Afghan Ambassador to Australia, HE Mahmoud Saikal, said "We  categorically reject the allegations made by the Independent Member for Calare, Mr.  Peter Andren. The 20 asylum seekers (17 from Nauru) who arrived in Kabul on 3  December had been seeking our assistance for a long time to expedite their  voluntary return to Afghanistan. On their arrival they were welcomed by Afghan  Government, IOM and other officials. They were placed in a guesthouse, where they  enjoyed the hospitality of the Afghan Ministry for Refugees and Repatriation".    

 Ambassador Saikal added: "Over a period of ten days from their arrival they left the  guesthouse for the following destinations:   One left for Ningarhar Province on 4 December   One joined his family members in Kabul on 6 December   Four left for Jaghori District of Ghazni Province on 6 December   Ten left for Ningarhar Province on 7 December   Two left for Qandahar Province on 11 December   Two left for Qandahar Province on 13 December   There is absolutely no report whatsoever about any of the above returnees to have  been persecuted, killed or executed".    

 Ambassador Saikal said: " irresponsible and abstract allegations of some of the  refugee advocates about the lack of security in Afghanistan, no matter how  humanitarian they may look, hurts the greater interests of our country which is going  through the sensitive phase of recovery. From now on, unless claims of insecurity of  the returnees are substantiated, we will be left with no other choice but to initiate  appropriate judicial processes against such false claimants whose' reckless and  unwarranted statements not only do not help the cause of the asylum seekers in  Australia, it also hurts and impedes seriously the process of reconstruction of  Afghanistan which bears an inseparable causal effect on the security of the country".    

 Ambassador Saikal added:" No doubt, like everywhere else, the remnants of terrorist  networks are still active in Afghanistan, but there is no sign that returnees are  targets of their operations. Also, unfortunately criminal daily violence happening in  all countries of the world is a fact of life, which should not be unfairly amplified as  political violence".    

 Contact: First Secretary A. Shayeq Qassem on (02) 62827311 

