---
title: "Harradine calls for investigation into Villawood detainee abortion claim."
date: "2003-10-28"
creators:
  - "Harradine, Brian"
source: "Office of HARRADINE, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Abortion"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211260646
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/54RA6%22
---

 

 

 

 Harradine calls for investigation into Villawood detainee  abortion claim   

 Senator Brian Harradine today called for an investigation into claims that a woman  detainee at Villawood Detention Centre, Sydney, had been encouraged to terminate her  pregnancy at a cost of $1500.   

 It is understood that the woman was about nine weeks pregnant when she was detained at  Villawood in 2001.  The claims have only recently come to light.    

 Senator Harradine asked the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous  Affairs, Senator Amanda Vanstone, whether it was routine procedure and practice to  encourage abortions.   

 “We’re talking here about a very vulnerable woman, in a fragile state emotionally, being  arrested and detained wondering how she is going to give birth and raise this child in  detention.  Obviously women in that situation are going to be especially susceptible to  suggestions from authorities that they end their pregnancies”, Senator Harradine said. 

 

 “Fortunately, in this case, the woman concerned withstood the pressure she felt and gave  birth to a baby girl.”   

 Senator Harradine said he understood that these allegations had been brought to the  attention of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission and the Department of  Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs. 

 

 Senator Harradine said there was a further serious allegation made by the woman who  says she was threatened with removal of her daughter unless she agreed to take certain  medication.   

 As part of his question, Senator Harradine also asked about the Government’s policy of  care of women pregnant in detention and whether the Government acknowledged that  such women deserve special care.   

 Senator Harradine said he was concerned to learn that guards were stationed outside the  delivery room door and about claims that that some women were denied access to their  partners during the birth.   

 28 October 2003   

 Senator Brian Harradine, Tel. 02 6277 3735 

