---
title: "The fate of Iraqi and Afghani refugees uncertain."
date: "2003-02-27"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Psychological stress"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253545
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2VN86%22
---

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Immigration 

 27th February 2003 MEDIA RELEASE     03/106             

 

 

 The fate of Iraqi and Afghani refugees uncertain   

 The Australian Democrats claim that the recent suicide of a refugee on a temporary protection visa,  highlights the dangerous situation facing thousands of refugees currently in Australia.   

 The Leader of the Australian Democrats Senator Andrew Bartlett told a public forum on the fate of  Afghani refugees, held in Adelaide Town Hall last night, that Iraqi and Afghani refugees on temporary  protection visas are currently having their claims reassessed and have to prove that it is not safe for  them to return to war torn Afghanistan or to Iraq.    

 “For the majority of Afghani and Iraqi refugees, returning is simply not an option. It is bad enough for  the Immigration Minister to ignore the volatile situation in Afghanistan, but to refuse to acknowledge  the ongoing danger for Iraqi refugees is bordering on criminal,” Senator Bartlett said.   

 “The Australian Government does not want people on temporary protection visas to feel welcome or to  begin to build a new life.   

 “Temporary protection visas were created to deliberately deter people from seeking asylum in  Australia. This is a visa designed to ensure people remain in a situation of high stress and uncertainty.     

 ”The result has been an increase in depression, psychiatric illness, and general ill health amongst the  refugee population. People have been forced to live in limbo whilst their families in Afghanistan and  Iraq are killed, tortured or disappear.    

 “After three years of stress and uncertainty, thousands of refugees are now forced to reapply for another  temporary visa. The Australian Democrats fear that the rejection of applications by the Australian  government will result in more deaths.     

 “People won’t attempt suicide as a means of drawing attention to their fate but as a final solution to a  spiral of despair and hopelessness they face.”    

 Senator Bartlett said the situation facing Afghani refugees and Iraqi refugees could be relieved  immediately if the government followed the sensible option of granting humanitarian visas to all  temporary protection visa holders in Australia.     

 

 

 To interview Senator Bartlett contact Daele Healy on 0419 867 649 

 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au 

