---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Hyde Park Corner, London: 11 November 2003."
date: "2003-11-11"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Visits from Australia"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "International relations"
  - "War memorials"
  - "Terrorism"
  - "Great Britain"
  - "United States"
  - "Refugees"
  - "US Supreme Court"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261173
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JCVA6%22
---

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   

 

 DATE:            November 11 2003  TITLE:   Doorstop Interview, Australian War Memorial, Hyde Park Corner, London   

 Journalist: Inaudible (general questions about the Australian War Memorial)    

 Mr Downer: I think the design of it is so good.  I just think it makes a point about the  sacrifices Australians made, not just in our own part of the world but in Europe as well, and I  think it has been a very moving ceremony, and a very important one for Australia and for the  veterans who have come along as well.  But it illustrates a point about the historic relationship  between Australia and Britain, but not that you can just focus in diplomacy on history, but it’s  a relationship that has been very dramatically modernized, as a result of the war against  terrorism and the conflict in Iraq, where, once just regional issues were important, and so  perhaps for a few decades after the Second World War we didn’t have a lot to do with Britain  other than trade.  In more recent times we have come together a lot on major strategic issues  and our perspectives are very similar even though our governments are of a different political  persuasion.  And we’ve been able to do some great things together in the war against  terrorism and obviously the liberation of Iraq, so that reminds us of the importance of that  relationship and we will be having over the next couple of days the Australia-Britain  Leadership Forum, which is an opportunity for us to get to know each other at different levels,  other than from just a government to government relationship.     

 Journalist: Mr Downer, as you say the Prime Minister drew the link between the historic bond  and the current bond in the war on terror. Do you think making that link might bring  sentiment around more, not so much in Australia but in countries like Britain where sentiment  is still not running strongly in favour of the war, it might make people see it differently when  you talk about the defensive values?   

 Mr Downer: Look, I’m not sure about that, not sure what impact it would have on public  opinion.  But I do think it’s very important to make the point that where you are confronted  with evil you have to have the courage to deal with it. You can’t just run away from it.   Australia and Britain are two countries that for the last hundred years haven’t run away from  evil, and the terrorists that we’re seeing, the Islamic fundamentalists, terrorists who attacked  in Riyadh very recently, we see of course in Iraq, and we saw in Bali, and in America two  years ago - these are people who have to be defeated.  I think the British are tremendously  strong in their determination to win the war against terrorism and we share that strength and  determination.  We’re two countries that make a major contribution, not just a contribution 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 through military forces but very importantly we make a very strong contribution through our  intelligence cooperation, which is very close.   

 Journalist: If I could ask you about Guantanamo Bay, the US Supreme court?   

 Mr Downer: They haven’t made a decision. Well I suppose they have in the sense that they  have said they will consider a submission.   

 Journalist: That’s right, and whether or not the detainees can appeal their detention through  the civilian court. Is that a victory for the legal system?   

 Mr Downer: It is just part of the American legal system.  I gather various groups have made  applications to lower courts in America, for cases to be heard on behalf of people in  Guantanamo Bay, and the American lower courts have rejected those applications, apparently  based on a Supreme Court case back in the 1950s, related to Guantanamo Bay and the legal  status of Guantantmo Bay.  So what the Supreme Court has been asked to do is make a ruling  on the legal status of Guantanamo Bay, that is whether it falls within American legal  jurisdiction or whether it doesn’t.  This is entirely a matter for the US Supreme Court, and we  offer no advice or comment and will be making no submissions to the American Supreme  Court.  It’s a matter for American law.  Now, if the Supreme Court rules against the  application, well then I would imagine that the military commission procedure which is being  set up at the moment will continue.  If the application is successful in the US Supreme Court  case then that will leave the door open to civil action in American courts so we will have to  wait and see what happens.   

 Journalist: But this does fall within the rights of the detainees to take this legal action?   

 Mr Downer: Well you are really asking me questions about American law, I mean my  understanding of American law, bearing in mind our own law is very similar to American  law, is that people can make applications to courts, and whether they will be successful is a  matter for the court.   

 Journalist: Are Australia and Britain working together to try to speed up the process of getting  a proper military commission going on this issue.   

 Mr Downer: Yes we are, and the Prime Minister and I had some discussions with Jack Straw  yesterday about the issue of Guantanamo Bay.  We have two people in Guantanamo Bay as  you know, and the British have nine I understand, and in both our cases, we very much want  the military commission procedure to move forward as quickly as possible.  It is taking a long  time at the moment.  We would like it to move forward quickly.  And we also want to ensure  as best we can that the military commissions meet the appropriate standards of justice.  We  made a lot of progress over the last few months with the Americans and we have worked hand  in glove with the British. We’ve often consulted each other, both at the Foreign Ministry level  and at the Attorney-Generals’ level.     

 Journalist: The asylum seekers who landed on Melville Island have apparently claimed  asylum in Australia.  Is that the case?   

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 Mr Downer: The advice I had on Sunday, through the talking points sent to me by the  Department of Immigration, was that they hadn’t, but I have seen since then, claims by some  of the Turks that they did claim asylum, and so I have asked for that to be investigated.  But it  doesn’t have any legal significance, because as you know Melville Island was excised from  the Australian Migration Zone by the Attorney-General, so in those circumstances such an 

 application wouldn’t have any meaning in law, as I understand it, but in any case, just for the  record, I have asked to be told more detail from Defence as to what was said and who said  what, so I just don’t know, I obviously wasn’t there myself.     

 Journalist: Is it right and proper for Australian ships to be towing people away from Australia  if these people say they are trying to claim asylum in Australia.   

 Mr Downer: It is right and proper for Australia to be vigorous in its determination to break the  back of people smuggling.  If people want to come to Australia they are perfectly welcome to  make application in the normal way.  If they try very deliberately to circumvent our own  rules, and they pay people smugglers and people smugglers make profits out of loading  people onto little boats and sailing them across the ocean, then that is a practice we want to  stop.  And we have been tough, but we make no apology for the fact that being tough has  proved to be very successful.  We have had since August 2001 only two boats come to  Australia.  We have a system which is working quite well with the Indonesians, of  cooperation with the Indonesians.  This was a very good example of cooperation with the  Indonesians - when the 14 Turks and the 4 crew, who of course were Indonesian citizens and  this was an Indonesian boat, when they were returned to Indonesia they were met by the  Indonesian police, who took care of them and we also made arrangements for officials from  the International Organisation of Migration to meet up with them and talk through their  particular claims and their case.   

 Journalists: Thank you       

 ENDS…………………………………………………………………..NOVEMBER 11 2003   

