---
title: "CSSS: extra $12m to help migrants settle into a 'new life' in Australia."
date: "2003-08-15"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Community Settlement Services Scheme"
  - "Government expenditure"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211256890
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7P5A6%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H111/2003 - 15 August 2003

 

 CSSS - Extra $12m to Help Migrants Settle Into a 'New Life' in Australia

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, today announced a  further $12.13m in funding to assist with the settlement of migrants, refugees and  humanitarian entrants through the Community Settlement Services Scheme (CSSS). 

 'Under the CSSS, $12.13m will be offered to 141 community organisations to deliver a range  of settlement services to migrants in metropolitan, regional and remote areas for periods of  nine or 21 months,' Mr Hardgrave said. 

 'These services include information and orientation assistance for newly arrived migrants  and refugees, community capacity building for small and emerging communities, and  casework and referral services to mainstream and specialist agencies,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 'These grants represent an investment in Australia's future. They will provide migrants and  refugees with the settlement assistance they need to participate equitably in Australian  society,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 This funding complements funding allocated in June for Migrant Resource Centres and  Migrant Service Agencies, bringing the total funding for community settlement services to  $27.1m.

 As with previous years there was a high level of interest in the CSSS, with 308 applications  for funding being received Australia-wide - evidence of the significant contribution settlement  programs in assisting new arrivals.

 'Settlement programs contribute enormously to the successful adjustment of those who seek  to make Australia their home,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 'The 181 grants being funded this year will greatly assist our newest community members to  become full and active participants in Australia's democratic society. 

 'In total 123 projects will receive funding for a period of nine months and 58 projects will  receive funding for a period of 21 months.'

 Grants have been offered for either nine or 21 months to align the funding year with the  financial year.

 Information about the new grants is available on the Department's website at  www.immi.gov.au/grants.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

