---
title: "Citizenship and multiculturalism: a political refugee's view."
date: "2003-10-09"
creators:
  - "Leovic, Rad"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Yugoslavia"
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Yugoslav Australians"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Case studies"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211259976
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7ZSA6%22
---

  O u r  Population, O u r  Future 

  Citizenship and multiculturalism: 

  a political refugee’s view  Rad Leovic 

  I was born in Nis, Yugoslavia, south east of Belgrade. I fled the Iron Curtain in May 1951 

  and arrived in Australia in March 1952. I departed the old country just six weeks before 

  my final law examination and graduation. Having been imprisoned once already, I took 

  the opportunity to leave when the authorities would have least suspected me. Political 

  refugee is defined in international law. My circumstances in Yugoslavia at the time met the 

  criteria very well. Further, Australia was pleased to accept me, for which I am eternally 

  grateful. 

  Australia has been an ideal home for genuine refugees. I would like to just briefly trace my 

  experience and reflect on the importance of Australian citizenship for me over the past 50 

  years. 

  As I settled in this country and when I soon became naturalised, I was aware of a strong 

  unity and collective identity in Australian society. The conferring of citizenship was 

  accompanied by much ceremony and celebration. The Good Neighbour movement and 

  annual congresses were major public events that seemed to represent most groups in the 

  host society. 

  In the 1950s Australian society seemed relatively homogenous and the official policy was 

  assimilationist, but there were many changes underway towards a heterogeneous society. 

  I was assimilated very fast and generously, in particular by my employer, I had joined the 

  Australian Bureau of Statistics. They had schemes of mentoring and subsidised tertiary 

  studies, that enabled me to graduate B.Ec. from the ANU and undertake post graduate 

  work. I served my entire career with the ABS in Canberra. I raised a family in the suburb 

  of Hughes, am happily married and enjoy an active retirement including triathlons, part- 

  time work, research and travel. 

  Page 73 

  Our Population, Our Future 

  Citizenship is the concept that embraces for me the Australian character and identity, its 

  institutions, the unity, integration and harmony of the country and the rights, values and 

  responsibilities of its citizens. It says so much more about Australia than multiculturalism. 

  I am concerned by persistent attention and emphasis given to ethnicity and ethnic origins, 

  when Australianism is such a rich and dynamic idea. Is the host Australian society to be 

  described as non-ethnic? Is multiculturalism detracting from full citizenship? 

  Multiculturalism and ethnic organisations represent, in my view, a considerable mis- 

  allocation of resources and configuration of specific values, traditions and activities. To a 

  certain extent, they compete with the vital tasks of national development, community 

  cohesion and agreement on basic, common values. 

  What lies in the future? Australia will have to respond to continued population growth, 

  immigration and refugee pressures on a secure basis of agreed national goals  and purposes. 

  Citizenship should exemplify national identity, unity, values and confidence - 

  strengthened and not displaced by multiculturalism. 

  Page 74 

