---
title: "Michael Danby condemns immigration raid."
date: "2003-02-20"
creators:
  - "Danby, Michael"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of DANBY, MICHAEL, MP"
subjects:
  - "Search and seizure"
  - "Illegal immigrants"
  - "Building industry"
  - "Police brutality"
  - "Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211253320
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LYU86%22
---

 MICHAEL DANBY MHR  Press Release from the Federal Member for Melbourne Ports  20 February 2003    Michael Danby condemns immigration raid   Following an early morning raid at a construction site in Bay Street, Port Melbourne, where 61 foreign workers were investigated, Michael Danby MHR, Federal Member for  Melbourne  Ports  has  joined  with  CFMEU  Victorian  leader  Martin  Kingham,  to  condemn the heavy handed approach of the raid.  This  morning’s  raid,  which  involved  20  armed  police  officers,  as  well  as  officials  from  the  Department  of  Immigration  and  the  Tax  Office,  was  conducted  without  consideration  for  the  well  being  of  the  workers,  and  could  have  resulted  in  serious  harm  or  injury.  Workers  were  separated  into  two  groups,  with  the  61  workers  of  Chinese descent being interrogated in an onsite shed.    Mr  Danby  continued;  “These  are  brutal  and  archaic  practices  that  should  only  be  reserved for hardnosed criminals and not construction employees, irrespective of their visa status.”  Following the interrogation onsite, almost half of those detained were transported to the Maribyrnong Detention Centre where they are being further questioned.   Like  his  fellow  Labor  colleagues,  Mr  Danby  denounced  the  detention  of  these  workers, saying; “Detention has become a system of punishment. It should be used for protecting Australia from genuine security risks. Refugees and illegal workers such as these should be treated in a humane way and should have access to English language training, medical aid and the Job Network. That way there would be no need for brutal dawn raids.”  Mr  Danby  also  criticised  the  Department  of  Immigration,  saying  that  it  is  irresponsible  of  the  Department  to  assume  that  all  workers  should  carry  their  identification and visas with them at all time.   Such raids should be avoided at all costs, and the Labor party does not support them.       The  construction  site  is  located  on  Bay  Street  in  Port  Melbourne.  Martin  Kingham  from  the  CFMEU can be contacted through his media office on 9416 1721. Further detail is available from Alex Kats at the Office of Michael Danby MHR on 9534 8126 or 0414 765613.   

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  

 20 February 2003

 

 Immigration raid “could have gone horribly wrong”  CONSTRUCTION   

 FORESTRY   

 MINING   

 ENERGY   

 UNION   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 VICTORIAN   

 DIVISION   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Media contact:   

 Jean Ker Walsh   

 9416 1721    

 0413 834 646   

 jkw@kerwalsh.com.au 

 

 Today’s early morning raid in search of illegal workers could have ended in  death or serious injury, construction union leader, Martin Kingham, said  today.   

 Mr Kingham said the raid by armed federal police and immigration officials  who ran through a Melbourne bayside building site flouted the fundamental  safety codes governing construction sites.   

 “Workers and the members of the raiding party were at real risk,” Mr  Kingham said.  “Someone could have gone down a lift well or over the edge,  barriers could have given way with people running around, or something  could have dropped on someone unknowingly in a ‘no go’ zone because of  work going on overhead.   

 “Building sites are dangerous places.  That’s why we insist on induction for  every new worker or visitor to work sites.   

 “Adding guns to the mix cranks up the danger level.  It all could have gone  horribly wrong.”   

 Mr Kingham said the heightened awareness of possible terrorist threats raised  further concerns about the way today’s armed raid had been conducted  without warning.   

 “Suddenly finding armed men in your workplace is just the sort of thing to  send people running for cover.  Running scared is dangerous behaviour in an  unfinished building.   

 “Employers have a duty of care to their workers and should have been  forewarned.  If it was an office or a bank, they wouldn’t have done it like  this,” Mr Kingham said.   

 Mr Kingham said unions had no authority to vet worker’s visas or to deny  membership on the basis of personal circumstances.  He would not support ID  cards for Australians.   

 He said the detained workers were most likely union members, although no-one had been able to get information from the site where workers had been  locked out.  The union had advised members to return for work tomorrow.   

 “The union recognises there are shortages of painters, plasterers and  bricklayers.  Employers are desperate to get workers in those areas where  apprentices have not been taking up the trade,” he said.  Mr Kingham said he  was only aware anecdotally of illegal workers in the industry.  He believed all  workers on the site were being paid their wages and entitlements.  

