---
title: "Government trying to muzzle HREOC."
date: "2003-05-02"
creators:
  - "Greig, Brian"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of GREIG, SEN BRIAN"
subjects:
  - "Australian Human Rights Commission Legislation Bill 2003"
  - "Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission"
  - "Bills"
  - "Reform"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211561428
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5T796%22
---

 Senator Brian Greig   Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Attorney General and Justice 

 2 May 2003 MEDIA RELEASE                           03/274 

 

 

 GOVERNMENT TRYING TO MUZZLE HREOC  Proposed changes will curb independence of human rights commission   

 The Federal Government’s proposed changes to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission  (HREOC) are little more than a politically motivated push to weaken the independent watchdog, warns  Australian Democrats’ Attorney General and Justice Spokesperson Senator Brian Greig. 

 More than 120 submissions had been received when a Senate committee began public hearings into the  legislation  this  week  -  and  not  one  supported  the  Government’s  planned  changes  outlined  in  the   Australian Human Rights Commission Legislation Bill 2003. 

 “Under this Bill, HREOC would be renamed the Australian Human Rights Commission but would no  longer  have  specialised  portfolio  commissioners,  who  currently  represent  the  areas  of  sex,  race,   disability, human rights and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice,” Senator Greig said. 

 The Bill also requires the Commission to seek leave from the Federal Attorney General to intervene in  cases  before  the  courts  and  prevents  it  from  being  able  to  recommend  the  payment  of  damages  or   compensation. 

 “While the Democrats have no objection to the proposed name change, we strongly oppose the other  changes, some of which are outrageous,” Senator Greig said. 

 “This Bill appears in part to be nothing more than Government payback to HREOC, because of the way  it  has  irritated  and  embarrassed  the  Government  in  recent  times  by  challenging  the  Government’s   ideological stances on matters such as the Tampa asylum-seekers, transgender rights to marriage, paid  maternity leave and the right for single women and lesbian couples to access IVF treatment. 

 “And allowing the Attorney General the power of veto to say whether or not HREOC can intervene in  court  cases  creates  a  massive  conflict  of  interest,  given  the  Federal  Government  is  often  party  to   litigation where the Commission might seek to make representation. 

 “But  that’s  HREOC’s  job  as  a  watchdog:  to  act  as  an  impartial  protector  and  investigator  of   discrimination and human rights violations.   

 “A structure using specialist Commissioners allows them to develop specialised expertise in their areas,  in the same way Government Ministers do with their portfolios, and to build up a national profile so  people then know who to turn to if they have an issue they want to raise.”   

 

 Media contact:  Senator Brian Greig or Chris Thomas on (08) 9228 3133  

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au 

