---
title: "Minasa Bone returns to Indonesia."
date: "2003-11-10"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Refugee boat movements"
  - "Indonesia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261154
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YOUA6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER    THE MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS SENATOR AMANDA VANSTONE 

 9  November 2003 

 

 MINASA BONE RETURNS TO INDONESIA   

 The Minasa Bone, the boat that arrived illegally near Melville Island on 4 November,  has returned to Indonesia following its escort back to international waters near  Indonesia.   

 We have been informed by the police in the port of Saumlaki that the 14 passengers  and four crew are currently in their care.  The International Organisation for  Migration (IOM) are in Saumlaki and are consulting with the police regarding the  ongoing care and further movement of the 14 passengers.   

 This successful return is another example of the continuing success of our existing  regional cooperation model, and our excellent working relationship  with Indonesia on  combating people smuggling.   

 The Australian Government warmly thanks the Indonesian Government for its  assistance.   

 This is only the second unauthorised boat arrival so close to the Australian mainland  since August 2001, reinforcing how successful our efforts have been, bilaterally and  regionally, in combating people smuggling.   

 But it also demonstrates the need for constant vigilance and reinforces the  Government’s approach to border protection.   

 The return of this vessel will send a strong message to those who would try to enter  Australia illegally, and those people smugglers who try to exploit these people.   

 The passengers on the Minasa Bone did not claim asylum in Australia.    

 If they were to claim asylum in Indonesia, the regional cooperation arrangements in  place in Indonesia would provide the basis for their care and consideration of any  claims.   

 As has occurred in the past with unauthorised arrivals at excised offshore places,  Australia will continue to meet its obligations under the Refugees Convention and  other international treaties wherever such obligations arise.   

 Contacts: Chris Kenny  0419 206890 (Mr Downer)    Damon Hunt 0419 691944 (Senator Vanstone) 

 

 

 

 

 

