---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: extradition of Khaleed Daoed; listing of terrorist organisations; excision regulations; Pauline\nHanson; Melville Island vessel."
date: "2003-11-07"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
  - "Khaleed Shnayf Daoed"
  - "Extradition"
  - "Terrorist groups"
  - "Melville Island"
  - "National security"
  - "Refugees"
  - "HANSON, Pauline"
  - "Indonesia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211261074
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9NUA6%22
---

 Minister for Justice and Customs

 Transcript of Doorstop 

 Senator the Hon. Chris Ellison Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Friday, 7 November 2003 

 Senate Courtyard, Parliament House, Canberra 

 Topics: Extradition of Khaleed Daoed; listing of  terrorist organisations; excision regulations; Pauline  Hanson; Melville Island vessel 

 E&OE

 MINISTER:     Australia has successfully sought the extradition of Khaleed  Daoed, an alleged people smuggler, and he is now in the custody of the  Australian Federal Police in Brisbane.  Mr Daoed faces 12 charges in relation  to people smuggling matters and this is the result of very hard work by  Australian authorities in securing his extradition from Sweden.

 We're grateful for the cooperation we've had from the Swedish authorities in  this matter and it demonstrates yet again Australia's determination to bring  to justice those criminals behind the abhorrent trade of people smuggling.

 Of course, Mr Daoed is an alleged accomplice with Abu Quassey, a man who  is on trial in Egypt for his role in relation to people smuggling charges, in  relation to Australia, in particular the vessel SIEV X which saw the tragic loss  of life of 353 people.  The Government of Australia is keen to have Mr Daoed  be brought before an Australian court and for these matters to be dealt  with.   

 These are serious charges.  Upon conviction they carry a maximum penalty  of 20 years imprisonment and of course in Mr Abu Quassey's case we saw  his extradition but the Egyptian authorities are trying him and we expect a  decision on that on the 27th of December this year. 

 People smuggling is an abhorrent trade.  We wont tolerate it and we will  ensure that those people behind it are brought to justice. 

 REPORTER:    Minister, how established are people smugglers in Australia?   Obviously we know they are active outside Australian shores, but how many 

 are actually here, do we know? 

 MINISTER:     Well recently we've charged an Australian national in relation  to another matter and of course we can't rule out that there are connections  in Australia.  But I can't go into it further than that for operational matters  but in this case we're very pleased to have Mr Daoed in Australian custody  and now in a position where he will face 12 charges related to people  smuggling. 

 REPORTER:    When did he actually arrive in Australia and do you know  when he will be making his first court appearance? 

 MINISTER:     Mr Daoed arrived in Australia this morning and he will be  fronting a court today.  He is in the custody of the Australian Federal Police  and he faces 12 charges.  

 REPORTER:    Do you know which court it is? 

 MINISTER:     I understand it will be the Brisbane Court of Petty Sessions.   

 REPORTER:    What do you make of today's Senate Hearing?  Is it a waste  of taxpayers' money? 

 MINISTER:     Today the Senate is dealing with a very important issue and  that is the issue of Australia's security.  We are listing, seeking to list, two  organisations which we believe pose a threat to Australia's security.   

 Unfortunately we have to go down the path of recalling the Senate because  the Opposition would not allow us a more streamlined process for listing  terrorist organisations and we've said that all along. We continue to say it.   Other countries don't have this process that we have, this cumbersome  process but while we are stuck with it we have to recall the Senate.  Now,  that has to be done in the interest of Australia's security.   

 REPORTER:    But is there an immediate threat to Australia?  Why couldn't  it wait for another two weeks? 

 MINISTER:     Well we've had information which requires that these  organisations be listed.   Now you couldn't possibly suggest that we sit  around waiting for Parliament to recommence when we are dealing with  Australia's security.  We have a system which the Opposition has imposed on  us that we have to recall Parliament and go through a legislative process and  that's why we are doing it.  We'd rather a much more streamlined process  and we proposed that but the Opposition has rejected it.   

 REPORTER:    Is there a current serious threat to Australia? 

 MINISTER:     Well I can say that we've received sufficient information in 

 relation to these organisations to have them listed as terrorist  organisations.  Now it would be irresponsible of the Australian Government  to have this information, sit on it and do nothing.  The Opposition would be  the first ones to complain, yet they've saddled us with a cumbersome  process where we have to go through this legislative process to have  organisations, terrorist organisations listed. 

 REPORTER:    Should the Senate deal with the excision legislation as well  today? 

 MINISTER:     Well the regulations which have been put in place to excise  Melville Island, of course were ones which we sought earlier and the  Opposition went soft and wouldn't let us have it because we've said all along  that the excision of certain islands and territory is a part of our border  protection for Australia.  It provides a buffer for Australia.  

 We are resolute that no one should come to Australia illegally, we will not  tolerate vessels arriving unannounced on our shores.  We have a right to  determine who comes to this country as any sovereign nation has.  Now the  excision of Melville Island is something which we believe is necessary for the  protection of Australia's interests. 

 REPORTER:    Is Pauline Hanson going to pose a political threat to the  Coalition? 

 MINISTER:     Look the court's made its decision in relation to Pauline  Hanson and she should be allowed now to get on with her life as any  Australian citizen in her position should.  The court's made its decision and  as the Prime Minister has said, we should now move on. 

 REPORTER:    Minister there's a Customs vessel off Melville Island with the  Navy at the moment, what's the role of Customs in this operation and what  have they found? 

 MINISTER:     Well Customs, of course are working with Navy as part of our  border protection and we've got the Australian Federal Police involved as  well.  They're carrying out their enquiries as they normally do in these  cases.  The matter's an operational one and I can't comment further.   

 REPORTER:    Can you tell us whether Customs officers are playing an  active role or are they just bystanders, letting the defence forces do most of  the work? 

 MINISTER:     Oh no, Customs are involved actively in this whole matter, in  fact what you must remember is that the Customs hotline was used to alert  us to the situation and of course it was Coastwatch that put in place the  exclusion zone.  We've had a Customs vessel there in very short time along  with a navel vessel.  We work in very close co-operation with Navy, both  Navy and Customs are working closely on this matter. 

 REPORTER:    Are there any new people smugglers being looked at in  relation to this particular boat? 

 MINISTER:     Well we do have people of interest, there is no question  about that and the Australian Federal Police are carrying out extensive  investigations, particularly using their international network.  I can't  comment on that but we are resolute in our pursuit of those criminals behind  people smuggling, it's an abhorrent trade and we've recognised that in our  legislation with penalties which carry terms of imprisonment of up to 20  years.  

 REPORTER:    Can you give any more details about, I think you said 12  charges that he is facing? 

 MINISTER:     The 12 charges relate to two vessels in 2001. SIEV X  resulted in the tragic loss of life of 353 people, the other vessel involved 147  people.  We allege that Mr Daoed was involved in both of those and of  course in relation to SIEV X he has a co-accused, Abu Quassey, who is on  trial in Egypt for these matters. 

 REPORTER:    Is he an Australian citizen? 

 MINISTER:     Mr Daoed is not an Australian citizen. 

 REPORTER:    Do you know what he is a citizen of? 

 MINISTER:     He was found in Sweden.  I am not aware of his nationality  but the Swedes granted his extradition to Australia and we're grateful for  that. 

 REPORTER:    How big a role do you think he played in those operations? 

 MINISTER:     Well it's alleged that he was involved in the organisation of  those two vessels and I can't go into it any further than that, that's now a  matter for the prosecution.  Suffice to say that the 12 charges that he faces  are serious and upon conviction can carry a maximum penalty of 20 years  imprisonment. 

 REPORTER:    Well was he a 'Mr Big' of people smuggling, is he one of the  main guys do you think? 

 MINISTER:     Well we allege that he is an organiser and I think that that is  as far as I can go in relation to that.  The matter is now for the prosecution,  he will be facing an Australian court today and it's a matter now before the  courts. 

 REPORTER:    Do you know where he was based during those operations,  was he in Indonesia? 

 MINISTER:     Well Mr Daoed has been a person of interest for some time  and we have been investigating this over a period of time.  We located him  in Sweden and successfully gained his extradition from that country.  But I  won't go into his whereabouts prior to that as that forms part of the  background to the investigation which I can't comment on. 

 Thank you. 

 

 

 Last Modified: Friday 07, November 2003 Minister for Justice and Customs

