---
title: "Judicial selection and training: two sides of the one coin. Address to the Judicial Conference of Australia colloquim, Darwin, 31 May 2003\n"
date: "2003-05-31"
creators:
  - "Gleeson, Murray"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Appointments"
  - "Judiciary"
  - "Recurrent education"
  - "Australia overseas comparisons"
  - "Great Britain"
  - "United States"
  - "Justice"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211563025
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MDI96%22
---

 Speeches 

 Judicial Conference of Australia

 Colloquim - Darwin

 31st May 2003

 Judicial Selection and Training: TwoSides Of The One Coin

 Murray Gleeson*

 

 There is a remarkable contrast between the level of interest taken by  governments, politicians, commentators, and the members of the public,  in two topics.

 

            The first is the policy and process adopted by governments when  they appoint judges. This is an interesting subject, on which many  people hold strong opinions.  Some complain of the lack of gender,  ethnic, geographical, or other forms of diversity in the judiciary.  Some  criticise the present system as inequitable, giving unfair preference to a  small group.  Some see it as inefficient, failing to make the best use of  all available talent.  The issue has political significance.  Proposals to  change methods of judicial appointment appeal to voters.  In a number  of Australian States, judicial vacancies are now advertised, and  expressions of interest solicited.  It may be only a matter of time before  it becomes necessary for people who want to be considered for  appointment, even to some of the highest judicial offices, to appear  before selection panels to display their professional and ideological  credentials.  Perhaps this will only mean that governments will take as  much care in appointing members of the selection panels as they now  take in appointing judges.  The capacity to control or influence the  selection of judges is regarded, on all sides of politics, as an important  aspect of governmental power.  It would be surprising to see it given  away.  However, governments like to be seen to be progressive, even if  there is no general agreement as to what kind of change constitutes  progress.

 

           The second topic is that of judicial education:  training newly  appointed judges and magistrates, and providing for their continuing  professional development.  There are absolutely no votes in this  subject.  It is without electoral sex appeal.  It is a topic of interest and  concern to some members of the judiciary, a handful of lawyers and law  teachers, and practically nobody else.  With a few honourable  exceptions, politicians and government officials ignore it completely.  It  rarely engages the attention of the media. 

 

           The reason why the contrast is remarkable is that, in truth, the  two topics are closely related.  But the relationship seems to have  escaped attention.  People who propose changes in the method by  which judges are selected, without having any knowledge or ideas  about their training or professional development, are beating the air.   Whether or not any specific change in methods of judicial appointment  is worthwhile may be contestable.  It is not my purpose to argue about  that.  One thing, however, is clear.  Significant and long-term (as distinct  from cosmetic) change is impossible without progress in developing  facilities for judicial education. 

 

           One of the main differences between the administration of justice  in common law and civil law countries is in the background, training and  appointment of judges.  In countries with a civil law tradition, being a  magistrate or judge is a career upon which lawyers ordinarily embark at  the beginning at their professional lives, and in which they remain until  the end.  Young lawyers are trained to be judges, and they progress  upon a career path within the judiciary.  Judges rarely sit alone:  they sit  in panels, which often include some who, by our standards, are  remarkably youthful.  (A recently published Code of Conduct for  Chinese judges admonishes them to keep their judicial uniforms clean  and tidy).  Judicial promotion is not the exception; it is the rule.  Often,  this is a career path shared with prosecutors, but that matter, although  important for another reason, is presently irrelevant.  In such countries,  lawyers who intend to enter the practising profession undergo a different  system of training, and, although in some places there are moves to  recruit more judges from within the profession, practitioners rarely take  up judicial office.  

 

           The common law tradition is different.  In England, and in other  jurisdictions with a divided legal profession, there has always been a  close association between Bench and Bar.  With occasional exceptions,  most judges, especially members of the senior judiciary, are appointed,  usually in middle age, from the ranks of experienced barristers.  In the  past, professional experience has been regarded as the primary  qualification for judicial appointment.  Not all successful barristers  wanted to be judges, but, among those who did, professional eminence  was regarded as a good practical guide to suitability for judicial office. It  has never been thought to be infallible.  No one ever professed to  believe that all good barristers would make good judges.  And there  were some outstanding judges who had not been particularly successful  at the Bar.  But it was seen as the best way of identifying prospective  judicial talent.

 

           The common law system of judicial recruitment has advantages  and disadvantages.  One major advantage is its contribution to a spirit  of judicial independence.  Judges have never regarded themselves as  public servants.  People who have made a career as independent  advocates, functioning without employers or even partners, find it easy,  and natural, following judicial appointment, to maintain their  independence of the executive government.  It should not be assumed  that governments are always unequivocally pleased by that  independence; but it is a fundamental constitutional value in our  society.  It is taken for granted.  One reason for that is the professional  background from which judges are chosen.   The status and 

 independence of the judiciary in common law countries owes a good  deal to the fact that judges have historically been appointed from within  the legal profession, and that many successful lawyers have regarded it  as a privilege to be offered judicial office, even if that involved a large  drop in income.  Another practical advantage of the system, from the  point of view of governments, was that it made it unnecessary to spend  money on training newly appointed judges.  Most people appointed to  judicial office had spent a substantial part of a professional lifetime  appearing regularly as advocates in courts.  They were familiar with the  rules of procedure and evidence, and the trial and appeal processes.   They understood the ways of litigants and advocates.  It was assumed  that their professional experience equipped them to take on the task of  judging without any need for formal instruction. This relieved  governments of the need to pay for their training and continuing  education.  A further benefit is that common law countries make do with  far fewer judges than civil law countries.  Our trial judges sit alone and  in civil cases this is usually without a jury.  Civil law judges, even at first  instance, sit in groups of three or five.  When I last checked the  numbers, France had eight times as many judges per head of  population as Australia.  The extent to which governments in common  law countries save money by using the Bar as the principal source of  judicial training and recruitment has never been acknowledged.  

 

           One of the disadvantages of the common law system, which has  attracted increasing attention in recent years, flows from the fact that  judges reflect the characteristics of the group from which they are  drawn.  That group is somewhat homogenous, in both the Latin and the  Greek senses.

 

           When I entered practice in New South Wales in 1963, most  judges had previously been barristers.  They were all male.  Few  solicitors, or law teachers, would have contemplated the possibility of, or  wanted, judicial appointment.  It was unlikely that they would be familiar  with the rules of procedure or evidence, and most would not have had  any experience of litigation.  If such a person had been appointed, then  he or she would have been offered no form of instruction to overcome  that practical difficulty.  That was a major impediment to the  appointment of solicitors or law teachers as judges.  It was both a cause  and an effect of the Bar's practical monopoly on judicial appointments.   It is impossible to understand that monopoly without relating it to the  absence of arrangements for judicial training and development.

 

           When I was Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New South  Wales, I sat mainly in the Court of Appeal and the Court of Criminal  Appeal.  However, I also made a point of sitting at first instance in most  areas of the Court's work, including civil and criminal jury trials.  This  was possible only because I had appeared, as a barrister, in cases of  that kind.  I would not have attempted it without that experience.   Criminal jury trials form a routine part of the work of most of Australia's  judges.  Conducting such a trial can be like walking on egg shells.  The  trial judge cannot adjourn to consult a textbook every time a point of  procedure or evidence arises, and a wrong ruling might result in a  mistrial.  It must be extraordinarily difficult for a person who has not had  substantial experience in advocacy, or been given the benefit of  appropriate training and instruction, to take up work of that kind.  Trial 

 judges, of course, are equipped with Bench Books and similar aids, but  these are usually prepared on the assumption that the reader already  has a fund of knowledge based on practical experience.  It would be  impossible to take even the most outstanding new graduate from law  school, and send him or her off on circuit to conduct criminal trials  equipped only with a Bench Book and a store of self confidence.  I  hesitate to think of what some of the trial lawyers I know would do to a  person like that. 

 

           I am not seeking to advocate the retention of the Bar's absolute  monopoly on judicial appointment.  My point is different; and one that  has largely been ignored by people who profess to be interested in  breaking down that monopoly.  It is that, historically, the monopoly has  been protected by the lack of proper arrangements for judicial training  and development.  Real change, as distinct from window-dressing, in  the one area, requires real progress in the other.

 

           The point is reinforced by considering what goes on in those  common law jurisdictions where, historically, the Bar has not dominated  judicial appointments.  In North America, there has never been a divided  profession, and the tradition of specialisation in advocacy by a distinct  and separate group of practitioners does not exist.  Both in the United  States, and in Canada, there is a long history of appointment of law  teachers to judicial office.  In many of the state jurisdictions in the United  States, judges are elected.  Many of the candidates for election are not  experienced trial lawyers.  However, it has long been recognised in  North America that, if people are to be appointed to the Bench without  practical experience in advocacy in trial or appeal courts, they need  training as judges.  No matter how learned and intelligent a lawyer might  be, if he or she is appointed a trial judge without experience in the  conduct of litigation, then the task of managing a civil or criminal trial,  especially a complex trial, is extremely difficult.  Consequently, in both  the United States and Canada, Institutes of Judicial Education, well-funded and providing formal programmes of orientation and on-going  training and development, are an established part of the judicial  system.  Governments in Australia, in the past, have avoided that issue  by relying on the Bar to train their prospective judges.  This has saved  them trouble and expense.  If governments want to reduce that reliance,  then they need to find an alternative way to train judges.  Until they do  that, experienced barristers will always have a huge advantage in any  selection process that is seriously based upon merit.  There is plenty of  room for argument about what constitutes merit in judicial selection.   But, if it means nothing else, it must at least include the capacity to  preside over adversarial litigation, conduct the proceedings with  reasonable efficiency, and produce a well-reasoned judgment at the  end.

 

           Until relatively recently, magistrates were part of the public  service.  They were recruited from within the public service.  Most had  obtained their qualifications by working as officers in the Courts of Petty  Sessions.  That was a form of practical training.  Nowadays, magistrates  have achieved structural independence from the executive government,  and most are appointed from outside the public service; principally from  the practising profession.  Many of them are people who have  previously been solicitors, rather than professional advocates.  

 Appointing, as magistrates, people who have not had in-service training,  raises the same issue.  Recruitment and training are two sides of the  one coin.

 

           In England, and in Australia, many people say they want to see  judges appointed from a wider pool.  Although the Bar is less male-dominated than it was 40 years ago, the numbers of women who reach  the top of the profession are still relatively modest compared with the  numbers of women who enter law school.  The fact is that, although the  position is gradually improving, women are still under-represented in the  senior ranks of the Bar.  Other forms of lack of diversity also attract  criticism.  Governments now recognise that there are solicitors who,  given the opportunity, would make good judges.  The same applies to  law teachers.  There is understandable pressure to widen the gene  pool.  

 

           On balance, this is a good thing.  Provided it is done properly,  widening the range of persons from whom judges and magistrates are  recruited will increase the vitality and strength of the judiciary.  But it  cannot be done successfully unless attention is paid to the reason why,  for so long, so much preference has been given to practising barristers. 

 

           In recent years, a good deal of effort has gone into the production  of lists of qualities that ought to be possessed by candidates for judicial  appointment.  I do not wish to under-estimate the importance of some of  the qualities that appear on those lists, but it is necessary to keep in  mind that there are certain basic skills that are also required. They may  not be sufficient to make a good judge; but they are necessary.  These  include, for example, an ability to write reasons for judgment.  That skill  is not taught at law school, and is not required of the majority of  practising lawyers, or law teachers.  Advocates, in the ordinary course  of their practice, become familiar with what is involved in the preparation  of reasons for judgment.  Their arguments are largely directed towards  encouraging judges to write reasons in a particular way, and they are  constantly required to scrutinise reasons for judgment in order to advise  upon the prospects of success of an appeal, or in order to conduct an  appeal.  This skill can be taught, as well as acquired by experience.  But  it cannot be ignored.

 

           This is something we can learn from civil law jurisdictions, and  from North American common law jurisdictions, where there has never  been the intimate relationship between bench and bar with which we are  familiar.  We are learning; but the message has still not reached a wide  audience.

 

           There are additional reasons why judicial training and  development should be a subject of wider concern.

 

           The increasing specialisation of legal practice means that old 

 assumptions about the breadth of the experience of professional  advocates are no longer valid.  How many modern barristers, before  being appointed to a trial court of general jurisdiction, or an appellate  tribunal that hears appeals from such a court, will have appeared in  anything like the full range of matters that come before the court?  Many  barristers find, upon judicial appointment, that much of the work they are  required to do is outside their range of experience.  How many  barristers appointed to the Federal Court have ever been involved in a  refugee case?  A specialist in revenue law might never have handled an  intellectual property dispute.  A specialist in personal injury cases at the  bar, appointed to the Common Law Division of the Supreme Court of  New South Wales, will be listed routinely to sit on major criminal trials,  perhaps without recent criminal trial experience.  And such a barrister is  unlikely to have any familiarity with bail applications.

 

           Furthermore, litigation is increasing in complexity.  The range of  cases that come before courts is as wide as the range of disputes that  can arise between citizens, or between citizens and governments.   Modern judges are required to deal with complex and technical issues  that can leave them at the mercy of experts.  One of the questions to be  addressed by judicial educators is whether judges, or at least judges  who sit in particular jurisdictions, should receive specialist training to  equip them better to assess evidence, including expert evidence.  This  is not the occasion to go into that question; but I raise it to indicate that  the context in which judges operate is changing in ways that call for an  educational response.  One of the challenges facing the judiciary is to  identify those changes, and design the appropriate response.

 

           There has been educational response from the Australian  judiciary over the last 15 years, but it has attracted little interest on the  part of governments or the legal profession, and virtually no public  attention.

 

           In England, the Judicial Studies Board was established in 1979.   It provides a formal and comprehensive programme of induction and  professional development for judges.  In New South Wales, the Judicial  Commission was established in 1986.  One of its principal functions is to  provide judicial orientation and training for magistrates and judges of all  courts in New South Wales.  In recent years, in conjunction with the  Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, it has conducted an  orientation programme for newly appointed judges from all Australian  jurisdictions.  Judges from overseas have attended those courses.    In  an article in 1993, Professor Sallmann described the Judicial  Commission of New South Wales as "(the) Rolls Royce of judicial  education bodies in Australia".  Over the years since its establishment,  the range of services it has provided to judges and magistrates has  expanded greatly.  In co-operation with the Education Committees of all  the New South Wales courts it conducts impressive programmes, and  these will, no doubt, continue to expand and develop.  But how much of  its work is known outside the judiciary?

 

           In 2002, the Judicial College of Victoria was established.

 

           Australia now has a National Judicial College, established in  2002.  It seems that it has not yet achieved the critical mass necessary  for its acceptance and success.  There is a small budget of $380,000  per annum compared to the budget of the Judicial Commission of New  South Wales of $4.2M.  It is supported by the Commonwealth  Government, and a number of state governments, but not by some  other state governments.

 

           Courts in all Australian jurisdictions have now developed their  own programmes of judicial development.  The progress that has been  made in this area is a notable, even if largely unrecognised,  achievement.  But there is a great deal of scope for further  development.  The orientation courses that are provided are a major  improvement on the past; but there is enormous potential for their  expansion.  And, although the Australian judiciary has embraced the  idea of continuing professional development, the range of topics that  could usefully be addressed could be expanded well beyond those that  are now covered.  Within the judiciary there are educators with  experience and imagination who, given the necessary support and  encouragement, could devise more ambitious and comprehensive  training schemes, to meet the needs of the Australian judiciary into the  twenty-first century.  Consider the challenges that are ahead of us.   Legislation will expand at an even greater rate, and become  increasingly complex and technical.  Advocates will become more and  more specialised, and judges will be required to match their expertise.   Expert witnesses, whose evidence judges will be required to evaluate,  will assume an increasingly important role, and the mastering of  complex litigation will require judicial skills of a higher order.

 

           Experience in Australia, and in the United Kingdom and North  America, has shown that programmes of judicial training and continuing  professional development will only be successful under certain  conditions.  Notwithstanding the enthusiasm of some for sending judicial  officers off for re-education along the lines of the Cultural Revolution,  with a view to instilling in them ideologically sound habits of thought, the  unromantic truth is that it is more important to ensure that new judges  and magistrates know the rules of procedure and evidence, and how to  write a judgment.  And needs for continuing education are largely  shaped by the requirements of the particular court to which a person is  appointed.  Judicial officers, once appointed, cannot be compelled to  learn anything.  Evaluating their educational needs is itself a skilled  task, as that of the growing class of judicial educators in common law  countries, including Australia.  Serving and retired judges are major  contributors to work in judicial training institutes.  They represent a  valuable resource upon which governments are able to draw.  Judges  respond much better where programmes are designed with substantial  input from experienced colleagues and former colleagues.  At the same  time, professional teachers themselves bring a specialist skill to judicial  training.  The most successful institutes are those which best combine  the contributions of judges and professional educators.

 

           It is important that the judiciary should accept that continuing  education is part of the job.  Judges value their independence, and are 

 quick to react against any form of pedagogical influence.  They are well  aware that there are those who would treat professional development as  an opportunity for indoctrination.  Much depends upon maintaining their  confidence.  That requires that institutes of judicial training share the  independence of the judiciary.  Obtaining financial support from  governments for bodies that are independent of government control, or  even influence, is not easy.  In fact, it is one of the most difficult arts of  practical politics.  But it is a challenge the judiciary must accept.  To do  that, we need to inform governments, and the public, about the issues  and about what is at stake.

 

           The acceptance of the need for judicial education in Australia is  growing, but it has a long way to go.  There was some early resistance  within the judiciary but that, I believe, has disappeared.  Some judges  were concerned that programmes of judicial training would be used for  inappropriate proselytisation; a concern that was heightened by  pressure from some sections of the community for programmes to  cultivate in judges attitudes reflecting the prevailing enthusiasm of the  day.

 

           What is missing however, amongst governments, the profession,  the public, and even some members of the judiciary, is an appreciation  of the connection between judicial training and development, on the one  hand, and changes in policies and practices concerning judicial  appointment.

 

           Outside the ranks of experienced advocates the sort of people  that governments might want to appoint to judicial office would be very  reluctant to accept such appointment unless proper arrangements are  made to equip them to perform the task.  Even among experienced  advocates, these days, such arrangements are necessary, but they are  doubly necessary in the case of others.  The success of any programme  that has its object widening of the pool from which judges are drawn  depends upon the existence of adequate facilities for judicial training  and continuing professional development.

 

           Let me return to the matter of the National Judicial College.  It has  the potential to become a major force in the Australian judiciary of the  twenty-first century.  I emphasise that it is national, not federal.  There is  a good reason for this.

 

           In the United States, the federal judiciary has a long history which  separates it from the state judiciaries.  Federal judges are appointed,  not elected; and they hold office for life.  In many states, judges are  elected.  The process of election can involve campaigns by supporters  and opponents of candidates.  It is completely foreign to our method of  judicial appointment.  The federal judiciary is large, and supported by an  enormous administrative apparatus.  Federal judges deal with criminal,  as well as civil, cases.  Within the federal judiciary there is a highly  developed appellate structure.  Federal and state judges have their  own, separate, training and educational arrangements.

 

           In Australia, until the mid-1970's, the federal judiciary was very  small.  The exercise of federal jurisdiction was largely entrusted to state  judges.  Apart from the High Court, and a small number of specialist  courts (principally in the areas of industrial law and bankruptcy) there  were no federal judges.  At that time, our Constitution also required that  all federal judges be appointed for life.  That, I am sure, is one reason  why there were so few of them.  With the amendment of that  Constitutional provision, and the creation of the Federal Court and the  Family Court, the federal judiciary expanded.  But, even today, the  States of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland appoint more  judges than the Commonwealth Government.

 

           In Australia, movement between the federal and state judiciaries  is common.  Five of the present members of the High Court were  formerly members of State Courts of Appeal.  A number of judges of the  Federal Court were formerly judges of State Supreme Courts.  One of  the members of the New South Wales Court of Appeal came to that  Court from the Federal Court.  Moreover, because of a difference in  ages of compulsory retirement, an acting appointment to the Supreme  Court of New South Wales is now a standard method of easing the  passing of Federal Court judges who happen to live in that State.

 

           Furthermore, there is a movement between State judiciaries.   One of the present members of the Court of Appeal of New South  Wales came to that Court from the Supreme Court of Western  Australia.  In a recent case, the New South Wales Court of Appeal was  constituted by the Chief Justice of Western Australia, and Judges of  Appeal from Victoria and Queensland.  In the last 10 years there have  been a series of exchanges between the Supreme Court of New South  Wales and the Northern Territory.  I hope that, over time, this valuable  form of cross-fertilisation will increase.

 

           Federal and State judges mix regularly in professional  associations, such as the Judicial Conference of Australia.  In all parts  of Australia, they come from virtually identical professional  backgrounds.  In the States other than New South Wales and Victoria,  the numbers of federal judges are relatively small, and, inevitably, they  associate as much with their State colleagues as with other federal  judges.

 

           As a result, the Australian judiciary is much more cohesive than  that of the United States.  This should be a source of strength, if we  make proper use of it.  The annual conference of judges from the  Federal Court and the State and Territory Supreme Courts has, for  many years, been a national force for the continuing legal education of  judges.  This Judicial Conference is an offspring of that annual meeting.   Although we are a federal nation, we have a national spirit in our  judiciary.  We should foster that, and take advantage of the benefits it  has to offer.

 

           The National Judicial College provides one such an opportunity.   Its governing body is representative of federal and state jurisdictions.   Its Chairman is a State Chief Justice.  It has the support of the federal  government and the federal judiciary.  It has the support and active  cooperation of the Judicial Commission of New South Wales.  Its  establishment was fostered by the Council of Chief Justices of Australia  and New Zealand, and the Australian Institute of Judicial  Administration.  It ought to be able to draw on the experience and  talents of judges and judicial educators through the Commonwealth;  and it ought to be in a position to service all judiciaries in the  Commonwealth.  Additionally, it ought to be in a position to represent  Australia in the increasingly significant developments in judicial training  that are taking place internationally.

 

           I have no difficulty understanding the desire of governments to  look for judicial talent beyond the group of experienced barristers who  have, in the past, held a virtual monopoly on judicial appointment.  But  governments, and the public, need to face up to the fact that the narrow  group from which judges were previously appointed brought certain  advantages, including significant cost advantages.  Governments did  not need to provide them with formal training in order to equip them with  the basic skills necessary to perform the judicial task.  But, for reasons I  have ready given, the assumption that experienced barristers require no  judicial training can no longer safely be made.  The days when  governments could act on the basis that, unlike their counterparts in civil  law jurisdictions, judges required no training or continuing professional  development, are gone.  The trend towards increasing recruitment of  judicial officers from outside the ranks of experienced advocates is not  the only reason why that is so, but it makes the need for appropriate  systems of judicial education more obvious and more urgent.

 

           The time has come for the matter of judicial training and  continuing legal education to be taken up by all governments that  appoint judges and magistrates as an issue of lively interest.  It is up to  judges to raise the level of public interest in that subject.  The Judicial  Conference has a key role to play.

 

 *      Chief Justice of Australia.

 

