---
title: "King announces funding boost for migrant services in the east."
date: "2003-08-15"
creators:
  - "King, Peter"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of KING, PETER, MP"
subjects:
  - "Grants"
  - "New South Wales"
  - "Nongovernment welfare sector"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211256911
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GR7A6%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  Peter KING MP  MEMBER FOR WENWORTH 

 

 

 

 King announces funding boost for migrant services in the east   

 Federal Member for Wentworth, Peter King has announced that three community organisations  in  the  eastern  suburbs  had  been  successful  in  obtaining  federal  government  funding  to  assist   migrants,  refugees  and  humanitarian  entrants  settle  quickly  and  effectively  into  the  local   community.   

 The  Friends  of  Refugees  from  Eastern  Europe  of  Bondi,  The  Echo  Neighbourhood  Centre  of   Bondi Junction and Jewish Care of Woollahra will receive total funding of over $155,000.   

 “Australia’s migration program plays a vital role in the economic, cultural and social life of our  nation. Arriving in a new country can be a daunting period. These grants will assist in making  the transition easier for those that come to our shores.   

 ‘The Friends of Refugees from Eastern Europe, The Echo Neighbourhood Centre and Jewish  Care all provide important settlement services.    

 “I  am  therefore  delighted  that  these  organisations  have  been  successful  in  obtaining  federal   government funding,” said Mr King.   

 The Friends of Refugees from Eastern Europe provide settlement information to newly arrived  Eastern  European  migrants,  including  Jewish  settlers  from  a  refugee  or  humanitarian   background  in  Sydney,  as  well  as  facilitating  mainstream  service  providers  with  awareness  of   their needs. 

 

 Jewish Care provides casework, information, community development and referral to the Jewish  community including Russian speaking new arrivals in the eastern suburbs and facilitates client  access to mainstream services.   

 The Echo Neighbourhood Centre provides information to newly arrived migrants, humanitarian  entrants  and  refugees  in  the  eastern  suburbs  as  well  as  working  with  mainstream  service   providers to address identified settlement service planning and delivery barriers encountered by  recent arrivals. 

 

 

 ENDS   

 

 15 AUGUST 2003   

 

 Pic available   

 

 

 For further information contact Peter King  - 0411 267 078 or   Jodie Newell, Media Officer - 0408 466 450 

