---
title: "Afghanis treatment disgraceful: Andren."
date: "2003-12-22"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262634
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BDCB6%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare   

 M  e 

 d 

 i 

 a 

 

 R  e 

 l 

 e 

 a 

 s 

 e 

 

 22nd December 2003

 Afghanis treatment disgraceful - Andren   

 The treatment of Afghani asylum seekers on Nauru is an international disgrace, according to  independent Member for Calare Peter Andren.   

 “These people have been forced to mutilate themselves to draw attention to the prospect of their  being sent home to face continued persecution at the hands of ethnic majorities and Taliban  sympathisers.   

 “Australia is warning its own people against travelling to Afghanistan yet is prepared to send back  people from the Hazara ethnic minority who have suffered persecution, torture and death long  before the Taliban rose to power.   

 “The UNHCR sought special international protection for these people in July this year, and the  situation has only worsened since then, with the Taliban appearing to regain a stronghold in parts of  Afghanistan.    

 “I am deeply disturbed by reports that Hazaras sent home from Nauru on December 1st may have  been killed.    

 “I call on the Australian Government to immediately confirm or disprove claims that between 7 and  10 of those sent home have been killed in Kabul, which is supposed to be a safe haven in a war-torn  country.   

 “I am appalled by statements from the immigration minister that because the detainees on Nauru are  in a foreign country under the control of a foreign security company, then their current lip-stitching  and hunger strike is not our concern.   

 “Had these Afghani people been processed on Australian soil they would have at least had the same  determination process as Afghanis here, like those who were so willingly accepted in the Young  and Dubbo communities on temporary protection visas.   

 “Those people too, should not be sent home under current circumstances and for the foreseeable  future.   

 “The asylum seekers on Nauru may be out of sight, but to the government’s shame, they are not out  of mind” Mr Andren said.      

 

 

 For further information:  02326 229 or 0419 612 891   

 

 

