---
title: "Defence are bad shoppers and the government is trigger happy."
date: "2003-08-20"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Government expenditure"
  - "Dept of Defence"
  - "Military equipment"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211257265
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/356A6%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Defence and Veterans Affairs  20 August 2003                      MEDIA RELEASE                                 03/605                 

 

 Defence are bad shoppers and the Government  is trigger happy   

 The problem with the Defence Budget is not the amount of funds but the management of big item  projects and the Government’s priorities for operations. 

 “Almost sixteen billion dollars a year plus occasional budget top-ups for Defence should be plenty  if the Government stuck to its stated aim of the ‘defence of Australia and its national interests’,” the  Leader of the Australian Democrats Senator Andrew Bartlett said today. 

 “Interventions in our region are necessary but following the United States into wars against Iraq and  Afghanistan were not. At a cost of over a billion Australian dollars and tens of thousands of lives,  we still don’t know where Saddam Hussein or Osama Bin Laden are. 

 “The successes in the war on terror are being achieved through intelligence, policing and  cooperation with other nations. We won’t win the war on terrorism by just invading country after  country. 

 “This Defence Budget is the bill for the Howard Government’s shift from defending Australia to  backing the US,” said Senator Bartlett. 

 “With around $3 billion annual investment on new military capabilities, we want to be buying what  we need, not what the United States wants to sell. 

 “The Democrats welcome signs the Government is reconsidering whether we need as many as 100  F-35 joint strike fighters, which are still in the design stage. Fifty joint strike fighters could achieve  a similar deterrent and a sufficient capability. 

  “There have long been concerns about Defence’s management of equipment tendering, purchasing  and project management. 

 “Almost the only big projects that are not more than a year overdue are those commissioned in the  last year. 

 “Defence are bad shoppers. They put items on lay-by, and then find they don’t fit. 

 “The Government also continues to waste defence funds and misuse defence personnel in turning  away asylum seekers at sea. This year’s Budget allocated $18 million towards more Tampa and  ‘children overboard’ debacles after throwing $41 million dollars out to sea over the last two years.”   

 Senator Bartlett welcomed the latest publication from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute titled  Sinews of Warwhich analyses the 2003 Defence Budget, saying ASPI is helping to demystify  Defence and open the debate.   

 For interview with Senator Bartlett contact Katrina Beikoff on 0419 867 649 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

