---
title: "Support for Victoria's East Timorese community."
date: "2003-03-11"
creators:
  - "Bracks, Steve"
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PREMIER OF VICTORIA"
subjects:
  - "Victoria"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Federal state relations"
  - "GILLARD, Julia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211564789
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KAS86%22
---

 Media release From the Premier of Victoria  Tuesday, March 11 2003  SUPPORT FOR VICTORIA’S EAST TIMORESE COMMUNITY  The Premier, Steve Bracks, accompanied by the Federal Opposition’s Shadow Immigration Minister, Julia Gillard, today visited Richmond West Primary School, where many children from Melbourne’s East Timorese community attend classes.  Mr Bracks said he supported moves by the Federal Opposition to move an amendment to legislation currently before the Senate, which would allow the East Timorese asylum seekers to remain in Australia.  He also announced a $50,000 grant to fund legal representation for the community through a program run by the Refugee and Immigration Legal Centre.  “I have written to the Prime Minister three times on this issue - twice last year and most recently, last week,” Mr Bracks said. “I have asked him to consider a special visa category for the East Timorese similar to the one established for Chinese students in 1993.  “These people have already suffered years of uncertainty about their future - we have offered what support we can to the community in Victoria, by far the biggest community in Australia.”  Mr Bracks said the amendment sought by the Federal Opposition would create a special visa class for the East Timorese and was fully supported by the Victorian Government.  He said the $50,000 would assist the East Timorese to be fully and properly represented in putting their case to stay in Australia.  “We have provided financial assistance before to the East Timorese asylum seekers and temporary protection visa holders and this money will continue that work,” he said. “We have provided a support package covering housing, education, health and legal representation.”  Attorney General Rob Hulls said the legal centre would provide refugee and immigration advice, prepare refugee applications, attend departmental interviews and represent people at the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Migration Review Tribunal.  “Some of these people have been in Victoria since 1991 - their children were born here and have never even visited East Timor,” Mr Bracks said. 

 

 “They have contributed much to their local community and we ask the Federal  Government again, on humanitarian grounds, to allow them to stay. One of the most  basic human rights is knowing where your future lies so you can make plans with  certainty.”   

 

 Media contact: Jane Wilson on 0407 831456  www.vic.gov.au     

 TRANSCRIPT - BRACKS - TUESDAY 11 MARCH 2003  EAST TIMOR CASE 

 

 

 Bracks 

 

 …  Government  decision  not  to  allow  individual  visas  to  the  asylum   seekers who have sought asylum here from East Timor, when you have  got  some  22  students  out  of  a  total  population  of  about  180  who   effectively  under  the  Federal  Governments  policy  would  have  to  go   back to East Timor. Most of these students have been here their whole  life,  some  were  born  here,  most  came  here  when  they  were  children,   most,  if  not  all,  have  not  been  to  East  Timor.  This  is  a  ridiculous   situation  the  Federal  Government  finds  itself  in  and  needs  to  change   quickly  its  decision  and  make  sure  that  visas  are  issued  to  these  East   Timorese  families  to  stay  here.  This  is  their  choice,  this  is  a  near   neighbour that needs assistance, a near neighbours families that want to  stay here in Australia and in Victoria and what we would urge them to  do is to do exactly that.  

 Question 

 

 Just on this concept of choice, when has that been central to refugee  status, it’s lack of choice that makes you a refugee isn’t it? 

 Bracks 

 

 Yes, you are right David, but their choice is to remain and stay now that  it  is  an  independent  nation  and  I  think  that  that  is  a  fair  choice  for   people  who  have  been  here  for  8-9-10  years.  For  children  as  we  saw   today who have had known nothing else except Australia, who would  not have any connection back to their previous village or locality back  in East Timor and I think that it is a reasonable choice to make and one  which  should  be  supported  by  the  Federal  Government  on  remaining   here and not returning to East Timor. 

 Question Just on the matter that there are 1700 East Timorese here in Australian,  how many do we have in Victoria?  

 Bracks  Well,  we  don’t  have  a  final  figure,  out  of  the  1,650  East  Timorese   asylum  seekers  who  are  here  in  Australia,  but  we  know  that  the   majority of them are here in Victoria,  we know that the great bulk of  East  Timorese  immigrants  are  here  in  Victoria  as  well,  and  that  has   been the case for some time, we don’t have  the  final figure, but there  is the majority of that  1,600.  

 Question So, what should it be, a blanket exception for all of them here or kids  born here or what sort? 

 Bracks I will ask Julia to comment on that. 

 Gillard The best way of dealing with it is the way that Labor has proposed to  allocate each of the Timorese a special humanitarian visa, so it would  be  a  blanket  exception  for  people  who  came  to  Australia  from  East   Timor and then had the processing for their refugee claims held up by 

  1

  2

 the Australian Government and consequently only find themselves in a  position  where  they  could  be  removed  from  Australia  because  of  the   actions of the Australian Government.  

 Question  It  is  not  really  a  refugee  thing  any  more,  it’s  a  humanitarian  thing,   because it’s not a country that you are fleeing anymore is it? 

 Gillard  The  central  issue  now  is  a  special  humanitarian  visa,  it  is  true  to  say   that  these  people  no  longer  have  valid  refugee  claims  because  the   administration of East Timor has fundamentally changed, from the days  in  which  they  fled  persecution,  but  as  the  Premier  has  said  and  as   Federal Labor has said, they have a special case to stay, many of them  have been here 8-10 years, kids we have met today were 2 or 3 when  they came out here and they’re 11 or 12 now, because of the deliberate  artificial delay of the Australian Government in processing their visas,  this  is  a  special  case  and  they  should  be  fixed  by  a  one  off  special   humanitarian visa’s class. 

 Question Do they have any fears about going back to East Timor, there is no fear  of persecution back in East Timor is there? 

 Gillard   I  think  individuals  might  still  hold  some  fears  about  their  personal   circumstances, but what really holds true for the whole class is that they  made their lives here for almost a decade; they have children who have  been  in  Australia  some  of  them  since  they  were  born,  some  of  them   since they were very small. The kids in this school wouldn’t remember  a time that they were in East Timor, they’re Aussie kids and these are  Aussie families know.  

 

