---
title: "Minister consults with states on improving settlement services for migrants."
date: "2003-06-13"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Resettlement"
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Federal state finances"
  - "Immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211254264
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4LN96%22
---

 Gary Hardgrave MP   Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs 

   Media Release H76/2003 - 13 June 2003

 Minister Consults with States on Improving Settlement  Services for Migrants

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary Hardgrave, is  meeting today with his state and territory counterparts to discuss better ways of  providing settlement services to migrants in the Australian community. 

 The meeting will focus primarily on how to implement the recommendations in  the Report of the Review of Settlement Services for Migrants and Humanitarian  Entrants, released on 27 May.

 'Successful settlement of migrants and refugees is a whole of government  responsibility and I am looking forward to working with all levels of government,  as well as the community, to improve outcomes for new arrivals to our country.  Particularly those who have come as humanitarian entrants,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 The discussions, to take place at the meeting of the Ministerial Council on  Immigration and Multicultural Affairs in Melbourne, are the first step in a series  of consultations on the implementation of the recommendations. 

 Mr Hardgrave said that he was looking forward to discussing the findings of the  report with his colleagues, and is confident of their support in the  implementation process.

 'The government is committed to the continuing development of a strong and  effective network of settlement service providers,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 The Minister will hold a series of implementation consultations throughout  Australia in July. 

 'The review was based on extensive consultations with stakeholders, and it's  important to get back to those key players to discuss where we go to from here,'  Mr Hardgrave said. 

 Mr Hardgrave said that the consultations he was embarking upon were  important in ensuring that the detailed implementation arrangements were  practical and workable. 

 State, Territory and local government officials, non-government organisations,  settlement service providers, community leaders and others who contributed to  the review will be invited to consultations on the implementation process.

 

 Amongst the recommendations that the Minister is consulting on are initiatives  to:

 ●     Pilot a program of cultural orientation and information 

 for refugees making the transition from refugee camps  and rural life in Africa, to life in suburban Australia. ●     Focus settlement planning arrangements more 

 strategically on services of particular relevance to  recently arrived humanitarian entrants and family  stream migrants with poor English proficiency. ●     Introduce stronger needs-based planning for 

 community grants programs, which fund services that  assist new arrivals settling in Australia. ●     Improve coordination and case management within the 

 Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy (IHSS)  and to increase support for humanitarian entrants  accessing accommodation and establishing a  household. ●     Combine Community Settlement Services Scheme 

 (CSSS) and Migrant Resource Centre (MRC) grants  programs, within two to three years, providing MRCs  with access to multiple year funding for outcomes-focused projects, rather than the current input-driven  core funding.

 'These and other initiatives in the report will lead to further improvements in  service delivery and outcomes for settlement clients,' Mr Hardgrave said.

 The Minister also said that Government's commitment to ensuring effective  service delivery was reflected in its decision to address review  recommendations requiring a whole-of-government response through the  establishment of a high-level taskforce to be chaired by the Department of the  Prime Minister and Cabinet. 

 For further information, and for a full copy of the review report, visit the DIMIA  web site at www.immi.gov.au/settle/settle_review.

 Media contact: Amanda Lynch 0419 123 862 

