---
title: "Australia brings relief to Sudanese refugees in Chad."
date: "2004-07-09"
creators:
  - "AusAID"
source: "AUSAID"
subjects:
  - "Humanitarian aid"
  - "Sudan"
  - "Oxfam"
  - "Chad"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211268587
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q03D6%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Australia brings relief to Sudanese refugees in Chad  riday July 9th 2004   

 Oxfam Community Aid Abroad and the Australian Government have joined forces to deliver much needed  ng in extreme  ovided the funds for these life saving supplies. 

 es of relief goods 

 ll be used to construct emergency water and sanitation facilities.    

 sert region where 

 0  degrees,’  says  Andrew  Hewett,  Executive  Director,  Oxfam  Community  Aid  

  key to preventing tens of thousands of 

 deaths in the coming months.’ 

  head  of  the  Australian  Government’s  humanitarian  programs  in  AusAID,  Alan  March  said  that   Australia’s  response  to  what  has  been  described  as  the  worst  humanitarian  crisis  in  the  world  today,  

 ‘Australia  responded  quickly  to  the  crisis,  committing  over  $8  million  to  help  meet  the  urgent  health,   people,’ Mr March 

 

 r to reach those in 

 ine parts, hygiene 

  -  will  arrive  in  Ndjamena,  Chad’s  capital,  and  make  a  difficult  1,000  km   Sudan. 

 The  risk  of  a  major  disease  outbreak  is  increasing  with  the  onset  of  the  rainy  season  as  human  waste   nitation urgent.  

 

 ‘The rain here 

 people  need  urgent  help,’  says  Andrew  Hewett.  ‘We  urge  Australians  to  help  save  more  lives  by   supporting our  

 There are about 200,000 Sudanese refugees in Chad. They are part of a vast crisis sparked by the conflict  in Darfur in western Sudan that is now affecting more than two million people.   

 Media inquiries: AusAID: Jo Elsom (AusAID) 02 6206 4960 or 0412 804 489   Oxfam Community Aid Abroad: Marlene McIntyre 03 9289 9415 or 0407 515 559   

 For more information on Australia’s aid program, please visit www.ausaid.gov.au

 F

 emergency water and sanitation equipment to help thousands of Sudanese refugees livi conditions in eastern Chad. The Australian Government pr  

 The DC8 plane will leave London Manston airport in Kent later today. It will carry 40 tonn that wi

 ‘These are people who have lost everything and are struggling to survive in a barren de temperatures  can  hit  5 Abroad.    

 ‘Humanitarian aid, while not the only solution to this crisis, is the

 

 The

 underscores Australia’s commitment to help the world’s most vulnerable people.   

 shelter, food, water and sanitation needs of Sudanese refugees and internally displaced  said. 

 ‘The start of the rainy season will worsen an already desperate situation, making it harde most need and increase the risk of diseases like malaria.’   

 The equipment on the plane - pipes, pumps, tanks, water testing and treatment kits, latr materials  and  mosquito  nets journey on poor roads to Abeche and then the camps along Chad’s eastern border with   

 washes into water sources. This makes the need for proper sa

 s have started in the region and we are racing against time to get to remote communities w

  Sudan Crisis Appeal.’ 

 

 

 To donate to Oxfam’s SUDAN CRISIS APPEAL call 1800 034 034   or visit www.oxfam.org.au to make an online donation. 

