---
title: "More migrants settle in regional Victoria."
date: "2004-01-12"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Skilled migration"
  - "Rural areas"
  - "Victoria"
  - "Visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262854
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WSCB6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS 

 More Migrants Settle in Regional Victoria

 VPS 020/2004

 Mildura, Ballarat, Bendigo and Traralgon are among the many towns in regional Victoria where more and more migrants are  choosing to settle.

 But we need to do more and the initiatives I announced today with the Acting Prime Minister, John Anderson, will help to  attract more migrants and refugees to Australia's regional areas.

 At the last Census, some 4,330 people living in Mildura were born overseas, of whom a majority was born in Italy and  England.

 In Ballarat, some 5,910 people were born overseas, and the top two birthplaces were England and the Netherlands.

 In East Gippsland, which includes Traralgon, some 3,720 people were born overseas - again the top two birthplaces were  England and the Netherlands.

 In the Central Goldfields, which includes Bendigo, some 910 people were born overseas, and the top two birthplaces were  England and New Zealand.

 In 2002-03 some 4,150 visas were granted to people under State-specific and regional migration initiatives in Victoria.

 This is an increase of approximately 95 percent over the 2001-02 financial year.

 Since 1997-98 nearly 13,150 visas have been granted to people who were planning to settle in Victoria under the various  regional migration programs.

 Visa grants for regional areas are steadily increasing, but more can be done to assist regional Australia to get the people they  want and this is what the measures being announced today aim to do.

 From 1 July, qualified people who want to come to Australia as skilled migrants will be able to obtain a three-year temporary  residence visa if they commit to living and working in regional Australia. After two years they will be able to apply for  permanent residency.

 There is also a new visa for self-funded retirees to encourage them to settle in regional areas.

 Under this visa, participating state and territory governments will be able to sponsor self-funded independent retirees settling  in regional Australia.

 Self-funded retirees provide an opportunity for Australia to benefit both from their capital investment and the money they  spend while in Australia.

 12 January 2004

 

