---
title: "Vanstone must free forgotten Iraqis on Nauru."
date: "2004-04-11"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Nauru"
  - "UN High Commissioner for Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211558234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9Y6C6%22
---

 

 

 senator. bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS 

 MEDIA     VANSTONE MUST FREE FORGOTTEN IRAQIS ON NAURU The Australian Democrats have called on the Immigration Minister to bring to Australia the Iraqi asylum seekers who are still marooned on Nauru, well over two years since they were first sent there by the Australian government. Democrats Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said there is no prospect of Iraqi asylum seekers being able to return to Iraq in the foreseeable future and they should not be kept detained and isolated on Nauru in the meantime. "Questioning by the Democrats at Senate Estimates in February showed that the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) has requested Australia to offer at least interim protection for the 50 or so Iraqis still on Nauru. "The Democrats urge Minister Vanstone to agree to the UNHCR request.  She has had long enough to consider the situation and it is clear that continuing to keep people detained in Nauru can no longer be justified. To quote Minister Vanstone directly - "it is difficult to see when things (in Iraq) will settle down ". "The Iraqis on Nauru may not have previously met the narrow definition of refugee, but it is still clearly unsafe for them to return.  They should not be forced back to such a dangerous environment, and they should not be stuck in prolonged detention in isolation, in the meantime," he said. "These people have been detained and isolated for well over two years, unable to even have visitors.  They have suffered enough. "Minister Vanstone's recent decision to allow Iraqi refugees in Australia to have their claims assessed is welcome, but it is just a belated recognition of the obvious - Iraq is not going to be safe anytime soon. "The ongoing turmoil in Iraq is a reminder of the need for the Federal Government to provide immediate help to those Iraqis who  have been left in limbo on Nauru for years." Senator Bartlett, who has visited Nauru detention centre twice, continues to challenge the Immigration Minister to make a first visit to the taxpayer funded facility where many families have been locked up for years. Media Contact - Daele Healy - 0419 867 649  SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT 

 LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS AND SPOKESPERSON ON IMMIGRATION   

 04/288  SUNDAY 11 APRIL 2004 

 DEMOCRATS   

 MEDIA 

 

 senator. bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 

 Additional Budget Estimates - 17th Feb, 2004 - edited transcript 

 Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee, page 63 

 

 Senator BARTLETT—Has the UNHCR expressed any view to DIMIA or the  Australian government about the possibility of providing some sort of temporary haven  for people on Nauru, even those who do not meet the criteria for refugees, given the  uncertainty of circumstances in both Afghanistan and Iraq? 

 

 Mr Hughes (DIMIA)—The UNHCR has asked that we consider giving complementary  protection to the Iraqis in Nauru. 

 

 Senator BARTLETT—Are you considering that? 

 

 Mr Hughes—It is ultimately a matter for decision by government as to whether  anything of that nature takes place. For the time being, I think Iraqis there are in the  same position as those in Australia and other parts of the world ……….  

 

 Senator BARTLETT—I suppose the main distinction between their situation and that  of those in Australia is that they are in detention, in effect. That is not necessarily an  identical scenario. 

 

 ……………… 

 

 Senator BARTLETT—So, in terms of … …… UNHCR having asked for consideration  to be given to that, is it fair for me to take from that that it is at least under  consideration (by the government) as opposed to having been given consideration  and given a negative response? 

 Mr Hughes—You could take that, Senator. 

 

 

