---
title: "Multiculturalism being undermined and undervalued."
date: "2004-09-30"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Muslim Australians"
  - "Australian Democrats policy"
  - "Counter terrorist measures"
  - "Multiculturalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271975
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FUYD6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration  and Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 30 September 2004 Press Release Number: 04/987

 Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Multiculturalism Being Undermined and Undervalued 

 The strength of multiculturalism is being undermined by the unwillingness of Labor or Liberal  leaders to properly defend it in a climate of fear of terrorism, Australian Democrats Leader  Senator Andrew Bartlett said at the launch of the Democrats Multiculturalism policies in Sydney  today. 

 "Our Multicultural society strengthens Australia's security and our economy. It helps us engage  effectively with the rest of the world," said Senator Bartlett.

 "Asylum seekers have been painted as terrorists and older migrants as an economic drain. But  the opposite is the case. Families, particularly older parents and grandparents are the  foundations of multiculturalism because they pass on culture. The Democrats used our Senate  strength to successfully enable older parents to join their families. Business and skilled migrant  places must not be at the cost of family reunions. This Government says it is pro-family but on  immigration they are often anti-family.

 Senator Bartlett said it is a reality that sections of our Muslim community feel threatened and  targeted by the Government's new anti-terror laws and the focusing of some Federal Police and  ASIO raids and actions on Muslims in Australia. 

 "There is a genuine danger that one of the real strengths of our nation will be compromised  unless we address this danger now." 

 "We should not ignore the fact that the strengths of modern Australia are due in large part to the  diversity and the impact of multiculturalism. There have been many instances over the decades  of Australia's immigration history where migrants who have arrived in different waves have been  feared and demonised. Strong leadership encouraging public acceptance of cultures and beliefs  is vital.

 "The Democrats believe that all cultures should be free to and encouraged to express  themselves, from their everyday forms of expression to their highest literary and artistic forms.

 "Keeping the Democrats strong in the Senate is vital to keeping multiculturalism strong. We  have been strong and active supporters of multiculturalism and ethnic diversity in an  environment where multiculturalism is under threat due to current world events and a failure of  political leadership. 

 "The Democrats have consciously worked over many years with numerous migrant  communities in Australia to ensure that their concerns are heard. 

 "The Democrats will ensure that the voices and views of people from all backgrounds are heard.  It is only through keeping a strong Senate that this can occur." 

