---
title: "Minister accuses refugee advocates of working against interest of women and children in immigration detention."
date: "2004-07-08"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Baxter (SA)"
  - "South Australia"
  - "Alternative detention measures (Immigration)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211268564
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SY2D6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND  INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Minister Accuses Refugee Advocates of Working  Against Interest of Women and Children in  Immigration Detention

 VPS 98/2004

 Minister for Immigration, Senator Amanda Vanstone, today condemned some advocates who she said were  encouraging families at the Residential Housing Project (RHP) in Port Augusta to return to Baxter  Immigration Detention Centre.

 The Minister said she'd been advised that some advocates were telling families that returning to Baxter may  increase their chances of being granted visas.

 'I can given an absolute assurance that consideration of individual cases will not be swayed by this sort of  tactic, ' the Minister said.

 'The worst thing any advocate could do to any family in immigration detention is give false hope and that is  exactly what is occurring at the moment.

 'One family, a mother and four children, chose yesterday to return to Baxter. That request has been  accommodated. 

 'Two other families have indicated they are considering returning to Baxter, but have not yet done so.

 'Any future requests by other families to move from the RHP to Baxter will be accommodated. The RHP is a  voluntary alternative immigration detention arrangement and is not forced on anyone.

 'The Government has worked hard to provide better facilities for women and children and advocates now  appear to be working against the best interests of the women and children who have enjoyed the benefit of  these facilities. '

 The Minister said the RHP in Port Augusta would remain available to those families who had opted to return  to Baxter, pending the outcome of their individual cases.

 'The Government has always said that the RHP is an improved form of immigration detention, ' the Minister  said.

 'The RHP provides an environment more conducive to the needs of women and children who are required by 

 law to be detained.

 'The RHP provides significantly greater freedom than a detention centre. Families are able to shop, grow  vegetables and receive at least twice-weekly visits from male immigration detainees at Baxter.

 'Outings are organised for families and school children's education and extra curricular activities are also  facilitated. Families can also regularly return to Baxter for visits.

 'While the RHP is below capacity at present, it will continue operating as an alternative arrangement to those  mothers and children who desire to take up the option. ' 

 8 July 2004

