---
title: "Big brother to combat terrorism."
date: "2004-05-20"
creators:
  - "Harris, Len"
  - "One Nation Party (Australia)"
source: "PAULINE HANSON'S ONE NATION"
subjects:
  - "Biometrics"
  - "Privacy"
  - "Counter terrorist measures"
  - "Budget, 2004-05"
  - "Identity cards"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211266525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GEKC6%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Senator Len Harris   One Nation Queensland 

 

 Big brother to combat terrorism  20 May 2004 

 Queensland Senator Len Harris says the $9.7 million allocation for biometric technology in  this year's federal budget has more to do with control of the Australian population than  protecting citizens from terrorism.   

 "Under this year's budget allocation, DIMIA has been allocated $4.4 million to develop a  capacity to store and use digital biometric images to better identify its clients each time  they deal with the Department."   

 "Who  do  these  people  think  they  are?   This  facial  recognition  program,  once  fully   developed, would enable DIMIA to identify you WITHOUT YOUR KNOWLEDGE, every time  you walk into a DIMIA office or up to a service counter!"    

 "This  same  notorious  technology  is  being  used  in  the  United  States.   In  2002,  face-recognition  software  surreptitiously  scanned  everyone  passing  through  turnstiles  in   Florida,  for  the  Super  Bowl  XXXV.   The  biometric  technology  flashed  probable  matches   with the mug shots of known criminals on the screens of a police control room."   

 "One Nation does not believe that the public understands or accepts that they could be  subjected  to  a  computerised  scan  upon  dealing  face-to-face  with  DIMIA.  It  is   preposterous and un-Australian and will not be accepted by us."     

 Biometric technology is inherently fraught with dangers and is a threat to open, free and  democratic  societies.  Leading  optometrist  have  concerns,  medical  records  prove  that   the iris does alter due to illness and traumatic events.   

 "One  of  the  most  frightening  and  repugnant  aspects  of  biometrics  is  the  ability  of  this   technology to racially profile people.  Biometrics also serve to enhance privileges of the  already  privileged,  for  example,  express  border  crossings  for  businesspeople.   The   technology can also act as an enforcement measure against the least privileged such  as  welfare  recipients,  concession  card  holders,  public  health  patients  and  legitimate   asylum seekers."    

 Senator Harris says biometric technology used to combat terrorism and identity fraud at  Australia's  borders  is  a  likely  entrée  for  a  na t i o n a l  i d e n t i t y  c a r d .   " T h e  U K  h a s  r e c e n t l y   introduced  legislation  for  an  identity  card  and  it  stems  from  several  government   programs there including research into a biometric passport for UK citizens."   

 Senator  Harris's  warning  on  biometrics  comes  shortly  after  global  human  rights  group,   Privacy  International  released  its  report  exploring  the  relationship  between  national   identity cards and the prevention of terrorism.   

 The Privacy International report says:   

 • There is no evidence between identity cards and successful anti terrorism measures.    

 • The link between anti terrorism and identity cards is intuitive.   

 • Of the 25 countries that have been most adversely affected by terrorism since 1986,  eighty  per  cent  have  national  identity  cards,  one  third  of  which  incorporate   biometrics. This research was unable to uncover any instance where the presence of  an  identity  card  system  in  those  countries  was  seen  as  a  significant  deterrent  to   terrorist activity. 

 

 • Almost two thirds of known terrorists operate under their true identity. The remainder  use  a  variety  of  techniques  to  forge  or  impersonate  identities.  It  is  possible  that  the   existence  of  a  high  integrity  identity  card  would  provide  a  measure  of  improved   legitimacy for these people. 

 

 "Biometric  technology  is  being  implemented  around  the  world  as  a  means  to  manage   borders and combat identity fraud.  Australia has been testing biometric passports and  the smart-gate facial recognition system for several years."   

 "The Smart- Gate technology, enables face scans to be stored on databases around the  world and linked and swapped with other countries that have the same technology.  The  privacy ramifications are enormous."   

 Senator  Harris  has  written  to  the  Federal  Privacy  Commissioner  to  clarify  whether  the   government consulted with the national privacy watchdog over the expansion biometric  research and development.   

 "The  new  budget  funding  raises  serious  questions,  in  terms  of  extra  resourcing  that  the   Privacy  Commission  will  require  in  order  to  monitor   future  developments.   The  office  of  the  Privacy  Commissioner  was  not  even  formally  consulted  in  2002,  when  the   government announced it would spend $3 million on research and development aimed  at adding a biometric identifier to Australian passports."   

 Senator  Harris  says  the  public  have  never  been  asked  for  their  views  on  biometric   technology, and given the very strong opposition to the 1986 proposal for an Australian  Identity Card,  it was unlikely the government would ask for any feedback." 

 

 "It is just being implemented as a fait a compli, it's very draconian."    

 Senator Harris says Queenslanders are asking him to block legislation in the Senate that  enables biometric technology to be used by government agencies.   

 "I will vote against this evil threat to Australia's freedom, which is a menace to the privacy  of Australian citizens, " Senator Harris said.   

 ENDS 

 

 Further Details Senator Harris:  07 4092 3194  or 0429 871 008   

 Also see Media Briefing which follows   

 MEDIA BRIEFING 

 

 

 Survey of terrorist target countries with ID card systems   

 (source:  Privacy International, Mistaken Identity; Exploring the Relationship Between National  Identity Cards & the Prevention of Terrorism,  2004)   

 Country  No. of attacks    deaths   ID  card   Biometric  

 

 Afghanistan    4     34    yes   no  

 Algeria    41     280    yes   no  

 A r g e n t i n a    2     1 2 9   y e s    n o  

 B a n g l a d e s h    5    4 9    y e s    n o  

 Cambodia    8     37    yes    yes  

 Colombia    90     400    yes    no  

 Egypt     22     115    yes    yes  

 France    31    37    yes    no  

 India     46     520    no    no  

 Indonesia    14     250    yes   no  

 I s r a e l     2 2 7     -    y e s    y e s  

 Kenya     3     267    yes    no  

 M o r o c c o    -     -    y e s    n o  

 Nigeria    2     171    yes   yes  

 Pakistan    68    420    yes   yes  

 P a l e s t i n e    2 4 0     -    y e s    n o  

 Peru     31     40    yes   yes  

 Philippines   38     113    no   no  

 Russia    32     620    yes   yes  

 Saudi  Arabia    10     30    no   no  

 Spain     51     250    yes    yes  

 Sri  Lanka    27    440    yes   no  

 T u r k e y     5 7    8 5    y e s   n o  

 Uganda    12     42   no   no  

 U n i t e d  S t a t e s    1 3     3 6 5 0    n o   n o  

 

 Eighty  per  cent  of  these  countries  have  long-standing  identity  card  systems,  a  third  of   which contain a biometric such as a fingerprint. While it is impossible to claim that terrorist  incidents have been thwarted as a result of an ID card, the above data establishes that  the cards are unable to eliminate terrorist incidents.    

 Privacy International's Report can be downloaded at:  http://www.privacyinternational.org/issues/idcard/uk/id-terrorism.pdf   

 

 Biometric Bonanza - 2004 Budget allocations 

 

 • The Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs (DIMIA) has  been  allocated  $4.4  million  to  research  and  test  the  best  way  to  incorporate   biometric  technologies  into  Australia's  existing  electronic  visa  and  entry   arrangements. 

 

 • In 2004-05, DIMIA will also develop a capacity to store and use digital biometric  images to better identify its clients each time they deal with the Department.   According to the Minister's Media Release: 

 

  "To  protect  our  border  we  must  constantly  review  our  operations.  It  is  vital  that  the  Government   continue to enhance border technologies given increased international travel, advanced identity fraud  methods  and  technically  sophisticated  terrorists  and  criminals.  The  use  of  biometric  identifiers  will   strengthen  border  protection  through  more  stringent  passport  verification  processes  and  will  reduce   the risk of passport fraud.  The possibility of terrorists and other criminals using fraudulently obtained  Australian  passports  to  enter  Australia  will  be  substantially  reduced.  The  introduction  of  biometric   identifiers  into  Australian  passports  will  keep  us  at  the  leading  edge  of  international  passport   technology and fraud detection techniques."   

 

 • An  allocation  of  $3.1  million  will  enable  Customs  to  expand  its  automated  face-recognition  trial,  Smart-Gate,  to  a  second  Australian  international  airport  and   additional users in 2004-05. 

 

 • Customs  will  extend  the  Smart-Gate  system  to  holders  of  prototype  Australian   biometric  passports,  selected  passengers  and  enrolled  aircrew  at  two  international   airports. 

 

 • The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) will receive $2.2 million in 2004-05  to test a prototype biometric passport for compatibility with US border control  equipment. 

 

 

 Senator Harris's webpage on biometrics   

 www.SenatorLenHarris.com.au/privacy_issues.htm   

 SenatorLenHarris.com.au 

 

 

 

 Ian Marston  Electorate Officer for Senator Len Harris   

