---
title: "Government committed to detention regime."
date: "2004-06-10"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Children"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211267376
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AZ2D6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND  INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Government committed to detention regime

 VPS 82/2004

 Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, reaffirmed the Government's commitment to mandatory  detention, as part of its strategy to control unauthorised immigration into Australia.

 'To release all children from detention in Australia would be to send a message to people smugglers that if  they carry children on dangerous boats, parents and children will be released into the community very  quickly,' Senator Vanstone said.

 'One of the key reasons the number of illegal boat arrivals to Australia have virtually ceased is because of the  detention regime.

 'At present, there are only 12 children in mainland detention centres in Australia who have arrived, with  parents, illegally by boat.

 'Of these children, 11 could be in alternative detention arrangements but their parents have refused.

 'There are 11 children on Christmas Island who also arrived illegally by boat.

 'In addition, there are 28 children currently in alternative detention arrangements. There are 37 children in  detention centres, detained as a direct result of compliance activities. These children are detained normally for  no more than a few weeks while departure arrangements are made. They are NOT long-term detainees.

 'Australia is committed to alternative detention arrangements, a commitment supported by the extension of  Residential Housing Projects announced in the recent Budget.

 'The arrangements I announced last week and implemented this week for the Bakhtiyari children and their  mother in Adelaide also reflect the Government's commitment to alternative detention, particularly for those  children who are in Australia for extended periods pending the outcome of litigation.

 'On Nauru, 54 of the 74 children have now been assessed as refugees and are in the process of being resettled  to Australia.

 'It shouldn't be forgotten that the mandatory detention regime was implemented by Labor and the Opposition  has, at no time, indicated it would change the policy.'

 10 June 2004

