---
title: "New Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs."
date: "2004-10-29"
creators:
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
source: "DEPT OF IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs portfolio"
  - "MCGAURAN, Peter"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272547
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JUFE6%22
---

 

 Media Release 

 New Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

 M001/04

 Coalition Government House of Representatives Member, Peter McGauran has been appointed to the Immigration  Portfolio as the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, following the Federal Election on 9 October.

 Prime Minister John Howard announced the new Ministerial arrangements with Mr McGauran joining Senator  Amanda Vanstone in the Immigration Portfolio.

 Mr McGauran was sworn in as Minister on Tuesday 26 October at a ceremony with the Governor General at  Government House in Canberra.

 Minister McGauran said he was privileged to be appointed to such an important portfolio and looked forward to  working with local community groups to promote Australia’s cultural diversity and encourage eligible people to take  up Australian citizenship.

 “Australian citizenship is something we can all share and should actively celebrate,” Minister McGauran said.

 “One of my first goals will be to raise the profile and extend the value that people put in citizenship. 

 “Currently there are almost a million eligible permanent residents who have not taken up citizenship, so I want to  strengthen that profile and encourage non-Australian citizens to become formal members of the Australian community.

 “In line with citizenship issues, multicultural affairs is enormously important, particularly in rural areas where we are  trying to attract skilled migrants where there are natural shortages, and examine issues in humanitarian settlement in  regional Australia. 

 “I would also like to reassure migrant communities that the Government remains committed to migrant and refugee  settlement services.

 “The Government is committed to the continuing development of a strong and effective network of settlement service  providers to address the needs of migrant and refugee communities,” Minister McGauran concluded.

 29 October 2004 

 29 October 2004

 MEDIA CONTACT: Jodie Naismith 0419622915

 For a high resolution image of Minister McGauran go to 

