---
title: "Government overboard: The Democrats called it from the start."
date: "2004-08-16"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Senate Select Committee on a Certain Maritime Incident"
  - "Children overboard affair"
  - "SCRAFTON, Mike"
  - "Political credibility"
  - "Opinion manipulation"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211269972
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M6GD6%22
---

 

 

 senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA 04/764 MONDAY 16 AUGUST 2004   SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS  Government Overboard - The Democrats called it from the start The truth could have been rescued years ago if the ALP had supported the Democrat's request that adviser, Mike Scrafton appear before the Children Overboard (Certain Maritime Incident) inquiry.  Australian Democrats Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett who was a key member of the children overboard Senate Committee said today that the revelation from Mr Scrafton shows that the committee was wrong not to insist on subpoenaing Mr Reith and Mr Scrafton.  "At the time of the inquiry I urged the committee to subpoena Mr Reith and others such as Mr Scrafton, but these suggestions were rejected by Labor.  "The Democrats were the first to question the children overboard claims, the first to raise the issue of the Tampa in the Senate and have been a key part of committees into children overboard and ministerial discretion over the past few years," Senator Bartlett said.  Thousands of Australians have already seen the Democrat's "Truth Overboard" internet clip at http://www.liedetectors.net.au/free_the_refugees/movie/  "Today's revelations by former senior government minister Mike Scrafton regarding what he told the Prime Minister about the children overboard affair is a bombshell that has blown apart what remains of John Howard's credibility and honesty.  "Less than a month after the Children Overboard lie, the Howard Government was re-elected. Today's revelations suggest the Prime Minister not only lied, but knew he was continuing to lie leading up to the election.  "All of these situations show that the Senate needs to be tougher and use every avenue to reveal the truth about a government that is consciously dishonest whenever it suits them.  "The Prime Minister knew that the children overboard allegations were false before he gave his address to the Press Club. This incident shows that he is willing to lie to press gallery and the public.  "The Democrats are relieved that three years on, the truth has finally been set free and believe that this incident proves once and for all, that Howard is not fit to hold the office of Prime Minister.  "Our democracy has repeatedly been undermined by the Howard Government. It continues to be at risk from a Prime Minster who is willing to lie time and time again for his own political gain.  "Now more than ever it is essential to have a strong Senate, with the Democrats at the helm to ensure the truth is exposed." Media Contact - Rowena Bew - 0400 729 555 

 DEMOCRATS    MEDIA 

 

 senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS PRESS RELEASES - selected quotes 2001 - 2002 

 "Fundamental to the Government's border protection regime is a lack of respect for the value of  human life and human rights. This was exposed in relation to SIEV 4, SIEV 6 and SIEV 10 and it is  my belief, was integral to the agencies' response to intelligence about SIEV X. If the SIEV X had  been intercepted by an Australian vessel before it sank, the policy of deter, detect and deny meant  that the first action when confronted with a grossly overloaded boat, would not have been to ensure  the safety of those on board, including 70 children, but to turn it around and make it sail back to  Indonesia. The Pacific Solution policy institutionalises systematic abuse of human rights and flaunts  domestic and international law." (Senator Andrew Bartlett, 23 October 2002). 

 "For the first time in history the defence forces were used to execute government policy that was  deliberately manipulated during an election period. The very nature of this policy ensured that the  Navy kept vessels that were only 'marginally seaworthy' in the water. It involved the Navy in a life  and death game of brinkmanship with desperate people in leaky boats. It was in this arena that the  dishonest and deliberate misrepresentation of events surrounding the SIEV 4 and the tragedy of the  SIEV X were played out…the government ignores any criticism no matter where it comes from.  Instead the Minister continues to vilify refugees and to use them to send a message to the electorate  regardless of the personal damage this treatment is causing." Senator Andrew Bartlett, 26 August  2002). 

 "There is little doubt that the Senate has the power to issue subpoenas requiring these people to  attend the Committee to answer questions. The Committee's refusal to go down this path, and to  instead take the alternative approach of appointing an independent assessor to determine what  questions Mr Reith and the staffers should ideally be asked, is a second best option." (Senator  Andrew Bartlett, 23 May 2002). 

 "The Australian Democrats support the ALP's call for a Senate inquiry into refugee children being  thrown overboard, but are calling for the inquiry's expansion to include the 'Pacific Solution', and the  use of Australian defence personnel in the turning around, detaining and transporting of boatpeople."  (Senator Andrew Bartlett, 13 February 2002).  

 "Admiral Chris Barrie's admission that he hadn't spoken to the HMAS Adelaide Commander, Norman  Banks, until last Sunday night sees John Howard's last plank of defence disappear from underneath  him. It's astonishing that Admiral Barrie would front-up to the Senate Estimates Committee without  first adequately investigating the facts behind the discredited Government allegations that children  had been thrown overboard in Australian waters." (Senator Andrew Bartlett, 27 February 2002). 

 This smacks of an attempted cover-up and should be subject to independent scrutiny to establish the  facts. A retired judge could conduct the inquiry and make the report public," said Senator Bartlett.    

 "The Government allowed the fear and divisiveness this issue provoked, to run throughout the  campaign and only produced the video under pressure in the dying days of the election. The Howard  Government's credibility has been undermined by the head of the Australian Navy on the eve of the 

 DEMOCRATS    MEDIA 

 

 senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 Federal election. The Prime Minister made asylum seekers a defining issue in this election, a stand  that has fuelled racial tensions in Australia and led to international condemnation. Australians  deserve to know the truth about the claims Government has made about asylum seekers. Today, the  Australian Democrats challenge the Prime Minister, Mr Howard, and the Opposition leader, Mr  Beazley, to commit to an independent inquiry following the election." (Senator Andrew Bartlett, 9  November 2001). 

 "It is of great concern that the Liberals and the ALP appear to have gagged MPs and candidates on  this issue when a proper debate about refugee policy is needed. There are also reports today that  Minister Ruddock's own department has revealed that the Government's hard-line refugee policy is  not working." (Senator Andrew Bartlett, 6 November 2001). 

 "At the same time as their region is being turned into a war zone, Mr Howard and his team are  continuing to paint asylum seekers as criminals rather than victims. Reports that Australian defence  personnel were required to open fire on a boatload of presumably unarmed people are an absolute  disgrace…The lies of this Government, the grotesque misleading of the Australian people, must be  exposed for the disgrace that it is. The repeated lie of the Coalition that it is illegal to enter a country  to seek protection must be exposed once and for all….The fact is that Australia is not even in the top  10 when it comes to accepting refugees. When there is such a humanitarian crisis erupting, it's about  time for the lies to end and the truth to be told to the Australian people." (Senator Andrew Bartlett,  9 October 2001). 

 "The untruths and distortions purported by the Howard Government are coming unstuck, as boatload  after boatload of genuinely desperate and despairing people seek sanctuary in Australia. The  Government's harsh treatment of asylum seekers is not working - they're still coming and they'll  continue to keep coming…boatload after boatload. How much money is the Howard Government  prepared to spend trying to deny their international responsibilities to asylum seekers?". (Senator  Andrew Bartlett, 7 October 2001). 

 

 

