---
title: "Australia boosts assistance for Sudan by $12 million."
date: "2004-07-27"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Humanitarian aid"
  - "Sudan"
  - "Humanitarian intervention"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211269204
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/V79D6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER 

 AA 04 054 27 July 2004 

 Australia Boosts Assistance for Sudan  by $12 Million 

 Australia is providing an additional $12 million in humanitarian assistance to  help relieve the terrible human crisis in Sudan.

 This takes Australia's humanitarian funding to $20 million, demonstrating the  Australian Government's deep concern about the situation in the Darfur region of  Western Sudan.

 The Government is actively engaged in humanitarian and political efforts to  solve this crisis and prevent further suffering caused by needless conflict.

 Australia has already provided $8 million to UN agencies, the International  Committee of the Red Cross and Australian NGOs, to deliver urgently needed  assistance to Sudanese refugees. The additional funding reflects the scale of the  humanitarian crisis in the Darfur region.

 More than 1 million internally displaced people need help in Darfur and more  than 180,000 refugees have crossed the border into Chad as a result of conflict.

 Many of these refugees are women and children, including over 20,000 who are  less than five years of age, and therefore are at extreme risk from hunger and  disease, as well as shortages of clean water and adequate shelter.

 Early contributions totalling $6 million will be made to the World Food  Programme and the United Nations Children's Fund to provide urgent assistance  to those most in need. 

 The remaining funds will be allocated through UN and other humanitarian relief 

 agencies to cover other needs including the protection of populations at risk.  Australia will consult closely with relief agencies working in the area to ensure  funding is directed to the highest priorities.

 Australia is actively encouraging and supporting action by the United Nations  and will continue to support international efforts to end the conflict and alleviate  the human suffering and gross human rights abuses in Sudan.

 If the humanitarian efforts of the international community are to be effective, it is  essential that the Sudanese Government fulfils immediately the commitments it  has made to disarm the Janjaweed militia, remove restrictions on humanitarian  access, permit the deployment of human rights monitors and bring human rights  abuses to an end.

 Media inquiries:

 Chris Kenny (Minister's Office) 0419 206 890

 Jo Elsom (AusAID) 02 6206 4960 or 0412 804 489

 

