---
title: "Labor welcomes increase in Australia's refugee intake."
date: "2004-03-23"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211265416
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WZ0C6%22
---

 

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

 

         23 March 2004 

 

 

 LABOR WELCOMES INCREASE IN AUSTRALIA’S REFUGEE INTAKE   

 

 I warmly welcome the significant increase in Australia’s annual offshore refugee intake  announced today by the Government.   

 Australia has a long and proud record of resettling refugees in Australia.  This is often  under appreciated by Australians.   

 Last year, for example, over 12,500 people were resettled in Australia under our offshore  refugee and humanitarian program.   

 Australia has had such a program of 12,000 or more in recent years.   

 The community will welcome this increase as will the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees and Australia’s non government refugee advocacy groups.   

 The enlargement of the off shore refugee program does not take away our obligations to  be a good international citizen under the Refugee Convention.   

 During the Howard Government’s time in office this has seen nearly 9,000 unauthorised  arrivals granted Temporary Protection Visas.  These refugees are now living in the  community.  They have previously been counted in our Refugee and Humanitarian  intake, without a consequent reduction in the actual maximum level of the offshore  refugee and humanitarian program. 

 

 Labor’s policy determined at our recent National Conference shows that it is possible to  be tough on border protection and people smugglers, but fair on the people who do claim  Australia’s protection under the Convention. 

 

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

 

