---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Nhulunbuy Town Hall, Northern Territory: 24 February, 2004: Australian community and Australian values."
date: "2004-02-24"
creators:
  - "Latham, Mark"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "ALP policy"
  - "Superannuation"
  - "Defence alliances"
  - "United States"
  - "Community development"
  - "Tasmania"
  - "Tax rates and margins"
  - "Australian community and Australian values."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211264194
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B7BC6%22
---

 

 

 STATION Rehame Reporter Press Conference  PROGRAM Nhulunbuy Town Hall, Northern Territory  DATE 24 February, 2004 

 TIME 10.00am 

 PRODUCER  

 SUMMARY Press conference regarding approach to the Australian community  and Australian values.   

 Speaker: Leader of the Opposition Mark Latham.    

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 MARK LATHAM - LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: 

 Yeah, well for those issues I think it’s also a matter of trying to 

 open up our democracy and have more face to face contact like 

 this.   So,  I’m  getting  around  to  the  country,  big  cities,  country  

 towns  remote  communities,  support  the  people  face  to  face  as  

 much as I can. 

 

 And  one  of  the  things  they’re  very  keen  on  is  more  public  

 feedback and participation in our policies.  Our democracy has 

 got to be for the people, not the powerful.  You shouldn’t have to 

 belong to some big interest group to have your say.  People who 

 do  the  voting  should  also  do  the  talking  face  to  face  with  the  

 politicians. 

 

  2   

 

 

 

  REF: M254115 

 

 

 And we’re also very keen to restore a bit of trust and confidence.  

 That’s  one  of  the  reasons  we  moved  to  close  down  the  

 parliamentary  superannuation  scheme  and  get  some  decent  

 community standards back in place. 

 

 So, I think that is an approach that’s very important and it’s a bit 

 different  from  Mr  Howard’s  show  because  he’s  been  in  the  

 system for thirty years and, sort of, running out of puff and going 

 a  bit  stale  and  is  certainly  not  opening  up  the  system  to  public  

 participation and the sort of face to face contact that we need in 

 our democratic system. 

 

 On  those  other  two  issues  you  mentioned,  the  Labor  Party  

 under John Curtin founded the American relationship but we’ve 

 never seen it as a rubber stamp.  And today - it was on one the 

 radio  programs  on  the  ABC  -  Alexander  Downer  was  on  there  

 sounding more like the Deputy Secretary of State in the United 

 States  saying  that  the  test  for  Australian  foreign  policy  is  

 whether or not you agree with the United States. 

 

 The test for Australian foreign policy is whether or not it’s good 

 for Australia, whether or not it’s good for us.   

 

 [applause] 

 

 

      3 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 That's the test (indistinct).  And to take any other approach gives 

 away  our  sovereignty,  gives  away  our  self  respect  and  gives  

 away our pride in being Australian.  So the test is what’s right for 

 Australia?  And stand up to those things at every opportunity. 

 

 So, we have the American alliance part of our policy but it’s not 

 a rubber stamp.  And in areas where there’s disagreement, such 

 as the son of Star Wars, last year the war in Iraq, well we stand 

 up  as  proud  Australians  and  say,  we  disagree,  we  don’t  think  

 that’s right for our country and we are Australian enough to say 

 that and mean it.  So, that’s the difference there, along with the 

 fact  that  we  also  (indistinct)  in  foreign  policy  on  the  United  

 Nations  international  cooperation  and  also  the  importance  of  

 engagement with Asia. 

 

 And  your  question  about  refugees.   We’ve  had  a  long  and  I  

 think,  very  good  policy  process  where  we  say  we  want  to  be  

 strong  on  border  protection  but  as  Australians  we  believe  in  a  

 fair go and we can have more compassion for genuine refugees.  

 Let’s get the kids out of detention centres.  I’m sure that anyone 

 who’s  a  parent  doesn’t  like  the  idea  of  children  of  any  

 background growing up behind barbed wire.  I mean, that’s not 

 the Australian way. 

 

 And we also want to bring those centres back into public sector 

 management and ensure it’s not a system of punishment, it’s a 

      4 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 system  that  people  can  be  processed  quickly  and  genuine  

 refugees  welcomed  into  the  Australian  community  which  has  

 always been the Australian way.  And those that aren’t genuine 

 of course have to make other arrangements. 

 

 So, if we make those changes I think we’re getting the balance 

 right  between  very  strong  border  protection  and  some  more  

 decent treatment of refugees in the system. 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 [Laughter] 

 

 LATHAM: 

 Well,  that  would’ve  been  the  alternative  but  it  would  have  sent  

 the  country  broke,  you  see.   So,  we  had  to  go  in  the  other  

 direction.   We  thought  because  it’s  a  lot  easier  to  get  a  small  

 group  of  people  from  sixty  to  nine  than  a  big  group  of  people  

 from nine to sixty.  (Laughs)  I’m sure you understand. 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 LATHAM: 

      5 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 Well, I’m going down there for … (indistinct) doing here today to 

 talk  to  people  face  to  face  about  the  issues.   Bob  Brown  is  

 someone  I  respect  as  an  environmentalist  and  he’s  had  a  fine  

 track  record,  particularly  on  issues  like  the  Franklin  Dam.   But  

 down  there  I’ll  be  talking  to  him  and  also  the  unions,  industry,  

 state  government.   We’ll  talk  about  their  perspective  and  try  to  

 get the balance right. 

 

 We certainly want to protect jobs.  It's not the Labor way to put 

 mature  based  workers  still  in  the  forestry  industry  out  on  the  

 scrap  heap.   That’s  not  social  justice.   So,  we  want  to  protect  

 jobs.   We  also  want  to  recognise  the  state  government  down  

 there  has  been  doing  a  good  job.   And  that’s  attributed  to  Jim  

 Bacon,  who’s  leaving  under  terrible  circumstances.   But  that  

 direction will carry on. 

 

 But, if on top of those things we can do something to enhance 

 the  environmental  protection,  well,  that  also  is  the  Labor  way.   

 We’re a party with good environmental values and I’ll be looking 

 at  sensible  ways  in  which  we  can  achieve  those  goals  in  

 consultation with the community.  And I mentioned earlier on the 

 importance of community-lead solutions. 

 

 In  Tasmania  they  have  a  really  process  called  Tasmania  

 Together where a lot of meetings and discussion about the state 

 needs  to  go  in  going  forward  are  (indistinct)  focused  on  the  

      6 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 balance  between  forestry  and  environment.   And  I  obviously  

 want  to  add  some  value  to  that  process  of  community  

 consultation and ensure we come up with a policy that’s in the 

 public interest.  So, I'll be down there in a couple of weeks' time, 

 and I'm certainly looking forward to it. 

 

 Yeah, mate (indistinct). 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 LATHAM: 

 You  know,  I  think  the  really  big  problem  is  the  interaction  

 between  the  tax  rate  and  the  withdrawal  of  social  security  

 benefits.   There’s  some  families  in  Australia,  they  work  hard,  

 earn an extra hundred dollars, the government takes a hundred 

 and  two  dollars  off  them  in  taxes,  and  the  loss  of  the  social  

 security, the family payments and the like.  So, they have a go, 

 they earn an extra hundred dollars and they’re two dollars worse 

 off in net terms.  Now, that is just appalling.   

 

 We need real reward for effort and incentives from the economy.  

 Our big priority is relief for PAYE taxpayers who've been doing it 

 tough, they've been the work horses of the taxation system.  But 

 also  to  bring  down  these  effective  marginal  tax  rates,  the  

 interaction  between  tax  and  social  security  and  get  away  from  

      7 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 the tax traps, where people work hard and they’re actually worse 

 off for doing it.  So, we need incentive rewards for effort.   

 

 I believe in an economy where if you get stuck, you can have a 

 go,  the  government  is  there  pushing  you  forward  and  saying  

 that’s  great,  rather  than  taking  more  money  out  of  your  pocket  

 than  you’re  actually  earning.   So,  we've  got  to  get  back  to  that  

 basic principle, and we’ll be having a look at their finances and 

 what  they  do  in  the  May  budget  and  then  we’ll  be  coming  out  

 with our taxation plans along those lines and principles. 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 LATHAM: 

 Yeah.  Well most of it comes out of your pocket.  This is bracket 

 creep,  where  you  earn  more  money,  you  go  onto  higher  rates.   

 And Mr Costello is happy to leave you there without giving you 

 relief.  And we’ll be looking at the size of the surplus and what 

 else they plan to do in the May budget, and then Labor can cut 

 its cloth and do its plans accordingly.   

 

 Is there someone out the back there? 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

      8 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 

 LATHAM: 

 Well,  just  in  my  short  time  here  today,  several  people  have  

 mentioned  to  me  the  problem  of  substance  abuse,  and  it  does  

 sound significant, something that needs to be tackled.  Trish and 

 Warren  are  working  on  our  indigenous  policy  for  the  Territory.   

 But  our  general  approach  is  to  say,  well,  you  do  need  extra  

 services,  you  do  need  extra  opportunities  and  support,  but  so  

 too on the flip side, you need the pressure and the demand for 

 responsibility.   

 

 I  mean,  government's  got  to  provide  the  services,  and  people  

 have got to respond to them in the right way, and if you get that 

 powerful  combination  right,  you  can  get  some  really  good  

 solutions.   And  that’s  why  I  was  glad  to  hear  the  success  of  

 (indistinct)  where  it’s  basically  here  are  the  opportunities  and  

 training, the skills, better to have a job, and if people respond to 

 it the right way and stay in the program, act responsibly and look 

 up  to  their  role  models,  then  they’re  obviously  going  to  get  a  

 good go and a good set of opportunities. 

 

 So,  I  think  that  general  principle  is  what  works.   We’ve  got  to  

 back the things that work in practice.  It’s got to be opportunity 

 plus responsibility.  It's got to be support plus a bit of pressure.  

 And  if  we  do  those  things,  then  we  can  find  some  solutions  

 working with community, and we’re very committed to that, very 

      9 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 committed to that.  And if you have got specific ideas, then we’re 

 happy  to  look  at  them  and  look  at  them  in  the  context  of  our  

 policy,  which  is  going  to  be  working  with  the  Territory  

 government - you need partnership.   

 

 I mean, one level of government heads off in the one direction 

 and  the  other  goes  the  opposite  way,  you’re  not  going  to  

 achieve  much  of  a  result.   So  the  government  working  with  

 community  in  an  integrated  coordinated  way  and  doing  things  

 according  to  the  principles  I’ve  just  outlined,  then  you  can  get  

 some results.  So, we’re happy to look at that proposal, and I’m 

 sure  it’s  something  that’s  debated  around  the  Territory,  and  is  

 much needed. 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 LATHAM: 

 Well, you’ve hit the nail right on the head in saying that a lot of 

 you  people  wanted  better  value  for  their  super,  it’s  got  to  work  

 for them instead of against them.  Late last year, we announced 

 a  policy  to  bring  down  fees  and  charges  on  superannuation  

 because  they’re  a  real  killer  for  people.   That  minimises  the  

 amount of super investment that’s working in your fund with your 

 retirement income.   

 

      10 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 And  the  other  policy  we’ve  announced  so  far  is  to  reduce  the  

 contributions  tax  from  fifteen  to  thirteen  per  cent.   If  the  

 government  taxes  you  less  on  the  way  in,  then  obviously  your  

 super money can accumulate, multiply, be invested successfully, 

 and it’s going to be a bigger pool of money on the way out for 

 your retirement income.   

 

 And  every  economist  worth  his  salt  will  tell  you  you're  much  

 better off taxing on the way out and minimising the government 

 taxes on the way in through superannuation. 

 

 And  we've  also  got  another  round  of  policies  to  announce  

 improving retirement income strategies and we'll be doing that in 

 the  next  couple  of  weeks.   So  we'll  be  interested  in  what  they  

 say on Wednesday.  I mean, it's been a long time coming.  Mr 

 Costello first said that superannuation reform was the big issue 

 four years ago.  We've got to wait for one more day (laughs) to 

 find out (indistinct) what that long time line means in practice.  

 

 But  we've  got  policies  out  there  already  to  bring  down  fees,  

 charges  and  taxes  and  ensure  that  your  super  money  is  doing  

 what  it's  supposed  to  do,  working  for  your  retirement  income  

 instead of going into the pockets of financial advisers, planners, 

 fund managers and worst of all Mr Costello. 

 

 MALE SPEAKER: 

      11 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

 Just  one  final  question  over  here.   This  young  lady's  from  

 (indistinct). 

 

 REPORTER: 

 [inaudible question] 

 

 LATHAM: 

 About  the  (indistinct)  I  said  if  I  could  be  remembered  as  an  

 education  prime  minister  that  would  leave  me  a  pretty  happy  

 fellow,  in  that  all  my  opportunities  in  life  came  out  of  good  

 schooling  and  good  family.   And  for  people  your  age  nothing  

 matters  more  good  education  opportunities  and  we've  got  to  

 invest  more.   I  mean,  the  job  for  the  future  is  in  skills.   It's  in  

 brain power, not so much muscle power.  Those jobs are fading 

 away.   

 

 And  I'd  like  to  (indistinct)  Australia  a  very  highly  skilled  country  

 with  plenty  of  opportunities  through  the  education  system  for  

 people  to  work  hard  and  advance  themselves.   So  if  anyone  

 ever  said  that  Mark  Latham  was  a  good  education  prime  

 minister  then  I'd  be  sitting  on  the  nursing  home  porch  one  day  

 rocking away thinking that's all right, you know, give me another 

 cup of tea and I'm a pretty happy old fellow.   

 

      12 

 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

 

  REF : M254115 

 

      13 

 

 

 

 So that's my one burning ambition for the country to invest more 

 in education and solve problems in the education system to give 

 people like you your best chance in life. 

 

 MALE SPEAKER: 

 Thanks very much Mark. 

 

 END OF SEGMENT 

