---
title: "Greens candidates see for themselves: Villawood visit confirms Howard's inhumanity."
date: "2004-09-17"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Australian Greens policy"
  - "New South Wales"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271353
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3PXD6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle 

 Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Greens candidates see for themselves:  Villawood visit confirms Howard's inhumanity   

 Senator Nettle, 17th September 2004 

 Australian Greens Senator for NSW, Kerry Nettle will lead a delegation of local  Greens candidates to visit asylum seekers at Villawood Detention Centre today. 

 The Greens are calling for all asylum seekers to be released from detention whilst  their claims are assessed and given humanitarian permanent residency where  appropriate. 

 "It's important for candidates to meet the detainees and see the conditions behind the  razor wire," Senator Nettle said. 

 "I challenge Liberal candidates to come to the detention centres, to meet the asylum  seekers as we have done and then try to justify the continued inhumanity of  mandatory detention. 

 "The Greens policy is to abolish mandatory detention and a return to a humane and  sensible approach where asylum seekers live in the community while their claims are  assessed. 

 "The Greens would hold asylum seekers in open style reception centres for no more  than 14 days for initial identity and health checks and then grant them an asylum  application visa (AAV) that wo uld allow them to live in the community with  appropriate support while their claims are assessed.  

 "All those asylum seekers currently in detention should be granted either an AAV or a  permanent visa on humanitarian grounds. 

 "Today I will meet with stateless asylum seekers who have spent up to 3 years in  detention. Detainees arriving in Australia with hopes to study and work in a new  country away from the troubles of home have had their dreams crushed by this  government's policy of indefinite detention.  

 "I will also meet with women and children in Villawood who are resisting attempts to  try to transport them to residential housing project prisons in the desert away from  friends and supporters.  

 "Abolishing mandatory detention is not a radical idea. Before 1992 Australia did not  have mandatory detention and most other countries do not have mandatory detention." 

 Contact Jon Edwards - 0428 213 146 

