---
title: "Where are the nation building projects?"
date: "2004-10-07"
creators:
  - "Windsor, Tony"
source: "Office of WINDSOR, TONY, MP"
subjects:
  - "Rural areas"
  - "Land transport infrastructure"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272218
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1PGE6%22
---

  PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Mall. 

  Ph  Toll Free  Fax  e-rnail 

  MEDIA RELEASE Web Page. 

  TONY WINDSOR MP  INDEPENDENT  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND 

  Shop 5  259 Peel Street  TAMWORTH PJSW 2340 

  PO Box 963  TAMWORTH NS’A 2340 

  (02) 6761 3080  1300301 839  (02) 6761 3380  Tony Windsor MP@aph gov au  www tonywndsor corn au 

  Where are the Nation building projects?  Indipcndent Member for New England. Tony Windsor has supported Inland Rail Chairman E\:erald  C’oripton in his claims that there has been no m%jor national infrastructure projects announcements that  w!li help grow inland Australia and bring people back into country areas. 

  b.F \ m l d  C‘ompton is right. 

  Zc.1 her the Coalition nor the Labor Party has given any support to major infrastructure projects that  COLI d enhance opportunities i n  inland Australia 

  Thc:.e has been nothing announced by either side that could be described as -Kation building‘ and it is  \ e n  disappointing that with so much surplus, funding has not been invested into providing much needed  in!;- istructure. 

  Pro!ects like the upgrading of the Murrurundi Tunnel, reopening the rail line north of Armidale and rail  l i n k  .; from Moree across the Queensland border to give easier access to the Port of Brisbane and further 

  iiorlh along the line that will make up part of the Melbourne to Darwin line proposed by Mr Compton’s  g o i  p ~ none have been mentioned in any possible funding of projects. 

  D u r  ng the election campaign three years ago. the Leader of the National Part) M ith inuch fanfdre dro\ e 

  ‘I >I the into the ground near Goondiwindi where the site of a new rail bridge n d i  to be conitructed 

  ‘icr( >\ the m e r  to Queensland bridging the missing link for Mr Compton’i Inland Rail project 

  Silli e then. Mr Compton’s great vision has stalled because of his ha\ ing to \bait for the slou ness of a  Vii:i\ter to act rather than get on with the job. 

  If i\il a nation do not invest in our ELitiire through ’nation building’ projects \\hen we haie surplus  tunc i. then we will be judged guilty of neglect by future generations when they say. ’nhq didn’t our  lorcl’atheri do this M hen they had the opportunity and the money to do i t ‘  and I won’t blame them.” Mr  \I/ I I  J w r  sdid 

  .- - 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  TONY WINDSOR MP  INDEPENDENT  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND 

  PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

  MEDIA RELEASE  6 October 2004 

  All Mail: 

  Shop 5  259 Peel Street  TAMWORTH NSW 2330 

  PO Box 963  TAMWORTH NSW 2330 

  Ph: (02) 6761 3080 

  Toll Free: 1300 301 839  Fax: (02) 6761 3380 

  e-mail: Tony Windsor MP@aph gov au  Web Page: www tonywndsor corn au 

  Windsor Wins Top MP Award  The Independent Federal Member for Neu England. Tony Windsor, \aid today he \\.as  >ornewhat humbled but honoured to have been name as “Rest MP” by Ioters’ ad\ ocate,  FairGO-Voterlobby. 

  M r  Windsor was recently named by FairGO as the most helpful Federal Member of  Parliament in responding to a wide range of issues which had been forlvarded b y  the  organisation on behalf of concerned citizens to e\ery MP in Australia during the last  Parliamentary term. 

  Mr Windsor said it was \.cry important that individuals in the community should have the  right to be heard by their elected representatives in relation to issues of concern. 

  “I commend FairGO Director. Greg Bloomfield. for his ongoing efforts m e r  many years to 

  help bring the community’s concerns to the attention of Parliamentarians across Australia.”  Mr Windsor said. 

  Windsor Sets Political Benchmark - Wins Best YIP 

  Kew England Independent MP. Tony Windsor set the benchmark for Federal Politicians in  the term just ended. Independent unaffiliated voters’ advocate. FuirCO-Voterlobby helps  voters put their issues before every MP to see who will help solve them. Some Federal \IPS  d w a y s  do. That allows benchmarking of politicians to compare one against the other. 

  Since 2001, Mr. Windsor has outperformed every other Federal MP. many of whom ha1.e  party machines behind them. Mr. Windsor has helped many voters \i.ho \ \ , i l l  never be able to  reward him with a vote, according to FairGO director Mr. Greg Bloomfield, w.ho said “In  jetting this Benchmark Mr. Windsor has shown selfless devotion to Parliamentar) duty and   he interests of all Australians. We applaud him and his effort.” 

  Issues raised with MPs via FairGO (Est 1986) by Australian voters during this parliamentary  term included Health services, Education in schools and unibersities, Nursing Home  performance. Road Safety. The Iraq War, Disability funding, Immigration, Illegal Inmiigrants  Sr Refugees, Capital city development and rural neglect, Rural senices including mail. phone 

  and drought assistance. greater Rural and Regional tax concessions. proper recognition of  WWII Returned Service \:eterans, Parenting skills education, Free Trade Agreement and the  impact of alcohol on under age drinkers, crime rates, anti-social behaviour and youth suicide. 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  Mr Windsor led runner up, Democrat Sen. Natasha Stott Despoja and third placed Liberal  Sen Marise Payne by a substantial margin. 

  Others in the Top Ten Politicians. in descending order were Democrat Sen. Lyn Allison.  Liberal Sen. Richard Alston, Green Sen. Kerry Nettle. Bradfield Liberal Education hlinister  Rrendan Nelson, Democrat Sen. John Cherry. Pauline I-lanson One Nation's Sen Len Harris  and equal 10Ih Labor's Sen. Jan McLucas and Berowra Liberal .4ttomey General Philip 

  Ruddock. 

  The most helpf~il political parties were First- Liberal. Second- Democrats and third Labor.  They were followed in Fourth place by Greens and in Fifth place Karionals. 

  Other Federal MPs who assisted voters with replies. but less frequently \vue:- 

  ALP- 

  Sen. Kim C a n ,  Mr. Mark Latham, Werriwa, Sen. Jacinta Collins, Sen. George Campbell. Ms.  Annette Ellis, Canberra, Mr. Martin Ferguson, Batman, Hon. Dr. Carmen Lawrence.  Fremantle, Ms. Tanya Plibersek, Sydney and Wayne Swan, Lilley. 

  Liberal- 

  Mr. Bruce Bilson, Dunkley, Hon. Jackie Kelly, Lindsay. Hon. Tony Abbott. Warringah. Hon.  .41an Cadman, Mitchell, Sen. Ross Lightfoot, Mr. David Hawker, Wannon. Mr. Michael  Johnson, Ryan, Mr. Peter Lindsay, Herbert, Hon. Trish Worth, Adelaide, hZs. Julie Bishop.  Curtin, tlon. Peter Costello, Higgins. Hon. John Howard. Bennelong and Andrew Southcott. 

  Hoothby. 

  Dernocrats- 

  Scn. Andrew Bartlett 

  Greens- 

  Sen. Rob Brown and Mr. Michael Organ, Cunninghani 

  Sationals- 

  Hon. John Anderson, Gwydir 

  Progressive Alliance- 

  Sen. Meg Lees 

  Some politicians ignore voters 

  Mr. Bloomfield said that any Federal MP not listed above did not, according to FairGO's  records, respond to voters working through it. on any of the issues listed above, appearing to  judge them or the voters as unimportant enough to warrant a response to mail. 

  . . . .3' 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  - 3 -  

  Vote for Windsor a Win for \,.oters 

  There is much debate as to how effective Independents are in parliament. The answer seems  to be "Very Effective" if Tony Windsor is any indication. 

  Windsor has set the Federal Parliamentary Benchmark for responding to voters. His record  has eclipsed the efforts of other MPs by a country mile. 

  Voters from all over Australia have put their concerns to every MP and voters' advocate  FairGO-Voterlobby has monitored who responded. 

  FairGO Director. Mr. Greg Bloomfield offered some comments on how an independent MP  could outpace all other MPs by such a huge margin as Tony Windsor's. 

  "First and foremost an independent is responsible to the voters. not to any party pre-selection  committee and so must perform well for voters to be re-elected. Secondly an Independent can  raise any voter's concerns in parliament whether or not that offends party leaders on either  side of the house. Thirdly. an Independent is not seeking promotion within a party and so can 

  freely campaign for voters regardless ofany party policy. Lastly. no government would he so  silly as to re-ject a good idea or a good policy simply because it was suggested by an  Independent so the Independent with good ideas for Australia has as much chance as anyone  of getting them adopted." 

  Mr. Bloomfield went on to say "None of that means that an Independent will automatically  perform well. There are brilliant performers and hopeless performers in Parliament and many  shades in between. as in all walks of life. What it does mean is that when a high performer  like Mr. Windsor takes office he has every opportunity to both influence policy and address  to the concerns of voters. We are extremely grateful to Mr. Windsor for his outstanding 

  responsiveness during this term. FairCO has no individual or party favourites. We simply  believe that whoever is elected to Government should do what the \,oters uant. Mr. U'indsor  has ccrtainly advocated that during his term in Federal Parliament." 

  MEDIA RELEASE - Further information from Greg Bloomfield Phone 02 9988 3312  Politicians Benchmarked on Actual Past Performance 

  I t  is not what politicians promise before an election that counts, but how they actually 

  perform when elected in dealing with voters' needs which change over time, according to one  of Australia's largest broad-interest community lobbying organisations. 

  Sincc the last Federal election in 200 1. the politically independent Community and  (iovernment Relations Consultant, FairGO-Voterlobby, has. on behalf of voters from around  Australia. put a number of issues and requests before all Federal Members of Parliament. ,411  MPs have had the same opportunity to respond. which enables them to be Benchmarked.  Actual post-election performance has been judged. 

  Consistent with the 20i80 rule, only 20% of politicians responded. SOoi;) failed to do so! Mr.  Greg Bloomfield of Sydney, who founded FairGO i n  1986 and is its National Director. says  "20"/0 is plenty to get the job done and voters' problems solved, because they influence  others and all influence the Government and bureaucracy." 

  . . .4' 

  f o r  further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  Top Ten Federal Politicians, when it comes to responding to voters 

  I" Mr. Tony Windsor, Tainworth (Ind) - by a large margin 

  2"" Sen. Natasha Stott Despoja (AD) 

  3"'Sen. Marise Payne (Lib) 

  4"'Sen Lyn Allison (AD) 

  5"'Sen. Hon. Richard Alston (Lib) 

  6'h Sen. Keny Nettle (Grn) 

  7"' Hon. Dr. Brendan Nelson, Bradfield (Lib) 

  X"' Sen. John Cherry (AD) 

  9'" Scn. Len Harris (PHON) 

  1 [)Ih Sen. Jan McLucas (ALP) & 

  IO"' Hon. Philip Ruddock, Berowra (Lib) 

  Other Federal MPs who responded to voters, but less frequently were:- 

  ALP- 

  Sen. Kim Carr, Opposition Leader, Mr. Mark Latham, Werriwa. Sen. Jacinta Collins. Sen.  Gcorge Campbell, Ms. Annette Ellis, Canberra, MI-. Martin Ferguson, Batman, Hon. Dr.  Carmen Lawrence, Fremantle, Ms. Tanya Plibersek, Sydney and Wayne Su.an. Lilley. 

  Liheral- 

  Mr. Bruce Bilson, Dunkley, Hon. Jackie Kelly, Lindsay, Hon.Tony Abbott, Warringah. Hon.  Alan Cadman, Mitchell, Sen. Ross Lightfoot, Mr. David Hawker, Wannon, Mr. Michael  .Johnson, Ryan. Mr. Peter Lindsay, Herbert, Mon. Trish Worth, Adelaide, Ms. Julie Bishop.  Curtin. Hon. Peter Costello, Higgins, Prime Minister, Hon. John Howard, Bennelong and 

  Andrew Southcott, Boothby. 

  Democrats- 

  Sen. Andrew Bartlett 

  Greens- 

  Sen. Bob Brown and Mr. Michael Organ, Cunninghani 

  Nationals- 

  Hon. John Anderson, Gwydir 

  ..s 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6767 3080 or 0427 668868 

  - 5 -  

  Progressive Alliance- 

  Sen. Meg Lees 

  Yon-respondents Benchmarked at 0. 

  The 80% of MPs NOT listed in the 20% above, although elected and paid by voters, did not.  according to FairGO's records, respond on any of the following important issues raised. as  listed later. Mr. Bloomfield said "Perhaps they did not think that the voters or these issues  \+ere important enough." 

  Party Benchmarks (sum of the score of all MPs in the party, thus favouring larger parties.  but also recognising that not all inembers of a party need to respond if one can solve the  problem) 

  1" Liberal 

  2"" Democrats 

  3"' Labor 

  4"' G reen s 

  5"' Nationals 

  ISSUES RAISED WTTH ALL MPS ON WHICH BENCHMARKS ARE BASED 

  Health services - including nurse education. the doctors' dispute & mental health services 

  Education - School & University funding 

  Nursing home accreditation and performance bonding 

  Road safety - including truck crashes 

  Iraq war 

  Importance of disability funding for children 

  Immigration - asylum seekers; illegal immigrants; Baxter detention centre 

  Capital city over-development 

  Rural senices - neglected regional & rural communities: inadequate country mail 61 phone  services; Regional and Rural Tax concessions to compensate for lack of facilities and  services; Drought & drought assistance; 

  WWI I returned service people seeking proper recognition 

  Parenting skills courses to help children grow into healthy, well ad.justed young Australians  free of abuse, loved and understood, educated with careers and free of criminal tendencies. 

  Zustralia/ US Free Trade Agreement, GATT, G M  food 

  Alcohol sales to minors, alcohol fuelled youth crime, deaths and anti-social beha\ lour. road  5afcty impact 

  . ..6 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  -6- 

  I n  announcing the benchmarking outcomes, Mr. Bloomfield urged "all voters, particularly  those not aligned to any political party, to work with the Parliament as a mhole 

  totvards building better government. Neither group can do it alone". he declared. Mr.  Bloomfield said "bureaucrats are often to blame for undermining rzlationships bet\k.een the  politicians and voters by providing politicians, particularly opposition MPs, smaller parties  and independents, with totally inadequate staffing to do their job properly. Business leaders",  lie said, "would not for a moment tolerate the inadequate staffing leizels provided to Members  of Parliament." 

  E N D  

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

