---
title: "Warped logic to finally free Iraqi refugees."
date: "2004-08-29"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Election, Federal, 2004"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211270539
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HSXD6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle 

 Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Warped logic to finally free Iraqi refugees   

 Senator Kerry Nettle, 29th August 2004 

 Today's announcement by Senator Amanda Vanstone that Iraqi asylum seeker's cases  will be reviewed in light of new information has been welcomed by The Greens but  with Senator Kerry Nettle describing the move "a good decision based on warped  logic." 

 "These Iraqis fled from Saddam Hussein but the government and refused to recognise  them as refugees. Now US and Australian troops are on the ground in Iraq the  government's warped lo gic has decided these Iraqis have become refugees," Senator  Nettle said. 

 "The Minister is wrong if she thinks this eleventh hour change of can salvage the  government's appalling record on refugees at the start of the election campaign. 

 "The Greens will continue to remind the electorate that this is the government that  locks up families who fled Saddam Hussein. 

 "Government policy has been a disaster for Iraqi people. 

 "The best thing we can do for Iraqis is to withdraw the troops that continue to inflame  tens ions in Iraq and to show compassion to those Iraqis who fled from Saddam years  ago and have been locked up in detention centres by this government. 

 "The Iraqis locked up in detention were clearly refugees when they fled from Saddam  and irrespective of the predictable failure of the occupation of Iraq they are still  refugees now and should be freed. 

 "The Greens continue to demand an end to mandatory detention of asylum seekers." 

 

 Contact Jon Edwards - 0428 213 146 

