---
title: "Dog whistles and death penalties: the ideological structuring of Australian attitudes to asylum seekers."
date: "2004-09-29"
creators:
  - "Goot, Murray"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Conservatism"
  - "Attitudes"
  - "Liberalism"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Election, Federal, 2001"
  - "Statistics"
  - "Power base"
  - "Opinion surveys"
  - "Middle East"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271906
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OA0F6%22
---

 

 Dog Whistles and Death Penalties:  The Ideological Structuring of Australian  Attitudes to Asylum Seekers   

 

 

 Professor Murray Goot  Department of Politics and International Relations  Macquarie University   

 

 Tim Sowerbutts  QSRC   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Refereed paper accepted for the 

 Australasian Political Studies Association Conference 

 University of Adelaide 

 29 September - 1 October 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  2

 

 

 

 

 

 Dog Whistles and Death Penalties: 

 The Ideological Structuring of Australian Attitudes to Asylum Seekers1   

 Murray Goot and Tim Sowerbutts   

 

 What drives opposition to asylum seekers who try to reach Australia  by boat? One set of explanations, advanced by those who support  asylum seekers, is organised around attitudes to ethnicity, particularly  to immigration from the Middle East. Another set, advanced by  supporters of the government’s hard line, valorises rule following with  its opposition to ‘queue-jumping’, ‘illegal’ immigration, and ‘people  smuggling’. Using data from the 2001 Australian Election Study (AES),  this paper argues that the popular rejection of asylum seekers is a  product of both sets of values: for the most part, opposition to  immigration, especially from the Middle East, and opposition to  Aboriginal land rights; but also a concern about crime and the need for  harsher punishments, including the re-introduction of the death  penalty. It shows that on a scale of social values, running from pure  liberalism to consistent conservatism, respondents: (a) are not wholly  drawn to one pole or the other, as presupposed by a discourse in which  the ‘elites’ betray ‘the people’; (b) are not clustered around the middle,  as assumed by talk of a ‘non-ideological’ age; but (c) are divided fairly  evenly between liberals, conservatives and those in between. The paper  shows how occupation and education predict positions on the scale. It  shows how positions on the scale predict party support - with One  Nation at one end, and the Greens at the other. And it shows that while  few liberals vote Liberal as many conservatives as liberals vote Labor.   

 

 The arrival in Australian waters of the Norwegian container boat M.V. Tampa,  in August 2001, with its unexpected cargo of asylum seekers, mainly from the  Middle East, was a turning point in Australian politics. Before the  Government’s decision to stop the boat landing, the Coalition was behind in                                                   

 1  This paper was submitted and accepted for presentation at the Australasian Political Studies  Association Conference, Adelaide 2004.  However, the paper was not presented as the registrant was  forced to withdraw at the last moment due to unexpected circumstances.   

  3

 the polls. But Labor vacillated on the issue, Kim Beazley’s leadership was seen  to be weak, and suddenly the Coalition’s fortunes had turned (Goot 2002, 71).  Party strategists (Henderson 2001), and journalists like Paul Kelly (2001a,  2001b), adamant that the Tampa crisis would have ‘little direct bearing on the  election’ because of ‘a lack of fundamental opposition’ between the  Government and Labor, proved badly mistaken. However close the parties,  the electorate clearly preferred John Howard’s handling of the issue to that of  Beazley’s (Goot 2002, 73). The Coalition may not have won on the strength of  this issue - there was the impact of September 11 (Denemark and Devereux  2002, McAllister 2003, 460-61), not to mention the Coalition’s advantage on  matters of economic and financial management (Goot 2002, 76-7; Crosby 2002,  117) - but that asylum seekers contributed significantly there can be little  doubt (Bean and McAllister 2002, 283-84; Solomon 2002, 247, McAllister 2003,  460-61).2 Howard’s handling of the Tampa and his response to the subsequent 

 terror also contributed to the sense that he was a strong leader (Goot 2002, 78;  Crosby 2002, 117).   

 On one view, attitudes to asylum seekers were organised around attitudes to  ethnicity, race or immigration. It was commonly argued, for example, that  opposition to boat people was generated almost entirely by hostility to people  from the Middle East. It was ‘anti-Muslim feeling and fear of the unknown’  that ‘drove the outpourings against the asylum seekers’, one columnist  remarked during the campaign (Day 2001). ‘Decent Muslims who have lived  here happily for years’, a former diplomat noted, ‘suddenly wonder if they  are really welcome’ (Kevin 2001). Looking back at ‘Tampa time’, Donald  Horne (2002) remembered those ‘calls on talkback for the murder of  “ragheads” planning to take over Australia’ and the ‘strong, if ill-defined, race  and ethnic hates’ that were ‘levelled at those desperadoes who were even  ready to throw their children overboard’. Some argued that what was  involved was really broader than this, but not so broad that it, too, could not  be reduced to a single factor - ‘dog-whistle’ politics (Oakes 2001), an appeal to  ‘the white vote’ (Millett 2001), or a prime minister prepared to play the ‘race  card’ (Solomon 2002, 243; Johnson 2002, 37; Marr and Wilkinson 2003, 175-6,  242, 285). Others, like the Economist (2001), thought that what opposition to  the asylum seekers signified was nothing short of opposition to immigration  itself, immigration being an issue that ‘hardens hearts and soften brains like  few other issues’.    

 

 2  However, a fundamental flaw in the analyses of AES data by Denemark and Devereux and also by  McAllister is the failure to factor in economic management as an issue. The particular impact of share-owning on the Coalition vote is analysed by Donaghue et al (2003).   

  4

 Overwhelmingly, those who argued for such positions were sympathetic to  asylum seekers, disturbed by public opinion (‘hysteria’) on the issue, and  highly critical of the positions taken by both the government and the  Opposition - Howard, in particular, standing accused of ‘playing (electoral)  politics’ rather than sticking to political ‘principles’; of pandering to public  opinion, especially as expressed on talkback radio, rather than leading it.  David Marr and Marion Wilkinson’s Dark Victory, the best account of the  politics of the time, exemplifies this line of argument (2003, 175-6). If ever  there was a case of ‘liberal intellectuals … attributing pathological qualities  (such as racism or even xenophobia) to those currents in public opinion with  which they happen to disagree’, said one sceptic, this was it (Burchell 2003,  55).3   

 A very different set of explanations focused not on whom the asylum seekers  were, or where they had come from, but on their mode of arrival. ‘Is there an  overt anti-Muslim feeling in Australia?’ one columnist asked. ‘I don’t think so.  In this country of the fair go, we’ll give anyone a chance - just as long as they  don’t abuse our good nature or our hospitality’ (Schofield 2001). ‘That’s why’,  said one journalist, ‘the immigration debate that has unfolded in Australia …  has been a debate about principle. Principle, not race’ (Sheehan, 2002). The  principle, said another, had to do with ‘queuing up’; adherence to the  convention about queuing was ‘one of the defining elements of the Australian  character’. An ‘abhorrence of queue-jumping’, he intoned, ‘probably explains  why the boatpeople are criticised less for who they are and where they come  from, rather [sic] their indifference to our national conviction that everyone  has to wait their turn’ (Penberthy 2001).4 After September 11, thoughts that  terrorists might have been smuggled onto the boats served to connect  concerns about queue jumping with the scare about national security.    

 

 3  For an important, if neglected, discussion of ‘intolerance’ in Australian history and the social  sciences, including an observation about the Left’s censoriousness of ‘the typical Australian, especially  his [sic] racist intolerance’, see Irving (1985, 35).    

 4  For an analysis of the press releases put out by the Minister of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs,  which argues that ‘asylum seekers are depicted as a consequence of [sic] criminal activity’, see van  Acker and Hollander (2003). That the language of lawlessness gained some purchase is suggested by a  national survey of respondents in paid work or wanting paid work, conducted in September 2003. Told  that ‘a variety of terms’ had ‘been used in recent years to describe the people who have attempted to  come to Australia as refugees’ and asked which terms it was ‘all right or not all right’ to use, 78 per  cent said it was all right to use the term ‘asylum-seekers’ and 45 per cent said it was all right to use  ‘boat people’. But 48 per cent also said that it was all right to use ‘detainees’, 47 per cent said it was all  right to use the term ‘illegals’, and 30 per cent said it was all right to use ‘queue-jumpers’ (Saulwick  2003). For discussions of ‘queue-jumping’ in this context, see Mares (2002) and Gelber (2003); for a  defence of the government’s position, using different terms, see Millbank (2003).   

  5

 Typically, those for whom opposition to asylum seekers was best explained in  these terms supported the government’s case. This is not surprising: the  condemnation of queue jumping, people smuggling and illegal immigration 

 constituted the centrepiece of the government’s case. Though widely accused  of ‘demonising’ asylum seekers - most notably in relation to its spurious  claims that asylum seekers had thrown their children overboard (Weller  2002), but also because of its claims that some of those who had sought to  come ‘illegally’ had criminal records (Clennell and Murdoch 2001) - the  government went out of its way to avoid any suggestion that asylum seekers  were being held at bay because of their religion, nationality or race.    

 ‘What’, one headline asked, if the boatpeople had been ‘white  Zimbabweans?’(Hollis 2001). The question, posed by one of Howard’s least  favourite papers, was rhetorical; no senior politician, whatever their view,  would have been caught out by it. Howard had learnt much since 1988, when  he had supported calls for ‘Asian immigration to be slowed down a little’ -  support which might have cost the Party victory in Victoria, and that certainly  helped cost Howard the Party leadership federally (Rubenstein 1993, 153-5;  Kelly 1994, 460ff; Jupp 2002, 128-9). One could ‘argue a racist position without  necessarily being a racist’, he said in the run-up to the 1996 election, but  arguing for ‘a reversion to a racially discriminatory criteria[sic]’ in  immigration policy was ‘probably arguing against Australia’s interests’, he  advised (Henderson 1998, 17). In the run-up to the 2001 election he would not  countenance anything he regarded as racist. When a West Australian Senator,  Ross Lightfoot, broke Liberal ranks to describe boatpeople as ‘repulsive’  Howard condemned it (Saunders and O’Brien 2001). Countering the charge  that his policies, nonetheless, pandered to a racist electorate, Howard  remarked: ‘I don’t find any racism in the Australian public’ (Marr and  Wilkinson 2003, 279). The charge of racism could also be met by highlighting  support for the government’s policy among asylum seekers themselves.  Immediately after the interdiction of the Tampa, the Daily Telegraph, reputedly  the prime minister’s favourite paper, led its ‘Weekend’ supplement with a  full-page picture of a Vietnamese refugee from the ‘first wave’, in the 1970s,  who ‘now feels we don’t need any more refugees’ (Keogh 2001).   

 The care taken by the Government not to talk about the boatpeople in terms of  their nationality, ethnicity or religion was one reason why Labor could find so  little in what the government was saying with which it might disagree,  especially when the government’s line seemed to resonate with the electorate.  ‘The fact is’, said Con Sciacca, shadow minister for immigration, ‘there is not a  great deal of sympathy among the Australian public - and, indeed, the public  of the whole western world - to [sic] people who jump queues, who come in  here illegally’ (Mares 2002, 117). In responding to the Tampa, ‘the government 

  6

 was seen to be standing up to the people-smugglers and the “illegals”, the  legions of “queue-jumpers” who, in the words of the opposition leader, Kim  Beazley, “flout” Australia’s generosity’ (Mares 2002, 133). ‘Ninety per cent of  Australian voters’, Beazley (2002) was later to claim, ‘do not believe that  illegal people movement should take place from people who have already 

 secured haven - and they are right to think so.’   

 Could the government appeal to both sorts of attitudes at once - to concerns  about Muslims as well as concerns about the integrity of the law? It could.  When Howard declared, in the most widely quoted statement from the  campaign, that ‘we will decide who comes to this country and the  circumstances in which they come’ (Megalogenis 2003, 178-9, for the origin), 

 he left his listeners entirely free to imagine for themselves the criteria by  which ‘we’ would be empowered and the circumstances in which ‘they’  would come.  

 

 What, then, does determine attitudes to asylum seekers: attitudes to where  asylum seekers come from or how asylum seekers get here? Are differences in  attitudes to asylum seekers symptomatic of some wider division in attitudes? 

 And if they are, what are the social correlates and the political significance of  this division?    

 Interpretations of the data 

 

 Social researchers wanting to explore public opinion on asylum seekers have  turned either to public opinion polls conducted on behalf of the press, or to  the 2001 AES, a post-election survey conducted on behalf of a group of  academic social scientists (Bean et al. 2002). The polls report widespread  support for government policy; prior to the election, upwards of two-thirds of  respondents supported the policy of refusing to allow boats carrying asylum  seekers to enter Australian waters or thought the Government was doing ‘a  good job’ in its handling of ‘the refuge problem’ (Goot 2002, 72). And both the  polls and the AES report majorities (a plurality in one case) in favour of the  idea that boats carrying asylum seekers should be turned back (Table 1).    

 TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE 

 

 Betts and the decline in support for asylum seekers: from the first wave to the third  Opposition to asylum seekers, Katherine Betts argues, has been no ‘sudden’  development but ‘a slow and growing trend over the last quarter of a century’  (2001, 44-5). To sustain her argument, she cites polls conducted in 1977 and  1979 (during the ‘first wave’ of boatpeople from Vietnam), 1993 (during the  ‘second wave’), and in 2001 (after the arrival of the Tampa carrying asylum 

  7

 seekers mostly from Iraq and Afghanistan). Polls taken between 1977 and  1979 suggest that most respondents thought a ‘limited’ number of ‘refugees  from Vietnam’ should be ‘allowed to live here permanently’; more than half  (57-61 per cent) of those interviewed by Morgan wanted numbers ‘limited’  rather than ‘any number’ or ‘none’. In 1993, the proportion of respondents in  favour of sending people who had ‘travelled to Australia from Asia in small  boats…straight back where they come from, despite what they say might  happen to them’ (44 per cent) was greater than the proportion in the late 1970s  (between 20 per cent and 32 per cent) that wanted to stop Vietnamese  refugees from ‘staying here’. In 2001, 50 per cent of those interviewed by  Newspoll agreed that the government should ‘turn back all boats carrying  asylum seekers’ (Betts 2001, 40-2).    

 Do these polls chart ‘a slow and growing trend’? The types of people seeking  asylum have varied, as have their origins and circumstances. Those in the first  wave were Vietnamese escaping communism; Australians themselves had  fought in the South to prevent a communist takeover; and the government  regarded them as ‘genuine refugees’ (Marr and Wilkinson 2003, 36). By  contrast, those in the third wave were from the Middle East, had been  brought in by people smugglers, and been condemned by the government as  ‘illegal immigrants’ and ‘queue jumpers’. As Betts herself concedes, the most  recent wave represents ‘a shift from Asian source countries to the Middle  East’, arguably a less popular source; and the presence of people smugglers  ‘feeds the suspicion that rather than being genuine refugees many of the  boatpeople are manipulating the system.’ Besides, it is not clear that rejecting  Vietnamese boatpeople in 1979 or 1993 and rejecting asylum seekers in 2001  meant the same thing. As Betts acknowledges: ‘In the late 1970s many people  could have thought that to turn the boats around would be to condemn  innocent and desperate people to death by drowning. Today a person offering  this response could think “Let the people smugglers take them back to  Indonesia”’ (2001, 45).    

 If opposition to asylum seekers has increased, as Betts maintains, what has  driven it? Opposition to immigration is one driver, she suggests, though this  ‘cannot fully explain current sentiment about boatpeople’, she notes, because  opposition to immigration has declined sharply since the Howard  Government came to office. The ‘experience’ Australians have had of  ‘boatpeople arriving’ is another. The greater their experience, she maintains,  ‘the more unhappy about it’ Australians have become (2001, 44). However,  she advances no evidence connecting this ‘experience’ with changes in the  pattern of polled response. The ‘scale of the movement’ - 2,000 arrivals from  1976 to 1981; over 10,000, from 1999 to 2001 - is another driver.    

  8

 Explaining attitudes to asylum seekers: McAllister’s model  To test a variety of explanations using data from the AES, Ian McAllister turns  to regression analysis. Opposition to immigration is one variable he plugs into  his model. The others cover prejudice (two), procedural fairness (two), and  national identity (two). The most powerful predictor of attitudes to whether  ‘all boats carrying asylum seekers’ should be sent back, he reports, comes  from responses to the question: ‘Do you think the number of people allowed  into Australia nowadays should be reduced or increased?’ Three other  variables also proved significant, one from each of the three sets: respondents’  sense of themselves as personally prejudiced, respect for authority, and pride  in being Australian. Views about the level of prejudice, satisfaction with ‘the  way democracy works in Australia’, and respect for Australian laws and  institutions, added nothing (McAllister 2003, 457).   

 The reasons for McAllister’s choice of variables are unclear. Half the items in  his model - views about level of racial prejudice compared to five years ago,  satisfaction with the way democracy works in Australia, and respect for  Australia’s institutions and laws - have such low zero-order correlations with  attitudes to asylum seekers that they were never likely to explain much.5 At  least one item - how the level of racial prejudice compares with the level five  years ago - conflates a research question with a survey question. And another  item - how respondents’ rate their own prejudice - is of doubtful validity  because of likely social desirability effects (Tourangeau et al. 2000, 269). Yet  other variables that correlated highly with attitudes to asylum seekers - most  notably, variables to do with crime and punishment - are overlooked.    

 Struck by the ‘predominant influence’ of attitudes to immigration, McAllister  set out to discover whether opposition to asylum seekers rested ‘simply on  opposition to more migrants per se’ or whether it rested on ‘more complex  beliefs and perceptions’. To do this he built another model. Along with the  original item on migrant numbers, he included items on whether migrants  ‘increase the crime rate’, are ‘generally good for Australia’s economy’, ‘take  jobs away from people who are born in Australia’, and ‘make Australia more  open to new ideas and cultures’. He also included items on whether Australia  should accept more migrants who are Asian, British, Southern European, or  who come from the Middle East.     

 

 5  The correlation coefficient for the belief that ‘there is more racial prejudice in Australia than there  was five years ago’ (G13) and views about asylum seekers (E4) was .016. The corresponding figures  for satisfaction with the way democracy works in Australia (C7) and views about asylum seekers was  .016 and for ‘respecting Australia’s political institutions and laws’ (G6) and views about asylum  seekers was .070. None of these was statistically significant.     

  9

 The variables in this model explained more of the variance than did those in  the original model: an adjusted R-square of 0.41 compared with the original  0.33. More importantly, the item that stood out now related to the number of  migrants coming from the Middle East; concern about the number of migrants  in general, while still important, was no more powerful than the concern that  migrants increase crime; and the item on migrants taking Australian jobs  mattered as well. Respondents who wanted asylum seekers returned were  ‘neutral about levels of immigration from Asia, Britain or southern Europe’,  and - he might have added - neutral about whether migrants were good for  the economy or made Australia more open to new ideas (McAllister 2003,  458). What, if anything, the other variables in the original model - respect for  authority, and pride in being Australian - would have added to the new  model, he does not say.   

 Betts and the broader significance of attitudes to asylum seekers  Before we turn to our own analysis of the AES, there is another question to  consider: is a focus on asylum seekers too narrow? Betts argues that attitudes  to asylum seekers need to be understood in the context of a broader range of  issues - issues around ‘national identity’. Using the AES data, she reports,  first, that the majority of respondents who said they had voted Labor in 1998  but not in 2001, and who wanted asylum seekers turned back, voted for the  Coalition, whereas those who had voted for the Coalition in 1998 but not in  2001 ‘were not particularly concerned with border control’; second, that this  was part of a wider pattern, with the Coalition doing best - holding its own  supporters and attracting voters from Labor - among those who rated ‘newer  questions’ like ‘asylum-seekers, immigration, defence, terrorism and the  environment’ ahead of ‘economically oriented political issues such as health,  welfare, employment and taxation’; and third, that these ‘newer questions  which are more about long-term social and political values’ and that ‘bear on  the integrity of the nation, both at the symbolic level and in reality’, are  ultimately captured by feelings of closeness to Australia and pride in being  Australian (Betts 2002a, 44, 51-2).    

 The occupational correlates of attitudes to asylum seekers, party choice, and  feelings about Australia, she argues, support this analysis. The occupational  groups that displayed the highest levels of opposition to sending asylum  seekers back were middle class groups - ‘social professionals’ (teachers,  journalists, lawyers, ministers of religion, counsellors, social workers, people  working in the arts, and so on) but also those labelled ‘other professionals’  under the Australian Standard Classification of Occupations (ASCO). Of those  who responded to the item on asylum seekers, exactly half (50 per cent) of the  social professionals opposed sending them back, as did a third (34 per cent) of  ‘other professionals’, compared with just a fifth (21 per cent) for the sample as 

  10

 a whole. Respondents who said they had switched from Labor were  disproportionately ‘middle class’ - nearly a third (30 per cent) being classified  as ‘associate professionals, advanced and intermediate clerks’ and more than  a quarter (27 per cent) as ‘managers, administrators and professionals’. And  while the proportion of social professionals or ‘other professionals’ who felt  ‘very close’ - ‘emotionally attached’ - to Australia was not significantly  different from the sample as a whole, the proportions who felt ‘very proud’ to  be Australian (69 per cent and 70 per cent respectively) were marginally lower  than in the sample as a whole (75 per cent) (Betts 2002a, 45, 49-51).   

 While a search for broader values that might underlie attitudes asylum  seekers is to be applauded, Betts’ search is flawed. Labels like ‘new’ and ‘old’,  used to distinguish the sorts of issues which Coalition and Labor respondents  prioritise, are misleading: ‘new’ issues, like immigration and defence, are just  as old as the ‘old’ issues; and ‘old’ issues, like the GST, are just as new as any  ‘new’ issues on Betts’ list. If we re-order the lists and re-do the sums the  differences between the priorities of Coalition and Labor respondents (30: 28,  ‘new’; 66: 70, ‘old’) largely disappear. As for the differences between ex-Coalition respondents and ex-Labor respondents - hopelessly unreliable  measures6 - they were minimal even before any adjustments were made.    

 Priorities, moreover, are not necessarily the most important connection  between issues and votes; a voter’s judgment about the position of the parties,  or of their competence, may also play a part. Asked, by ACNielsen, which of a  number of issues would have ‘the greatest impact’ on their vote, more  Coalition respondents chose ‘the economy’ (34 per cent) than chose either  ‘refugee policy’ (16 per cent) or the ‘war on terrorism’ (13 per cent). And the  proportion of Labor respondents who chose ‘the economy’ (8 per cent) was  less than the proportion (11 per cent) who chose ‘refugee policy’ or the ‘war  on terrorism’ (Goot 2002, 76).    

 Nor do the occupational correlates necessarily bolster Betts’ case. If, as the  AES data suggest, managers, administrators or professionals display no less a  pride in being Australian than the average respondent, and the propensity to  switch votes away from Labor is determined by level of pride in Australia,  why do managers, administrators and professionals appear to be so heavily  over-represented in ex-Labor ranks? Betts’ argument is based on a series of bi-variate analyses. Even so, since the distinctiveness of social or other 

 

 6  While 47.3 per cent of respondents said they had voted for the Coalition in 1998, the Coalition  actually received only 39.5 per cent of the vote (Bean et al. 2002, item B16). In both McAllister (2003,  Table 2) and Betts (2003, Table 2), the impact of unreliable recall on the turnover matrix is sure to be  considerable; this also undermines the work of Denemark and Devereux (2002).   

  11

 professionals on pride in being Australian pales by comparison with the  distinctiveness of their views in relation to asylum seekers, it is unlikely that  in any multivariate analysis pride in Australia would turn out to be more  important as a vote-switcher than attitudes to asylum seekers. In McAllister’s  analysis, pride in being Australian contributed nothing to an explanation of  why respondents wanted asylum seekers sent back. Without this variable the  pseudo R-square was 0.32; with the variable the pseudo R-square was 0.33  (compare McAllister 2002, Table 6 with McAllister 2003, Table 6).   

 The AES data re-examined 

 

 There is much in the AES data that separates those who supported the idea  that boats carrying asylum seekers be turned back from those who opposed it.  Supporters and opponents even disagreed about who the boatpeople were. Of  those who wanted them sent back, only a quarter (28 per cent) agreed that  ‘most of the people seeking asylum in Australia are political refugees fleeing  persecution in their homeland’; of those who did not want them set back, two-thirds (66 per cent) agreed that they were fleeing persecution. Even so, the  issue of who the boatpeople was not what distinguished supporters from  opponents most sharply.   

 The items that correlate most strongly with attitudes to asylum seekers (all  had correlation coefficients of 0.4 or more) are of three kinds. One cluster, as  might be expected, covers attitudes to immigrants and immigration; a second,  overlooked by both McAllister and Betts, concerns Aborigines; the third, is  about punishment. Most of the items on migrants will already be familiar  from McAllister’s list: whether the number of migrants coming to Australia  has gone too far, whether the number of migrants should be reduced or  increased, whether the government should accept more migrants from Asia or  from the Middle East, whether migrants increase the rate of crime, whether  equal opportunities for migrants have gone too far, whether migrants take  jobs away from people who are Australian-born, and whether it is more  important for migrants to learn what it is to be Australian than to cling to  their old ways. The items on Aborigines include: whether land rights have  gone too far, whether government help for Aborigines has gone too far, and  whether it is better for the well being of Australian society that the aspirations  of Aborigines be recognised. The items on punishment had to do with  whether the death penalty should be reintroduced, and whether people who  break the law should be given stiffer sentences.   

 From a theoretical perspective, the clusters make sense. The first group  includes items central to the idea that what drives attitudes to asylum seekers  are views about migrants in general, and to migrants from Asia or the Middle 

  12

 East in particular. The second group, on attitudes to Aborigines, is useful for  testing claims that attitudes to asylum seekers are a product of a mind-set  focused not just on the migrant ‘other’ but on the indigenous ‘other’. The  third group invokes the government’s position with its rhetorical targeting of 

 queue-jumping and illegal entry.   

 Of these items, which were the most important? Bi-variate analysis, the  approach that Betts’ explores, offers no way forward. Rather, we need to  follow McAllister and build a multivariate model. Among the thirteen items  we have identified, four pairs are made up of items that express similar ideas  and, as one might expect, are strongly related (r > 0.60); to minimise the  problem of co-linearity, we selected the item in each pair that correlated more  strongly with attitudes to asylum seekers and discarded the one that  correlated less strongly. This left nine items.    

 Using the forward step-wise method that shows which variable explains the  greatest amount of variance, which the next, and so on, we entered each of  these into a regression. The item on immigration from the Middle East had  the highest zero-order correlation with the dependent variable; hence, it was  entered first. Adjusting for the effect of this first item, we assessed the partial  correlations of all the other items and the one with the highest value - the item  on the reintroduction of the death penalty - was entered next. And so on.  Based on the standard test of significance for each item (p >.05), all nine  variables in Table 2 were entered into the model. However, after step five,  each additional variable added little; typically, less than one percentage point.  In the interests of parsimony, therefore, we decided to restrict our analysis to  the first five variables. At step 5, the standardised regression coefficients  (betas) for each predictor all have absolute values of about 0.2 (Appendix,  Table A). This indicates that when all are acting together the effect of each is  roughly the same.   

 TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE 

 

 The five variables account for 51 per cent of the variance. This represents a  substantial improvement on McAllister’s models in terms both of power and  parsimony. As Table 2 shows, opinions about taking more migrants from the 

 Middle East accounted for 28 per cent of the variance, or rather more than half  of the total variance explained. Views about reintroducing the death penalty  contributed a net 12 per cent. Opinions about stiffer sentences added another  six per cent. Rather less was added by opinions on the number of migrants  entering the country (four per cent) or views about Aboriginal land rights  (two per cent). That these last items, and more particularly items six through 

  13

 nine, added so little testifies to the fact that they correlated strongly with  items already in the model.   

 Liberalism versus Conservatism: The Ideological Structuring of Attitudes   

 While a combination of four or five items goes a long way to predicting  support for sending asylum seekers back, how was support for the various  permutations and combinations of these attitudes distributed across the  sample? We know that the majority of respondents thought the number of  migrants coming from the Middle East was too many (53 per cent), that the  death penalty should be reintroduced for murder (55 per cent), and that  people who break the law should receive stiffer sentences (72 per cent); we  know that nearly half (46 per cent) agreed that Aboriginal land rights had  gone too far; and we know that about a third (36 per cent) thought the  number of migrants coming to the Australia should be reduced. But what  proportion affirmed all these things? Was it as high as 36 per cent (the  theoretical maximum set by the item with least support)? And what  proportion endorsed none of these things? Was it as high as 28 per cent (the  theoretical maximum, given that no fewer than 72 per cent supported the call  for stiffer sentences)? Was opinion polarised, with most respondents  supporting either liberal or conservative positions across each of these issues;  or was opinion quite evenly spread, with most respondents endorsing two or  three liberal positions and three or two conservative ones? And what of the  occupational and political correlates of these views? Might they help recast  the work of Betts and clarify the ideological bases of the parties?    

 To answer these questions we began by dichotomising each of the five  variables, giving the value 1 to conservative responses and the value 0 to  liberal ones; with three of the items offering conservative response categories  before liberal ones and two offering liberal responses before conservative 

 ones, the items were roughly balanced (see Appendix, Table B). We then  created a table that put numbers against each of the 32 (25) permutations and  combinations that such an array makes possible, assigning the responses to  one of six types on a liberal (0) - conservative (5) continuum (Table 3). At the  conservative end were those who thought there were too many migrants  coming from the Middle East, and who wanted fewer migrants generally;  who felt that the death penalty should be reintroduced for murder, and who  wanted stiffer sentences generally for people who break the law; and who  believed that Aboriginal land rights had gone too far. At the liberal end were  those who supported none of these things.   

 TABLE THREE ABOUT HERE 

 

  14

 The distribution of opinion  The polarisation of opinion was remarkable. More than a quarter (28 per cent)  of those who expressed a view on all five items (all but 8 per cent of the  sample) were either at the liberal end (12 per cent) or the conservative end (16  per cent) of the spectrum. Had the respondents been completely non-ideological, so that their responses to one item bore no relation to their  responses to any other, we would have expected a total of no more than about  6 (100/32 x 2) per cent at these two poles. If we count as liberal or conservative  those who were not ideologically pure, but almost so (that is, took liberal or  conservative positions on at least four of the five items), then the liberal end  (scores of 0 or 1), with 26 per cent of respondents, and the conservative end (4  or 5) with 36 per cent of respondents, attracted more than half as much  support again as the ideologically non-descript middle (2,3), with 38 per cent  of respondents endorsing either two liberal and three conservative positions  or three liberal and two conservative positions (Table 4).    

 That there were more conservatives than liberals should come as no surprise  given the frequencies for the individual items. Consistent conservatives  outnumbered consistent liberals by more than a third. Conservatives more  broadly defined - respondents we might call inconsistent conservatives (0, 1) -  also outnumbered liberals more broadly defined - inconsistent liberals (4, 5) -  by more than a third.    

 What occasioned ideological inconsistency? Among liberals who broke ranks  (13 per cent of the sample), the issue that mattered most frequently was  support for stiffer sentencing; more than half (57 per cent) of those who  scored 1 rather than 0 did so for this reason. Among the much larger number  of conservatives breaking ranks (21 per cent of the sample), two reasons  loomed large for scores of 4 rather than 5: an unwillingness to endorse the  view that Australia should accept fewer migrants (45 per cent of the group),  and a rejection of the idea that Aboriginal land rights had gone too far (25 per  cent).    

 The relationship between liberal or conservative positions and attitudes  towards the boat people was strong. Indeed, as Table 4 shows, it could hardly  have been stronger. Of those who adopted consistently liberal views (0 on the  scale), only 9 per cent supported the view that ‘all the boats carrying asylum  seekers should be sent back’; of those who adopted consistently conservative  views (5 on the scale), no fewer than 95 per cent wanted the boats sent back.  Among inconsistent liberals (1), only 28 per cent favoured sending the boats  back, while among inconsistent conservatives (4) no less than 88 per cent did  so. If ever there was an emblematic issue, asylum seekers are it.   

  15

 TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE 

 

 The occupational structuring of opinion  Support for liberal positions has a very clear occupational structuring - one  that is similar to the occupational structuring of support for asylum seekers  (Betts 2002a, 45). Social professionals (57 per cent of consistent or almost  consistent liberals) were the only occupational group to register a liberal  majority, broadly defined. Professionals (41 per cent), managers and  administrators (31 per cent), and associate professionals (29 per cent) followed  - these last two being not far from the mean (26 per cent). And beyond the  professional and managerial middle class, support for a broadly liberal set of  values was quite atypical; in none of the other groups did the level of support  exceed 18 per cent (Table 5).    

 Expressed in terms of support for conservative positions, the occupational  structuring is not quite so clear; nor is it quite the same as the occupational  structuring of opposition to asylum seekers The most conservative groups  were tradespersons and related workers, and intermediate production and  transport workers - stereotypically, the demographic for talkback hosts like  Alan Jones, John Laws and Howard Sattler (Adams and Burton 1997, 242-5;  Lyons 1991, 12-13, 47); half (51 per cent) the respondents in these categories  were conservatives, broadly defined. Intermediate, clerical sales and service  workers (47 per cent), and elementary clerical, sales and service workers (44  per cent) followed. These groups encompass large sections of small business,  and a fair slab of the working class.    

 Nonetheless, occupational groupings with scores close to the sample mean (36  per cent) range across class: labourers and related workers (33 per cent),  advanced clerical and service workers (33 per cent), managers and  administrators (33 per cent), and associate professionals (32 per cent).  Managers and administrators, together with associate professionals, display  the widest opinion spread of all, being evenly divided between the two ends  and the middle. And whereas the majority of those in every occupation,  except the social professionals, wanted asylum seekers sent back (Betts 2002a,  45), in only two occupational categories was there majority support for  conservative values, broadly defined.    

 TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE   

 Education and ideology  Support for liberal positions also has an educational structuring, though (pace  Betts 1999, 119, 120-4, 126-8) one that cannot be reduced to the presence or  absence of what Betts variously calls more education, higher or tertiary 

  16

 education, or university education. Amongst those with an undergraduate  diploma, or better, liberals easily outnumber conservatives; even a higher  degree does not change things very much. Among those with associate 

 diplomas downward, conservatives easily outnumber liberals; not even the  absence of a post-school qualification matters much (Table 6).    

 Exposure to a university alone cannot explain support for liberal positions.  Most social professionals are liberal and almost all (92 per cent) have  university degrees or undergraduate diplomas; but most (70 per cent) of those  categorised as other professionals have university degrees or undergraduate  diplomas and most are not liberals.    

 TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE   

 Political correlates of liberalism and conservatism  The political correlates of liberalism and conservatism are clear-cut. The  Coalition’s dominance of the conservative end of the spectrum is almost  matched by Labor’s dominance of the liberal end. Among consistent  conservatives, half (55 per cent) reported voting for the Coalition; not much  more than a quarter (28 per cent) recalled voting for Labor. Among consistent 

 liberals, half (49 per cent) reported voting for Labor; only a fifth (20 per cent)  said they had voted for the Coalition. Among inconsistent conservatives  (scores of 4) and liberals (scores of 1) the gap narrowed. Inconsistent  conservatives voted for the Coalition rather than Labor by a margin of 16  percentage points; inconsistent liberals voted for Labor over the Coalition by a  margin of six percentage points (Table 7a).    

 More remarkable is the story in the middle. Here, amongst the least  ideological third of the sample, the Coalition was almost as dominant as it  was amongst the most conservative third. About half (48 per cent) the  respondents who endorsed three liberal and two conservative positions, and  half (50 per cent) who endorsed three conservative and two liberal positions,  voted for the Coalition; not much more than a third (37 and 38 per cent  respectively) reported voting for Labor.    

 Of the minor parties, the Greens and the Democrats did best among liberals;  One Nation did best among conservatives. The Greens did three times better  among consistent liberals than they did across the sample as a whole; the  Democrats did a bit better than twice as well. Indeed, more liberal  respondents reported voteing for the Greens (15 per cent) or Democrats (12  per cent) than for the Liberals or Nationals (20 per cent combined). One  Nation, by contrast, did nearly three times better among conservatives than 

  17

 across the sample as a whole. More conservatives reported voting for One  Nation (9 per cent) than for the Greens and Democrats (4 per cent combined).   

 TABLE 7A ABOUT HERE 

 

 Having asked how liberals and conservatives distributed their votes, we can  turn the question around and ask: how dependent was each of the parties on  liberal and conservative voters? Here, the results are equally striking. Labor, it  appears, was hardly more dependent on liberals (32 per cent), broadly  defined, than on conservatives (29 per cent). However, the Coalition was  much more dependent on conservatives (44 per cent) than on liberals (16 per  cent). Labor (39 per cent) and Coalition (41 per cent) were equally dependent  on the middle ground (Table 7b).   

 TABLE 7b ABOUT HERE 

 

 The parties most dependent on liberals were the Greens and the Democrats;  both opposed the government’s policies on Tampa (Barns 2003, 131). More  than half the vote for both the Greens (61 per cent) and the Democrats (53 per  cent) came from liberals, broadly defined, no less than 40 per cent of the  Green vote and 28 per cent of the Democrat vote coming from consistent  liberals. The party most dependent on conservatives was One Nation, the  party from whom some said the government had taken its Tampa policy (eg,  Marr and Wilkinson 2003, 283). Of those who said they had voted for One  Nation, two-thirds (67 per cent) were conservatives, broadly defined; 39 per  cent were consistent conservatives. In the run-up to the 1998 Queensland  election, two of the items in an ACNielsen poll on which One Nation  supporters stood out were ‘The law should be tough on law breakers’ and  ‘Racial problems in Australia are getting worse’ (Goot 1998, 69).    

 Overall, the parties most dependent on those of liberal disposition, in  descending order, were the Greens, the Democrats and Labor. The parties  most dependent on conservatives were One Nation and the Coalition. Labor  respondents were more liberal and Coalition respondents more conservative  than the sample as a whole.    

 Conclusion 

 

 Our analysis suggests that, in relation to the conflicting interpretations of  public opinion advanced by opponents and supporters of the government’s  position on asylum seekers, each side grasped part of the truth but only part  of the truth; that voters opposed asylum seekers for reasons that had to do 

  18

 with both whom the asylum seekers were and how they had arrived; and that  opposition to asylum seekers was also reflected attitudes to Aborigines.    

 In arguing for these conclusions we need to enter three caveats. First, we have  assumed that attitudes to asylum seekers and to immigrants from the Middle  East are analytically distinct. it might be objected, However, that because  recent asylum seekers have been drawn largely from the Middle East and  because the most publicised arrivals from the Middle East have been asylum  seekers, to insist that opposition to migrants from the Middle East drives  opposition to asylum seekers is not to explain attitudes to asylum seekers but  simply to redescribe them.    

 We have some sympathy for this view. If attitudes to the latest wave of  asylum seekers differ only in degree from attitudes to the first and second  wave of asylum seekers from Vietnam, the idea that hostility to immigrants  from the Middle East is the primary driver of attitudes to the latest wave of  asylum seekers loses some of its force. Nonetheless, we are convinced that the  Middle Eastern origin of this third wave of asylum seekers is significant. We  doubt that public opinion would have been quite so hostile had the asylum  seekers been Vietnamese. We are certain it would have been very different  had the asylum seekers been ‘white’.    

 The second caveat has to do with our assumption that there is real difference  between hostility to people based on their ethnicity and hostility to people  based on what they do. It is sometimes suggested that the language of law 

 and order is really code for getting tough with Aborigines (especially in  Western Australia and Queensland), with other ethnic groups (for example, in  Sydney’s western suburbs), or with strangers on our shores. Nonetheless, we  remain convinced that an analysis of the kind we have undertaken does  distinguish respondents concerned about race - including those who think  they heard a dog whistle - from those concerned about crime.   

 A third caveat concerns the question of causation - of whether we have got  the independent and dependent variables right. We have argued that  opposition to immigrants from the Middle East helped generate opposition to  asylum seekers. But it is possible that the government’s handling of asylum  seekers itself generated opposition to immigration from the Middle East. Did  opposition to immigration from the Middle East increase as a result of the  controversy generated around the asylum seekers? In the 2001 AES, 55 per  cent of respondents wanted fewer migrants from the Middle East. In 1988, the  only similar survey of recent origin, 43 per cent of those interviewed by  AGB:McNair wanted fewer migrants from the Middle East. However, in that  survey the order in which the questions were asked may have encouraged a 

  19

 more sympathetic response (Goot 1991). Even if it did not, we are in no  position to pinpoint when opinions shifted. We suspect that the  Government’s attitude to asylum seekers and its rhetoric did increase the  level of opposition to immigration from the Middle East; it surely increased  the issue’s salience. But we are equally confident that attitudes to Middle  Eastern migrants impacted substantially on attitudes to asylum seekers as  well.   

 To say that attitudes to asylum seekers are driven largely by attitudes to  immigration, especially from the Middle East, attitudes to Aborigines, and  attitudes to punishment, especially to the death penalty, is not necessarily to  say that attitudes to asylum seekers are driven by either ethnocentrism or  authoritarianism. It is possible to want fewer migrants, whether from Asia or  the Middle East, for reasons other than ethnocentrism; this was precisely the 

 position taken in the 1960s by the Immigration Reform Group that wanted the  White Australia policy dismantled but not in a way that would offend the  sensibilities of Australian voters or at a pace that would generate ‘racial’ 

 tensions (Rivett 1962, 116-7; 1992, 16). It is also possible to want tougher  sentencing without subscribing to the entire authoritarianism package; in  the1960s, Doug McCallum observed that ‘Australians often exhibit a number  of features of the authoritarian personality’, including ‘a tendency to be on the  lookout for, and to condemn or punish those who violate conventional  values’, without displaying ‘other traits of the authoritarian personality so  notably’ (1962, 41-42). Nonetheless, we would be surprised if the items we  have isolated were not correlated with both ethnocentrism and  authoritarianism (Ray 1974, 224 for the connection between social  conservatism and authoritarianism; Hughes 1965, 9 for the connection  between social conservatism and ethnocentrism).   

 What our analysis suggests is not just an authoritarian streak, so often denied  in the Australian character (eg, Shanahan 2003), but an authoritarian streak  with a strongly populist inflection - where authority is valorised but where  there is considerable scepticism about the willingness of established  institutions to exercise it. When interviewers for the Morgan poll told  respondents that the Federal Court had ‘ruled that the Government acted 

 unlawfully in detaining the refugees on the Tampa’, and had ‘ordered the boat  people on the Tampa be returned to the Australian mainland’ rather than be  ‘sent by the Australian Government to Nauru and New Zealand for  processing’, no fewer than three-quarters (76 per cent) of the respondents  rejected the decision; they thought the boatpeople should not ‘be returned to  Australian mainland now’ (Morgan 2001). Even before the poll, the  government was attempting to extend the ‘populist themes’ it had ‘cultivated 

  20

 since it came to office’, including the perceived softness of the legal system  generally and asylum seekers in particular’ (Seccombe 2001).   

 Law and order, like border protection, leverages a concern with security that  is both widespread and wide-ranging. This helps explain why, during the  election, the Coalition campaigned hard in many electorates against drugs,  and why Labor, some months after the election, created a shadow portfolio  that covered not only border security’, but ‘gang violence’, ‘organised crime’,  and ‘drug abuse’ (Goot 2002).   

 Our findings demonstrate the ideological structuring of attitudes to social  issues. For a society routinely described as non-ideological (see Kelley 1988,  68, 75, for an argument based on survey research; Henderson 2003, for a  columnit’s view), or as sharing the one ideology - usually utilitarianism (see,  Connell 1968, for a brilliant account of W.K. Hancock’s influence in spreading  the notion that ‘Australian politics is virtually devoid of ideas’, and Collins  1985 for a celebrated restatement of the Benthamite case) - this is surely  remarkable.7  The proportion of liberals, broadly defined, is only a little shy of  the 30 per cent Robert Manne (1998) thinks of as members of an Australian  ‘ideological-cultural’ elite - a group based on ‘employment or employment  prospects, on status and on wealth’ and on their ‘world views’. To the right on  economic policy (something we do not explore), they remain distinctly liberal,  says Manne, in their social views: ‘far less keen on harsh punishment for  serious crime’ than ‘ordinary people’, they are also ‘more sensitive to  questions of Aboriginal justice’, more likely to ‘support current levels of Asian  immigration’ and are more sympathetic to multiculturalism.8    

 The term ‘elite’, used by Manne, is one that our analysis has sought to  challenge. In social theory, the complement of ‘elite’ is ‘mass’. But in  Australia, the distribution of opinion is not of this kind. Contrary to the idea  that liberal views are held by a relatively small number of voters, while most  of the electorate is committed to views which are the polar opposite (Flint  2003, 13, puts the ‘rank and file conservative’ or ‘anti-elite’ vote in 2001 at  about 90 per cent), our analysis points to three broad groupings not two: 

 

 7   Using the 1990 Australian Election Study, McAllister identifies ‘a small proportion’ that can be  classified as ideologues (1992, 94-5). But the test he applies has to do with the match between  respondents’ self-placement on a left-right - not liberal-conservative - scale and their ‘economic view’,  not their view on social issues.    

 8  John Carroll had earlier described an Australian class structure, based on ‘cultural rather than socio-economic level’, in which ‘the upper middle class’ could be identified by its university education and  ‘chosen milieu of opinion, information and entertainment’. This class, which accounted for about 15  per cent of the population, he thought, was readily identifiable by its ‘internationalist, cosmopolitan  vision’; its embrace of ‘new Labor causes’, from economic rationalism to multiculturalism; and its  reliance on the ABC and SBS and, in Melbourne, the Age (Carroll 1997). 

  21

 liberals, conservatives, and those whose views consist of a more or less equal  mix.   

 Of course, the exact percentage of liberals or conservatives in our analysis is  an artefact of several things. One is whether all respondents are included in  the denominator or, as we have done, only those who responded to each of  the items. Another, more substantial, consideration has to do with the  construction of the items themselves; the inclusion of an explicit ‘don’t know’  option in any of the AES items would have significantly increased the  proportion that declined to choose. A third is the number of items in the scale:  the greater the number, the smaller the proportion to be found at either  extreme. Were we to drop back from a five-item to a four-item scale, by  omitting the item on land rights, the proportion at the extremes would rise  and the proportion in the middle would fall.   

 We should also note a certain asymmetry in our scale. To count as  conservative, respondents had to want something changed, some measured  tightened up. Liberals, on the other hand, wanted change in the opposite  direction (more migrants, more migrants from the Middle East, or more land  rights for Aborigines), supported the status quo, or (in relation to tougher  punishments) neither supported change nor opposed it. If one rejects the  notion that liberals could be indifferent on such issues, then our approach  produces an overestimates of the liberal presence, since those who neither  agreed nor disagreed with the idea of having stiffer sentences represented 17  per cent of the sample as did those who neither agreed nor disagreed with the  idea of having the death penalty reintroduced. Rather than thinking of these  respondents as liberals, therefore, one may prefer to think of them in more  neutral terms as not endorsing conservative positions.   

 What cannot be gainsaid is that the scale proved powerful and not only in  second-guessing which respondents would almost certain to approve and  which disapprove sending boatpeople back. First, it revealed a clear  occupational structuring to social attitudes. While social professionals are the  only occupational category for which a liberal disposition is the rule rather  than the exception, substantial minority support for liberal positions can be  said to characterise middle class respondents generally. While liberal  positions are much less common elsewhere - hence the Coalition’s  opportunity for ‘wedge politics’ - among respondents in the largest fraction of  the working class the level of support for liberal values appears to be not very  different from that reported by managers and administrators.    

 Second, and related, it reveals a structuring of attitudes by education. The  argument about a great cultural divide in Australia, typified by divisions over 

  22

 immigration and opened up by Betts, is important. But our analysis suggests  that the divide is not a simple one between ‘university-educated people  usually with professional qualifications’ - Betts ‘new class’ (1999, 3) - and  ‘lower-class parochials’ - or ‘the rest of society’, to quote the front cover of her  book. Social professionals, typically, are university-educated and liberal;  ‘other professionals’ are university educated but not liberal.    

 Third, it establishes how liberals and conservatives cast their votes and, just as  importantly, the extent to which each of the parties depended on liberal and  conservative voters. Those categorised as liberals voted disproportionately for  the Greens and the Democrats and, to a lesser extent, Labor; conservatives  voted disproportionately for One Nation and, to a lesser extent, the Coalition.  Labor benefited less from liberals than the Coalition benefited from  conservatives. This contrast is more striking when the question is turned  around: whereas the Labor vote drew almost equally on liberals, broadly  defined, on conservatives, and on those in between, the Coalition’s vote drew  mostly on conservatives, broadly defined, and to a lesser extent on those who  were neither liberal nor conservative; it drew relatively little on conservatives,  whether narrowly or broadly defined.      

 The existence of a divide within Labor’s social base is not new. Talk of ‘the  disappearance of consensual positions on social issues that are now dividing  the traditional constituencies of social democracy’ (Wilson 2002, 17), as if it  were, is therefore misleading. Simon Jackman’s analysis, based on the 1996  AES, showed that Labor identifiers exhibited more ‘ideological diversity’ in  relation to race than Liberal and National identifiers (1998, 180). Forty years  ago, Alan Hughes noted that on ‘conscience radicalism’ - including ‘a death  penalty for murder’ and keeping the White Australia policy ‘as it is now’ -  Labor voters interviewed in Melbourne, and subsequently Sydney, presented  a ‘sharp cleavage’: educated supporters tended to be ‘radical’, but its ‘working  class supporters, especially those less interested in politics’, were ‘more  conservative’ (1964, 16-17; 1969, 95-6; 1975, 102-3, and Appendix D). And in  the 1920s, Vere Gordon Childe wrote eloquently about the ‘Heterogeneity of  the elements within the Labour Party’- the liquor trade versus the  ‘temperance party’, nationalists against internationalists, the attitudes of the  petit-bourgeoisie versus those of the industrial proletariat (1923, ch. V).    

 On the Coalition side, it is not only liberals within the Liberal Party who have  been marginalised, as Party members or ex-members like Chris Puplick (1994)  were lamenting prior to Howard’s accession to the leadership and those like  Greg Barnes (2003) have been lamenting ever since; the Party’s dependence  on the votes of social liberals is marginal as well. To what extent the 

  23

 dominance of conservatives in the government and the paucity of liberals  voting for the Party are related we cannot say.    

 What of the minor parties? The idea that they simply pick up a ‘protest’ vote  can be discounted: ideologically, those who vote for the Greens, at one end of  the spectrum, or for the Democrats, are quite different from those who vote  One Nation, at the other (see also Goot and Watson 2001). Nor are these  parties built around single issues. ‘The single issue tag went’, says Greens  leader Senator Bob Brown, ‘when we took our stand over the Tampa’ (Wright  2003). Perhaps. But what is clear that support for the minor parties has to be  understood, to a greater or lesser extent, in terms of issues of social liberalism  or conservatism.    

 In the hostility expressed towards asylum seekers, some commentators see ‘a  populist backlash’ against migrants in general (Hewett 2001, Devine 2002).  This is a misreading. Surveys suggest that opposition to immigration has  actually declined since the Coalition came to office (Goot 2000, Betts 2002b,  26). And while opposition to asylum seekers is correlated with opposition to  immigration, it does not follow that widespread opposition to asylum seekers  means widespread support for cuts to immigration. John Hirst argues that the  government’s stand on ‘illegal immigration’ has actually boosted support for  legal immigration (2002, 91). He may not be right, but there is no evidence  that its stand has done it any harm.    

 REFERENCES   

 Adams, Phillip and Burton, Lee (1997) Talkback: Emperors of the Air, St Leonards, NSW: Allen  & Unwin.   

 Barns, Greg (2003) What’s Wrong With The Liberals? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   

 Bean, Clive, David Gow, and Ian McAllister (2002) ‘Australian Election Study, 2001: User’s  Guide for the Machine-Readable Data File’, SSDA Study No. 1048, Canberra: Social Science  Data Archives, ANU.  

 

 Bean, Clive and Ian McAllister (2002) ‘From Impossibility to Certainty: Explaining the  Coalition’s Victory in 2001’, in John Warhurst and Marian Simms (eds) 2001: The Centenary  Election. St.Lucia: University of Queensland Press.   

 Beazley, Kim (2002) ‘Refugees: Labor has nothing to apologise for’, Age 26 September.   

 Betts, Katherine (1999) The Great Divide: Immigration Politics in Australia, Sydney: Duffy &  Snellgrove,   

 Betts, Katherine (2001) ‘Boatpeople and Public Opinion in Australia’, People and Place 9 (4): 34-48. 

  24

 

 Betts, Katherine (2002a) ‘Boatpeople and the 2001 Election’, People and Place 10 (3): 36-54.   

 Betts, Katherine (2002b) ‘Immigration and Public Opinion: Understanding the Shift’, People  and Place 10 (4): 24-37.   

 Burchell, David (2003) Western Horizon: Sydney’s Heartland and the Future of Australian Politics.  Melbourne: Scribe.   

 Carroll, John (1997) ‘The middle-class quake’, The Australian’s Review of Books, 12 February: 18-19.   

 Childe, Vere Gordon (1923/1964) How Labour Governs, Second edition, Parkville: Melbourne  University Press.   

 Clennell, Andrew and  Lindsay Murdoch (2001) ‘Bad apples could barely make up a cricket  team’, Sydney Morning Herald, 20 September.   

 Collins, Hugh (1985) ‘Political Ideology in Australia: The Distinctiveness of a Benthamite  Society’, in Stephen R. Graubard, ed. Australia: The Daedalus Symposium, North Ryde, NSW:  Augus & Robertson.   

 Connell, R.W. (1968/1974) ‘Images of Australia’, Quadrant 12 (2): 9-19; reprinted in Don  Edgar, ed. Social Change in Australia, Melbourne: Cheshire.   

 Crosby, Lynton (2002) ‘The Liberal Party’, in John Warhurst and Marian Simms (eds) 2001:  The Centenary Election. St.Lucia: University of Queensland Press.   

 Day, Mark (2001) ‘Land waiting for population’, Daily Telegraph 10 October.   

 Denemark, David and Joanna Devereux (2002) ‘TV Coverage and International Issues in the  2001 Australian Federal Election’, AQ 74 (6): 8-16.   

 Devine, Miranda (2002) ‘When allegations go overboard’, Sydney Morning Herald 27 June.   

 Donaghue, Jed, Bruce Tranter and Robert White (2003) ‘Homeownership, Shareownership,  and Coalition Policy’, Journal of Australian Political Economy, 52: 58-82.   

 Economist (2001) ‘Welcome stranger’, The Economist, 8-14 September: 11-12.   

 Flint, David (2003) The Twilight of the Elites. North Melbourne: Freedom Publishing.   

 Gelber Katherine (2003) ‘A Fair Queue? Australian Public Discourse on Refugees and  Immigration’, Journal of Australian Studies, No. 77: 23-30, 181-4.   

 Goot, Murray (1991) ‘Public Opinion as Paradox: Australian Attitudes to the Rate of  Immigration and the Rate of Asian Immigration, 1984-1990’, International Journal of Public  Opinion Research, 3 (3): 277-294.   

  25

 Goot, Murray (1998) ‘Hanson’s Heartland: Who’s for One Nation and Why’, in Nadine  Davidoff, ed. Two Nations: The Causes and Effects of the Rise of the One Nation Party in Australia,  Melbourne: Bookman.   

 Goot, Murray (2000) ‘More “Relaxed and Comfortable”: Public Opinion on Immigration  under Howard’, People and Place 8 (3): 46-60.    

 Goot, Murray (2002a) ‘Turning Points: For Whom the Polls Told’, in John Warhurst and  Marian Simms (eds) 2001: The Centenary Election. St.Lucia: University of Queensland Press.   

 Goot, Murray (2002b) ‘Despite the alarm bells and whistles, tide is turning on immigration’,  Sydney Morning Herald 30 August.   

 Goot, Murray and Ian Watson (2001) ‘One Nation’s Electoral Support: Where Does it Come  From, What Makes it Different, and How Does it Fit?’, Australian Journal of Politics and History,  47 (2): 159-91.    

 Henderson, Gerard (1998) Menzies’ Child: The Liberal Party of Australia, revised edition,  Sydney: HarperCollins.   

 Henderson, Gerard (2003) ‘Rallying around the flag is no jingoism’, Sydney Morning Herald, 8  April   

 Henderson, Ian (2001) ‘Libs relish distraction from GST scam: Labor’, Australian, 3 September.   

 Hewett, Jennifer (2001) ‘Skipper Howard all at sea without a moral compass’, Sydney Morning  Herald, 31 August.   

 Hirst, John (2002) ‘Correspondence’, Quarterly Essay, No. 6: 89-91.   

 Hollis, Colin (2001) ‘What if they were white Zimbabweans?’ Age, 31 August.   

 Horne, Donald (2002) ‘Best-case scenario’, Sydney Morning Herald, Spectrum, 9-10 November.   

 Hughes, Alan (1964) ‘Political Attitudes in a Sample of Melbourne Voters: A Survey During  the Federal Elections of 1963’. Canberra: APSA Conference (mimeo)   

 Hughes, Alan (1965) ‘Authoritarian Orientation, Alienation and Political Attitudes in a  Sample of Melbourne Voters’. Sydney: APSA Conference (mimeo)   

 Hughes, Alan (1969) ‘Political Review’, Australian Quarterly, 41 (3): 87-98.   

 Hughes, Alan (1975) Psychology and the Politics of Experience, Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press.   

 Irving, T.H. (1985) ‘Sources of Australian Intolerance: Some Reflections’, in George Shaw, ed.  A Pluralist Australia? Brisbane: Australian Studies Centre, University of Queensland.   

 Jackman, Simon (1998) ‘Pauline Hanson, the Mainstream, and Political Elites: The Place of  Race in Australian Political Ideology’, Australian Journal of Political Science, 33 (2): 167-88.   

  26

 Johnson, Carol (2002) ‘The 2001 Campaign: The Ideological Context’, in John Warhurst and  Marian Simms (eds) 2001: The Centenary Election, St.Lucia: University of Queensland Press.   

 Jupp, James  (2002) From White Australia To Woomera. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press.   

 Kelley, Jonathan (1988) ‘Political Ideology in Australia’, in Jonathan Kelley and Clive Bean,  eds Australian Attitudes. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.    

 Kelly, Paul (1984) The End of Certainty. Revised edition. St Leonard’s, NSW: Allen & Unwin.   

 Kelly, Paul (2001a) ‘There’s no way out for a pale imitation’, Weekend Australian, 1-2  September   

 Kelly, Paul (2001b) ‘How PM’s ship came in’, Weekend Australian, 22-23 September   

 Keogh, Kylie (2001) ‘All in the same boat’, Daily Telegraph, September 1   

 Kevin, Tony (2001) ‘Spurn the poison unleashed by hatred’, Australian Financial Review, 19  September.   

 Lyons, John (1991) Laws: A life of Power, Sydney: Random House Australia.   

 McAllister, Ian (1992) Political Behaviour. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire.   

 McAllister, Ian (2002) ‘Border Protection, the 2001 Australian Election and the Coalition  Victory’, Australasian Political Studies Association Conference, ANU, Canberra, 2-5 October.   

 McAllister, Ian (2003) ‘Border Protection, the 2001 Australian Election and the Coalition  Victory’, Australian Journal of Political Science, 38 (3): 445-63.    

 McCallum, Douglas (1962) ‘The State of Liberty’, in Peter Coleman, ed. Australian Civilisation.  Melbourne: F.W. Cheshire.   

 Manne, Robert (1998/2001) ‘The two Australian nations’, Age, 30 March; reprinted in The  Barren Years: John Howard and Australian Political Culture, Melbourne: Text   

 Mares, Peter (2002) Borderline: Australia’s Response to Refugees and Asylum Seekers in the Wake of  the Tampa, Second edition, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.   

 Marr, David and Wilkinson, Marion (2003) Dark Victory. Crows Nest, NSW: Allen & Unwin.   

 Megalogenis, George (2003) Fault Lines: Race, Work and the Politics of Changing Australia,  Melbourne: Scribe   

 Millbank, Adrienne (2003) ‘Dark Victory or Circuit Breaker: Australia and the International  Refugee System Post Tampa’, People and Place 11 (2): 24-38.   

 Millett, Michael (2001) ‘White fringe fury feeds Labor’s fall’, Sydney Morning Herald 28-29  December.   

  27

 Morgan (2001) Morgan Poll Finding No. 3446, 19 September, www.roymorgan.com   

 Oakes, Laurie (2001) ‘   ‘, The Bulletin, 13 November.   

 Puplick, Christopher (1994) Is The Party Over? The Future of the Liberals. Melbourne: Text  Publishing   

 Ray, John J. (1974) ‘Are the Workers Authoritarian, Conservative or Both?’, in John J. Ray, ed.  Conservatism as Heresy: An Australian Reader, Sydney: Australian and New Zealand Book  Company   

 Penberthy, David (2002) ‘Jumping the queue just isn’t tolerated’, Daily Telegraph, 21  September.   

 Rivett, Kenneth ed. (1962) Immigration: Control or Colour Bar?  Revised and enlarged, Parkville,  Vic: Melbourne University Press.   

 Rivett, Ken (1992) ‘The Immigration Reform Movement’, in Nancy Viviani, ed. The Abolition of  the White Australia Policy: The Immigration Reform Movement Revisited, Centre for the Study of  Australia-Asia Relations, Griffith University, Queensland.   

 Rubenstein, Colin (1993). Immigration and the Liberal Party of Australia’. In The Politics of  Australian Immigration, eds. J. Jupp and M. Kabala. Canberra: Australian Government  Publishing Service.   

 Saulwick (2003) ‘Jobfutures/Saulwick Employee Sentiment Survey’, No. 10,  www.jobfutures.com.au   

 Schofield, Leo (2001) ‘War of words’, Sunday Telegraph, 9 September.   

 Seccombe, Mike (2001) ‘Immigration looms as election weapon’, Sydney Morning Herald, 3  September.   

 Shanahan, Dennis (2003) ‘Howard has more to gain from crisis’, Australian, 23 March   

 Sheehan, Paul (2002) ‘Paltry debate places race above principle’, Sydney Morning Herald, 23  September.   

 Solomon, David (2002) ‘Election Race or Race Election?’ in D. Solomon (ed) Howard’s Race:  Winning the Unwinnable Election, Sydney: HarperCollins.   

 Tourangau, Roger, Rips, Lance, J. and Rasinski, Kenneth (2000) The Psychology of Survey  Response, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   

 van Acker, Elizabeth and Robyn Hollander (2003) ‘Protecting Our Borders: Ministerial  Rhetoric abd Asylum Seekers’, Australian Journalism Review 25 (2): 103-19.    

 Weller, Patrick (2002) Don’t Tell the Prime Minister. Melbourne: Scribe.   

 Wilson, Shaun (2002) ‘The Emergence of the Green Electorate in Australia’, AQ, 74 (6): 17-22.   

  28

 Wright, Tony (2003) ‘The green house effect’, Bulletin, 4 November.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 1 Whether Australia should turn back boats carrying asylum seekers, 2001-2002 (percentages)   

 

 Date 

 

 Poll 

 Accept  none 

 Accept  some 

 Accept  all 

 

 DK 

 

 n 

 

 Aug. 31 - Sept. 2, 2001 Newspoll 50 38   9   3 (1200) 

 Sept. 16-18, 2001 Morgan 68 na 20 12   (853) 

 Oct. 26-28, 2001 Newspoll 56 33   8   3 (1200) 

 Nov. 2001 - Apr. 2002 AES 61 20  20* (2010) 

 Aug. 30 - Sept. 1, 2002 Newspoll 48 38 10   4 (1200) 

 

 

 na: not asked   * Includes neither    

 Questions:  ‘Thinking now about asylum seekers or refugees trying to enter Australia illegally. Which one of the  following are you personally most in favour of with regards to boats carrying asylum seekers entering  Australia? Do you think Australia should: turn back all boats carrying asylum seekers; allow some  boats to enter Australia depending on the circumstances; allow all boats carrying asylum-seekers to  enter Australia?’ [Rotated] (Newspoll)   

 ‘Recently there has been a lot of discussion about the refugees arriving in Australia by boat. Do you  feel the Australian Government should accept those refugees arriving in Australia by boat or put those  boats back to sea?’ (Morgan)   

 ‘Here are some statements about general social concerns. Please say whether you strongly agree, agree  [neither agree nor disagree 18%], disagree or strongly disagree with each of these statements. …All  boats carrying asylum seekers should be sent back. (AES)   

 Source: 

  29

 Newspoll.com.au, for the Australian 4 September 2001, 31 October 2001, and 5 September 2002;  roymorgan.com.au, Finding No. 3446, 19 September 2001; and Bean, Gow and McAllister, 2002, 72-73.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 2 Items that predict support for sending all asylum seekers back: a step-wise regression model,  Australian Election Study 2001   

 

 

 Zero  order  R 

 

 

 Cumulativ e 

 Adjusted     R square   

 

 

 Additional  variance  explained  % 

 

 

 Standardised  Beta  Coefficients* 

 

 F.8    Governments should accept more migrants           who are from the Middle East   

 - 0.53 

 

 .283 

 

 28.4 

 

 -0.195 

 E.4    The death penalty should be reintroduced for            murder 

 

   0.50  

 

 .396 

 

 11.3 

 

  0.178 

 E.4    People who break the law should be given           stiffer sentences 

 

   0.48 

 

 .448 

 

   5.2 

 

  0.224 

 F.6    The number of immigrants allowed into             Australia nowadays should be increased             (a lot/a little) 

 - 0.52  .484 

 

   3.7 

 

 -0.208 

 E.2    Aboriginal land rights have gone too far   0.52 .509   2.4  0.185 

 

 F.7     Immigrants increase the crime rate   0.50 .520   1.2 0.140 

 G.10  It is more important for new migrants to learn            what is to be Australian than to cling to their             old ways 

   0.43 .527 

 

   0.7 

 

 0.099 

 F.7     Immigrants take jobs away from people who            are born in Australia 

 

   0.45 

 

 .529 

 

   0.3 

 

 0.073 

 G.10  It is important for the well-being of Australian            society that Aboriginal aspirations be             recognised 

 -0.34  .531  

 

   0.2 

 

 -0.051 

  30

 

 

 * For the first five variables the standardised Beta coefficients are as at step 5; for each of the other  variables, they are as at step 6 (Migrants increase crime), step 7 (important that migrants learn to be  Australian), etc.  

 

 Source: Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 3 Patterns of response to combinations of items comprising a liberal-conservative scale,  Australian Election Study, 2001    

 

 Position on  Lib-Cons  scale* 

 

 Too many  Mid-East  migrants 

 

 Restore  death  penalty 

 

 Stiffer  penalties  needed 

 

 Too many  immigrants 

 

 Aboriginal  land rights  gone too far   

 

 

 % 

 

 0  No  No  No  No  No  12.2  

 1  No  No  No  No  Yes  1.7  

 1  No  No  No  Yes  No  0.7  

 2  No  No  No  Yes  Yes  0.1  

 1  No  No  Yes  No  No  7.6  

 2  No  No  Yes  No  Yes  3.3  

 2  No  No  Yes  Yes  No  1.0  

 3  No  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  0.6  

 1  No  Yes  No  No  No  1.5  

 2  No  Yes  No  No  Yes  0.8  

 2  No  Yes  No  Yes  No  0.1  

 3  No  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  0.3  

 2  No  Yes  Yes  No  No  5.4  

 3  No  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  5.5  

 3  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  2.0  

 4  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  2.0  

 1  Yes  No  No  No  No  1.8  

 2  Yes  No  No  No  Yes  0.9  

 2  Yes  No  No  Yes  No  0.8  

  31

 3  Yes  No  No  Yes  Yes  0.8  

 2  Yes  No  Yes  No  No  4.0  

 3  Yes  No  Yes  No  Yes  3.5  

 3  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  No  2.3  

 4  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  2.4  

 2  Yes  Yes  No  No  No  0.7  

 3  Yes  Yes  No  No  Yes  1.3  

 3  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  No  0.4  

 4  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  Yes  1.8  

 3  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  No  4.3  

 4  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  9.2  

 4  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  5.1  

 5  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  15.9  

 

 

 * Where 0 represents a consistently liberal set of responses and 5 represents a consistently conservative  set of responses   

 Source: Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 4 Relationship between position on liberal-conservative scale and support for sending back  asylum seekers, Australian Election Study, 2001 (percentages)    

 

 

 

 Liberal-Conservative Scale 

 

 Return asylum seekers 

 

 Position 

 

 Proportion   

 n 

 

 Favour 

 

 Oppose     

 

 0 Liberal 12.2 (223)   9.0 91.0 

 1  13.3  (245)  27.8  72.2  

 2  17.1  (314)  52.2  47.8  

 3  21.1  (389)  71.5  28.5  

 4  20.5  (378)  88.1  11.9  

 5 Conservative 15.9 (294) 94.6  5.4 

 

 Total  100.1  (1843)    

 

 

 

 Source: Table 3; and Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002   

  32

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 5 Relationship between position on liberal-conservative scale and occupation, Australian  Election Study, 2001 (percentages)    

 

 

 Occupation Position on Liberal-Conservative scale* 

 

  0  1  2  3  4  5  n  

 

 Managers  &  administrators  16.5  14.2  13.8  22.5  20.2  12.8  (218)  

 Social professionals 32.5 24.5 18.4 10.4   9.2   4.9 (163) 

 Other  professionals  19.8  20.9  18.6  16.4  15.3    9.0  (177)  

 Associate  professionals  13.2  15.5  18.4  21.3  16.1  15.5  (174)  

 Tradespersons & related workers   7.2   6.6 15.7 19.3 26.5 24.7 (166) 

 Advanced clerical & service workers   2.8   6.9 31.9 25.0 23.6   9.7   (72) 

 Intermediate clerical, sales & service workers   7.5 10.6 16.5 18.1 25.6 21.7 (254)  Intermediate production & transport workers   7.2   7.2 12.0 23.2 25.6 24.8 (125) 

 Elementary clerical, sales & service workers    6.3 11.0 18.1 20.5 26.0 18.1 (127) 

 Labourers & related workers   4.0 13.5 16.7 32.5 19.0 14.3 (126) 

 

 

 * Where 0 represents a consistently liberal set of responses and 5 represents a consistently conservative  set of responses.   

  33

 Source: Table 3; and Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 6 Relationship between position on liberal-conservative scale and educational level, Australian  Election Study, 2001 (percentages)    

 

 

 Educational level Position on Liberal-Conservative scale* 

 

  0  1  2  3  4  5  n  

 

 Postgraduate degree or postgraduate diploma 32.3 20.4 16.2 16.2 10.2   4.8 (167)  Bachelor degree (including Honours)  26.0 25.0 19.1 13.7   9.3   6.9 (204) 

 Undergraduate diploma 21.7 20.0 20.0 11.7 21.7   5.0   (60) 

 Associate diploma   8.5 12.0 20.5 26.5 20.5 12.0 (117) 

 Trade qualification   4.9 10.1 17.0 21.0 23.3 23.6 (347) 

 Non-trade qualification   8.0 11.1 17.7 22.6 23.0 17.7 (226) 

 No qualification since leaving school   8.7 10.1 15.0 23.0 24.0 19.1 (612) 

 

 

 * Where 0 represents a consistently liberal set of responses and 5 represents a consistently conservative  set of responses.   

 Source: Table 3; and Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002, 189.   

 

 

 

  34

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 7A Relationship between position on liberal-conservative scale and reported vote, Australian  Election Study, 2001 (percentages)   

 

 

 Lib-Cons Scale Greens AD ALP LNP ONP Other n 

 

 0 Liberal 14.5 12.2 48.9 19.9 0.9 3.6 (221) 

 1   8.2 10.8 40.1 34.5 1.7 4.7 (232) 

 2   5.5  5.5 37.0 48.3 1.0 2.7 (334) 

 3   2.2  4.3 37.8 49.7 3.0 3.0 (370) 

 4   2.6  2.0 30.1 56.5 4.8 4.0 (352) 

 5 Conservative   1.4  2.5 28.1 55.4 8.6 3.6 (264) 

 

 Reported vote  5.0  5.6 36.3 46.0 3.5 3.6  (1745) 

 

 

 Source: Table 3; and Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  35

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table 7B Reported vote by position on liberal-conservative scale, Australian Election Study, 2001  (percentages)    

 

 

 

 Lib-Cons scale Greens AD ALP Total* LNP  ONP  Other  

 

 0 Liberal  39.8 27.6 17.1 12.7   5.5   3.3 12.7 

 1  21.6  25.5  14.7  13.3 10.0   6.6 17.5 

 2  18.2  16.3  17.1  16.7 17.6  4.9  12.7  

 3   9.1 16.3 22.1 21.2 22.9  18.0  17.5  

 4  10.2   7.1 16.7 20.2 24.8  27.9  22.2  

 5 Conservative   4.5   7.1 12.3 15.9 19.2  39.3  17.7  

 

 n  (88)  (98)  (633)  (1745) (802)  (61)  (63)  

 

 

 * Sample mean, against which parties to the left are relatively liberal and parties to the right relatively  conservative.   

 Source: Table 3; and Bean, Gow and McAllister 2002.   

 

  36

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Appendix   

 Table A. Liberalism-conservatism scale   

 New  variable 

 Original  variable 

 YES  Score = 1 

 NO 

 Score = 0 

 

 No data 

 

 Too many Mid-East migrants  F.8 Whether  govt should 

 accept more or  less migrants  from Middle  East  

 4 = Accept  some less  5 = Accept a lot  less 

 1 = Accept a lot  more  2 = Accept  some more  3 = Stay about  the same 

 -1 = Missing  data 

 

 Restore death  penalty  E.4 Reintroduce  death penalty for 

 murder  

 1 = Strongly  agree  2 = Agree 

 3 = Neither  agree nor  disagree  4 = Disagree  5 = Strongly  disagree 

 -1 = Missing  data 

 

 Stiffer penalties  needed  E.4 Stiffer  sentences for 

 people who  break the law 

 1 = Strongly  agree  2 = Agree 

 3 = Neither  agree nor  disagree  4 = Disagree  5 = Strongly  disagree 

 -1 = Missing  data 

 

  37

 Too many  immigrants 

 F.6 Whether the  number of  migrants should  be increased or  decreased 

 4. Reduced a  little  5. Reduced a lot 

 5. Increased a  lot  4. Increased a  little  3. Remain about  the same as it is   

 -1 = Missing  data 

 

 Aboriginal land  rights gone too  far 

 E.2 Whether  Aboriginal land  rights have gone  too far 

 1.Gone much  too far  2. Gone too far 

 3. About right  4. Not gone far  enough  5. Not gone  nearly far  enough 

 -1 = Missing  data 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Table B. Standardised coefficients (betas)   

  Step 

   1  2  3  4  5 6  7  8  9  

 F.8 Accept more migrants from the Middle East -0.533 -0.379 -0.333 -0.240 -0.195 -0.166 -0.147 -0.147 -0.147 E.4 Reintroduce the death penalty for murder   0.370 0.271 0.225 0.178 0.156 0.149 0.142 0.137

 E.4 Have stiffer sentences for law breakers     0.259 0.244 0.224 0.213 0.207 0.207 0.207

 F.6 Increase the number of immigrants       -0.231 -0.208 -0.167 -0.167 -0.144 -0.138

 E.2 Aboriginal land rights have gone too far         0.185 0.169 0.155 0.155 0.129

 F.7 Immigrants increase crime           0.140 0.118 0.094 0.092

 G.10 Important that new migrants learn to be Australian             0.099 0.095 0.098

 F.7 Immigrants take jobs from Aust               0.073 0.077

 G.10 Important that Aborigines be recognised                 -0.051

 

 R Square Change 28.4% 11.3% 5.2% 3.7% 2.4% 1.2% 0.7% 0.3% 0.2%

 R Square 0.284 0.397 0.449 0.486 0.509 0.521 0.528 0.531 0.533

 Adjusted R square 0.283 0.396 0.448 0.484 0.508 0.52 0.527 0.529 0.531

 

 

 

