---
title: "Diplomatic appointment: Ambassador to Iraq."
date: "2004-08-27"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Iraq"
  - "Appointments"
  - "Australian ambassadors"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211270516
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Y5KD6%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER FA129             27  August  2004  

 

 

 

 

 DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT: AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ   

 I  have  today  announced  the  appointment  of  Howard  Brown  as  Australia’s  Ambassador  to   Iraq.     

 Mr  Brown  will  replace  Neil  Mules  AO  who  has  been  Australia’s  senior  diplomatic   representative  in  Iraq  since  May  2003  and  Ambassador  since  29  June  2004  following  the   historic  transfer  of  authority  to  the  sovereign  Iraqi  Interim  Government.   Mr  Brown  is   expected to take up his appointment in October 2004.   

 Australia  is  committed  to  working  with  the  Iraqi  Interim  Government  to  build  a  stable,   prosperous  and  democratic  Iraq.   Australia  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  Iraq’s   rehabilitation  and  humanitarian  needs,  having  committed  over  $125  million  in  assistance.   This assistance includes $45 million directed towards reconstruction activities focused on the  agriculture sector and $25 million for the International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq  to support efforts to strengthen governance and civil society, provide electoral assistance and  support refugees and IDPs.  Australian technical advisers will continue to play an important  role  in  advising  the  new  government  in  areas  such  as  agriculture,  donor  coordination,  the   electricity sector and security policy.  

 As a contributor to the Multinational Force in Iraq, Australia is helping to establish a secure  environment  to  facilitate  Iraq’s  political  and  economic  development.   Part  of  Australia’s   contribution  is  also  directed  to  the  training  of  Iraq’s  security  forces,  which  will  be  vital  to   Iraq’s long-term stability. 

 Australia  is  also  committed  to  building  comprehensive  bilateral  ties  with  Iraq  and  further   developing  on  our  already  strong  commercial  partnership,  including  through  continuing  to   satisfy  the  Iraqi  preference  for  high  quality  Australian  wheat.  Australia  supported  Iraq's   successful bid for observer status in the World Trade Organisation and will continue to assist  Iraq  as  it  seeks  to  rejoin  the  global  economy.  Australian  companies  are  actively  engaged  in   Iraq's reconstruction, including in the oil sector.   

 Mr  Brown  has  just  completed  a  four-year  assignment  as  Australia’s  High  Commissioner  to   Islamabad. Prior to this, he served as Head of Mission in Nicosia, Lagos and Nuku'alofa.    

 Mr Brown has an arts degree with first class honours from the University of Queensland.  He  is single.   

 

 Media inquiries:   Chris Kenny (Ministerial) 02 6277 7500/0419 206890  Julie McDonald (DFAT) 02 6261 1555   

 

 Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/ 

