---
title: "Labor's TPV policy still the best approach."
date: "2004-07-14"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "ALP policy"
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211268759
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DN4D6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 39/04    

 14 July 2004 

 

 

 LABOR’S TPV POLICY STILL THE BEST APPROACH   

 While Labor has welcomed the Howard Government’s back flip on Temporary  Protections Visas (TPVs), the Government’s change in policy comes with considerable  difficulty in the detail.   

 The Government has lifted some barriers by allowing TPV holders under subclasses 447,  451, 785 to be able to apply for permanent protection.  This is a significant move towards  Labor policy by the Government. 

 

 The initial positive response from community organisations and refugee advocate groups  has been dashed however with the realisation that TPV holders will still be required to  commence the permanent protection application process and prove again that they are  refugees. 

 

 Under Labor’s approach, the onus or burden of proof will be on the Commonwealth to  show that the ongoing protection of the Refugee Convention is not required.   

 Labor announced in January this year a single one off TPV period of two years.   

 Upon coming to Government, Labor will conduct an immediate review of the  circumstances of each existing TPV holder of two years or more duration, giving priority  to those who have been on a TPV for the longest period.   

 Where a TPV holder has been in the community longer than two years, a Labor  Government will offer permanent protection if the ongoing protection of the Refugee  Convention is required.  If the Commonwealth determines that is not the case, that will be  reviewable as a Migration Act decision.   

 Part of Labor’s approach also considers the TPV holders who currently have been here  for over two years but for whom ongoing protection is determined to no longer be  required.    

 Minister Vanstone is proposing that those TPV holders who no longer require permanent  protection will be allowed to apply for another non-humanitarian migration visa.  There 

 are suggestions that only a few hundred of the over 9,000 current TPV holders will be  eligible for another non-humanitarian migration visa.   

 Labor will not require these people to ‘fit’ another visa category.   

 Labor will offer permanent residence to the TPV holder who passes a rigorous public  interest test where it is found the person is the sort of person who Australia would  otherwise select for a migration program - someone who has made, and can continue to  make, economic, social, community and family contributions beneficial to the Australian  community, particularly within rural or regional Australia.     

 As well, Minister Vanstone’s changes only deal with the backlog of the current 9,500  TPV holders, most of whom have been living in the Australian community for 3 to 4  years.  The Howard Government has failed to establish a TPV regime that will provide  certainty for people who may receive a TPV in the future.   

 Labor’s approach to TPV holders will not only clear the Howard Government’s backlog,  but it will set up a better TPV system for the future.   

 Extract from ALP Conference 2004 Resolution attached.   

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

 

 

 EXTRACT FROM ALP NATIONAL CONFERENCE 2004 RESOLUTION   

 THE IMPLEMENTATION OF LABOR’S REFUGEE AND ASYLUM SEEKER  POLICY IN GOVERNMENT   

 4. Temporary Protection Visas   

 (i) Maintain a Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) system for unauthorised arrivals with  a one-off TPV period of two years, after which, if ongoing protection is still  required, provide permanent protection    

 (ii) Immediately upon coming to office, conduct a review of the circumstances of each  existing TPV holder of two years or more duration, giving priority to those who  have been on a TPV for the longest period.  Where a TPV holder has been in the  community longer than two years, if ongoing protection is required, provide  permanent protection 

 

  If ongoing protection is no longer required, offer permanent residence to a TPV  holder who passes a rigorous public interest test where it is found the person is the  sort of person who Australia would otherwise select for a migration program -  someone who has made, and can continue to make, economic , social, community 

 and family contributions beneficial to the Australian community, particularly within  rural or regional Australia.   

 (iii) Enable TPV holders to access English language training and employment assistance  in addition to existing services   

 (iv) Ensure asylum seekers and refugees in the Australian community have, either  through Commonwealth, State or community based services, appropriate health,  income and settlement support, as well as alleviate the financial and organisational  burden currently borne by the States, Territories, welfare and volunteer  organisations   

 

 

