---
title: "Democrats to contest all 28 Queensland seats."
date: "2004-09-17"
creators:
  - "Cherry, John"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of CHERRY, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
  - "Election, Federal, 2004"
  - "Queensland"
  - "Australian Democrats"
  - "Election candidates"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271349
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/11UD6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator John Cherry Democrats Senator for Queensland

 Dated: 17 September 2004 Press Release Number: 04/928

 Portfolio: Electoral Matters & Public Administration

 More from on Electoral Matters & Public Administration

 Democrats to contest all 28 Queensland seats 

 The Australian Democrats have nominated candidates in all 28 Queensland seats and are  already campaigning hard to defend their Queensland Senate seat.

 Democrats Lead Senate candidate Senator John Cherry said the party in Queensland was in  'fine fighting shape' and would have a significant influence on outcomes in both the Senate and  the House.

 "The Democrats have shown yet again our diversity, with the largest number of female  candidates of any party (12 out of 28), an Indigenous candidate in Herbert, and four candidates  born in other countries," Senator Cherry said.

 "We have a very strong team on the ground determined to ensure that the Democrats win a  Senate seat for the tenth election in a row.

 "The election campaign gets serious from here on in. We will be running hard on our record of  delivering strong results for Queensland in the Senate, as well as doing the hard yards of  reviewing legislation, working on committee and keeping the bastards honest," Senator Cherry  said.

 The Democrats House candidates include:

 - Dr Tracy Schrader, former vice-president of the Doctors Reform Society, taking on ex AMA  President Dr Ingrid Tall in Brisbane;

 - Frederika Steen, a former migrant and Immigration Department official turned refugee  advocate, taking on Junior Immigration Minister Gary Hardgrave in Moreton;

 - Richard Hoolihan, an Indigenous educator and trainer, taking on Peter Lindsay in Herbert, a  seat where 6.7% of the population is indigenous;

 - Allen Reid, from Thursday Island, a training consulant and Indigenous Rights Activsist of  Niuean/Samoan descent in a seat where 14.3% of the population is indigenous;

 - Terry Hennesey, a retired teacher from Mt Surprise (population 50) in North Queensland, now  campaigning around the wide expanse of Kennedy;

 - Anita Martin, a community activist from Studio Village who has received two community  services awards, including an award for founding a support service for single mothers.

 FULL LIST OF DEMOCRAT CANDIDATES:

 Senate:

 Senator John Cherry: Senator since 2001, raised in Boonah, has degrees in Economics, Law  and Public Administration, and has worked as a journalist, industrial relations advocate and  economic policy adviser. His achievements as a Senator include:

 - $16 million for the protection of wetlands adjoining the Great Barrier Reef;

 - $462 million in extra superannuation incentives for low income earners;

 - $52 million in welfare reform initiatives;

 - $10 million in tax concessions for charities;

 - $10 million in extra Telstra call concessions for low income earners;

 - $100 million in excise concessions for ethanol producers in Queensland;

 - Part of the committee which forced the import risk assessment on banana imports to be  withdrawn twice.

 Bonny Bauer: A Tully based Rural researcher and activist, Bonny has campaigned on issues of  food safety, the protection of the Wet Tropics rainforests and sustainable farming.

 House: Blair: Neil McKenzie, an Ipswich based psychiatric nurse and small business owner.

 Bonner: Chad Smith, a Wynnum based accountant and financial adviser;

 Bowman: Robert Bromwich: Former Birkdale Progress Association President and Central  Queensland University Union director.

 Brisbane: Dr Tracy Schrader, a general practioner who has worked in the public heath services  in inner Brisbane for ten years, and a former vice-president of the Doctors Reform Society.

 Capricornia: Naomi Johns, a Yeppoon based community activist, former teacher and political  adviser now working as an education administrator.

 Dawson: Dr Archie Julien, a Mackay based engineer, active in the Mackay Conservation Group.

 Dickson: Kirsty Reye, a psychology graduate now working in the airline industry while  completing an MBA.

 Fadden: Suzanne Wilson, an administrator and community lobbyist, active in many Gold Coast  community and environmental groups.

 Fairfax: Debbie Campbell, a former vet nurse who works in the family business, a leader in the  campaign by the community of Federal last year to stop a mobile phone tower near the school.

 Fisher: Craig Wilmot: A long time Sunshine Coast resident active in the family transport  business.

 Forde: Anita Martin. A long time Gold Coast resident and mother of two, currently completing a  Masters in policy, while working as a social researcher and for a single mothers' support  service.

 Griffith: Bruce Carnwell, a Kangaroo Point based computer industry worker also managing a 

 small business partnership. Active in many community organisations.

 Groom: Chris Donges, a Toowoomba based information technology specialist.

 Herbert: Richard Hoolihan, an Indigenous educator, Executive Officer of an Indigenous  employment organisation, and long active in Indigenous policy advisory committees.

 Hinkler: Alison Jensen, born and raised in Biloela and now working as a program administrator  for the Central Queensland University.

 Kennedy: Terry Hennesey, a retired teacher and former secretary of the Mt Surprise progress  Association.

 Lecihhardt: Allen Reid, a Torres Strait training consultant and Indigenous Rights Activist.

 Lilley: Dawn Forsyth, a Clayfield resident who has worked for many years as a nurse in  occupational health and aged care.

 Longman: Jacqui Kennedy, a former Melbourne tram driver and volunteer community worker  who has worked in Fiji, Singapore, America and Europe with a strong interest in cultural  awareness.

 Maranoa: Greg Ridge, a business development adviser in Queensland railways who has lived  and worked in Roma.

 McPherson: Russell White: A self employed urban development consultant long active in Gold  Coast community groups.

 Moncreiff: Ros Roberts: A long term Gold Coast resident who teaches accountancy at CQU  Gold Coast Campus. 

 Moreton: Frederika Steen, a retired Immigration Department official and now volunteer  information officer for the Romero Centre for asylum seekers at Buranda.

 Oxley: Nick Wood: A student in Information Environment and Ipswich resident.

 Petrie: Terrie Bell: A long time northside resident who works in a family small business.

 Rankin: Catherine Sporle: A Brisbane based financial adviser, educated on the Gold Coast.

 Ryan: Simon Ingram: A psychology graduate and administrator active in human rights groups.

 Wide Bay: Darryl Weir: A long time Maryborough resident working as a Customer Services Co-ordinator for the Brolga Theatre.

 

