---
title: "New initiatives to draw more migrants to regional areas."
date: "2004-01-12"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Skilled migration"
  - "Rural areas"
  - "Visas"
  - "Northern Territory"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262832
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0TCB6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS 

 New Initiatives to Draw More Migrants to Regional Areas 

 VPS 019/2004

 More and more migrants are choosing to settle and remain in the Northern Territory with most continuing to be drawn to the  territory's multicultural hub - Darwin.

 But we need to do more and the initiatives I announced today with the Acting Prime Minister, John Anderson, will help to  attract more migrants and refugees to Australia's regional areas.

 At the last Census, some 19,160 people born overseas were living in Darwin, and a majority of whom were from England and  New Zealand.

 In 2002-2003, some 130 visas were granted to people under State-specific and regional migration initiatives for the Northern  Territory - an increase of approximately 132 percent over the 2001-02 financial year. 

 Since 1997-98 some 550 visas have been granted to people who were planning to settle in the territory under various regional  migration programs.

 Visa grants for regional areas are steadily increasing, but more can be done to assist regional Australia to get the people they  want and this is what the measures being announced today aim to do.

 From 1 July, qualified people who want to come to Australia as skilled migrants will be able to obtain a three-year temporary  residence visa if they commit to living and working in regional Australia. After two years they will be able to apply for  permanent residency.

 There is also a new visa for self-funded independent retirees to encourage them to settle in regional areas.

 Under this visa, participating state and territory governments will be able to sponsor self-funded retirees settling in regional  Australia. 

 Self-funded retirees provide an opportunity for Australia to benefit both from their capital investment and the money they  spend while in Australia.

 12 January 2004

