---
title: "Unanimous support from States for new approach to TPV policy."
date: "2004-05-21"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Federal state ministerial councils"
  - "Visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211266591
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BWOC6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

 27/04          21  May  2004  

 

 UNANIMOUS SUPPORT FROM STATES FOR NEW APPROACH TO TPV POLICY  

 

 

 Federal Labor welcomes the unanimous support of all State and Territory Governments at  the Ministerial Council on Multicultural Affairs and Immigration for a changed approach  to Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) policy.   

 The resolution proposed by the Victorian Government reinforces the need for a new  approach.     

 Federal Labor’s policy approach to TPV holders adopted at the ALP National Conference  in January this year is attached.   

 There are currently 8,000 to 9,000 TPV holders in the Australian community.  Nearly  4,000 of them have lived in the Australian community for over 3 years.  They came as  unauthorised arrivals on John Howard’s watch.  He said they were refugees, and said they  could live in the Australian community. 

 

 Under John Howard’s TPV system, these people have no certainty in their lives and  could potentially live in the Australian community on a temporary basis for the rest of  their lives. Labor’s policy change to a two year one-off TPV will end that uncertainty.   

 Labor believes that these people deserve certainty.  Federal and State Labor also  understand the social and economic contribution genuine refugees can bring to rural and  regional Australia. It is a similar position to one advocated by the Coalition Members,  John Forrest, Kay Hulls, Petro Georgio and Patrick Secker.   

 There has been significant movement this week in the Government’s TPV policy with the  Prime Minister moving further toward Labor’s policy, in granting a TPV holder the right  of return to Australia after leaving the country for personal reasons. 

 

 I am encouraged by the support for our policy approach from the States and Territories.    I again call on the Prime Minister to adopt Labor’s approach to TPV policy.   

 

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

 RELEVANT EXTRACTS FROM ALP NATIONAL PLATFORM AND  CONFERENCE 2004 RESOLUTION   

 

 PLATFORM 

 Labor recognises that the Refugee Convention has always envisaged that the protection  of the Convention might not be required on an ongoing basis. 

 Accordingly, Labor will maintain a Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) system for  unauthorised arrivals. Labor will introduce a one-off TPV period of two years, after  which, consistent with the Convention, if ongoing protection is still required, permanent  protection will be provided. 

 

 

 RESOLUTION   

 The Implementation of Labor's Refugee and Asylum Seeker Policy in Government   

 Temporary Protection Visas 

 (i) Maintain a Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) system for unauthorised arrivals with a  one-off TPV period of two years, after which, if ongoing protection is still required,  provide permanent protection; 

 (ii) Immediately upon coming to office, conduct a review of the circumstances of each  existing TPV holder of two years or more duration, giving priority to those who have  been on a TPV for the longest period. Where a TPV holder has been in the community  longer than two years, if ongoing protection is required, provide permanent protection. 

 

 

