---
title: "Audit report into the Howard Government's processing of asylum seekers."
date: "2004-06-25"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
  - "Australian National Audit Office"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211268004
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KRXC6%22
---

 

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E 

 

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 35/04          25  June  2004  

 

 

 AUDIT REPORT INTO THE HOWARD GOVERNMENT’S PROCESSING OF  ASYLUM SEEKERS    

 A second report in less than a week by the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) has  criticised the Howard Government’s administration of its asylum seeker policy.   

 Last week an ANAO Report provided a comprehensive condemnation of the  Government's policy of privatisation of the management of immigration detention centres  and a comprehensive indictment of the Department of Immigration’s (DIMIA)  administration of it.   

 An ANAO Report released late yesterday into DIMIA’s Management of the Processing  of Asylum Seekers has raised concerns about the value of information available to officers  when determining applications for protection under the Refugee Convention.   

 While the latest ANAO report considers DIMIA’s general administrative processes  adequate, it does raise concerns about the delay between any change of Government  policy for protection visas and the Department’s administrative implementation of that  policy change.    

 The Report also identifies problems with relevant and accurate in-country information,  which has led to delays in Departmental decisions on protection visa applications.     

 Citing a lack of faith in the relevance and accuracy of DIMIA’s Country Information  Service (CIS), officers advised ANAO that alternative sources of information were often  used to assist decision makers in the processing of protection claims.    

 The resort by individual officers to alternative sources for in-country information is of  significant concern.     

 This is particularly the case after revelations at Senate Estimates last month that the  Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) has overturned up to 80% of DIMIA decisions on  further and permanent protection applications.  A senior Departmental officer indicated  that changes in country information was the reason for the RRT overturning these DIMIA  decisions. 

 

 Both these administrative failures identified by ANAO need to be addressed by the  Government to ensure that decision makers of applications for permanent protection are  provided with the best possible information available at the time of assessment. 

 

 Relevant extracts from ANAO Report and Senate Estimates attached   

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

 

 EXTRACT FROM ANAO REPORT - 24 June 2004  Management of the Processing of Asylum Seekers   

 Key Findings   

 10. Decision-makers have access to a comprehensive and well defined set of  procedures and guidelines that are updated to reflect changes to legislation and  policy by a dedicated branch in Central Office. However, there were  administrative shortcomings. In particular, there was a significant time lag  between the announcement of a change in legislation and/or policy and the  provision of updated guidance to decision-makers. During focus group  discussions with PV decision-makers, staff advised the ANAO that it was  difficult, at times, to determine what the current guidance regarding a  certain aspect of PV processing was. The ANAO considers that DIMIA’s more 

 timely incorporation of policy changes into guidelines would reduce the risk that  decisions on PV applications are not in accordance with guidance and legislation.   

 11. In line with an earlier review undertaken by DIMIA internal audit, the ANAO  also identified shortcomings within the Country Information Service (CIS).  In particular, the ANAO found that there was a need for an analysis of emerging  trends to be undertaken, in addition to historical trends, when assigning priority 

 ratings to countries. This approach would decrease the delays to decision-makers in obtaining up to date and relevant country information. In addition,  decision-makers stated that at times the information contained within the 

 CIS did not provide them with the level of detail that they required, and they  needed to access other sources of information such as the internet to  supplement information gained from the CIS. There is a risk that  information gained from sources other than the CIS is not up to date or  accurate. One way to mitigate this risk would be to highlight this potential  exposure during training sessions.   

 

 Full report can be found at: www.anao.gov.au   

 

