---
title: "Alleged people smuggler extradited to Australia."
date: "2004-11-12"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
  - "People smuggling"
  - "Perth"
  - "Prosecution"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272806
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9REE6%22
---

 Media  Release 

 

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON   

 

                                             Minister for Justice and Customs 

                                                   Senator for Western Australia 

 

 E153/04           12 November 2004 

 

 Alleged people smuggler extradited to Australia  

 Alleged people-smuggler, Masood Ahmed Chaudhry, has arrived in Perth following his extradition  from Thailand to face charges over people smuggling offences, the Minister for Justice and Customs,  Senator Chris Ellison, announced today. 

 “The joint Australian Federal Police (AFP) and Department of Immigration and Multicultural and  Indigenous Affairs People-Smuggling Strike Team have worked closely with Thai authorities in the  lead-up to Chaudhry’s arrest and subsequent extradition,” Senator Ellison said. 

 “This sends a very clear message that Australia and its regional counterparts will work cooperatively  and vigorously to pursue alleged people smugglers and bring them to justice,” he said. 

 “This is another example of the excellent relationship the AFP has with their regional law enforcement  counterparts.”  

 Chaudhry, a Pakistani national, was brought to Australia following the recent decision of the Thai  Government to extradite him.   

 He is wanted in Australia to face two charges under the Migration Act, each punishable by a maximum  term of ten years imprisonment.   

 Chaudhry is alleged to have been involved in organising the passage of a boat from Indonesia to  Australia between November 2000 and April 2001 and collecting payments from suspected unlawful  non-citizens for this purpose.     

 Chaudhry’s extradition to Australia follows the successful extradition of other alleged people  smugglers from Thailand, including Ali Al Jenabi in February 2003 and Hasan Ayoub in July 2003.  

 Al Jenabi, an Iraqi national, was extradited from Thailand in February 2003 and has been convicted  and sentenced to eight years imprisonment.  Ayoub, a Pakistani national, was extradited from Thailand  in July 2003 and is currently on trial in Perth. 

 “These extraditions reinforce the Australian Government’s commitment to taking all steps possible to  ensure those who are accused of organising and facilitating the practice of people smuggling face  justice in Australia,” Senator Ellison said. 

 “The Australian Government is grateful for the excellent cooperation and support it has received from  Thai authorities in this matter, in particular, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Thai Police.”  

 Media Inquiries:  Simon Troeth (02) 6277 7260/(0439) 300 335  http://www.ag.gov.au/www/justiceministerHome.nsf   

