---
title: "Increased assistance for Sudan and Chad."
date: "2004-12-14"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Sudan"
  - "Chad"
  - "International aid"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211273826
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TYPE6%22
---

 AA 04 090                          Tuesday 14 December 2004 

 

 Increased assistance for Sudan and Chad 

 

 In response to the ongoing crisis in Africa, Australia will provide an additional $10 million to  help relieve the suffering of people in Darfur, Sudan and in Eastern Chad. $7 million has been  allocated for Darfur and $3 million for Eastern Chad. This brings Australia’s total assistance  to the Sudan/Chad crisis to $30 million.   

 The increased contribution reflects the deterioration of conditions in the Darfur region where  up to 2.3 million people have been displaced and the level of insecurity is high. A further  200,000 of the displaced are in refugee camps in Chad.   

 Australia’s funding will be channelled through the World Food Programme and other aid  agencies including UNICEF, ICRC, Care Australia, Oxfam CAA and World Vision Australia.  It will be used for emergency food aid, logistical operations, emergency assistance, health  care, water supply and sanitation and the protection of civilians.   

 This announcement coincides with the release today of a new Humanitarian Action Policy  which will underpin Australia’s response to emergencies and disasters.   

 Australia has for many years given generously to people in difficult or desperate  circumstances not of their making. We have a proud record of rapid support for the victims of  humanitarian crises and disasters, both within our region and globally. This financial year  funding for our humanitarian, emergency and refugee programs will exceed $180 million.   

 The Humanitarian Action Policy recognises that while our assistance is largely concentrated  on the Asia Pacific region, we will continue to respond to emergencies in other parts of the  world as our capacity permits.   

 The policy also reflects the increasingly difficult environment aid workers find themselves in  and the growing recognition of the links between relief, rehabilitation, peace-building and  development.   

 Australia strongly supports the objectives of humanitarian action in saving lives, alleviating  suffering and maintaining human dignity during and in the aftermath of man-made crises and  natural disasters.    

 Through the Australian aid program, AusAID will continue to work with partner countries to  prevent disasters from occurring and build up local and community skills and resources  needed for disaster preparedness, mitigation and response.   

 Details about the Humanitarian Action Policy can be found at: www.ausaid.gov.au   

 Media inquiries:   Andrew Park (Minister’s office) 02 6277 7500 or 0418 253 285                                Jo Elsom (AusAID) 02 6206 4960 or 0412 804 489 

 

 Media releases and speeches are available on AusAID’s website www.ausaid.gov.au 

 

 Media releases and speeches are available on AusAID’s website www.ausaid.gov.au 

 

