---
title: "Asylum claims managed well: Audit Office."
date: "2004-06-24"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Australian National Audit Office"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211267894
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2Z2D6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND  INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Asylum claims managed well: Audit Office

 VPS 89/2004

 An audit office report tabled in Parliament this afternoon confirms the processing of asylum seekers in  Australia is managed well, Minister for Immigration, Senator Amanda Vanstone, said today.

 'I welcome this very positive report on Australia's asylum seeker processes, which confirms what we've  always known,' Senator Vanstone said. 

 'Processing of asylum claims has long been an area of considerable public interest and this government has  given high priority to maintaining a robust and reliable process.'

 The Australian National Audit Office report finds the overall standard of record keeping, including the  documentation of the reasons for decisions is high.

 'The report highlights the skill and experience of departmental officers who make decisions in protection visa  applications,' Senator Vanstone said. 

 The report says officers are also 'supported with appropriate training and guidelines'.

 The Minister said Australia is almost alone in the Western world in having no backlog of new asylum  applications.

 'Processing times for new protection visa applications lodged in 2002/03 were better than the published  performance standards for the program,' Senator Vanstone said.

 'More than 80 per cent of applications from these asylum seekers in the community were decided within 90  days and more than 70 per cent of applications from people in detention were decided within 42 days,' the  Minister said.

 'These rates are even better when allowances are made for delays by factors beyond the department's control,  such as lack of identity papers.

 'I welcome the report's two recommendations, which deal with opportunities to refine performance measures  used for the program and existing management monitoring.' 

 24 June 2004

