---
title: "Minister launches DlMlA publication and promotes biometric technology to help manage the border."
date: "2004-07-21"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "STER Remote Sensing"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
  - "Biometrics"
  - "Identity fraud"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211268986
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E47D6%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for lmmiqration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs 

  I 

  . -. 

  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation 

  ‘IPS 102.04 Wednesday, 21 July 2004 

  Minister launches DlMlA publication and promotes Biometric  Technology to help manage the border 

  Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, said the dramatic impact of the Government’s efforts  to combat people smuggling is highlighted in a new departmental publication, Managing the  Border, released today. 

  The Minister released Managing the Border while opening a new biometrics testing facility in  Canberra, designed to enhance Australia’s efforts in border security. 

  “The publication, covering border compliance activity in 2002-03 shows that there were no  unauthorised boat arrivals in that period, compared to a peak of more than 4,000 people in 1999-  00 and 2000-01 ,” Minister Vanstone said. 

  “However, we should not be lulled into a false sense of security 

  “There is no doubt that there are people smugglers still trying to take money off vulnerable people  and families on the promise of reaching Australia,” the Minister said. 

  “That is why the Government remains committed to maintaining the Pacific Strategy - a proven  strategy which has worked effectively in stemming the tide of unauthorised boat arrivals.” 

  The Minister said Managing the Border also highlighted the complexity and sheer volume of  DIMIA’s workload in managing Australia’s border. 

  For example, the report shows more than 8 million people leaving and arriving in Australia by air  each year. 

  “This presents major challenges for DIMIA, particularly in an age where criminals also have access  to advanced technology,” the Minister said. 

  “For example, identity fraud costs taxpayers an estimated $1.1 billion dollars a year. 

  “The Biometric Testing Facility in Canberra I am launching today, has the potential to greatly  enhance Australia’s border security effort. 

  “The testing facility uses practical applications of new technologies such as facial recognition,  fingerprint and iris scanning, to assess how these technologies could be integrated into DIMIA’S  existing processes. DlMlA staff are actively involved, role-playing as clients in a simulation of the  technology being applied to identity and border management. 

  “These technologies present the possibility of a new line of control in managing our borders. 

  “Biometric technology is a powerful weapon in the fight against identity fraud as it enables  travellers’ identity documents to be linked to their unique physical characteristics. 

  “This testing will give DlMlA some substantial information on which to define its long-term biometric  strategy. Testing will take place between July and December this year with a report to DlMlA in  January 2005.” 

  Minister’s Media Contact: Kevin Donnellan 0417 445 886  Copies of the publication are available on the Press Gallery Table, Parliament House and at www.immi.gov.au 

