---
title: "Labor welcomes Coalition members support for policy changes on TPV's (Temporary protection visas). \n"
date: "2004-02-06"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen, (AIG)"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211263603
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BZKB6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

         6  February  2004  

 

 

 LABOR WELCOMES COALITION MEMBERS SUPPORT FOR  POLICY CHANGE ON TPVS   

 

 

 A second Coalition member has come out in support a policy change for the Temporary  Protection Visa (TPV) system.   

 Along with John Forrest, Member for Mallee, Kay Hull, Member for Riverina, has urged  Amanda Vanstone to allow TPV holders to remain permanently living and working in  rural and regional Australia.   

 Labor’s policy recognises the significant contribution TPV holders have made and can  make to Australia’s rural and regional communities.   

 John Howard has made the ludicrous suggestion that a change of policy on TPVs will  somehow encourage more unauthorised arrivals.   Obviously some of his colleagues  don’t agree with him.     

 There are currently 8,000 to 9,000 TPV holders in the Australian community.     

 They came as unauthorised arrivals on John Howard’s watch.   He said they were  refugees, and said they could live in the Australian community, which they are now  doing, some of them already up to 3 or 4 years.   

 John Howard has also allowed these families to live and work in the Australian  community, many of them for 3 or 4 years, without any certainty of where their future  will be. Labor’s policy change to a two year one-off TPV will end the uncertainty.   

 While John Howard refuses to face up to a solution to the TPV problem, a problem of his  own making, he will continue to face backlash from his Coalition backbenchers.   

 

 Ends Release.   

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651   

