---
title: "Labor's Coastguard not supported by the experts."
date: "2004-09-18"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "STER Oceans - Resources"
  - "Election, Federal, 2004"
  - "Coastal surveillance"
  - "ALP policy"
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271388
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/P1UD6%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  ALEXANDER DOWNER   

 September 18 2004 

 

 Labor’s Coastguard Not Supported By The Experts   

 Tomorrow Labor will announce that their Coastguard will become the  responsibility of the Australian Federal Police. This will be their fifth different  Coastguard policy in three years.    

 Labor’s Coastguard would jeopardise Australia’s existing world-class border  protection capabilities.  Just listen to the experts.   

 The then Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Mick Palmer, told the  Joint Committee on Public Accounts and Audit in January 2001 that:   

 “My unqualified experience in looking at arrangements in countries where there  are coastguard type arrangements…..is that I would gain no comfort at all from  those arrangements. Those arrangements have caused a division through the  investigative focus and it has caused competition between the investigative  agencies in a very counterproductive way.”   

 Defence experts have also expressed concerns about Labor’s proposal.  Alexey  Muraviev, a strategic affairs expert at Curtin University, has questioned the very  logic of Labor’s coastguard:   

 “In the US, Russia and Japan, the coastguard comes under the command of the  navy during times of conflict.  They are effectively a naval reserve which means  crew must be trained by the navy to navy standards.  That means you’re  effectively retaining them as navy boats anyway, so why set up another  authority?  It just doesn’t make sense”. (West Australian, 20/11/03).”   

 Defence expert and managing director of independent think tank Future  Directions International, Lee Cordner, has also said: “Labor’s Coastguard  policy will only burden another agency, at greater cost and detract from the  flexibility we now have” (West Australian, 18 December 2003).  The fact of the matter is that under the Howard Government, Australia has a  world-class coastal surveillance system in place that is working incredibly well.   

 The evidence is overwhelming.  The Coalition’s policy has reduced illegal boat  arrivals to virtually nil; it has been central in massively increasing drug hauls  with more than 10 tonnes of illicit drugs taken off the streets; and it is catching  boats that illegally fish in our waters.  

 The fundamental question Labor has to answer is why, for the sake of a cheap  headline, is it planning to spend hundreds of millions of taxpayers’ dollars  changing a system that is getting the results. 

 This week, the Coalition has further beefed up Australia’s offshore surveillance  by announcing UAV trials and two new patrol boats to protect the North West  Shelf.  

 Most importantly, a coastguard means absolutely nothing unless it is  accompanied by a commitment to strong border protection policies. Labor’s  policies send people smugglers and illegal arrivals the signal that if they make it  to Australian waters they will be brought onshore, processed quickly and  allowed into the community.  That is why Labor’s coastguard is really only a  coast guide. 

 It looks like just another attempt to force those Australians working in maritime  surveillance roles into joining the Maritime Union of Australia. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Media Inquiries: Chris Kenny 0419 206 890   

