---
title: "Refugees call Victoria home."
date: "2004-12-16"
creators:
  - "Mcgauran, Peter"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211273927
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CVRE6%22
---

 

 Peter McGauran MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

 Media Release 

 Refugees Call Victoria Home

 16 December 2004

 A new book that will benefit some 3200 refugees and humanitarian entrants settling in Victoria this financial year, was  launched by the Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Peter McGauran today.

 Minister McGauran said about 12 000 people would be settled throughout Australia in 2004-05 and of these about  1800 had already arrived in Victoria between July and November this year.

 ‘All refugees experience severe disruption and in most cases associated trauma so adjusting to a new life in Australia is  hard,’ Minister McGauran said.

 ‘To help them settle more quickly the Government provides intensive settlement services so they can successfully  rebuild their lives. These services include accommodation, material goods to start establishing a household, English  language training, torture and trauma support and interpreting services.’

 Minister McGauran was speaking in Melbourne at the launch of the publication, Australia’s Support for Humanitarian  Entrants 2003-2004. 

 Minister McGauran said the book provided people working with newly arrived refugees an overview of the settlement  services available, profiles of refugees assisted in 2003-04 and examples of what services refugees found particularly  useful.

 ‘ Australia has the third largest dedicated humanitarian resettlement program in the world and our settlement programs  are looked on as an international benchmark,’ Minister McGauran said.

 ‘The provision of these intensive settlement services are an investment that returns enormous benefits for the refugees  as well as for the social, cultural and economic life of Australia.’

 MEDIA CONTACT: Stewart Foster - 02 6277 7890

