---
title: "Budget 2004: Hardgrave Budget claims don't add up."
date: "2004-05-12"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Expenditure restraint"
  - "Budget, 2004-05"
  - "Migration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211266181
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GYKC6%22
---

 LAURIE FERGUSON MP   

 Shadow Minister for Population, Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 12 May 2004 

 HARDGRAVE BUDGET CLAIMS DON’T ADD UP  Claims that migrant settlement services have received a significant boost in the Budget  are not reflected in the fine print of the Portfolio Budget Statement. 

 

 On Minister Hardgrave’s own admission, almost 60% of the apparent increase simply  reflects previously announced increases in migration program numbers. These  automatically produce a flow-on increase in funding for English classes under the Adult 

 Migrant Education Program (AMEP) and for on-arrival services for refugees under the  Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy (IHSS). 

 

 The alleged increases in funding as a result of the Settlement Services Review are much  harder to substantiate. This is particularly the case with the appropriation item Grants  for Migrant Community Services, which encompasses Migrant Resource Centres  (MRCs) and migrant welfare projects funded under the Community Settlement Services  Scheme (CSSS). The DIMIA Portfolio Budget Statement shows that funding for these  only increases from $27.12 million this year to $27.57 million in 2004-05. This is nothing  like the multimillion dollar increase claimed in Minister Hardgrave’s media kit. 

 

 The Budget confirms that some existing services for established migrant communities  are simply being transferred from DIMIA to the Department of Health and Ageing. This  is not an increase. 

 

 The DIMIA Portfolio Budget Statement appears to show a $12 million cut in funding for  the Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS) and a $2.7 million cut in spending on the  Coalition’s multicultural agenda. No explanation is offered for these substantial  reductions. 

 

 The Opposition will be seeking clarification of these matters through the forthcoming  Senate Estimates hearings. 

 

 For further information:  Laurie Ferguson MP 02 6277 4920 

 Warren Gardiner 0409 910 004 

 

