---
title: "Greens join cross party group to call for freedom of refugees and asylum."
date: "2004-09-10"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Australian Greens"
  - "Visas"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271085
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8QXD6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle 

 Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Greens join cross party group to call for  freedom of refugees and asylum   

 Senator Nettle, 10th September 2004 

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle today joined speakers from a range of political parties to  support a call for the end to the mandatory detention regime. In particular Senator  Nettle called for Peter Qasim who has been in detention for seven years today to be  freed. 

 The event held in Sydney's Pitt St Mall was hosted by ChillOut and Amnesty  International and was attended by hundreds of supporters and passers by eager to  support calls for an end to the detention of asylum seekers, particularly children. 

 "I went to visit Peter Qasim in Baxter and can personally attest to his poor emotional  state after seven years behind the razor wire," Senator Nettle said. 

 "The Greens see no reason why Mr Qasim along with all the other asylum seekers  need to be imprisoned whilst his claims are processed.  

 "The cruel mandatory detention system has stolen seven years of Peter's life. 

 "Its indicative of the broad support for a compassionate approach to asylum seekers  that today's event was attended by representatives of The Greens, the Democrats,  Liberal, Labor and the Australian Progressive Alliance. 

 "The Australian people clearly know how to be welcoming and compassionate. Its  time the government caught up. 

 "The Greens will prioritise the treatment of refugees in the next parliament to ensure  that the mental anguish of those locked up in the desert is ended as soon as possible." 

 The Greens call for the immediate end to mandatory detention of asylum seekers and  an end the Temporary Protection visa class in favour of permanent residency for  refugees. 

 Contact Jon Edwards - 0428 213 146 

