---
title: "Vanstone 'deliberately misleading' about status of detainees."
date: "2004-06-20"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211267692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E7YD6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle 

 Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Vanstone 'deliberately  misleading' about status of  detainees  20th Jun 04 

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle has labelled comments made by Immigration Minister 

 Amanda Vanstone claiming that there are no refugees in detention as 'cynical' and  'deliberately misleading'.   

 Speaking at a world refugee day rally in Sydney today Senator Nettle condemned  Senator Vanstone for "putting propaganda before compassion."   

 "The Minister is setting out to deliberately mislead the public by relying on the  warped logic that says a refugee is only a refugee when the immigration department  says so," Senator Nettle said.   

 "Amanda Vanstone knows full well that genuine refugees find it hard to prove their  claims in a system set up to discourage applications from 'boat people.'   

 "History tells us that the overwhelming majority of those locked up in detention  centres are genuine refugees. That this government takes years to recognise that does  not change the fact that they are and always have been refugees.   

 "The Minister's comment is just the latest in a string of cynical mistruths and  distortions that have become the stock in trade of the Howard government.   

 "To embark on such an insulting a spin is to accept that the government's policies are  unacceptable to the Australian public."   

 Senator Nettle, following her visit to Baxter IDF, will be questioning the Minister for 

 Immigration regarding her justification of the mandatory detention regime and asylum 

 seeker processing in the Senate next week.  

