---
title: "Greens pledge to build a multicultural Australia."
date: "2004-10-06"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Election, Federal, 2004"
  - "Multicultural education"
  - "Australian Greens policy"
  - "Government schools"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272193
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9N1E6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle 

 Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Greens pledge to build a  multicultural Australia  6th Oct 04 

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle speaking at today's 'Australian's Against Australia'  essay 

 prize giving, in Parliament House, Canberra, told the young finalists that The Greens  share their positive view of multiculturalism and will work to ensure Australia can  enjoy a multicultural future.   

 "Multiculturalism is under attack in Australia from the current government, from the  failure of the opposition and from extreme right groups like Family First," Senator  Nettle said.   

 "The amazing stories shared by the finalists today underline the need to celebrate  multiculturalism in Australia which so enriches our society.   

 "The Greens are keen to pursue the goals of multiculturalism that ensure all  Australians can participate fully in the nation.   

 "The Greens recognise that the vision for multiculturalism has been undermined under  John Howard.    

 "The recognition and celebration of the rights and history of the first Australians is  central to the project of multiculturalism and The Greens are committed to securing  that recognition and backing for Indigenous Australians.   

 "Our vision is for a future generation of Australians to be a multilingual generation.  The Greens schools policy has identified the need to prioritise languages in public  schools to achieve this.   

 "Public schools are vital to a successful multicultural Australia. Public schools are  overwhelmingly the place where kids from all kinds of backgrounds mix and learn 

 together. The Greens value this and our call for a $2.5bn funding boost to public 

 schools is about increasing the numbers of parents who choose public schooling.   

 "Only when our immigration and refugee policies are returned to a humanitarian basis  can we truly be proud of our multicultural society. The Greens congratulate all the  participants and organisers of Australians Against Racism and pledge to work harder  than ever to realise a harmonious welcoming and egalitarian Australia."   

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

