---
title: "Howard Government needs to go public on backdoor release of children in detention."
date: "2004-06-10"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission"
  - "Children"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211267352
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/43SC6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E 

 

 

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

 31/04           10  June  2004  

 

 

 

 HOWARD GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO GO PUBLIC ON  BACKDOOR RELEASE OF CHILDREN IN DETENTION   

 Four weeks after it was tabled in Parliament, the Government has failed to respond to the  findings and recommendations of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity  Commission’s (HREOC) report into Children in Detention. 

 

 At the time of the report’s tabling in Parliament on 13 May, the Government rejected the  major findings and recommendations, and considered the report unbalanced and  backward looking. 

 

 The HREOC report’s first recommendation is the release of children from immigration  detention by no later than four weeks from the tabling of the report in Parliament,  Thursday 10 June.   

 Recent Department of Immigration (DIMIA) figures indicate that the Howard  Government is surreptitiously releasing children from detention out the back door  without any publicity.   

 In comparing DIMIA figures at the time of the Report's tabling four week ago to current  information on children in detention, the Government has been active in removing seven  asylum seeker children from immigration detention facilities, three of whom are 

 unaccompanied children.  There are now no unaccompanied children in immigration  detention.   

 Labor welcomes these efforts by Minister Vanstone in removing children from  immigration detention.  This however cannot be done through the back door.  I call on the  Minister to be open and honest about the removal of children from immigration detention  facilities.   

 It’s not good enough for the Government to publicly condemn the HREOC report while  secretly removing children from immigration detention.  The Minister cannot have her  cake and eat it too.  

 

 The HREOC report, A last resort?, is an indictment of the Howard Government’s  children in immigration detention policy and an indictment of its administration of that  policy.   

 The Government has presided over a bad period here.  Minister Vanstone should be open  and honest with the Australian people and acknowledge that the Howard Government’s  immigration detention policy and administration has been a mistake and set the system up  for the future so that this cannot happen again.    

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

 

