---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Parliament House, Perth: 8 January 2004: hunger strike in Nauru."
date: "2004-01-08"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "UN High Commissioner for Refugees"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Demonstrations and protest movements"
  - "Nauru"
  - "RUDDOCK, Philip, MP"
  - "VANSTONE, Amanda"
  - "Ministerial responsibility"
  - "hunger strike in Nauru."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211262778
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8EBB6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

 

 

 

 02/04         8  January   2004  

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT  OF  DOORSTOP,  1.30PM  (AEST),  PARLIAMENT  HOUSE,   PERTH   

 SUBJECT: HUNGER STRIKE IN NAURU   

 SMITH: The Government’s attitude to the hunger strike in Nauru is a complete  disgrace.   The management of the issue is now in grave danger of becoming a major  debacle.  You will recall that very early in the piece Immigration Minister Vanstone  said it wasn’t the Howard Government’s responsibility.  Yesterday the former  Immigration Minister, Philip Ruddock, repeated that saying it wasn’t a matter for  Australia, it was a matter for the Nauru Government.  He also made the point that he  believed the Nauru government was only making the suggestion that medical facilities  were not appropriate or adequate to try and screw more money out of Australia.   If  this is the Howard Government’s attitude toward the Government of Nauru and the  people of Nauru, then why did the Howard Government ..inaudible .. hunger strike in  the first place?     

 We now have the unseemly sight of the government of Nauru, having been rebuffed  by the Australian government, effectively touted the AMA to send a medical  delegation to Nauru to examine the situation.  The Howard Government should  urgently send a Commonwealth medical officer to Nauru to do an assessment and  report urgently to the Government.  If the Government won’t take the word of the  Government of Nauru then it should urgently send back a qualified medical  practitioner, or more as the case may be, preferably in the company of Mr Hodges, the  Chair of the Immigration Detention Advisory Group, and make their own assessment.   No stone should be left unturned here in making sure that the hunger strikers have  adequate medical services and treatment.   

 JOURNALIST: And then what?  They be treated there or brought back to  Australia?   

 SMITH: They should be treated in Nauru.  I’ve made the point right from the  first moment that there was suggestions of the medical services and facilities might  not be adequate or appropriate that the Australian government, the Howard  Government, had to make sure that it there was any doubt the medical facilities might  not be adequate or appropriate they had to err on the side of caution and send those  facilities  personnel, equipment and  services to Nauru, so as to ensure that there no 

 danger that anything was left to doubt …inaudible…  The Government has rebuffed  the suggestion made yesterday by the Finance Minister of Nauru.  Not only is the  Government of Nauru concerned about the adequacy of treatment to the hunger  strikers, they are also feeling the pressure that that is putting on the Nauru hospital has  the potential to cause difficulty for the treatment the people of Nauru themselves.  So  there’s an urgent crisis here and the Government has to respond, and it can’t respond  simply by saying it is not our responsibility.  It is the Howard Government’s 

 responsibility, they should urgently dispatch Mr Hodges back to Nauru in the  company of a qualified medical practitioner or practitioners and do their own  assessment …inaudible…   

 JOURNALIST:  inaudible..  AMA  delegation    

 SMITH: That’s a matter for the Government of Nauru, but what it does do is  underline the point that the Government of Nauru has entirely lost hope that the  Australian government might respond in any reasonable way.  I make the point that  the Government management of this issue is in grave danger of going to debacle and  that’s because we have the unseemly sight of the Government of Nauru effectively  touting for an AMA team to go there.  The Howard Government should send a  qualified medical practitioner to directly advise the Howard Government as to the 

 circumstances in Nauru.  And the Government should do that in the company of Mr  Hodges.  And when Hodges is there, he should also make the point to the detainees  the Howard government will respond favourably to the request made by the UNHCR  to review cases previously assessed by Australian officials on the basis of the  UNHCR’s view of changed circumstances in various regions of Afghanistan.   

 JOURNALIST: What if someone actually dies, surely the Government has to  take responsibility for that?   

 SMITH: Let’s just take thing step by step.   The reason I’ve been saying, since  the first moment that there was a suggestion that the medical services might not be  able to cope adequately, was that the provision of medical service had to be the  absolute highest priority .  That remains the absolute ..inaudible…  inaudible..for the  Howard Government to say it’s not our responsibility in the face of the comments  yesterday by the Finance Minister of Nauru that not only was he worried about the  adequacy of medical services being provided to hunger strikers, he was also  concerned that that would place a burden on the capacity of the Nauru hospital to  service the people of Nauru themselves.   

 JOURNALIST:  inaudible  

 

 SMITH Let’s take it step by step.  As I’ve said for some time making sure there  is adequate provision of  medical services is the highest priority.  That needs to be  attended to as a matter of urgency.   

 

 JOURNALIST: Where does the Australian Government draw the line in terms  of ..inaudible…   

 SMITH: Ultimately the Australian Government has a responsible to ensure  every medical service is made available to the hunger strikers.  Yesterday the 

 Government of Nauru said that they didn’t believe the services were adequate and that  the Australian Government hadn’t spoken to them.  I would have the thought the first  thing the Australian Government would do in the face of a hunger strikes would be to  sit down with the government of Nauru and have a private conversation with them  rather than sledging them in public.  The government should sit down with the  Government in Nauru, have a sensible conversation with them, send their own  medical practitioner to Nauru, so they can receive an independent medically qualified  assessment and respond in an urgent manner.  Rather than saying as former  Immigration Minister did yesterday that it’s not the Commonwealth responsibility and  the only reason the Nauru Government is doing this to screw some more money out of  Australia.  The response doesn’t require more money, it requires urgent medical  assessment as to whether further medical personnel or services are required.   

 JOURNALIST:  ..inaudible…medical treatment is the priority would you expect  the Government to favourably respond to the AMA delegation?   

 SMITH: I would prefer that the Government send its own medically qualified  practitioner.  It’s all well and good for the AMA, in their own mind quite rightly to  say we are available to help but the responsibility here is the responsibility of the  Australian government.  The Australian government should be sending it’s own  medically qualified team.  A team that it has confidence in, rather than the AMA  having to go cap in hand to the government saying we’re to go to make an  assessment, and by the way would you mind helping us out with the fare.   

 ENDS.   

 

 

 

 

 

 Ends  

