---
title: "Abuse that is detention centre regime must stop."
date: "2004-06-08"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Election, Federal, 2004"
  - "South Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211267290
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K7YD6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle 

 Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Abuse that is detention centre  regime must stop  8th Jun 04 

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle today called for all parties to outline how they would 

 reform Australia’s immigration policy to end the abuse that results from the  mandatory detention regime.   

 “In my visit to Baxter detention centre and the Port Augusta Residential Housing  Project I have seen evidence of persecution and obstruction. The immigration policy  of this government continues to be inhumane,” Senator Nettle said.   

 “All parties running in the coming election need to spell out how their policies will  deliver a humanitarian outcome for asylum seekers and end the abuse that continues  as a result of the mandatory detention regime.   

 “Greens in South Australia are particularly concerned with this issue and will be  looking for humane alternative policies when deciding preference allocation in the  marginal seats.   

 “I met detainees who are effective imprisoned indefinitely because they have been  refused visas for Australia but cannot get visas for any other country including their  country of origin.   

 “The detention of ‘stateless’ people puts the lie to the Minister’s claim that detention  is not imprisonment.   

 “I have seen the Residential Housing Project that is simply a prison by another name.  The Residential Housing Project is not a humane answer to our immigration  challenges.   

 “Detainees are suffering a culture of humiliation, frustration and obstruction. This 

 appears to be a deliberate culture designed to pressure asylum seekers into leaving 

 Australia.”   

 The Greens policy calls for the end of mandatory detent ion and instead a system of  open reception centres and genuine community based support for asylum seekers.   

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

