---
title: "2004 Who's Who guide to the ALP Conference."
date: "2004-01-29"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS"
subjects:
  - "ALP trade union relations"
  - "Party conferences, National"
  - "Party cohesion and loyalty"
  - "ALP"
  - "Quotations"
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
  - "FERGUSON, Laurie, MP"
  - "LATHAM, Mark"
  - "LAWRENCE, Carmen"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211263321
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4XBD6%22
---

 Thursday January 29, 2004                                                                                       KA11/04 

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations 

 Kevin Andrews    

 2004 WHO’S WHO GUIDE TO THE ALP  CONFERENCE    

 TODAY I have released a comprehensive Who’s Who Guide to the Labor Party conference to be  held in Sydney over the next three days.   

 The guide affirms the truism that a leopard never changes its spots. For the ALP nothing could  be more true.   

 The make up of the conference is again dominated by union heavyweights, Labor Party  apparatchiks, former and current members of parliament - state and federal - and failed ALP  candidates.   

 At the last ALP conference unions represented only 20 per cent of the private sector workforce  and 25 per cent of the public and private sector combined.   

 Now they represent just 17.7 and 23.1 per cent respectively.   

 Despite changes to the ALP rules to make conference membership more inclusive, unionists still  dominate the peak ALP decision policy making forum.   

 Mark Latham has previously argued that:   

 “….we have to face the reality that union coverage in the workforce has fallen to just 25%.  But unions still have 60% of the delegates at our conferences, so it is pretty clear that 60  doesn’t go into 25.  60 doesn’t go into 25, and there will have to be some adjustment, so  we’ll be making those adjustments. It is also pretty clear that 50 won’t go into 25 either and  that some adjustment simply doesn’t go far enough.”   

 - Sunday Sunrise, 25/11/01   

 If Mark Latham was right then, he is even more right now.   

 If 50 doesn’t go into 25 then it certainly doesn’t go into 23.1 and even less so into 17.7   

 Despite rule changes to limit so called union delegates to the conference to 50 per cent, the  conference comprises (conservatively based on publicly available information) more than 58 per  cent of people who are union members, be they official delegates or not.    

 In total, at least 85 per cent of delegates are union members and officials, former and current  members of parliament, Labor councillors and party apparatchiks, leaving at best 15 per cent of  delegates representing the broader community.   

 

 The fact is that the ALP is unrepresentative of the broader community and this is reflected in its  conference makeup and the platform it will be debating.   

 Similarly the Parliamentary ranks of the Labor Party are stacked with former union officials -  which has worsened since the 1998 election.   

 After the 1998 election union control of the Parliamentary Labor Party reached its highest level  in two decades with 55 per cent of members being former union activists.   

 Now, half a decade later, the percentage of ex-unionists has reached a staggering 66.3 per cent.   

 Labor’s front bench is even more unrepresentative with 83 per cent of the shadow ministry being  former and current unionists.   

 Combined with the unrepresentative make up of the ALP conference it is little wonder that the  Labor Party is fighting a rearguard action to wind back the industrial clock as its latest platform -  the fourth since 1996 under its third leader - reveals.   

 Since 1993 the Labor Party has failed to pursue genuine industrial reform.    

 Labor’s electoral successes of the 1980s coincided with minimal union influence over its  Parliamentary Party. In 1983, 1984 and 1987 union careerists controlled less than a third of  Labor’s Parliamentary ranks.   

 Labor in opposition, dominated as it is by reactionary unionists and apparatchiks, has fallen into  what Mark Latham has previously referred to as “scab lifting”.   

 Following the 1998 election Latham wrote that there are two types of Opposition parties.   

 “The first represents what I call scab lifting. This is an opposition which sees its role as  exploiting the change process. It tries to feed off the discomfort governments inevitably  encounter in having to manage the consequences of economic and social change. It  constantly tries to lift the scab off the wounds of change…Since 1996, federal Labor has  been in scab-lifter mode.   

 ….this approach sits easily with the political background of Labor’s inner circle,  comprising ex ALP State secretaries and ex union secretaries. The State secretaries know  of no other politics than scab lifting. The union secretaries automatically align themselves  with the producer interests. Each is comfortable with the critique of economic rationalism  - a belief that economic reform is contrary to society’s best interests.” 

 

 The conference is the first real test for Mark Latham to reveal whether he is a true reformer in  key areas such as workplace relations.   

 Will Latham stare down the unionists and party apparatchiks, or simply be a “scab lifter” now  aligned with the “producer interests” he despises. 

 

 NOTE. This edition of the Who’s Who carries commentary by Mark Latham on many of the  officials and unions who will be attending the conference and their commentary on him. Also  attached are the comments by the new ALP president, Carmen Lawrence, on union influence and  ALP membership. 

 

 

 

 MEDIA inquiries: Felicity Dargan (Press Secretary) 0409 550 446.   

 

 

 LAWRENCE QUOTES 

 

 ‘To widen participation in the debate…will require the party to reform itself, breaking the  stranglehold of the factions and moderating the power of the affiliated unions in the interests of  broadening the engaged membership.’ Dr Carmen Lawrence, Member for Fremantle, AFR,  30/11/01   

 

 “She (Lawrence) enraged unions with her consistent view that they have “disproportionate  influence” in the Labor Party through their affiliated membership, and that many wield influence  despite having no direct connection to the party.”  SMH, 13 October 2003   

 

 We lost because ‘the party did not open its doors.  So the membership means something…so  new members are not corralled into factions or groups.’    SMH, 13/11/01, Dr Carmen Lawrence, MP, Member for Fremantle and former ALP  Premier of Western Australia.   

 

 ‘There are enough people around now who want to give the party a wake-up call so I think fine,  go ahead with the (Hawke and Wran) review, but we need to shake up the party more  substantially than that.’   The Australian, 20/12/01, Dr Carmen Lawrence, MP, Member for Fremantle and former  ALP Premier of Western Australia.   

 

 My worry is that a lot of people don’t know why they are voting for the Labor party.’   The Australian, 20/12/01 Dr Carmen Lawrence, MP, Member for Fremantle and former  ALP Premier of Western Australia   

 

 ‘I feel ashamed that many of my colleagues haven’t yet spoken, but we have to make good that  shame.  (The policy) is demeaning to our fellow human beings, its damaging to the asylum  seekers and to our society, clearly demonstrating we need a change in policy.’   The Age, 5/02/02 Dr Carmen Lawrence, MP, Member for Fremantle and former ALP 

 Premier of Western Australia:   

 

 “We also need to recruit party members and candidates from a wider cross-section of the  community. Too many candidates come from the party’s organisations and Mps’ staff. Manly  have little experience with anything other than backroom operations and are not active in their  communities. The only qualification they require is a factional support base and a willingness to  conform to the faction’s demands...”  - Carmen Lawrence, “Party’s over for autocratic leadership”, The Australian, 14  November, 2001   

 

 

 LATHAM QUOTES   

 Latham on Michael Costa:   

 “I think when Michael Costa fixes the crime wave in my electorate, then I will think about taking  Michael seriously. The constant commentary from state people would be on stronger ground if  they addressed the real state problems before talking about things at a federal level. We would  then take them a bit more seriously.’ (Mark Latham, The Australian, 13/12/01)   

 Latham on Craig Emerson:   

 “What sort of sh..t is this? Do you feel embarrassed having to send out this garbage? Please take  me  off  your  distribution  list  for  Emerson’s  infantile  stunts.  They  are  an  embarrassment  to  the   public policy functions of the Parliament. Thank you.’ (Mark Latham, SMH, 4/11/00)    

 Latham on Laurie Ferguson:   

 ‘Laurie Ferguson has again demonstrated why he is one of the great embarrassments. His letter  …  is  a  rambling  mess.  The  only  reason  he  is  in  Parliament  is  his  father  had  the  numbers  in   Granville. The only reason he is on the frontbench is his brother had the numbers in the Left…’  (Mark Latham, SMH 31/5/01)   

 ‘If the Fergusons were listed on the stockmarket it would be under the trading name, Nepotism  Inc.’ (Mark Latham, SMH 31/5/01)   

 ‘Laurie’s political ability was fully exposed during the last campaign. It is an embarrassment to  the Labor movement and to think of him as a future Minister.’ (Mark Latham, SMH 31/5/01)   

 Latham on Martin Ferguson:   

 ‘As ever, the interests of the Left are totally abstracted from the mainstream concerns of working  class people. And to think Martin Ferguson has the hide to call people in Marrickville yuppies.  He ought to have a good look at the mob he is sponsoring in Liverpool. Please do not reward the  abstract  political  agenda  and  branch  stacking  of  the  Ferguson  Left.’  (Mark  Latham,  SMH   31/5/01) 

 

 ‘As  for  Mar’n,  the  poor  (expletive)  can  barely  string  two  words  together  and  get  his  tongue   around  the  English  language…  He  should  never  have  been  pushed  into  public  life.’  (Mark  Latham, SMH 31/5/01)   

 ‘Not surprisingly, given the way in which parliamentary careers were served to them on a plate,  the Fergusons have become disconnected from reality … In a world of family favours, notions of  decency and fairness go out the window.’ (Mark Latham, SMH 31/5/01)   

 ‘I  may  not  be  everyone’s  cup  of  tea,  but  whatever  I  have  achieved  in  politics  has  been  on  the   basis of merit and hard work. No-one ever gave me an inside lane. I’ll always be proud of that. I  will also stand against the nepotism of the Ferguson machine.’ (Mark Latham, SMH 31/5/01)   

 

 

 Latham on ‘Labor for Refugees:’   

 ‘Too many ALP activists are now willing to excuse or rationalise away bad behaviour, such as  juvenile crime, welfare fraud and illegal immigration … Groups like Labor for Refugees look at  atrocities such as the Woomera riots or the payment of money to people smugglers and declare  ‘the people who did this need help.’ The first priority of a just society is to help needy people  within  the  collective  boundaries  of  the  law.  The  first  priority  of  your  organisation  is  to  find   excuses for people to break the law.’ (Mark Latham, The Age, 9/2/02)   

 Latham on Kevin Rudd:   

 ‘Hey knucklehead!’ (Mark Latham, SMH, 4/11/00)   

 ‘The erudite Rudd is one of the brighter  people  in  federal  parliament.  Yet  like  so  many  of  the   modern  political  class,  he  has  the  roar  of  a  mouse  rather  than  the  crusading  zeal  of  a   parliamentary lion.’ (Mark Latham, Daily Telegraph, 14/5/01) 

 

 “As expected, Rudd has no suggestions of his own to assist the poor. As ever, rhetoric is easy in  politics. Change is hard.” (Mark Latham, AFR 14/5/00)   

 ‘Some  politicians  have  trouble  with  the  truth.  Labor  MP  Kevin  Rudd  has  consistently   misrepresented the nature of my direct democracy system in Werriwa. While this system is less  than perfect, it has a lot more going for it than Rudd’s little online fantasy.’ (Mark Latham, Daily  Telegraph, 25/6/01)   

 2) ALP colleagues criticising Latham (in alphabetical order):   

 Anthony Albanese on Latham:   

 ‘ … it seems to me that your rhetoric has the ability to be used by the conservatives. I know it’s  not your aim, but … certainly the end line is that it can be used to justify taking away that social  safety net, and that’s fundamental to the Labor way.’ (Anthony Albanese, SBS Insight, 19/11/98)   

 Bob Carr on Latham:   

 ‘Earlier I’d had a phone conversation with Mark Latham, unsuccessful right wing candidate and  staff member. He in tears. Hung up on me. He later phoned in to resign. Bugger him. He failed to  do the grassroots organisation that was necessary for a clear cut, unambiguous win. We bled on  the  canvas  for  three  weeks  as  a  result.’  (Extract  from  Marilyn  Dodkin’s  book  Bob  Carr:  The   Reluctant Leader, 2003, p27)    

 Michael Costa on Latham:   

 “…we  don’t  always  agree  with  Mark  Latham.  He’s  said  some  very  silly  things  about  trade   unions  and  a  few  other  things  in  recent  times.  So  I  wouldn’t  take  anything  that  Mark  says  as   being  a  reflection  of  the  position  of  the  ALP.”  (Michael  Costa,  Legislative  Council  Hansard,   12/12/01)   

 

 

 Simon Crean on Latham:   

 ‘I  wanted  talent  and  teamwork  (on  the  frontbench).  The  teamwork  question  was  not  in  doubt   with anyone else. It was with Mark.’ (Simon Crean, Weekend Australian, 24/11/01)   

 Laurie Ferguson on Latham:   

 “Obviously  his  refusal  to  face  a  preselection  has  caused  him  deep  embarrassment.  In  such   situations, it is always advisable to seek scapegoats … To avoid a repetition, he should change  tack. I suggest less time seeking the plaudits of PP McGuinness, David Kemp, Tony Abbott and  Piers Ackerman and more time in a place called the electorate office. (Laurie Ferguson, SMH, 

 31/5/03)   

 ‘I turn to his convoluted conspiracy theories. They owe more to the Protocols of the Elders of  Zion or Piltdown Man than to contemporary reality.’ (Laurie Ferguson, SMH, 31/5/03)   

 ‘Put simply, he has relentlessly sold out his electorate, his rank and file and western Sydney over  Badgery’s Creek. The motivation was an endless sycophancy to Leo McLeay. This has assured  his survival despite a cavalcade of self-indulgent disloyalty to the party through his outpourings.  What’s more, he gets paid for it while drawing a parliamentary salary - playing both sides of the  field.’ (Laurie Ferguson, SMH, 31/5/03)   

 Kevin Rudd on Latham:   

 “Latham has written much that is innovative in each of these areas (education, welfare, taxation).  His most recent tax proposal, however, is just plain loopy.’ (Kevin Rudd, The Australian, 9/3/00)   

 ‘Mark  Latham  is  a  bright  bloke,  but  sometimes  the  brightest  of  blokes  can  come  up  with  the   dumbest of ideas.’ (Kevin Rudd, Daily Telegraph, 17/5/01)   

 3) Unionists criticising Latham:   

 ACTU:   

  ‘People like Mark Latham must have lost the plot when he thinks that shares are the elixir of life.’ (Sharon 

 Burrow, ACTU President, ABC Lateline, 6/5/02) 

 

 AEU:   

 ‘If he (Latham)  is allowed anywhere near education policy in this country there will be a blue.’  (Denis Fitzgerald, Australian Education Union President, AEU Federal Conference, 16/1/02)   

 AMWU:   

 ‘I  think  Mark  Latham’s  ideas  are  quite  wrong  in  a  range  of  areas.’  (Doug  Cameron,  AMWU   secretary, Ch 10 Meet the Press, 30/6/02)     

 ‘I don't care how much the ALP whinges and Mark Latham pontificates about aspirational voters,  there are lots of  working class people out there doing it really tough and they need a champion, 

 they need a Labor Party or a Party  that will stand up for them and the ALP at the moment is not  that Party.’ (Doug Cameron, AMWU Secretary, Politics in the Pub speech, 26/3/02)   

 ‘I am sick and tired of hearing about Mark Latham, a professional politician all his life, who has  never  been  on  a  normal  job,  who,  because  he  lives  in  Campbelltown  is  able  to  pull  a  cloak  of   working class respectability around himself for the ‘bullshit’ he goes on with.  It is outrageous, he  has  never  had  to  battle  to  pay  his  MasterCard  or  his  mortgage.’  (Doug  Cameron,  AMWU   Secretary, Politics in the Pub speech, 26/3/02)   

 ‘We now have Mark Latham with responsibility to promote employee share ownership schemes.   He is the Shadow Minister for mini-capitalists.  That is not a Labor party for me and I would say  that its not a Labor party for many of our members.’ (Doug Cameron, AMWU Secretary, Politics 

 in the Pub speech, 26/3/02)   

 Transport Workers Union:   

 ‘Well I'd say that his (Latham’s) ideas and policies are maverick and deformed. I think that they  have  very  little  substance  behind  them.’  (Tony  Sheldon,  TWU  NSW  Secretary,  Ch  9  Sunday,   30/6/02) 

 

 Workers Online:   

 ‘Far from being Labor’s new Light on the Hill, Latham’s share ownership agenda is a dousing of  the  flame,  a  desertion  of  the  ideas  of  working  together  as  a  society  rather  than  as  individual   players for our mutual benefit. If we give up on this we may as well all join the Liberals. Mark  could do us all a favour by leading the way.’ (Workers Online, 10/5/02)   

 ‘Some months ago Latham pronounced the time had come to muscle up to the Liberals. Ever since  he’s  been  giving  an  impression  of  a  canetoad  on  steroids  -  ugly  and  venomous  and  prone  to   explode.’ (Workers Online, 28/6/02)    

 4) Latham criticising unions:   

 Mark  Latham  argues  ‘…we  have  to  face  the  reality  that  union  coverage  in  the  workforce  has   fallen to just 25%.  But unions still have 60% of the delegates at our conferences, so its pretty  clear  that  60  doesn’t  go  into  25.   60  doesn’t  go  into  25,  and  there  will  have  to  be  some   adjustment, so we’ll be making those adjustments.’ (Source. Sunday Sunrise, 25/11/01)  Its also  pretty  clear  that  50  won’t  go  into  25  either  and  that  ‘some’  adjustment  simply  doesn’t  go  far   enough.   

 ‘If  trade  union  membership  had  not  fallen  so  sharply  there  would  be  no  need  to  review  the   relationship  between  political  and  industrial  Labor.’  (Mark  Latham,  From  the  Suburbs,  2003,   p66) 

 

 ‘My  criticism  of  modern  trade  unionism  is  that  its  become  too  big,  centralised  and  bureaucratic   …’ (Mark Latham, Workers Online, 23/4/99)    

 ‘Trade  unionism  in  this  country  is  in  crisis…  How  can  unions  survive  if  they  fail  to  appeal  to   people in newly created enterprises and workplaces?  The union movement needs to find a way of 

 becoming  relevant  …  Otherwise,  it  runs  the  risk  of  becoming  yet  another  dinosaur  from  the   industrial age.’ (Mark Latham’s column, Daily Telegraph, 23/11/98)    

 ‘Whereas in its origins unionism was a force for economic change and progress, it has fallen into  the habit of opposing change in its contribution to most issues.  In Australia there is little evidence  to suggest that the leadership of the union movement has adapted successfully to the demands of  the new economy.’ (Latham M, 1998, Civilising Global Capital, Allen and Unwin, Sydney, p85)   

 ‘The emergence of new labour market structures has fragmented the economic interests of labour  and  challenged  the  effectiveness  of  the  trade  union  movement.’  (Latham  M,  1998,  Civilising   Global Capital, Allen and Unwin, Sydney, p75) 

 

 ‘Given  a  choice  between  two  Scotsmen,  we  need  to  follow  Adam  Smith,  not  Doug  Cameron.’   (Mark Latham’s column, AFR, 31/7/00)     

 ‘Parties that cling to old constituencies and old ways are not likely to survive.’ (Latham M, 1998,  Civilising Global Capital, Allen and Unwin, Sydney, p336)   

 ‘Free  trade,  of  course,  is  all  about  fair  trade  -  making  it  free  and  open  for  all  nations.   The   Cameron/Scott policy doesn’t even pass the dictionary test.  Even worse, it fails the reality test.’  (Mark Latham’s column, AFR, 31/7/00)   

 ‘We  pretend  that  …  old  industrial  institutions,  such  as  trade  unionism  and  working  class   solidarity, are still in good shape …’ (Mark Latham, From the Suburbs, 2003, p34)    

  ‘They (aspirational voters) have done precisely what we have always wanted them to do - work  hard,  acquire  skills  and  accumulate  assets.  Yet  some  Labor  activists,  obviously  uncomfortable   with the practice of economic mobility, have the hide to call these people greedy … Do not think  for  a  moment  that  these  critics  have  impoverished  themselves  in  the  search  for  ideological   purity.’ (Mark Latham, From the Suburbs, 2003, p68)   

 ‘Contrary to the rhetoric of left wing politics, poor people have little faith in government. They  already  live  in  the  equivalent  of  socialist  suburbs,  with  90  per  cent  of  the  income  and  assets   owned by government … The distrust of bureaucracies such as the Department of Housing and  Social Security and the Child Support Agency is palpable … Non government agencies such as  St  Vincent  de  Paul  and  Anglicare  are  well  respected  for  their  pastoral  role.  Based  on  the   evidence, we need to mobilise more resources of this kind.’ (Mark Latham, From the Suburbs,  2003, p85)   

 8) Latham on the ALP and miscellaneous issues    

 ALP:   

 ‘A party like Labor has no future if it fails to support the growth potential of a market economy.  There  can  be  no  good  society  without  market-based  growth  and  employment.  This  is  why   Labor’s  post-1996  scepticism  about  the  market  is  so  concerning.  And  so  unnecessary…Since   1996,  the  ALP  has  fallen  too  easily  for  the  populist  fashion  in  Australian  politics  -  the  false   divide  between  economy  and  society…  The  Party’s  electoral  strategy  has  been  to  build  a   coalition of producer interests and then campaign against any type of economic reform. It now  prefers industry deals and cash handouts to the basics of a market economy.’ (AFR, 9/11/98) 

 

 ‘Whenever we modernise, we win. Whenever we react to old agendas, we lose.’ (Mark Latham,  From the Suburbs, 2003, p57)  

 

 43rd ALP National Conference - January 2004   

 The 43rd ALP National Conference is comprised of 404 delegates.   

 Despite the much vaunted reforms to the ALP structure, it is still dominated by unionists and  party apparatchiks.  The table below, complied by publicly available data, reveals the make up of  the conference delegates.    

 It is worthwhile noting that many State branches require either directly or indirectly that people  joining the Labor Party must be union member if eligible.  Thus the percentages quoted below  are conservative.   

 404 delegates (including non voting Presidents and State secretaries)   

 Background  Number  Percentage  

 Union members/officials 233 58% 

 Members/former members/Labor councillors 99 25% 

 Staffer/former staffer 78 19% 

 Former candidates 25 6% 

 

 Note: Some fall into multiple categories   

 In total at least 85% of delegates are either:   

 - union officials 

 - Members or former Members of Parliament  - Labor councillors 

 - Labor Party officials  - Staffers or former staffer  - Failed candidates 

 

 

 Allocation of Delegates Number of 

 delegates 

 Number of  union delegates  Percentage of  union delegates 

 Federal Presidents 3 0 0% 

 Federal Parliamentary Leaders 4 4 100% 

 Federal Parliamentary representatives 6 5 83% 

 Young Labor 3 1 33% 

 NSW  113  65  58%  

 Northern Territory 8 1 12.5% 

 Queensland  67  46  69%  

 South Australia 38 22 58% 

 Tasmania  23  8  35%  

 Victoria  88  58  66%  

 Western Australia 42 23 55% 

 

 Note: The information in the table attached is sourced from Parliamentary Handbooks,  Parliamentary Libraries, union websites and other publicly available documents. 

 The ‘Who’s Who’ at the 2004 Australian Labor Party Convention 

 

 

 Delegate 

 

 

 Union   

 

 Labor Links 

 National - Non Voting Presidents 

 Carmen Lawrence 

 

 President of ALP, Labor for Refug ees, Emily’s List, former minister and former WA  premier 

 Barry Jones 

 

 Vice President of the ALP, fo rmer President, Former Labor Minister 

 Warren Mundine 

 

 Junior Vice Presiden t of the ALP, CEO of NSW Native Titles, Former Branch Secretary  and National and State Executive 

 Parliamentary Leaders 

 Mark Latham 

 Australian Services Union 

 Mayor of Liverpool 1991-94, former staffer to Bob Carr and Gough Whitlam 

 Jenny Macklin 

 CPSU 

 Former Adviser to former Deputy PM  Brian Howe, former adviser to Victorian Health  Minister David White, research co-ordinat or at the Labor Resource Centre 19881-85 

 John Faulkner 

 Liquor, Hospitality and  Miscellaneous Workers’  Union, NSW Teacher  Federation 

 ALP Assistant General Secretary 198 0-89, and staffer to NSW Minister 

 Stephen Conroy 

 Transport Workers Union 

 TWU officer 92-96, former staffer to federal and state labor members 

 Federal Parliamentary Labor Party Representatives 

 Anna Burke 

 Australian Services Union 

 National Industrial Officer for the FSU 1994-98 

 Martyn Evans 

 

 Former Minister for Health, Family and Community Services  and the Aged 1992-93 in  South Australian Labor Government 

 Martin Ferguson  

 Liquor, Hospitality and  Miscellaneous Workers’ Union

 ACTU President 1990-1996, Federated Mi scellaneous Workers Union 1975-90 

 Michael Forshaw 

 Australian Workers Union 

 General Secretary of the AW U 1991-94, Senior industrial o fficer with the AWU 1981-89,  ACTU Executive 1989-91 

 Julia Gillard 

 Australian Services Union,  CPSU 

 Chief of Staff to former Victorian Oppos ition Leader, John Brumby 1996-98, partner with  Slater and Gordon 1990-96, Solicitor 1987-90 

 Tanya Plibersek 

 CPSU 

 Electorate officer to Senator Campbell and Senator Childs, professional officer in the  Domestic Violence Unit, NSW Minister fo r the Status and Ad vancement of Women,  Women’s officer at the UTS Students Association 

 Young Labor 

 Ryan Batchelor 

 National Union of Students 

 WA govt Staffer, YL  National Conference Delegate , Education Council President,  University of Western Australia student guild 

 Damian Kassabgi 

 

 NSW Young Labor Executive 

 Alexandra Stalder 

 

 Victorian La bor Party headquarters staffer Australian Capital Territory 

 Jon Stanhope 

 

 Former Beasley Staffer 

 Jenny Hargreaves 

 

 Public servant  

 Nicholas Martin 

 CFMEU 

 Convenor of the Young Labor Le ft, Former staffer, and former National of Union  Students candidate 

 Sue Robinson 

 

 Labor staffer 

 Christ Sant 

 

 Lawyer, former senior vice president of the ACT Labor party 

 Sarah Schoonwaler 

 CFMEU 

 President ACT CFMEU, Industrial officer CFMEU 

 Athol Williams 

 SDA 

 Official SDA for nearly 30 years 

 Matthew Cossey  (Territory Secretary -  non voting) 

 

 

 New South Wales 

 Bob Carr 

 

 Premier, Education officer - Labor Council 1972-78 

 Anthony Albanese 

 AMWU 

 Senior polic y adviser to NSW Premier Carr 1995- 96, Assistant General Secretary of  NSW ALP 1989-95 

 Mark Arbib 

 

 Assistant Secretary, NSW ALP 

 Helen Ball 

 

 

 John Berry 

 

 

 Paul Bastian 

 AMWU 

 Secretary, AMWU 

 Diane Beamer 

 TWU 

 NSW Minister, former staffer, Join ed the Australian Labor Party, Emu Plains Branch  1975. Active in local branch, Federal Elec torate Council, Stat e Electoral Council  (including term as President of the State Council). Active in Young Labor, delegate to  several Young Labor conferences. Member  of the NSW Branch Administrative  Committee, Member of the National Executive. 

 Derrick Belari 

 

 

 Sharon Bird 

 

 Former and current Labor Candidate for Cunningham, former staffer 

 David Borger 

 

 Former Local councillor, lost preselection for State seat in 2003 in factional brawl, former  Labor Candidate for Parramatta 

 Chris Bowen 

 

 Chief of Staff to Carl Scully 

 Natalie Bradbury 

 Health Research Employees  Association 

 Organiser 

 Katie Brassil 

 

 Labor Councillor, NSW Labor Wo men’s forum secretary, former Fitzgibbon staffer 

 Laurie Brereton 

 Electrical Trades Un ion 

 Member of NSW Parliament 1970 - 1990, former Hawke/Keating Minister 

 Anthony Burke 

 SDA 

 Member of NSW Parliament elected in 2003, former Electorate Officer to Senator  Graham Richardson 1993 - 1994 and Sena tor Michael Forshaw 1994-1995. Lobbyist -  Director , "Euthanasia No" 1995 - 1997. Lobbyi st - Campaigner Manager, Australian  Republican Movement 1997. Director of A ticus. Union Organiser to SDA 1997 - 2003  

 Linda Burney 

 

 NSW State member for Canterbury - 1st indigenous fe male elected to NSW Parliament  (2003) 

 Janice Burnswoods 

 NSW Teachers’ Federation 

 NSW Upper House member - Joined ALP at Drummoyne in 1972. Officer of NSW Labor  Womens Committee: 1977-86. Convenor of na tional Labor Women' s Conference: 1999.  Member of NSW Administrati ve Committee: 1978 - 1985. Delegate or proxy to national  Conferences since 1981. Member  of National Executive: 2000 -. Former Teachers  Federation Executive 

 Cherie Burton 

 ASU 

 Member of NSW Parliament, Previous experience as  an accounts clerk, a Labour Council  Officer, union official, and as a senior adviso r to the Premier, Mr Carr. Office holder at  Branch S.E.C. and F.E.C. level. Delegate  to Annual Conference  since 1980. Former  President of Australian Young Labor. 

 Doug Cameron 

 AMWU 

 National Secretary, AMWU, Vi ce President ACTU since 1975, Former National  Secretary, Metal Trades Federation of Unions 

 Nicole Campbell 

 APSMEA 

 APSMEA offici al, former candidate for Bennelong 2001 

 George Campbell 

 AMWU 

 NSW Senator, former ACTU Vice Pr esident, ALP Vice President, National Secretary of  the AMWU 

 Diane Carter 

 

 Tamworth Labor Councillor 

 Chris Christodoulou 

 NSW Labor Council 

 Deputy Assistant Secretary, NSW Labor Council 

 Lisa Clancy 

 

 ALP candidate for state seat 2003 

 Russell Collison 

 AWU 

 State Secretary AWU,  Vice President NSW Labour Council 

 Carmel Cook 

 LHMU 

 Hunter Region Secretary of LHMU 

 

 

 

 Michael Costa 

 Rail Tram and Bus union ASU 

 Mini ster for Transport, Former Secretary of  NSW Labor Council, Assistant Secretary of   Labor Council 1994-98, Managing Director - Chifley Financial Services 1989-94 

 Sophie Cotsis 

 LHMU 

 Organiser LHMU, former Labor candidate 

 Kristyn Crossfield 

 

 

 John Della Bosca 

 ASU 

 NSW Minister  for State, Research Assistan t to Senator Kerry Sibraa 1976 - 1979.  Australian Transport Officers' Federation: National Research Offi cer 1979 -81 and State  Organiser 1981 -1983. Australian Labor Party (NSW Branch): State Organiser 1983 -1985; Assistant Secretary 1985 -1990;  General Secretary 1990 - 1999 

 Geoff Derrick 

 FSU 

 Secretary, FSU 

 Meryl Dillon 

 

 Moree Shire Plains Councillor 

 Marilyn Dodkin 

 

 ALP Historian - Aut hor Bob Carr: The Reluctant Leader 

 Gregory Donnelly 

 SDA 

 State Secretary SDA 

 Amanda Fazio 

 United Services Union 

 NSW Member of Parliament - Worked for the Australian Labor Party as Executive  Officer of the NSW Branch from 1992 - 2 000. Member of the ALP from 1977 and  has been active in all levels of the Party - particularly in respect to Party rules and  increasing the participation of women. Served on the Party's Rules Committee  since 1979 and has also served on th e Community Service Policy Committee,  the Status of Women's Committee and the Women's Forum. Attended most  National ALP Conferences for the last 25 years. Has worked on the staff of the  House of Representatives Speakers, Hon Leo McLeay MP and Stephen Martin  MP.  

 Andrew Ferguson 

 CFMEU 

 CFMEU State secr etary, brother of Laurie and Martin 

 Luke Foley 

 ASU 

 Secretary, NSW, ASU 

 Wayne Forno 

 TWU 

 TWU Sydney sub branch secretary 

 Robyn Fortescue 

 AMWU 

 Regional secretary AMWU 

 Aaron Gadiel 

 

 Former Chie f of Staff to Eddie Obied 

 John Gilmore 

 

 

 Stephen Gurney 

 Australasian Meat Industry  Employees Union 

 Industrial Officer AMIEU 

 Margaret Hains 

 

 

 Brian Harris 

 MEU 

 General Secretary, MEU Federated Clerks Union 

 Jodie Harrison 

 

 

 Julie Hatcher 

 

 

 Nadine Hickey 

 

 

 Kelly Hoare 

 CPSU 

 Member for Charlton, fo rmer electorate officer to Bob Brown 

 George Houssos 

 

 President NSW Young Labor and staffer to Eddie Obied 

 Eddie Husic 

 CEPU 

 Organiser CEPU, likely ca ndidate in Greenway at next election 

 Veronica Husted 

 Public Service Association 

 Former ALP candidate  

 Stephen Hutchins 

 TWU 

 NSW Senator, Federal Presid ent of the TWU 1995-98, Secretary of the TWU (NSW)  1993-99, Assistant Secretary of the TWU (NSW) 1989-93 and President of the NSW  ALP 1998-02 

 Stephen Jones 

 CPSU 

 Regional Secretary CPSU 

 Sarah Kaine 

 NSW Labour Council 

 NSW La bour Council Organising Coordinator 

 Tony Kelly 

 

 NSW Minister Local Government 

 Kristina Keneally 

 ASU 

 NSW Member of Parliament 

 Janice Kershaw 

 

 Councillor - Wollongong City Council 

 Jeffery Lawrance 

 LHMU 

 National Secr etary LHMU, Vice President NSW ALP 

 Michael Lee 

 

 Former Member for Dobell, currently  running as Sydney Lord Mayor as Labor candidate 

 Mark Lennon 

 NSW Labour Council 

 Assi stant Secretary NSW Labour Council 

 Nick Lewocki 

 Rail, tram and bus union  

 Secretary, Rail, tram and bus union 

 Anthony Maher 

 CFMEU 

 CFMEU National President 

 Maurice May 

 

 

 Ian McCarthy 

 CEPU 

 Branch Secretary, CEPU 

 Robert McClelland 

 

 Shadow Minister for Homeland Affairs 

 Gregory McLean 

 ASU 

 Assist ant National Secretary, ASU 

 Leo McLeay 

 

 Member for Watson, former State Or ganiser and Assistant Ge neral Secretary, NSW ALP 

 Sally McManus 

 ASU 

 Executive President, ASU 

 Elizabeth McNamera 

 

 Former senior Staffer to  NSW Minister and form er Young Labor President 

       Reba Meagher 

 TWU 

 State Minister for Fair Trading, former  Electorate Officer to Paul Elliott, M.P., Federal  Member for Parramatta, 1990-92. Industrial Officer for Transport Workers Union  (N.S.W. Branch) 1993-94. Member of ALP Administrative Committee, 1993-present .  Member of ALP Disputes Committee, 1992-95. Alternate Delegate to A.L.P. National  Conference, 1994. Delegate to A.L.P. State Conference, 1990-present. President N.S.W.  Young Labor, 1992-1994. Vice President N.S.W. Young Labor, 1992. Delegate to  N.S.W. Labor Council (T.W.U.), 1993-95. Dele gate to A.C.T.U. Congress (T.W.U.)  1994.  

 James Metcher 

 CEPU 

 Secretary NSW CEPU 

 Rebecca Mitsud 

 ETU 

 Legal officer, ETU, Young Labor 

 Philip Morgans 

 

 

 John Morris 

 LHMU 

 Divisional Presiden t and Branch Vice President LHMU 

 Peter Mylan 

 Health and Research Employee  Association 

 Organiser, Health and Rese arch Employee Association 

 Deborah O’Neill 

 

 University Lecturer, Former Labor Candidate 

 Annie Owens 

 LHMU 

 Branch secretary, LHMU 

 Karyn Paluzzano 

 Teachers’ Federation 

 Member NSW Parliament 

 Alison Peters 

 NSW Labour Council 

 Deputy A ssistant Secretary, NSW Labour Council 

 Roger Price 

 ASU 

 Member for Chifley 

 Jan Primrose 

 AMWU 

 AMWU staffer 

 Anthony Ramsey 

 

 Academic 

 Andrew Refshauge 

 

 NSW Deputy Premier, f ounding member of doctors reform society 

 Bernard Riordan 

 CEPU 

 Secretary CEPU electrical branch - Vice President NSW ALP 

 Christine Robertson 

 Health and Research Employee  Association 

 Member of NSW Upper House, former President of New South Wales Nurses  Association - Tamworth Base Hospital Bran ch 1996 - 2003 and sub Branch secretary for  two years. Union Representive to Rural Communities Consultative Council 1996 -1998.  Rural communit

 y  member to NSW Board of Adult and Communit

 y  Education 1998 - 

 2001. 

 John Robertson 

 NSW Labour Council 

 Secretary NSW Labour Council 

 Eric Roozendaal 

 

 NSW ALP secretary 

 Michelle Rowland 

 

 

 Adam Searle 

 

 Former Chief of Staff to Labor State Minister, Branch ALP President, failed candidate in  Macquarie 

 Paul Sekfy 

 

 Former ALP candidate, contact for ASU campaign 

 Anthony Sheldon 

 TWU 

 Secretary, NSW TWU 

 Craig Smith 

 CFMEU 

 Secretary, Forestry  and Furnishing Products CFMEU NSW 

 Ursula Stephens 

 NSW Public Service  Association 

 NSW Senator, Presiden t, NSW Labor Party 

 John Sutton 

 CFMEU 

 Assistant National Secretary, CFMEU 

 Natalie Sykes Hutchins 

 TWU 

 TWU organiser 

 Jill Taylor 

 

 

 Anne Thompson 

 AWU 

 AWU regiona l organiser, central coast 

 David Tierney 

 

 Former Richardson staffer and chief of staff to Michael Knight 

 Joe Tripodi 

 ASU 

 Member of NSW Parliament, former Labor staffer and union official 

 Barry Tubner 

 Textile, clothing and footwear  union 

 Secretary TCFU 

 Michael Veitch 

 

 Former ALP candidate, labor councillor 

 Maryn Wagstaff 

 

 

 Wendy Waller 

 

 Labor Deputy Mayor Liverpool Council 

 Christopher Warren 

 Media Arts and Entertainment  Alliance 

 Federal secretary MAEA 

 Suzanne West 

 

 Former ALP Senator 

 Steve Whan 

 

 State Member of Parliament 

 Monika Wheeler 

 

 NSW Youn g Labor executive member 

 Cassandra Wilkinson 

 

 Former ALP staff 

 Geoffrey Williams 

 SDA 

 Hamilton office SDA 

 Michael Williamson 

 HSU 

 General Secretary HSU, Vice President NSW ALP, Vice President NSW Labor Council 

 Penelope Wright 

 

 

 Michael Want 

 ASU 

 Secretary, ASU Clerical branch 

 Johno Johnson 

 

 Former Member of NSW parliament  

 Northern Territory 

 Clare Martin 

 

 Chief Minist er, former ABC journalist 

 Sara Amdahl 

 

 Staffer to the Chief Minister 

 Bob Durnan 

 

 Australians for Reconciliation advocate 

 Laurene Hall 

 

 Former ALP candida te, ex-Telstra union delegate 

 Jeff Jones 

 LHMWU 

 Secretary NT LHMWU 

 Kieran Phillips 

 

 Sta ffer to Chief Minister 

 Marion Scrymgour 

 

 NT Minister for Family & Children Services 

 Brett Walker 

 

 NT ALP Secretary 

 Queensland 

 Peter Beattie 

 Queensland Railway  Employees Union 

 Premier - former ALP state secretary 

 Sarah Abbott 

 National Union of Student s 

 Former branch president of ALP 

 Katelyn Allen 

 AMWU 

 AMWU official 

 Chris Barrett 

 Queensland Council of  Unions 

 Assistant Secretary 

 Greg Betts 

 CFMEU 

 Mining and Energy Division CFMEU district secretary 

 Arch Bevis 

 Queensland Teachers Union,  CEPU 

 Member for Brisbane, Former Deputy Secret ary and official of Qld Teachers Union 

 Julie Bignell 

 ASU 

 ASU official 

 Gary Bullock 

 LHMU 

 Assistant Secretary LHMU 

 Terri Butler 

 AWU 

 Organiser AWU, former pr esident of James Cook University Union 

 Terry Callaghan 

 Queensland Teachers Union -  Lifemember 

 

 Russell Carr 

 AMIEU 

 Townsville President ACTUQ, 

 Terrie Carrington 

 SDA 

 Organiser 

 Frank Chambers 

 AWU 

 National Vice President AWU 

 Matt Collins 

 ASU 

 Communications officer ASU 

 Mick Colwell 

 

 

 Daryl Cox 

 

 

 Yvette D’Ath 

 AWU 

 Senior Industrial Advocate, AWU 

 Andrew Dettmer 

 AMWU 

 Assistant St ate Secretary TS&A Division AMWU 

 Cameron Dick 

 

 Senior sta ffer, ALP State Minister 

 Owen Doogan 

 Rail, Tram and Bus Union 

 Secretary Ra il Tram and Bus Union, National ALP Policy Committee 

 Cheryl Dorron 

 Queensland Nurses Union 

 Failed ALP candidate 

 Jenny Gribaudo 

 PSA 

 Electorate officer 

 David Hanna 

 BLF 

 Queensla nd committee member BLF 

 Jenny Hill 

 PSA 

 Failed ALP candidate 

 John Hogg 

 SDA 

 Queensland Senato r, former SDA secretary 

 Tom Jeffers 

 AWU 

 

 Chris Ketter 

 SDA 

 Secretary Queensland SDA 

 Tegan Krarup 

 

 

 Sophia La Pietra 

 

 

 Peter Lees 

 AMWU 

 Assistant Stat e Secretary Metal Division AMWU 

 Bill Ludwig 

 AWU 

 National and State President AWU and ACTU executive 

 Joseph Ludwig 

 AWU 

 Senator for Qu eensland, former AWU official 

 Steve Mason 

 CEPU 

 Branch Secret ary Communication division CEPU 

 Sandra McGrady 

 

 

 Shirley Mellor 

 LHMU 

 President Queensland Branch, LHMU 

 Cameron Milner 

 

 State Secretary Queensland ALP 

 Ron Monaghan 

 LHMU 

 Secretary Queensland br anch LHMU, President of Queensland ALP 

 Henrietta Moran 

 ASU 

 

 Noel Morris 

 

 

 Charis Mullen 

 

 Queensland Minister Staffer 

 Shayne Neumann 

 

 

 Stacia Palaszcsuk 

 

 

 Gillian Pechey 

 

 

 Graham Perret 

 Queensland Independent  Education Union 

 Organiser 

 Warren Pitt 

 

 Minister in  Beattie Government 

 Chris Price 

 CFMEU 

 President CFMEU, Construc tion and General, National Divisional Office 

 David Pullen 

 LHMWU 

 Union official 

 Michael Ravbar 

 CFMEU 

 

 Amanda Richards 

 Queensland Nurses Union 

 O ccupational Health and Safety Officer and Executive Member of Queensland Council of  Trade Unions 

 Kevin Rudd 

 Queensland Public Sector  Union 

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Former ALP Staffer 

 Garry Ryan 

 AWU 

 District Secretary AWU 

 Catherine Savage 

 SDA 

 Organising staff 

 Con Sciacca 

 National Union of  Workers/AWU 

 Member for Bowman 

 David Smith 

 ASU 

 Branch Secretary ASU 

 Valerie Smith 

 

 

 Paul Stafford 

 NUW 

 Branch Secretary 

 Kathie Standen 

 

 Ministerial st affer to Queensland Government 

 Carryn Sullivan 

 

 Member of Queensland Parliament 

 Wayne Swan 

 AWU 

 Member for Lilley, former staffer and state secretary of ALP 

 Melissa Thomas 

 

 Staffer Queensland ALP Headquarters 

 Kellie Trigger 

 

 Failed ALP candidate and electorate officer 

 Wendy Turner 

 ASU 

 Vice President ASU Queensland Branch 

 Marina Williams 

 AWU 

 Organiser AWU 

 Dick Williams 

 CEPU 

 National President and Qu eensland Secretary CEPU, Electrical Division 

 Tony Wolfenden 

 

 Former CFMEU staffer, TWU organiser 

 Terry Wood 

 

 

 Carmel Ybarlucea 

 

 Former James Cook University Union President 

 South Australia 

 Mike Rann 

 

 Premier, former staffer to Don Dunstan and John Bannon 

 Brer Adams 

 SDA 

 Staffer to Minister for Environment,  former President of Flinders University Student  Association 

 Dascia Bennett 

 

 Convenor, Labor women 

 Quentin Black 

 SDA 

 Twice failed candidate 

 Mark Butler 

 LHMU 

 Branch secretary LHMU 

 Nicholas Champion 

 

 

 Susan Close 

 

 

 Moira Deslandes 

 SDA 

 Failed candidate, Ch ief of Staff to E ducation Minister 

 Alexander Dighton 

 SDA 

 National President of Young Labor 

 Don Farrell 

 SDA 

 SDA secretary 

 Bernard Finnigan 

 SDA 

 

 Alex Gallacher 

 TWU 

 TWU branch secretary 

 Robyn Geraghty 

 CEPU 

 Member for State Parliament 

 Beverly Hall 

 

 Academic 

 Wayne Hanson 

 AWU 

 AWU Branch secretary 

 Phillip Harrison 

 ASU 

 President ASU 

 Annette Hurley 

 SDA 

 SA director of Hawker Britton, former Labor Member and deputy leader 

 Matthew Loader 

 TWU 

 Former staffer, s pokesman for ‘lets get equal campaign’ 

 Carmela Luscri 

 

 Staffer to Minister Weatheril 

 Brigid Mahoney 

 

 

 Leah Marrone 

 LHMU 

 Student politician 

 Anna McEwen 

 ASU 

 ASU State Secretary 

 Paul McMahon 

 AMWU 

 AMWU - Assistan t State Secretary, Vehicle Division 

 Nigel Minge 

 

 

 John Olenich 

 

 Staffer, President Young Labor SA 

 Noel Paul 

 

 Junior Vice President SA ALP 

 Carolyn Pickles 

 LHMU 

 Former member of Parliament, former State ALP President 

 Matt Pinnegar 

 

 

 Davine Quirke 

 

 Deputy Convenor La bor Women, wife of John Quirke, former Member of Parliament 

 Amanda Rishworth 

 SDA 

 Organiser SDA, former Pres ident Flinders University Student Association 

 Shannon Sampson 

 

 

 Trevor Smith 

 CFMEU 

 National President CFME U and secretary of the forestry division 

 Lucia Snelling 

 

 

 Timothy Stanley 

 

 Failed candidate for Adelaide 

 Trish White 

 SDA 

 State Minister for Education, National ALP executive 

 Russel Wortley 

 TWU 

 TWU Gas industry Sub Branch Secretary 

 Roger Zubrinich 

 

 Academic 

 Ian Hunter 

 

 State ALP Secretary 

 

 Tasmania 

 Jim Bacon 

 BLF 

 Premier, former secretary of the TTLC , former member of the ACTU executive, former  state secretary BLF in Tasmania 

 Philip Baker 

 AMWU 

 State secretary AMWU 

 Catryna Bilyk 

 

 Failed Senate candida te, Former ASU organiser, former  Vice President of the ALP in  Tasmania 

 Julie Collins 

 

 

 Sean Kelly 

 ASU 

 State secretary ASU 

 Duncan Kerr 

 

 Member for Dennison 

 David Llewellyn 

 

 State Minister for Health 

 Sue Mackay 

 CPSU/CEPU 

 Senator for Tasmania , former PSU organiser and Labor staffer 

 Scott McLean 

 CFMEU 

 State secret ary CFMEU, forestry division 

 Rex Neil 

 

 

 Leah Nischler 

 

 

 David O’Byrne 

 LHMU 

 Secretary LHMU, Vice President of Tasmanian ALP 

 Helen Polley 

 

 

 David Price 

 

 State Secretary of ALP 

 Allison Ritchie 

 

 Member of Tasmanian Parliament, former ALP staffer 

 Nick Sherry  

 

 Shadow Minister and Senato r for Tasmania, former senior union official 

 Lisa Singh 

 

 Director, working wo mens centre, former staffer 

 Lin Thorp 

 

 Member of Tasmanian Parliament, former ALP staffer 

 Anne Urquhart 

 AMWU 

 President of AMWU (Tasmani an Division), Vice President of Tasmanian ALP 

 Ian Wakefield 

 AWU 

 Secretary AWU 

 Nicole Wells 

 

 Duncan Kerr staffer 

 Kelly Wood 

 

 

 Sally-Anne Young 

 

 

 Victoria 

 Steve Bracks 

 AMWU 

 Premier 

 Russell Atwood 

 ASU 

 Executive President Victorian ASU 

 Rosemary Barker 

 

 Chief of Staff to Victorian Minister 

 Jenny Beales 

 

 Failed Labor candidate 

 Liz Beattie 

 ASU 

 Member of Victoria n Parliament, former ASU official 

 Graham Bird 

 Australian Meat Industry  Employees Union 

 Secretary and Treasurer AMIEU 

 Anne Black Blandthorn 

 ACTU 

 Electorate officer 

 Raif Bokhaazi 

 

 

 Bill Bolitho 

 

 Senior Ministerial staffer, failed candidate for Gippsland 

 Christine Campbell 

 SDA/ASU 

 Member of Victorian Parliament, form er staffer and union official 

 Kim Carr 

 Federated Teachers Union and  Technical Teachers Union 

 Senator and Shadow Minister, former staffer 

 Matt Carrick 

 NUW 

 Adviser to John Brumby 

 Jacinta Collins 

 SDA/ASU 

 Senator and Sh adow Minister, former union official 

 Trish Conneily 

 SDA 

 Senior organiser SDA 

 Ann Corcoran 

 Victorian Independent  Education Union 

 Member for Isaacs 

 David Cragg 

 AWU 

 Trades Hall Council Senior Vice President 

 Jodi Dack 

 

 

 Brian Daley 

 ASU 

 Branch Secretary ASU 

 Lily D’Ambrosia 

 ASU 

 Member of Victorian Parliament , former union organiser, ALP staffer and electorate  officer 

 Michael Danby 

 SDA 

 Member for Melbourne Po rts, former staffer and union organiser 

 Fiona Darwin 

 

 Convenor, Monash Universi ty Federation of Student Organisations 

 Joe de Bruyn 

 SDA 

 National Secretary SDA 

 Eric Dearricott 

 AEU (Associate  Member)/Victorian  Association of State School  Principles 

 Vice Principal and Teacher at Kyneton High School 

 Juliana Dickinson 

 AMWU 

 AMWU  National Industrial Officer 

 Trevor Dobbyn 

 Rail, Tram and Bus Union 

 State secretary 

 Charles Donnelly 

 NUW 

 Branch Secretary NUW 

 Alison Donohue 

 

 

 Michael Donovan 

 SDA 

 Victorian Branch Secretary SDA 

 Mick Eagles 

 AWU 

 Victorian President AWU 

 Nazih El Asmar 

 

 Former Mayor of Darebin 

 David Feeney 

 

 Former State ALP Secretary and current senior adviser to the Premier 

 Kosmos Felekos 

 

 Ministerial Adviser 

 Ruth Frenzel 

 LHMU 

 Industrial officer LHMU 

 Monica Gould 

 NUW 

 President of the Legislative Council former Minister 

 Danielle Green 

 AWU 

 Member of Victorian Parliament 

 Alan Griffin 

 ASU and Federated Clerks  Union 

 Member for Burke, former union organiser and staffer 

 Denise Guppy 

 Health and Community  Services Union 

 Branch Senior Vice President of HCSU 

 Wesley Hayes  

 CEPU 

 Organiser CEPU 

 Joe Helper 

 

 Member of Victorian Parliament 

 Abbey Howe 

 

 Organiser Victorian ALP Headquarters 

 Jeff Jackson 

 HSU 

 State Secretary HSU 

 Gavin Jennings 

 Rail Tram and Bus Industry  Union/Electrical  Trades Union 

 Minister in St ate Government 

 Ian Jones 

 AMWU 

 Federal Secretary Vehicle Division AMWU 

 Marlene Kairouz 

 

 Darebin City Councillor 

 Cathy King 

 

 Member for Ballarat 

 Martin Kingham 

 CFMEU 

 State Secretary, CFMEU 

 Marg Lewis 

 

 Failed Labor Candidate 

 Hong Lim 

 

 Member of Victorian Parliament 

 Wayne Mader 

 TWU 

 Senior organiser TWU 

 Justin Mammarella 

 

 

 Sithy Marikar 

 Communication workers union 

 Organiser, CWU 

 Richard Marles 

 ACTU 

 A ssistant secretary ACTU 

 Andrew McKenzie 

 

 Senior staffer and former Victorian ALP staffer 

 Jenny Mikakos 

 ASU 

 Member of  Victorian Parliament 

 Fernando Moya 

 

 Electorate offi cer to the Member for Holt 

 Dave Noonan 

 CFMEU 

 Assistan t National Secretary CFMEU 

 Bill Oliver 

 CFMEU 

 Victorian Assistant Secretary CFMEU 

 Dave Oliver 

 AMWU 

 Assistan t National Secretary AMWU 

 Michelle O’Neil 

 Textile Clothing and Footware  Union 

 State Secretary TCFU 

 Martin Pakula 

 NUW 

 Assistant Branch Secretary 

 Denis Parker 

 SDA 

 Senior organiser SDA 

 Caitlin Phillips 

 

 

 Jaala Pulford 

 NUW 

 WorkCover Official 

 Robert Ray 

 

 Senator for Victoria 

 Fiona Richardson 

 

 Ministerial Adviser 

 Julius Roe 

 AMWU 

 National President, AMWU 

 Bob Sercombe 

 

 Federal Member for Maribyrnong 

 Earle Setches 

 CEPU 

 Assistan t National Secretary CEPU 

 Bill Shorten 

 AWU 

 National Secretary AWU 

 Paul Slape 

 ASU 

 National Secretary ASU 

 Howard Smith 

 TWU 

 Branch Industrial Research Officer TWU 

 John Speight 

 AMWU 

 Victorian State President AMWU 

 Tonya Stevens 

 AWU 

 Recruitment officer 

 Ingrid Stitt 

 ASU 

 Secretary Private Sector Brach, ASU 

 Natile Suleyman 

 

 Brimbank City Councillor 

 Hakki Suleyman 

 

 Electorate officer 

 Greg Sword 

 NUW 

 General Secretar y NUW and former ALP President 

 Lee Tarlamis 

 

 

 Theo Theophanous 

 AWU 

 Minister  in Victorian Government 

 Maria Vamvakinou 

 CFMEU 

 Senator for Vi ctoria, former electorate officer 

 Gary Ward 

 SDA 

 Former Assistant State Secretary 

 Heather Wellington 

 

 Geelong ALP councillor 

 Linda White 

 ASU 

 Assistant National Secretary, ASU 

 Lloyd Williams 

 Health and Community  Services Union 

 Secretary HCSU 

 Howard Worthing 

 CEPU 

 Organiser CEPU 

 Vicki Vianoulatos 

 

 

 Burhan Yigit 

 

 Mayor of Hume 

 Erik Locke 

 

 State Secretary Victorian ALP 

 Western Australia 

 Geoff Gallop 

 MWU 

 Premier 

 Susan Anderson 

 

 

 Mark Bishop 

 SDA 

 Senator for Wester n Australia, former union official 

 Joe Bullock 

 SDA 

 State Secretary WA SDA 

 Geraldine Burgess 

 CPSU/Civil Services  Association 

 CSA delegate 

 Sarah Burke 

 

 Junior Vice President WA ALP, cand idate for Federal President former union organiser 

 Gary Carson 

 CEPU 

 Branch Secretary CEPU Communications Division 

 Vince Catania 

 

 President, WA Young Labor 

 Roger Cook 

 

 Western Australia Aboriginal Native Title Working Group 

 Helen Creed 

 LHMU 

 Vice President ACTU, National President LHMU 

 Mark Cuomo 

 

 Failed ALP candidate 

 Tim Daly 

 AWU 

 State Secretary AWU WA branch 

 Ed Dermer 

 SDA 

 Member of the Western Aust ralian Parliament, former union organiser 

 Kate Doust 

 SDA 

 Member of the Western Aust ralian Parliament, former union organiser 

 Graham Edwards 

 

 Member for Cowan 

 Jock Ferguson 

 AMWU 

 State Secretary 

 Brad George 

 Australian Maritime Officers  Union 

 Industrial Officer AMOU 

 Daniel Guise 

 Edith Cowan University  Student Union 

 WA Young Labor 

 Ros Harley 

 CPSU/CSA 

 

 Alistair Jones 

 

 Failed Labor Candidate 

 Alison Karmelich 

 

 Women’s Co-ordinator, Austra lian Young Labor, Former student union president 

 Nuala Keating 

 

 President and Secretary Australian Society of Labor Lawyers 

 Veronica Keating 

 

 Failed Labor Candidate 

 Dave Kelly 

 LHMU 

 WA State Secretary LHMU, Vice President WA ALP 

 Sue Lines 

 LHMU 

 Assistant Se cretary LHMU, WA Branch 

 Norm Marlborough 

 AMIEU 

 Member of WA  Parliament, former union official 

 Simon Mead 

 

 Former Labor National Headquarters staffer 

 Shelia Mills 

 

 

 Jenny Mott 

 

 

 Batong Pham 

 

 Failed Labor Candidate 

 Jaye Radisich 

 National Union of Students 

 Delegate and Member of NUS, Formerly  Vice-president (Asia-Pacific) of the  International Union of Socialist Youth  

 Kevin Reynolds 

 CFMEU 

 State Secretary CFMEU 

 Michelle Roberts 

 

 Member of WA  Parliament, President WA ALP 

 Daniel Smith 

 

 Failed Labor Candidate and Labor Staffer 

 Stephen Smith 

 AWU 

 Shadow Minister and Member for Perth 

 Glenn Sterle 

 TWU 

 Industrial official  TWU, candidate for Senate at ne xt election replacing Senator Cook 

 Sally Talbot 

 

 Assistant State Secretary WA ALP 

 Andrew Waddell 

 

 Failed Labor Candidate 

 Simon Ward 

 CPSU 

 Ministerial staffer 

 Simone Waterton 

 

 

 Ruth Webber 

 AMWU/CPSU 

 Senator for Western Australia 

 Bill Johnson 

 SDA 

 State Secretary WA ALP 

 

