---
title: "80 refugees helped to find jobs."
date: "2004-03-05"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS"
subjects:
  - "Job seekers"
  - "Labour market programs"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Dept of Employment and Workplace Relations"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
  - "Skills"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211264699
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YAUB6%22
---

 THE HON KEVIN ANDREWS MP

 MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

 

 Media Release

 04904

 80 Refugees Helped To Find Jobs

 EIGHTY humanitarian and refugee job seekers will be helped to find work under an Australian Government Employment  Innovation Fund pilot project starting this month. 

 The project will test ways of helping the job seekers into work and, if successful, will be made available to the wider Job  Network. 

 Job Network members were invited to participate and six will be involved at eight sites. 

 The project follows the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs’ Report of the Review of  Settlement Services for Migrants & Humanitarian Entrants which examined ways of providing help to humanitarian and  refugee job seekers.

 It also follows the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations’ work with Horn of Africa communities in  several states.

 Humanitarian and refugee job seekers are among the most disadvantaged groups looking for work. Many have suffered  traumas in their home country and disruption to their education and working lives.

 Having a job will help them settle in Australia and feel part of the community. It will also boost their confidence and self  esteem. 

 The project will examine participants’ skills and how these could be matched to local job opportunities. Skills training will  be provided as well as training about the Australian workplace and labour market.

 The participants will also have a 10-week work experience placement which will help them understand the Australian  labour market and workplace culture.

 

 For further information contact: 

 Felicity Dargan Press Secretary  0409 550 446

 

 

 5/03/2004

