---
title: "Rally a reminder of Australia's support for refugees."
date: "2004-11-16"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Government expenditure"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272878
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D7GE6%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs  I Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Indigenous Affairs 

  VPS 136.04 

  Tuesday, 1 6th November 2004 

  Rally a reminder of Australia’s support for refugees  Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, today welcomed the rally at Parliament Houqe  in Canberra in support of refugees. 

  “The rally is a timely opportunity to remind people about the generosity of Australia’s  Refugee and Humanitarian Program,” Minister Vanstone said. 

  “The Program costs Australian taxpayers approximately $500 million a year, or $2 billion  over a four-year budget cycle. This is a significant contribution by Australia to those  people most in need of protection. 

  “The Australian Government has this year (2004/05) increased its refugee intake by 50%,  to 6,000 places out of a total of 13,000 places within the Program. 

  “Australian taxpayers fund all travel, medical and settlement costs for these 6,000 people,  most of whom will come from refugee camps in Africa and who have been assessed by  the UNHCR as being in most desperate need of refugee protection. 

  “From this financial year, Australian taxpayers are also funding medical costs for the 7,000  people to be granted Special Humanitarian visas under the Program and $2.5 million has  been provided to establish a community based no-interest loans scheme to assist with  travel to Australia. 

  “My Department’s annual report, tabled in Parliament yesterday, shows that 13,851 visas  were granted under the Program in 2003/04. This large intake was achieved as a result of  greater flexibility in the Program, introduced in 1999, to allow for carry over of unused  places and/or the bringing forward of places between program years. 

  “Australia’s commitment to ensuring protection for those most in need cannot be  questioned. It is why Australia is ranked behind only the United States and Canada in the  size of its refugee intake. 

  “While many commentators and speakers like those at today’s rally focus on the claims of  people who have been found not to be in need of protection, it’s important to remember  that Australia has a long history of bipartisan support for providing protection to those most  in need.” 

  Minister’s media contact: Kevin Donnellan 0417 445 886. 

