---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview of the Minister for Foreign Affairs: Solomon Islands: 22 December: news of the death of Adam Dunning in Honiara."
date: "2004-12-22"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "DUNNING, Adam"
  - "BAKHTIYARI FAMILY"
  - "Homicide"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Solomon Islands"
  - "Australian Federal Police"
  - "Pakistan"
  - "Peacekeeping operations"
  - "Criminal investigation"
  - "Immigration controls"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211274073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PZSE6%22
---

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   

 

 DATE: December 22 2004 

 

 TITLE: DOORSTOP SOLOMON ISLANDS    

 

 Mr. DOWNER: I just want to say that the government is shocked at the news of the death of  Adam  Dunning  in  Honiara.   It’s  a  tragic  incident.   It  underlines  the  difficulty  and  the  risks   associated with the operation that we have in the Solomon Islands.  I was there myself just a  week a week ago.     

 The  Federal  Police  and  others  in  the  Solomon  Islands  have  been  doing  an  outstanding  job.    We  don’t  know  whether  this  attack  was  premeditated  or  opportunistic.   We  don’t  know   whether it was specifically targeting the Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands  or whether it wasn’t.     

 So that’ll be a matter that the police will be investigating.  And as you know, the police are  sending reinforcements to conduct an investigation.   

 We’re  giving  consideration  as  to  whether  we  should  send  in  a  small  number  of  additional   military  assets  to  reinforce  the  multinational  military  company  that  we  have  in  Solomon   Islands  in  order  simply  to  make  the  point  that  we  are  utterly  determined  to  ensure  that  the   improvements that have taken place in law and order in the Solomon Islands remain.  And we  want  to  send  a  very  simple  message  to  anybody  in  the  Solomon  Islands  who  thinks  that  by   intimidating  or  resorting  to  murder  they  are  going  to  drive  away  the  Regional  Assistance   Mission.  Those people will fail.  We will not be intimidated.  We will retain our etermination  to ensure that this mission in the Solomon Islands continues to be the success that it’s already  been.   

 I obviously I express my condolences to the family of the Federal Police officer who’s lost his  life.  I’ll be writing to them myself and it is a tragic event and our message is that we won't be  cowered by this.  We will continue to ensure that we do the good job that we have been doing  in the Solomon Islands into the months and year ahead.   

 REPORTER: What can you tell us about the officer?   

 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 

 Mr.  DOWNER:  Well,  I  don’t  know  a  great  deal  about  him.   He’s  twenty-six  years  old.    Comes from Canberra and you know, he was out on a patrol during the course of the night  and he was with another AFP officer and they were shot at by a high-powered weapon and it  killed Dunning, but the other officer who I think was driving the vehicle was unharmed.   

 REPORTER: How many officers to do we have there?   

 Mr. DOWNER: I might be able to give you the exact number here, so I'm not guessing, I've  got the exact figure.  Ninety-four AFP, fifty-three protective service and then there are thirty-five from New Zealand and fifty-five from other Pacific Island countries.  So we’ve got a lot,  we’ve got nearly a hundred and fifty.   

 Well, RAMSI was deployed in the middle of last year, the middle of 2003.  So they’ve been  there for about sixteen, seventeen months.  The first deployment was in July of last year.  So  they’ve been there a little while.   

 REPORTER: You were saying it’s still not clear if it was a premeditated attack.   

 Mr. DOWNER: No.   

 REPORTER: But there are reports he was killed in a sniper-style fashion.   

 Mr.  DOWNER:  Sure.   Well,  it  would  appear  so.   It  would  appear,  (indistinct)  say,  sniper-style, but it would appear that the vehicle was shot at with a high-powered weapon and this  isn't the first time that’s happened.  There was a shooting at a RAMSI vehicle, RAMSI being  the Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands.  There was a shooting at a RAMSI  vehicle in October and it was one of the Pacific Island police who was in that vehicle at the  time.   No-one  was  hurt  or  no-one  was  killed,  but  not  a  hundred  per  cent  sure  though  what   would have motivated it; whether somebody was stalking, waiting, for the vehicle - it seems  unlikely  -  but  we  just  don’t  know,  and  the  police  will  be  investigating  all  of  that  and  it   doesn’t really pay to guess and speculate at this stage.   

 REPORTER: How did you find the security situation when you were there last week?   

 Mr. DOWNER: It’s good.  I mean, they have done an outstanding job, the police, and they’re  backed  up  by  a  company  of  …  an  army  company,  but  it’s  a  multinational  company,  which   includes  a  small  number  of  Australians  but  it  also  includes  soldiers  from  New  Zealand  and   some of the Pacific Island countries; Papua New Guinea, Fiji, I think.   

 REPORTER: (Indistinct)   

 Mr. DOWNER: But you know, we’ve always been wary about it.  There’s been a very bad  security  situation  there.   That’s  why  we  had  to  send  in  the  Regional  Assistance  Mission.    We’ve done it; we’ve restored law and order; we’ve started to get the country back on its feet.   But  having  said  all  that,  there’s  no  question  that  the  risks  are  there  and,  unfortunately,  this   tragic incident just underlines the risks involved.     

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 

 

 REPORTER:  Who  will  be  involved  in  the  investigation?   Will  it  be  mainly  Australian   police?   

 Mr.  DOWNER:  Australian  Federal  Police.   Well,  they’ll  work  with  the  Royal  Solomon   Islands Police.     

 REPORTER: Have you seen the revelations coming out of America today in relation to the  FBI  memos  and  torture  at  Abu  Ghraib  and  Guantanamo  Bay;  do  you  have  any  increased   concerns, obviously, that it seems to be a systematic thing?  Will you be taking this up with  the United States at all?   

 Mr.  DOWNER:  I  have  seen  the  FBI  memo,  so  it’s  just  …  to  be  honest  with  you,  they’re   really focusing on …I haven’t … I’ve only been focusing on the RAMSI incident, and we’ve  barely been working on that during the course of this morning and been on a plane coming  back from Sydney as well.  So I’m just not aware of it.  I’ll have to have a look at it.     

 REPORTER: What about … oh, you wo… you may not be aware but apparently the Afghan  embassy in Canberra has come out a short time ago and said that Mrs Bakhtiyaris’ claims that  she is from Afghanistan has appeared to be backed up by a relative in Afghanistan and that  her nationality at this stage is inconclusive.  Any comment?   

 Mr.  DOWNER:  Well,  you  know,  what  …  on  the  one  hand  these  people  who  are   campaigning  for  the  Bakhtiyaris  have  criticised  our  government  for  sometimes  disagreeing   with  decisions  that  have  been  made  by  the  courts.   On  the  other  hand,  they  themselves  are   disagreeing with the courts.  The fact is that the Bakhtiyaris came to Australia illegally.  They  claim  to  be  refugees  and  the  Department  of  Immigration  found  they  weren’t.   That  was   appealed to the Refugee Review Tribunal.  That has been appealed to … its decision has been  appealed to various courts.  And on every account they have been found not to be refugees.   They  said  they  came  from  some  village  in  Afghanistan,  so  The  Australian  newspaper  sent   someone to that village in Afghanistan and no-one had ever heard of them.     

 All the evidence points to them having come from Pakistan.  Now look, understand this, we  are  very  happy  for  people  to  come  to  our  country  through  legal  means.   If  they  come   (inaudible)  they  are  genuine  refugees  we  have  an  obligation  to  keep  those  people  under  the   UN  Refugee  Convention.   But  if  they  come  illegally  they  don’t  even  do  us  the  courtesy  of   getting a visa, they come illegally and they make a claim for refugee status and that is found  to be false by the Immigration Department and subsequently by our courts, then those people  are required to return home.  And the Bakhtiyaris may have got a bit of a support group going  but that doesn’t change the fact that people are allowed to come to Australia if they're genuine  refugees of if they're genuine migrants with appropriate approvals.  But they are not allowed  to come illegally, claiming to be refugees and then be found by our courts not to be refugees.     

 It’s quite simple.   

 

 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 

 

 REPORTER: (Indistinct) significance of my own paper but a reporter from The Australian  going  to  Afghanistan  and  finding  that  no-one  recognised  this  person,  that’s  (indistinct)   conclusive …   

 Mr. DOWNER: They didn’t say that, did they.  They didn’t say that.  They didn’t say no-one  recognised them.  They went to the village … I'm just using that as an illustration of a point,  I'm not using that as my solid evidence.  I'm using the courts as the evidence.   

 I mean, if people want to attack the courts, let them do so.  If the courts have apparently got  this  wrong  and  the  hearsay  and  claims  of  the  Bakhtiyaris  family  are  somehow  right,  I’d  be   very, very surprised.  And added to that is the fact that The Australian newspaper, as a matter  of interest, when they interviewed people in the village haven’t heard of this family.  Yet this  family seems to be rather well-known in Pakistan.     

 The courts have found these people are required to return to Pakistan and so they should go  back to Pakistan.     

 REPORTER: They'd be …   

 REPORTER: (Indistinct) from the Afghan embassy strengthens their case at all?   

 Mr. DOWNER: No, it’s nothing to do with their case.  It’s just … this is a campaign, right,  to put the government under pressure, mount a campaign.  What about all the other people in  the world who might want to come to live in Australia.  Should we mount a campaign for all  of  those  people?   Should  we  get  someone  from  the  Afghan  embassy  to  put  out  a  statement   that, you know … seriously, we have ….   

 REPORTER: Are you saying (indistinct) supporters have coerced the Afghan embassy to ….   

 Mr. DOWNER: No, (indistinct) did I say that?   

 REPORTER: No, I’m asking …   

 Mr. DOWNER: No, no, no.  I didn’t say that.   

 REPORTER: Then how …   

 Mr. DOWNER: Of course I wouldn’t say that.  Absolutely no idea why they would, but as  I’ve explained to you, I offer no comment on the Afghan embassy, excepting that the courts  of this country are fair and reasonable courts.  The courts of this country are not bodgie courts  and  they’re  not  corrupt,  and  the  courts  of  this  country  have  upheld  the  Department  of   Immigration’s assertion that these people are not genuine refugees.   

 REPORTER:  So,  the  Australian  government  wouldn’t  be  asking  the  Afghani  government   about these claims?   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 

 

 Mr.  DOWNER:  That’s  all  being  dealt  with  by  the  Immigration  Department.   Of  course   they’ve been through this issue for …   

 REPORTER: (Indistinct)   

 Mr. DOWNER: … it’s not months, it’s years.   

 REPORTER: (Indistinct) was the relative, the apparent relative.   

 Mr. DOWNER: Oh yeah.  Right.  Well, I’m sure the Immigration Department will deal with  it,  but  these  people  have  been  found  by  our  courts,  by  our  Immigration  Department,  by  the   Refugee Review Tribunal not to be refugees.  And that’s it.  If you come to Australia illegally,  claim to be a refugee and then you are found not to be a refugee, you are required to return.   

 REPORTER: (Inaudible question)   

 Mr.  DOWNER:  (Indistinct)  more  important  issue,  if  I  can  say,  so  this  is  a  very  good   illustration  of  my  point  about  perspective.   Perspective.   Someone’s  just  been  killed  in  the   Solomon Islands, but that apparently is of a great deal less interest to you than the Bakhtiari  case.  I think that’s pretty unattractive actually.   

 Any other questions on any other issue?   

 REPORTER: (Inaudible question)   

 Mr. DOWNER: Well, you can go to Amanda Vanstone and get more information from her.   

 REPORTER:  Well,  no,  I  want  to  get  back  to  the  FBI  memos  if  I  can.   You  haven’t  seen   them; will you be calling for a report?   

 Mr DOWNER: I haven’t seen them and I don’t know about them.   

 REPORTER: Will you be asking for a report on them?   

 Mr. DOWNER: I’ll have a look at what’s in the media.  I haven’t seen them.   

 REPORTER: Can you tell us about the Victorian police officer that’s been arrested in Sierra  Leone?   

 Mr.  DOWNER:  Yes,  well  that’s  quite  a  long-standing  case  and  our  high-commissioner,   who’s  based  in  Accra  in  Ghana  is  accredited  to  Sierra  Leone.   He  has  spoken  with  the   Attorney-General  in  Sierra  Leone  about  this  case.   I  don’t  want  to  say  much  more  about  it.    I’m going to see the Victorian Police Association I think in the next day or so about it.    

 REPORTER: What have the Australian government … what action have they actually taken  at this stage?   

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 6

 

 Mr.  DOWNER:  They’ve  spoken  to  the  Attorney-General  of  Sierra  Leone,  a  high   commissioner  who’s  based  in  Ghana  is  accredited  to  Sierra  Leone  and  he’s  spoken  to  the   Attorney-General there about this case.  We’ve been following the case very carefully.    

 

 

 END OF SEGMENT 

 

 

 

