---
title: "Labor raises the bar even higher."
date: "2004-01-24"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Reynolds, Kate"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "ALP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211263209
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R0IB6%22
---

 

 Senator Lyn Allison Kate Reynolds  

 Australian Democrats    Australian Democrats 

 Acting Leader Member of the SA Legislative Council 

 24 January 2004                  MEDIA RELEASE                                     04/027 

 

 Labor raises the bar even higher   

 Opposition Leader Mark Latham’s claim that his new asylum seeker policy is more fair and humane  for asylum seekers shows how little the ALP has understood the effects of the system it helped to  introduce, according to the Australian Democrats’ Refugee spokesperson Kate Reynolds MLC. 

 “The Opposition Leader’s announcement is simply not good enough,” said Ms Reynolds. 

 “Labor’s  so  called  ‘new’  position  doesn’t  end  mandatory  detention,  it  blatantly  ignores  the   UNHCR’s  stand  on  protection,  it  ignores  our  obligations  under  international  conventions  and  it   ignores the effects of granting only short term protection to people fleeing persecution, torture and  trauma.  

 “If  someone  has  a  humanitarian  need  to  remain  in  the  country,  then  they  should  be  given   complementary protection, as is the case in every other western country. 

 “Asking  people  who  have  suffered  massive  trauma  in  their  homelands,  and  then  suffered  more   trauma during prolonged detention in Australia, to settle in just two years is for many people, not  reasonable or realistic. 

 “We know that it takes some people up to five years to recover and move on from their experiences  at the hands of violent regimes and at the hands of a hostile Australian Government. 

 “Granting protection to people after two years is a positive move but the reality is that many people  have  fled  countries  where  the  political  climate  is  constantly changing, leaving  them  vulnerable  to   the ALP’s requirement that they must repeatedly reprove their case for asylum. 

 “How  can  Labor  expect  people  to  be  simultaneously  ‘making  a  positive  contribution  to  the   Australian community’ and battling a rigorous public interest test which appears designed to keep  raising the bar higher and higher? 

 “Refugees  have  made  enormous  and  much  needed  contributions  to  this  country,  especially  in   regional  Australia,  and  will  continue  to  do  so,  but  anything  less  than  abolishing  the  cruel  and   unnecessary  TPV  system  for  recognised  refugees  is  just  tinkering  around  the  edges  of  an   unnecessarily harsh system. 

 “This isn’t about ending uncertainty - this latest announcement just sharpens the knife edge of life  on a temporary protection visa,” concluded Ms Reynolds. 

 

 

 

 Media Contact:     08 8568 2132       0412 637 387 

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

  1031304

