---
title: "Huge cost of the Pacific solution."
date: "2004-02-11"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Government expenditure"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211263768
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RBQB6%22
---

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E     1 1  F e b  2 0 0 4 

 

 

 

 HUGE COST OF THE PACIFIC  SOLUTION   

 

 

 Labor’s call to end the Howard Government’s so called ‘Pacific Solution’, with its huge  cost to Australian taxpayers, is reinforced today by reports of the $1.3 million to keep one  asylum seeker detained at Manus Island for a six month period.   

 Labor called for an end to the ‘Pacific Solution’ in December 2002 with a warning that  the cost was unsustainable. Estimates of the all up cost are over half a billion dollars.   

 John Howard’s ‘Pacific Solution’ has now reached the point where it is costing over  $200,000 a month to keep one asylum seeker on Manus Island.   

 Immigration Minister, Amanda Vanstone, reportedly justifies the cost saying, through a  spokesman, they were “not high given the centre had to stay in ‘operational readiness’ to  take other detainees, and given the high security and maintenance costs of ‘its  remoteness and position in the tropics’.”    

 This is clearly a nonsense.   

 The Government should close Nauru and Manus Island now.  Labor would respond  constructively to transitional arrangements the Government might suggest on announcing  the closure.   

 Labor is also considering the cost and sustainability of immigration detention facilities in  Australia.   

 I recently visited Port Hedland and Baxter Detention Centres, together with the  Residential Housing Projects associated with those Centres.   

 Given the number of detainees currently in Baxter and Port Hedland, I can see no  requirement or justification for the continuing use of the Port Hedland Detention Centre.   

 The Government should, as well as closing Nauru and Manus Island, mothball Port  Hedland now.   

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen - (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651 

 

 

