---
title: "Government's strong stand against illegal fishing."
date: "2004-04-05"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Macdonald, Ian"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
  - "STER Fishing"
  - "Search and seizure"
  - "Illegal fishing"
  - "People smuggling"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211558040
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OT4C6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Senator Ian Macdonald Senator Chris Ellison 

 Minister for Fisheries,   Forestry and Conservation 

 Minister for Justice   and Customs 

 

  J  O  I  N  T   M  E  D  I  A   R  E  L  E  A  S  E

 

 Government’s strong stand against illegal fishing   

 There has been no change in the Australian Government’s strong stand against illegal fishing in  our northern waters, the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison, and the Minister  for Fisheries, Senator Ian Macdonald, said today.   

 Customs and Navy vessels have had the ability for several years to either apprehend illegal fishing  boats or conduct “administrative seizures” of catch and gear - an ability which was supported by  Labor’s Gavan O’Connor when he voted for the Fisheries Legislation Amendment Bill (No 1) 1999.   

 “Labor’s sudden opposition to administrative seizures is nothing but desperate short-term political  opportunism,” Senator Ellison said.   

 “Administrative seizures are necessary as they allow the men and women of the Australian  Customs Service and Royal Australian Navy the utmost flexibility to make decisions based on  operational requirements when they encounter illegal fishers. 

 

 “In every instance where a Customs patrol boat comes alongside an illegal fishing vessel, the  evidence is assessed before a decision is made to either seize or apprehend in consultation with  AFMA.     

 “This increase has prompted border protection agencies, including Customs, to look at the best  way to deal with situations where there may be a large number of illegal vessels entering  Australian waters at the one time.   

 “The number one priority of Customs patrol boats is targeting vessels that may be smuggling illegal  arrivals and contraband, with illegal fishing by Indonesian vessels also targeted. This is a practical  approach based on the high number of illegal vessels that may enter Australian waters at certain   times of the year. 

 

 Contrary to Opposition claims that this approach leaves Australia more vulnerable to quarantine  breaches and drug and people smugglers, these issues are central to the Government’s approach  to border protection.   

 “It appears to be becoming a common theme of the Australian Labor Party to criticise sound policy  that they have supported in the past in an effort to gain short-term political mileage,” Senator  Macdonald said.   

 “During Mr O’Connor’s last stint as the Opposition Fisheries Shadow (20/10/98 to 25/11/01), he  supported the use of administrative seizures and he now seems to forget what he stood for less  than five years ago.   

 “Labor’s paltry Coastguard proposal of three boats, one helicopter with a sniper and a raft of  volunteers will not cover Australia’s 37,000 km coastline.   

 “Under the Howard Government the facts and figures speak for themselves. There have been a  record 138 apprehensions last year; a new permanent armed patrol capability to protect Australia’s  interests in the Southern Ocean will be established in July, and funding to the Australian  Quarantine and Inspection Service has been increased after Labor cut its budget to shreds. 

 Page 2 

 

 

 “Australia’s fisheries have never been more secure than today, with Customs Coastwatch and the  Royal Australian Navy working together with the Australian Fisheries Management Authority to  protect our precious fishing stocks,” Senator Macdonald said.   

 Media Inquiries:   Simon Troeth (02) 6277 7260/(0439) 300 335       David Crisafulli (07) 4771 3066/(0400) 144 483 

