---
title: "Bakhtiyari case."
date: "2004-06-04"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "BAKHTIYARI FAMILY"
  - "Children"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211267139
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CZ2D6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND  INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Bakhtiyari case

 VPS 79/2004

 `The Australian Government confirmed today that an offer would be made to enable the Bakhtiyari children to  be reunited with their mother in alternative detention arrangements in Adelaide.

 Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, said this followed yesterday's Federal Court decision not to  grant an interlocutory injunction releasing the children from their current alternative detention arrangements,  pending hearing of their application.

 'Yesterday's ruling is the latest in a series of legal actions involving this family, who have been found not to be  refugees - a finding which has been repeatedly challenged by the family and upheld right up to the High  Court,' Senator Vanstone said.

 'Justice Lander in the Federal Court yesterday again stated they are not refugees.

 'DIMIA officials are negotiating for care, welfare, detention and supervision of Mrs Bakhtiyari and the  children to be transferred to Family and Youth Services (FAYS) in South Australia.

 'FAYS has agreed to assume the care and supervision of the children and their mother and is well placed to  take on this role. This change in administrative arrangements stems from Centacare's concern that it could not  meet the requirements of the alternative detention.'

 The Minister said it was appropriate to reconsider arrangements for the children's mother, now that her infant  has reached almost eight months of age.

 'The Government's offer, if accepted, means the elder children's education at Adelaide private schools can  continue without disruption.

 'This family should consider themselves very lucky. The privilege of exclusive, private education is something  most of Australia's genuine refugees could only dream of.'

 The Minister said the new arrangements had been discussed in detail with Member for Adelaide, Trish Worth  and Member for Sturt, Christopher Pyne, both of whom have made numerous representations on behalf of the  family.

 The Minister said that while this case had attracted significant attention, it was important the following facts  were not overlooked.

 'The parents have the ability to stop the detention arrangements by agreeing to return to their homeland -  Pakistan,' Senator Vanstone said.

 'The parents claim they fled Afghanistan and are refugees. They are not refugees. They are Pakistani nationals  and can return safely to Pakistan at any time.

 'It is cases like these that tie up significant resources that could be better utilised assisting genuine refugees.

 'It's quite an amazing story that so many people have opened their hearts to this family, who have repeatedly  been found not to be in need of refugee protection. There are thousands of local children and refugee children  in Adelaide who would also like the support and opportunities of private education made available to this  family.

 'Australia has a generous refugee system. The Government has announced an increase in the Humanitarian  and Refugee Program to 13 000 for 2004/05.

 'The increase will mean 2000 additional genuine refugees in urgent need of resettlement will be able to secure  a place in Australia.'

 4 June 2004

