---
title: "Malcolm Turnbull's first speech in Parliament."
date: "2004-11-29"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of TURNBULL, MALCOLM, MP"
subjects:
  - "First speeches"
  - "Wentworth (Electorate)"
  - "New South Wales"
  - "Members backgrounds"
  - "Population growth"
  - "Children"
  - "Immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211273240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XVKE6%22
---

 

 

 

 Malcolm Turnbull's First Speech  in Parliament   

 Monday, November 29, 2004

 Mr Speaker,  

 

 I am proud and honoured to address this House today as the Member for Wentworth whose people I 

 thank for the great trust they have reposed in me.  

 

 Each of us has come to this House to represent our own communities, each unique, each making up 

 Australia, the home all of us are pledged to serve.  

 

 Wentworth’s green hills and golden beaches are strung like jewels between the harbour and the 

 sea. From the tropical gullies of Bronte and Cooper Park to the urban bustle of Bondi Junction and 

 Double Bay, from the sheltered rock pools of Watsons Bay to the thunderous waves of Tamarama, 

 Wentworth’s geography is as varied and engaging as its people. -  

 

 It is not a big place. You can paddle a surf ski from one end to the other in an hour; which is not a 

 lot longer than it takes to drive in peak traffic!  

 

 Wentworth’s most endearing aspect is the least well known. Contrary to popular myth, our 

 community is egalitarian, democratic and far from homogenous. Like the majority of Wentworth’s 

 residents I grew up living in flats, mostly rented and, in the style of the times, with small rooms 

 running off a long dark corridor.  

 

 I did not feel deprived of anything (although I would have liked a dog). I was rarely inside. The best 

 things in Wentworth; the waves at Bondi, the ducks in Centennial Park or even the brisk nor’easter 

 whipping down the harbour on a summers day take no account of your bank balance.  

 

 Most mornings my father and I went for a swim at North Bondi Surf Club. The surf club showers 

 were no respecters of rank or privilege. Our companions included judges and garbos, teachers and 

 policemen, businessmen of all types; from shmattas in Surry Hills to high finance in Martin Place. 

 There were surgeons whose hands saved lives and there were gentlemen whose calloused hands 

 were used, in a rather emphatic manner, to collect debts for bookies.  

 

 Wentworth was multicultural before the term was invented. Our prayers fly heavenward not just in 

 English, but in the language of the New Testament at St George’s Greek Church, of the Old 

 Testament at Central Synagogue and many other shuls, and if you believe the Irish, (and who 

 would doubt them?) just once a year in the tongue of the angels themselves at St Patricks in Bondi.  

 

 Wentworth has the largest Jewish community in our city. The community has grown stronger with 

 successive waves of immigration, from Europe, from Russia, from Israel and from South Africa. 

 Their generous community spirit, their family pride and tireless enterprise are admired by all of us.  

 

 Australia is a good friend of Israel, the only democracy in the Middle East. We have been resolute in 

 supporting Israel’s right to take the necessary steps to defend itself from terror. The death of Arafat 

 has now opened up new opportunities for peace based on the roadmap: two states within secure, 

 internationally recognised boundaries We must hope, and pray, that all parties, in the words of King 

 David’s 34th Psalm not merely, “seek peace” but “pursue it.”  

 

 Wentworth is a Federation seat and its representatives have been as distinguished as the great 

 colonial statesman after whom it is named. The longest serving, Sir Eric Harrison, was Sir Robert 

 Menzies’ deputy and a co-founder of the Liberal Party sixty years ago this year. I salute all my 

 predecessors and thank them for their service which has set a high bar for my own performance.  

 

 ***  

 

 I was an only child and my parents split when I was nine. My father, Bruce, Turnbull was a single 

 parent for much of my childhood.  

 

 All divorces are difficult and painful. My parents’ was no exception. My mother had moved overseas. 

 Bruce and I moved into a smaller flat.  

 

 Yet,my father never spoke a critical word in my presence about my mother, nor she about him. He 

 went to the greatest pains to ensure, very successfully, that my mother and I remained on the most 

 loving terms.  

 

 I was very close to my parents, both of whom died long ago and far too young. I thank them for 

 their great love.  

 

 I will work here to defend and promote marriage and families. We must do more to help families 

 stay together. When divorce occurs, we must do all we can to help parents, no matter how bitter 

 their differences, to support each other’s vital role in the life of their children.  

 

 I am proud to be part of a Government that has already made great strides to make family law 

 more about families and less about divorce. But we must always remember that those of us with 

 intact families owe as much to providence as we do to commitment and in this as in so many other 

 areas of social policy, we are not called to judge or preach, only to help and to heal.  

 

 Like most children who live in Wentworth my father chose to send me to an independent school. I 

 boarded at Sydney Grammar from the age of 8 as my hotel broker father travelled around New 

 South Wales on business. Sometimes when I was at home on school holidays he would take me 

 with him, often to complete a stocktake before a pub was sold. I was counting beer glasses long 

 before I was old enough to drink out of them.  

 

 My father found paying the school fees was often a real struggle. But he chose to postpone other 

 things, like buying a flat of our own, so that I could go to the school he chose.  

 

 This came back to me vividly when the election campaign was in full swing and the Labor Party was 

 declaring that so-called “elite” schools deserved little or no government funding, I knew exactly 

 which parents that policy would hurt most: the battlers, the renters, the Bruce Turnbulls of today - 

 who choose to sacrifice personal comforts so they can give their children the education they choose.  

 

 I met the love of my live in 1978. Lucy Hughes was 19 and I was 23. She was smart and happy. 

 She shone with love and optimism as she does today. I immediately proposed and two years later 

 we were married.  

 

 Lucy has been my partner in life and love, in law and in business. In addition to all that, and 

 bringing up our children, she was the first woman to be Deputy Lord Mayor and then Lord Mayor of 

 Sydney. She oversaw the expansion of the City’s boundaries into Kings Cross and Glebe and her 

 disarming charm and keen vision are sorely missed.  

 

 Lucy and our daughter Daisy, who is at Sydney University, are here today. Our son Alex, also at 

 University, is overseas watching us on the Internet.  

 

 Lucy’s mother Joanna is with us today as is her father, Tom Hughes and his wife Chrissie. Tom was 

 a member of this House for nine years and Attorney General in the Gorton Government. I could not 

 have asked for a more loyal friend or a better role model.  

 

 

 

 Apart from loading bananas in the City Markets my first job was as a political correspondent at 

 State Parliament.  

 

 I suppose it was just downhill from that noble calling - into 25 years of law and business!  

 

 Lucy and I have found much of our satisfaction in business has come from starting new enterprises, 

 creating new jobs and new markets for Australian technology.  

 

 Our life’s experience has been that there is little reward without risk.  

 

 Australia’s economy and prosperity depend on a culture of initiative and enterprise which supports 

 Australians doing what we do best: having a go and when things do not succeed, getting up and 

 having another go.  

 

 Big public companies and multinationals are no strangers to the political process.  

 

 However the smaller, newer and more entrepreneurial businesses often feel disconnected or 

 crowded out. The cost of regulatory compliance falls especially heavily on the smaller and medium 

 sized businesses.  

 

 We need to ensure that no regulation, no compliance burden is imposed on business unless it is 

 absolutely necessary and that the policy objective cannot be achieved in any other way.  

 

 I hope that my experience in the small and medium business sector, will enable those men and 

 women who are the very engine of our nation’s growth to become better understood as our 

 Parliament makes the laws that affect them.  

 

 ***  

 

 I believe, passionately, that politics is for people. It is not an elite sport played only by Members of 

 Parliament.  

 

 All my life I have practiced active citizenship. It is why I first joined the Liberal Party in 1973. It is 

 why I ran for Parliament. It is why I have I have written and spoken out, often controversially, on 

 some of the big issues that await us in the coming decades.  

 

 It is why I am a Director of Clean Up Australia our world’s largest grass roots environmental action 

 group.  

 

 It is why, for nearly eight years, as a private citizen I was Chairman of the Australian Republican 

 Movement.  

 

 I am for the republic: Australia’s Head of State should be one of us.  

 

 The Republic debate brought together many Australians, from both sides of politics.  

 

 The Constitutional Convention which sat in the old Parliament House was a splendid moment of 

 Australian democracy where a common love of country cracked the frosted lens of partisanship and 

 every speech on every side was from a patriotic heart.  

 

 ***  

 

 Mr Speaker, within the lifetimes of most of us and certainly in the lifetimes of our children, the 

 world we know today will be transformed.  

 

 The sharp decline in fertility and improved life expectancy, is resulting in the old and very old 

 making up a larger and larger percentage of the population, a slowdown if not a decline in the 

 labour force and, in many countries a decline in the overall population itself.  

 

 In the developed world only the United States has a total fertility, or birth, rate at replacement level 

 of 2.1. Ours is 1.7. In Japan and most of Europe it is closer to 1.3 or lower.  

 

 This phenomenon has been described as an “ageing population”. That is a glib and slippery 

 euphemism. Societies, like Italy, Spain, Greece, Russia and many others in Europe, with birth rates 

 of 1.3 or lower are not ageing; they are dying.  

 

 A population with a birth rate of 1.3 will, absent massive immigration, shrink by 75% over a 

 hundred years. This would mean that if Italy, for example, has the same population in a century as 

 it does today, less than a quarter of that future population will be the descendants of today’s 

 Italians.  

 

 Can it be true that at the peak of our technology and prosperity the Western world is losing the 

 confidence to reproduce itself. Are we witnessing the beginning of the dying of the West?  

 

 Certainly we are at a tipping point in our civilization’s story. Unless fertility rates dramatically 

 improve, in a cycle of loss and dislocation matched only by the Black Death in the 14th Century 

 societies with birth rates substantially below replacement level will either dwindle into an 

 insignificant fraction of their current numbers or be swamped by larger and larger waves of 

 immigation.  

 

 Our welfare state was devised in days when fertility was higher, life expectancy shorter, medical 

 costs lower and the percentage of the population over 65 a fraction of what it is today.  

 

 Within forty years the over 65s will double as a percentage of our population: from 12 to 25%.. In 

 countries, like Japan, with lower birth rates it will be closer to 40%. China is not exempt; it may be 

 the first country to get old before it gets it rich.  

 

 Demography is indeed destiny. America’s global leadership is reinforced by its strong population. 

 The Economist has estimated that by 2050 the US population will not only have overtaken that of 

 Europe but that the median age of Europeans will be 53, seventeen years older than Americans and 

 ten years older than Australians.  

 

 These changes to our population, and their consequence of very substantially increased demands on 

 Government for health and aged care, will pre-occupy this Parliament and its counterparts in other 

 nations for the rest of this century.  

 

 Australia is well prepared to deal with these challenges as we have seen laid out in the Treasurer’s 

 ground breaking Intergenerational Report.  

 

 More than the leadership of any other developed nation, the Howard Government has not only 

 recognized these demographic changes and their implications but moved to meet them.  

 

 There is no room for complacency. The demographic storm is coming. How hard it blows and how 

 well our children weather it will depend, in large measure, on the decisions we take today and our 

 maintaining the courageous and determined leadership of the last eight and half years.  

 

 A strong Australia in a changing world will be one committed to enterprise, self-reliance, economic 

 growth and, above all, high productivity. It will also be an Australia which recognizes that we have a 

 vital interest in strengthening, promoting and defending marriage and family life.  

 

 Sound economic management has reduced Government debt to the lowest in the OECD and created 

 the conditions for long term sustainable economic growth. On the other hand, other countries 

 combine soaring levels of Government debt and unfunded pension and retirement schemes.  

 

 By contrast, Australia has a strong and growing superannuation and investment savings culture. 

 The continued promotion of savings and financial self-reliance will be a vital concern for this 

 Parliament.  

 

 As the Productivity Commission reminded us only last week, our economy is driven by three Ps: 

 population, participation in the work force and productivity.  

 

 With slow or no growth in the labour force the only factor which can drive our economy this century 

 will be improving productivity. There will be growing claims on Governments in the years ahead; 

 only higher productivity will generate the revenues to meet them.  

 

 There is no conflict between good public health and education on the one hand and economic reform 

 and productivity on the other. Nothing increases choices or widens the horizons of families more 

 than a strong economy. Indeed without the tax revenues only a strong economy can deliver and a 

 Government capable of keeping that economy strong even the warmest words and kindest hearts 

 will bring cold comfort to the aged and the sick.  

 

 Our birth rate is higher than most comparable countries. But it is in the national interest that it 

 decline no further and ideally increase. The Government’s family policies have already helped more 

 parents have the families they want.  

 

 But just as the causes for this unprecedented decline in fertility are debateable, so are the 

 appropriate policy responses unclear. Over time, some will be more effective than others. 

 Pragmatism, experience and common sense will be better guides than ideology.  

 

 There is nothing any of us are likely to do which is more important for the future of this nation than 

 to raise children. Motherhood and fatherhood have been greatly devalued, and this has occurred to 

 our grave cost.  

 

 We must affirm that children are a social good and not merely a private optional pleasure. 

 Australia’s children are Australia’s future.  

 

 We must work to enhance rather than restrict Australians’ work and family choices and recognise 

 that it is desirable for women if they wish, to fulfill two goals: childbearing and a career and that our 

 society’s survival depends on making it possible for them to do both.  

 

 More workplace flexibility with all it entails is not an option, it is a necessity, and not just for 

 parents. The worthwhile objective of longer participation by older Australians in the workforce will 

 also require more flexible workplaces. We have the technology: all that is required is commitment 

 and imagination.  

 

 We need to continue to expand the Government’s skills based immigration programme, in addition 

 to meeting our humanitarian obligations to refugees.  

 

 I see our immigration programme as essentially a recruiting exercise, conducted in the national 

 interest of Australia. It is a competitive world and we want as many of the world’s enterprising and 

 energetic to join and strengthen our Australian family.  

 

 While we wish all other nations tranquility and prosperity, the fact is that troubled times in other 

 lands have brought many migrants to Australia. The social problems resulting from demographic 

 change in other countries are likely to bring many more highly qualified immigrants to Australia.  

 

 More, perhaps than any other people, Australians are particularly mobile and employable around the 

 world. Already one million of us are living and working overseas. High skills and easy familiarity with 

 other cultures makes Australians citizens of the world.  

 

 But immigration is a two way street: a revolving door in fact. If we are uncompetitive, if our 

 economy falters , if our personal income tax rates remain relatively high or become higher we run 

 the risk that our best talent will leave and in large numbers. In some years New Zealand, for 

 example, has suffered a net loss of nearly 1% of its native born population.  

 

 Mr Speaker, it is not just populations which are changing. So, apparently, is our weather. We must 

 assume on the basis of current science that our world is getting warmer and our country at least, 

 drier.  

 

 I am proud to be part of a Government which has led the way in the better management of our 

 water resources. For the first time, a Federal Government has shown it is prepared to take a 

 leadership role to help meet the challenges of urban water supply and cleanliness.  

 

 We have a lot to do. Many mistakes have been made when water was taken for granted. It is 

 incredible that in Sydney, the largest city of the driest continent on earth, we are still pumping our 

 waste water out to sea rather than recycling it.  

 

 The Wentworth campaign was hard fought, which is no bad thing. The Party’s organization was 

 unstinting in its support as were Ministers, Members and Senators.  

 

 Nearly a thousand Liberals volunteered to work on our campaign; more than 600 on polling day 

 alone.  

 

 Our magnificent Young Liberals, some of them voting for the first time, worked side by side with 

 veterans who had joined the Party in Sir Robert Menzies’ day.  

 

 Nearly 400 are here today and I thank them particularly for this very moving show of support.  

 

 I thank all of our Liberal Party family from the bottom of my heart.  

 

 I particularly thank our Prime Minister. John Howard provided every assistance we requested and 

 much more. In Wentworth, as across the nation, he clearly set out the choice presented to the 

 people. His discipline, leadership and teamwork delivered our victory.  

 

 Finally, I thank my best advocates, Lucy, Daisy and Alex. Their love gave me the strength to run. 

 Their charisma made up for many of my shortcomings and their advocacy was as compelling as it 

 was sincere.  

 

 ENDS 

 

 

 

 

