---
title: "The fabrication of female genital mutilation: the UN, Walter Roth and ethno-pornography."
date: "2004-09-29"
creators:
  - "Pringle, Helen"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Ethnography"
  - "Female circumcision"
  - "Men"
  - "Aboriginal women"
  - "Cultural anthropology"
  - "Sex behaviour"
  - "Aboriginal culture"
  - "Fraud"
  - "Evaluation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211271846
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AZ1F6%22
---

 

 

 

 The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation:  The UN, Walter Roth and Ethno-Pornography   

 

 

 

 

 Dr Helen Pringle 

 School of Politics and International Relations 

  University of New South Wales 

 

 

 

 

 Refereed paper presented to the 

 Australasian Political Studies Association Conference 

 University of Adelaide 

 29 September - 1 October 2004 

 

 

 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 Page 2 

 

 

 Note: I would like to thank Ashley Sherwin, a US student at the University of NSW  in 2003, whose question led me to Walter Roth and this topic. Second, I acknowledge  the  members  of  the  Roth  family.  I  was  anxious  when  I  heard  that  members  of  the   family  would  be  at  the  conference  at  which  an  nitial  draft  of  this  paper  was  read,   particularly given the concerns of my paper, but I was completely disarmed by the  courage, curiosity and honesty of the family.1 Above all I acknowledge the traditional  owners and stewards of this land, and the owners and stewards of Pitta Pitta land. In  these  acknowledgments,  I  do  not  want  simply  to  perform  the  usual  courtesies  -   although  I  have  nothing  against  the  usual  courtesies,  and  I  think  that  Australia   would  be  a  very  different  place  if  the  usual  courtesies  had  been  observed  more   stringently in our history, and in our present. My paper concerns grievous wrongs,  and  in  some  ways  the  rehearsal  of  the  material  here  will  repeat  those  wrongs,  an   outcome  by  which  I  am  profoundly  disturbed.  I  do  not  think  that  being  well-meaning  is  sufficient  to  excuse  me  from  responsibility  for  what  my  words  and   actions  do.  At  any  rate,  all  too  often  we  confuse  motivation  and  intention,  a   distinction  that  is  absolutely  central  to  discussions  of  genocide  and  human  rights   more broadly. It is to human rights that I now turn.    

 

 

 

 As part of a global campaign against the genital cutting of women and girls, the UN 

 High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  (HCHR)  publishes  a  Fact  Sheet  entitled  

 “Harmful Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children”.2 The 

 Office  of  the  HCHR  publishes  a  large  number  of  such  fact  sheets,  in  order  to  “deal  

 with topical human rights issues and explain the structure and procedures of United 

 Nations human rights treaty monitoring bodies and special mechanisms. The goal is 

 to help readers understand basic human rights and the international machinery that 

 has  been  established  to  promote  and  protect  them.”  The  genital  cutting  of  women  

 and  girls  has  become  a  crucial  test  case  for  the  limits  of  toleration  of  traditional  

 

 1  I canvass wider issues of the responsibility of children for the wrongs of their parents in my paper  “Fathers and Sons: Hezekiah, Atonement and Responsibility”. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 3

 cultural  practices.3  The  UN  Fact  Sheet  forms  part  of  a  campaign  against  such  

 practices. 

  The  Fact  Sheet  lists  three  surgical  forms  of  female  genital  mutilation,  defined  as  

 “surgical  removal  of  parts  or  all  of  the  most  sensitive  female  genital  organs”.  The  

 three forms are infibulation, excision, and circumcision. The Fact Sheet notes that of 

 these  forms,  only  circumcision  (or  “Sunna”  circumcision)  “can  be  likened  to  male  

 circumcision”.  Indeed,  the  UN  campaign  simply  assumes  that  the  circumcision  of  

 boys  and  men  is  not  a  “harmful  traditional  practice”,  and  that  it  does  not  raise  

 questions of conflict between the principles of toleration and of equality. 

  After its enumeration of the three surgical forms of genital mutilation, the UN Fact 

 Sheet adds a note on another type of such harmful traditional practices: 

 Another  form  of  mutilation  which  has  been  reported  is  introcision,  practised   specifically by the Pitta-Patta aborigines of Australia. When a girl reaches puberty,  the  whole  tribe-both  sexes-assembles.  The  operator,  an  elderly  man,  enlarges  the   vaginal  orifice  by  tearing  it  downward  with  three  fingers  bound  with  opossum   string.  In  other  districts,  the  perineum  is  split  with  a  stone  knife.  This  is  usually   followed  by  compulsory  sexual  intercourse  with  a  number  of  young  men   [emphases added].4   

 This  is  a  striking  claim,  particularly  in  its  use  of  the  present  tense.  In  the  literature  

 arguing for the prohibition of female genital mutilation in Australia, I have found no 

 mention  of  this  practice  among  the  “Pitta-Patta”.  The  reasoning  underlying  legal  

 

 2 Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Fact Sheet No. 23: Harmful Traditional Practices  Affecting the Health of Women and Children, at http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu6/2/fs23.htm.  3 See for example, Susan Moller Okin et al., Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women? (Princeton: Princeton  University Press, 1999), also at http://bostonreview.net/BR22.5/toc.html. Okin asks “whether groups  that are illiberal and sexist should be afforded group rights and protections by liberal states, or  whether, instead, sexist cultural practices and perhaps entire cultures should be altered or allowed to  become ‘extinct’.”  4 The Fact Sheet adds that “It is reported that introcision has been practised in eastern Mexico and in  Brazil”, and gives as an example an operation that is (allegedly) performed in north-east Peru. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 4

 prohibitions  on  genital  cutting  in  Australia  addresses  practices  originating  in  the  

 Middle East and Africa, and the corresponding education programs target migrants 

 and refugees to Australia from those areas.5 

  The passage from the UN Fact Sheet on the “Pitta-Patta” is repeated verbatim on 

 the  website  of  the  Inter-Parliamentary  Union’s  campaign  “Stop  Violence  against  

 Women”,6  and  the  IPU  lists  introcision  among  the  “Pitta-Patta”  under  the  heading  

 “Current status” in Australia.7  In the case of both the United Nations and the Inter-

 Parliamentary  Union  campaign  material,  no  source  is  given  for  the  claim  that  

 Australian  Aborigines  are  current  and  regular practitioners of introcision on young 

 women.  The  claims  about  the  “Pitta-Patta”  are  repeated  by  various  other  sources  

 concerned with the human rights of women, such as Womenaid International.8 

  It  is  not  clear  exactly  where  these  documents  have  gleaned  their  information  on  

 genital  mutilation  in  Australia,  as  none  of  them  cites  any  references  for  the  claims.  

 However,  the  original  source  of  reports  of  introcision  practised  on  Aboriginal  

 

 5 Genital mutilation is specifically prohibited in most states of Australia, and (implicitly) considered  a form of assault in the others. See for example, Crimes Act 1900 (NSW), §45: Prohibition of female  genital mutilation, at http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consol_act/ca190082/s45.html. 

 6 Inter-Parliamentary Union, Parliamentary Campaign “Stop Violence against Women”: Female  Genital Mutilation, at http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/fgm-what.htm.  7 Inter-Parliamentary Union, Parliamentary Campaign “Stop Violence against Women”: Female  Genital Mutilation, at http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/fgm-prov-a.htm.  8 See Womenaid International Information Paper FGM/40, at  http://www.womenaid.org/press/info/fgm/fgminfo.htm, which notes in addition that “In all cases of  female mutilation if the child dies from complications, the excisor is not held responsible: rather, the  death is attributed to evil spirits or fate.” Another example is posted on sistahspace, “The culture of  circumcision”, at http://www.sistahspace.com/nommo/fgm25.html: in this case, the past tense is used  of the practice among the Pitta Patta “ethnic group of the Australian aborigines”. The eminent refugee  advocate (and Living National Treasure) Julian Burnside notes that “Female circumcision is practised  by some Australian Aboriginal groups”, in “Concepts of Liability - Female Genital Mutilation and  Negligent Barristers”, address to the Medico-Legal Society, 28 May 1994, at  http://www.users.bigpond.com/burnside/FGM.htm. See also Wikipedia, entry under “Female 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 5

 women  appears  to  be  Walter  Roth,  in  his  1897  book  entitled  Ethnological  Studies  

 among the North-West-Central Queensland Aborigines. Roth was a doctor in the Boulia 

 area  of  Queensland  in  the  1890s,  and  was  later  appointed  Northern  Protector  of  

 Aborigines,  and  then  Chief  Protector  of  Aborigines  in  Queensland.9  Roth’s  

 Ethnological  Studies  refers  to  practices  of  the  Pitta-Pitta  (and  to  other  tribes  in  

 Northwest  Queensland).  How  Roth’s  account  came  to  take  on  the  garbled  form  it  

 does in authoritative modern human rights documents is a little mysterious. 

 As far as I can gather, a gynaecologist in the colonial administration of the Sudan 

 called Allan Worsley transformed the tribe studied by Roth from the Pitta Pitta into 

 the  more  euphonious  “Pitta  Patta”,  in  the  1930s.  And  “Pitta-Patta”  they  have  

 remained.  In  an  article in  the  British  Journal  of  Obstetrics  and  Gynaecology  in  1938,  

 Worsley  charted  the  boundaries  of  circumcision  of  women  in  Australia  as  being  

 “[f]rom Urabunna in the south, throughout the continent, to the eastern shores of the 

 Gulf of Carpentaria”. Under the heading “Introcision”, Worsley notes, 

  I believe this occurs among certain South Sea Islanders, who practise a similar  cutting into the posterior part of the male urethra, but I cannot find clear evidence.  It  is,  however,  practised  among  the  Pitta-Patta  of  Australia  in  the  following   manner.   

  When the girl reaches puberty, the whole tribe, of both sexes, is assembled. The  operator,  an  elderly  man  trained  for  the  purpose,  enlarges  the  vaginal  orifice  by                                                                                                                                                            

 Circumcision”, which notes that “excision, was practiced as an initiation rite among Australian  aborigines”: http://en2.wikipedia.org/wiki/Female_circumcision.   9 If he is remembered at all today, Roth would perhaps be recognised as a figure in the story of the  removal of Walter told by Robert Manne, In Denial: The Stolen Generations and the Right, Australian  Quarterly Essay no. 1 (2001), pp. 7-10. It was also during Roth’s term as Protector that Aboriginal  children began to be removed to Barambah (now Cherbourg, near Murgon, where I spent part of my  childhood): see Thom Blake, A Dumping Ground: A History of the Cherbourg Settlement (Brisbane:  University of Queensland Press, 2001). It seems to me from an examination of the records of Roth’s  term as Protector that the children of Aboriginal women and non-white men were particularly  vulnerable to removal orders, a massively underexplored topic in my view. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 6

 tearing  it  downwards  with  three  fingers  bound  round  with  opossum  string.  In   other districts the perineum is split up with a stone knife. This is usually followed  by  compulsory  sexual  intercourse  with  a  number  of  young  men,  and  even  yet   more disgusting practices, for the rejuvenation of the tribal aged and infirm.10   

 According  to  Worsley,  the  practice  is  performed  by  “specially  trained  male  

 operators”.11 Worsley offers some intriguing suggestions as to the purpose of female 

 genital cutting. For example, he notes that one of the aims of the practice is to prevent 

 labial hypertrophy, “the result, it is said, of prolonged masturbation”, and concludes, 

 “Herein lies a deep, though unadmitted, cause for circumcision of the female”.12 

  Worsley cites Roth’s Ethnological Studies as his source on introcision, although he 

 notes the wrong page number.13 There is no suggestion in Worsley’s article that his 

 claims are based on any direct acquaintance with the practices of Aborigines in any 

 part of Australia. 

  In the rest of this paper, I explore the provenance of the accounts of introcision set 

 out in the human rights documents noted above. I do this in relation to the work of 

 Walter  Roth.  First,  I  suggest  that  Roth’s  understanding  of  the  introcision  of  

 Aboriginal  women  is  tied  to  his  theoretical  conjecture that the genital mutilation of 

 men is in some sense a mimesis of the vulva. That is, Roth’s reports of introcision are 

 based on hypothesising a connection of some sort between female and male genital 

 

 10 Allan Worsley, “Infibulation and Female Circumcision: A Study of a Little-Known Custom”,  British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 45 (1938), pp. 686-691, at 688.  11  Ibid.,  689.   12  Ibid.,  690.   13 See ibid., 691 fn 2, citing p. 170 of Ethnological Studies. It seems to me possible, given his mention of  introcision among the South Sea islanders, that Worsley might have consulted Venus Oceanica: The  Sexual Life of South Sea Natives; Erotic Rituals; and Ethnopornographia, ed. R. Burton (NY: Oceanica  Research Press, 1935), rather than Ethnological Studies. The last chapter of Roth’s Ethnological Studies is  reprinted in Burton’s volume, interspersed with photos from disparate areas. As nothing in my  argument rests on this possibility, I simply mention it here. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 7

 cutting  (although  Roth  does  not  argue  that  either  is  a  “harmful”  practice).  I  would  

 suggest that Roth’s curiosity is not at all directed to the question of the genital cutting 

 of  women.  He  is  rather  concerned  with  how  to  explain  the  performance  of  genital  

 cutting  on  Aboriginal  men,  the  practice  he  calls  intro-cision,  which  other  

 anthropologists  of  the  time  called  sub-incision.  Roth’s  portrayal  of  the  introcision  of  

 women  does  not  appear  to  be  based  on  any  sustained  empirical  observation  of  the  

 rite  -  and  in  any  case,  such  “introcision”  of  women  is  only  tendentiously  akin  to  

 subincision  in  men.  What  Roth  pictures  in  Ethnological  Studies,  it  seems  to  me,  is  

 involuntary  episiotomy  followed  by  gang  rape  -  and  not  a  form  of  circumcision  as  

 we would understand it today, or as is understood in the human rights documents I 

 have mentioned above. What Roth pictures in these passages, in other words, might 

 arguably be an example of a “harmful traditional practice”, but it is not the harmful 

 traditional practice of circumcision. 

  Second,  I  look  at  the  controversy  surrounding  Roth’s  attempt  to  back  up  his  

 theories  on  the  introcision  of  women,  with  reference  to  an  incident  that  was  one  of  

 the  sources  of  the  disputes  in  his  term  as  Protector,  and  which  formed  one  of  the  

 triggers  of  his  resignation  from  the  office  and  departure  for  British  Guiana  in  1905.  

 Roth was determined to show that the purpose of the introcision of Aboriginal men 

 was  not  the  prevention  of  procreation.  In  order  to  illustrate  that  insemination  was  

 entirely  possible  by  an  introcised  man,  Roth  “paid”  an  Aboriginal  couple  to  

 demonstrate a sexual position of which he then took photographs. In 1904 and 1905, 

 speeches  in  the  Queensland  Parliament  on  this  and  other  aspects  of  Roth’s  work  

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 8

 were  said  to  form  “a  pile  as  high  as  the  Eiffel  Tower”.14  I  will  not  deal  with  the  

 controversy  at  length  in  this  paper,  only  insofar  as  it  relates  to  the  incident  of  the  

 photos. 

 

 1. Walter Roth and the practice of “introcision” 

 Roth  reported  the  practice  of  introcision  in  a  chapter  of  Ethnological  Studies  entitled  

 “Ethno-pornography”.15 He placed this chapter, with accompanying drawings, right 

 at  the  end  of  the  book  so  that  an  unwitting  reader  would  not  stumble  across  the  

 material. In the book’s Preface, Roth notes of his final chapter, “I am well aware that 

 it  is  far  from  suitable  for  the  general  lay  reader;  the  subject  matter,  however,  being  

 essential  to  a  scientific  account  of  these  aboriginals,  I  have  decided  upon  its  

 publication, at the same time placing it at the very last, in the hope that those who do 

 not wish to peruse its pages need not unwittingly find themselves doing so.”16 Roth 

 also  placed  an  Author’s  Note  at  the  head  of  the  last  chapter  itself,  warning,  “The  

 following chapter is not suitable for perusal by the general lay reader.”17 

  When  Roth’s  book  was  sent  to  the  printer  in  1897,  the  Government  Printing  

 Officer  sent  a  memo  to  the  then  Under  Secretary  of  the  Home  Department,  Sir  

 Horace Tozer, inquiring: “You are doubtless aware that the last chapter - ch: xiii and 

 

 14 According to Mr Lesina, Queensland Parliamentary Debates (QPD), 24 November 1905, 1810:  “Hansard teemed with speeches delivered against the administration of Dr. Roth until they had a pile  as high as the Eiffel Tower, and the Minister brushed everything aside as he would a fly from his  aristocratic nose.” 

 15 Walter E. Roth, Ethnological Studies among the North-West-Central Queensland Aborigines (Brisbane:  Edmund Gregory, Government Printer, 1897), chap. xiii, “Ethno-Pornography”.  16  Ibid.,  v-vi.  

 17  Ibid.,  169.  

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 9

 the  last  plate  (pl.  xxlv)  deal  with  indelicate  subjects,  is  it  likely  they  may  be  in  

 violation of the Indecent Advertisements Acts, and, if they are, is the author’s note, at 

 the head of the chapter, a sufficient protection?”. Sir Horace replied in Pauline mode: 

 “To the pure all things are pure. The impure will never pay 10 s for this book.”18 Roth 

 dedicated  the  book  to  Tozer,  by  then  Acting  Premier  of  Queensland,  “As  a  slight  

 tribute  in  appreciation  of  his  determined  efforts  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  

 Queensland Aboriginal”. 

  The topics covered in Roth’s indelicate chapter include initiation rites of men and 

 women,  marriage,  betrothal,  love  charms,  venery,  pregnancy  and  labour,  abortion,  

 babyhood, menstruation, micturition and defecation, and finally, foul language. Not 

 all  these  subjects  fall  (or  fell)  within  usual  understandings  of  “pornography”.  Roth  

 begins  the  final  chapter  with  a  consideration  of  social  rank,  and  ends  the  chapter  

 (and  the  book)  with  the  sentence,  “I  have  no  evidence  as  to  any  practice  of  

 masturbation  or  sodomy  anywhere  among  the  North-West-Central  Queensland  

 aboriginals.”19 

 

 18 Memo from Government Printing Office to Under Secretary of the Home Department, 13 October  1897, with note by Sir Horace Tozer, 16 October 1897, both in Queensland State Archives (QSA)  A/58550. Also see Roth to Baldwin Spencer, quoted in Russell McDougall, “Walter and Henry Ling  Roth: ‘On the Signification of Couvade’: The Place of Australia and British Guiana in the Fin de SiÃ¨cle  Debate concerning the History of Humanity”, Australian Cultural History, 21 (2002), 61-67, at fn 29:  “the government originally intended omitting the last chapter, with accompanying plate, and  publishing it separately for special distribution to certain people only - mainly for the purpose of  drawing attention to the present condition of certain of the aborigines in view of the legislation  proposal to be enforced. The ordinary reading public had in a sense to be protected by being told that  such and such a chapter was obscene, and that they could please themselves if they chose to read it.  And after all, scientific and interesting as these particulars are to men like us, they are certainly not so  to the general lay reader.”  19 Ethnological Studies, 184. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 10

  Initiation practices are at the centre of the final chapter, just as they would be in 

 the  parliamentary  controversy  around  Roth’s  work.  As  presented  by  Roth  in  the  

 chapter,  both  men  and  women  at  around  puberty  were  cut  genitally,  but  as  noted  

 above, his portrait of the introcision of girls reads more like a report of rape than of 

 circumcision.  Roth  details  the  genital  cutting  of  women  in  his  account  of  the  first  

 ceremonial  stage  for  young  Pitta-Pitta  and  neighbouring  women  in  the  Boulia  

 District, in the following terms: 

 Two  or  three  men  manage  to  get  the  young  woman,  when  thus  ripe  enough  [ie   showing  signs  of  puberty],  all  alone  by  herself  away  in  the  bush,  and,  throwing   her  down,  one  of  them  forcibly  enlarges  the  vaginal  orifice  by  tearing  it  

 downwards  with  the  first  three  fingers  wound  round  and  round  with  opossum-string (cf. introcision in the male - sects. 317-322). Other men come forwards from  all directions, and the struggling victim has to submit in rotation to promiscuous  coition  with  all  the  ‘bucks’  present:  should  any  sick  individual  be  in  camp,  he   would  drink  the  bloody  semen  collected  from  her  subsequently  in  a  koolamon   (sect. 283).20 

 

 This  stage  of  “the  common  orgie”  by  “dusky  Lotharios”  was  foreshadowed  in  an  

 earlier chapter of the book. Roth claims that this stage is the only one insisted upon 

 absolutely  for  all  women.  He  does  not  detail  the  higher  ranks  of  ritual  for  women.  

 Roth  assimilates  the  second  ritual  stage  for  men  with  that  of  women  in  the  Boulia  

 district, but the accompanying drawing, figure 426, is of a male with a phallocrypt. 

  Roth  gives  several  other  instances  of  initiation  practices  in  the  area  of  northwest  

 Queensland.  He  writes  that  in  the  area  around  Glenormiston,  the  practice  begins  

 when a young woman is drawn away from a daytime corroboree: 

 She is stealthily followed by two or three men who, suddenly pouncing upon her,  seize her by the wrists while other bucks, till now in ambush, come rushing upon 

 

 20  Ibid.,  174.  

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 11

 the scene, the old chaperone clearing away to a distance. Four ‘bucks’ hold one on  to each limb, while another presses upon her stomach so as to compel her to draw  her legs up: her thighs are now drawn apart and her eyes covered so as to prevent  her  seeing  the  individual,  probably  a  very  old  man,  who  is  beckoned  up  from   some hiding-place to come and operate directly everything is ready. This he does  by slitting up a portion of the perineum with a stone-knife, and sweeping his three  fingers  round  inside  her  vaginal  orifice.  Before  this  ceremony  the  woman  was  a   wa-pa-ri: she is now a ka-na-ri, her attainment of full puberty having been publicly  celebrated.  She  is  next  compelled  to  undergo  copulation  with  all  the  bucks  

 present; again the same night, and a third time, on the following morning.21   

 Roth’s  third  citation  of  the  practice  is  among  the  Yaroinga  in  the  Upper  Georgina  

 District: 

 ...  three  men  under  the  leadership  of  one  of  her  future  husband’s  brothers  catch   the young woman, at the period of suitable physical development, and throw her  down  lengthways,  face  upwards  upon  the  back  of  one  of  them  lying  face   downwards  on  the  ground,  where  she  is  held  in  position  (Fig.  422  [Plate  xxiv]).  

 The actual operator, sitting astride the woman’s chest and neck cuts with a stone-knife into the perineum downwards and forwards, turning the implement slightly  upwards  at  the  close  of  the  incision....  On  the  completion  of  this  ornamentation,   she is temporarily on loan to her future husband’s friends and others in camp, but 

 there  would  appear  to  be  no  subsequent  collection  of  the  semen,  as  in  the  other   districts.22   

 There seem to be two other instances of the rite in Roth’s final chapter: 

 In  the  Leichhardt-Selwyn  District.  With  the  Kalkadoon  tribe  there  is  no  special   corrobboree, &c., but the young women, the wom-pa (? or un-do) is just seized upon  and cut, and publicly proclaimed an e-ra-ji.   

 At Birdsville, &c., a wooden stick of very hard wood about two feet long, with a  representation of the extremity of a life-sized penis rudely carved at the top, and  thinner  all  the  way  down  to  the  handle  (Fig.  424),  is  used  for  the  purpose  of   tearing down the hymen and posterior vaginal wall.23   

 

 21  Ibid.  

 22  Ibid.,  175.   23 Ibid. I was reminded of Edward Kienholz’ installation “Five Car Stud” in reading these passages:  the installation comprises three cars which illuminate a scene of a black man tied down and castrated  by four white men. A white woman vomits in a truck behind the scene. The spectators are made  complicit in rape. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 12

  Roth’s accounts of the rite of the genital cutting of women, in other words, refer to 

 a  wider  area  than  only  Pitta  Pitta  lands.  Significantly,  Roth  also  includes  the  

 Kalkadoons  (Kalkatungu)  as  practitioners  of  the  rite.  However,  it  is  unclear  exactly  

 what kind of evidence Roth’s accounts are based upon. 

  Roth writes in the Preface to Ethnological Studies that it is necessary to gain mastery 

 of  the  local  language  in  order  to  study  societies  properly,  and  he  emphasises  the  

 opportunities  for  anthropological  inquiry  that  he  had  in  his  position  of  hospital  

 surgeon. But Roth also notes that his information on the progression through the two 

 upper degrees of social rank in the area is “meagre”. He explains that this is partly 

 because  “the  aboriginals  were  always  very  chary  of  imparting  information  

 concerning  these  higher  grades  even  to  me  who  had  become  intimately  connected  

 with  them  through  a  knowledge  of  their  written  and  sign  languages  and  other  

 causes.” Roth was rather more modest about his possession of such knowledge when 

 he  spoke  to  a  Committee  of  the  QLD  parliament  on  amendments  to  the  1897  

 Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act.24 

   In Ethnological Studies, Roth adds that some other difficulties in collecting accurate 

 information  stem  from  the  effects  of  the  onslaught  of  European  civilisation  in  the  

 area: 

 ...  with  the  gradual  depletion  of  the  aboriginal  population,  the  initiation   ceremonies  of  the  higher  ranks  are  gradually  becoming  obsolete,  those  for  the   females  especially  being  already  very  marked;  that  individuals  belonging  to  the  

 higher grades and consequently older people are not too commonly met with; and  that  no  one  is  allowed  to  be  present  or  to  assist  in  the  initiation  of  any  degree   higher  than  that  of  which  he  is  himself  a  member.  As  far  as  my  personal  

 

 24 QPD, lxxxvii (1901), 1135-1145, esp. 1138. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 13

 knowledge  goes,  in  North-West-Central  Queensland  the  procedures  of  the  first   and second degrees only are permitted to be viewed by Europeans.25   

 Roth is forthright throughout his official reports as Protector about the” depletion” of 

 the  Aborigines  by  disease  and  shot.  The  area  around  Boulia  in  which  Roth  was  

 working  had  been  “depleted”,  for  example,  by  Alexander  Kennedy  and  his  good  

 friend  Police  Sub-Inspector  Frederick  Urquhart.26  Kennedy  was  a  bloodthirsty  

 savage,  originally  from  Scotland,  who  established  a  station  at  Buckingham  Downs,  

 and later Noarnside and Calton Hills. Kennedy subdued the area with his stockwhip, 

 his pistol, and his penis.27 Most notoriously, Kalkatungu country was the scene of a 

 pitched  battle  fought  by  Aborigines  against whites and native troopers armed with 

 guns.  On  what  is  now  known  as  Battle  Mountain,  the  Kalkatungu  faced  a  cavalry  

 charge by Urquhart, in the course of which perhaps 200 Kalkadoons were killed.28 

 Alexander  Kennedy’s  biographer  (and  friend)  Hudson  Fysh  notes  that  the  

 Kalkadoons and other Aborigines in the Cloncurry district who caused Kennedy “so 

 much concern” were to be “the subject of a brilliant study by Walter E. Roth, whose 

 work  has  been  closely  consulted  and  quoted  in  the  following  observations.” 29  By  

 

 25 Ethnological Studies, 169.  26 I am extremely grateful to Iain Davidson for drawing attention to this background of Roth’s work.  27 See especially Hudson Fysh, Taming the North, 2nd edition (Sydney: Angus & Robertson, 1950 [first  ed 1933]), a book claimed to be written in consultation with Kennedy and Urquhart.  28  Fysh,  Taming the North, 183-184. Urquhart went on to became Commissioner of Police for  Queensland, becoming involved in right-wing politics and the Red Flag riots in Brisbane after World  War I, and then an Administrator of the Northern Territory. He also had a part in the investigation of  the Gatton murders: see Stephanie Bennett, The Gatton Murders (Sydney: Pan, 2004). Urquhart was a  writer of poetry, and was given to describing his massacres in some detail in his poems as also in his  police reports. For an example of his poetry, see Camp Canzonettes, for his police reports see QSA  Murder Files A/49714, reports on the murders of James Powell and E. Watson.  29  Fysh,  Taming the North, 127. The chapter in which this passage is found is chapter xv, “The Savage  Kalkadoons”. The Kalkatungu appear to have put together a special “Kill Kennedy corroboree”, with  a song aimed directly at him beginning “We kill Kennedy in the morning” (at 124). The corroboree 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 14

 1885,  Fysh  argued,  the  power  of  the  Kalkadoons  had  been  “finally  broken”.30  Roth  

 first came to the area in 1890. A powerful picture of the state of the Aborigines in this 

 area is given in a report by B.H. Purcell sent to the Colonial Secretary in 1892: 

  Carandotta seems to be the centre of disease and there I saw men and women,  their faces sunken in, their bodies so shrunken, and eyes so small and far back in  their  heads  that  at  first  sight  they  appeared  like  mummies  of  centuries  gone  by  

 walking about the camps....   I saw one poor child not 12 years that had syphilis for 12 months or more, can  anything be more horrible than this, it is bad enough to know how they have been  shot down without allowing these things to continue.   Lake  Nash  has  some  bad  cases  and  my  friend  the  Manager  Mr.  M.  Costello   informed me, that white travellers do their very best to disease the black gins.31   

 Even  allowing  for  some  exaggeration  in  this  and  other  reports,  it  appears  that  

 Roth’s account refers only to a small and diminishing number of Aborigines. In this 

 context,  I  think  it  would  be  wise  to  be  cautious  as  to  whether  Roth’s  accounts  of  

 initiation ceremonies were wholly, or even in part, based on direct observation. Roth 

 regularly used material on Aboriginal practices given to him by what he called “old 

 hands”, by which he meant station owners.32 He certainly did not accept such reports 

 holus-bolus,  and  he  seems  to  have  favoured  certain  station  owners  over  others;  for  

 example, Roth seems to give particular credence to Mr Craigie of Roxburgh station. 

 

 was unsuccessful and Kennedy became an important figure in the formation of Qantas, along with his  biographer Fysh.  30  Fysh,  Taming the North, 117.  31 B.H. Purcell, “The general condition of Aborigines in the Western and Northern parts of this  Colony”, QSA Col/A717 in-letter no. 14199 of 1892. Most of this report is reprinted in Raymond  Evans, Kay Saunders, and Kathryn Cronin, Race Relations in Colonial Queensland: A History of Exclusion,  Exploitation and Extermination, 2nd ed (Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1988), 386-388; my  transcription of the report differs slightly.  32 In his 1898 report as Protector on Rockhampton, Roth notes that the delay in submitting the report  was because “old hands” had given him additional information after the journey. See Report to the  Commissioner of Police, 6 July 1898, QSA A/19898 [Roth Estrays]. It is important also to exercise  caution as to Roth’s reports on cannibalism, information which was conveyed to him by Mr Craigie.  Iain Davidson notes that a contemporary native title claimant is a descendant of Mr Craigie. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 15

 In  the  context  of  the  history  of  the  area,  I  would  stress  that  Roth’s  picture  of  

 Aborigines presents a culture in disarray. Hence it is extremely difficult to assess the 

 “authenticity”  and  historical  development  of  the  rituals.  Roth  of  course  confidently  

 assumes that he can distinguish between authentic and depleted rites. But given the 

 recent history of the area at the time he was writing, it would be a foolhardy person 

 who would trumpet these rites as traditional practices with any confidence at all. 

 Moreover,  Roth  freely  admits  in  Ethnological  Studies  that  he  was  excluded  from  

 viewing parts of the ceremonies he describes. However, in his Ethnography Bulletin 

 no. 12, Roth does note: 

 I have been present at initiation ceremonies on the East Coast (Princess Charlotte  Bay,  McIvor  River,  etc.),  and  several  [Roth’s  fn  For  descriptions  see  Ethnol.   Studies, etc., 1897 -Sects. 299 to 315] in the North-Western Districts; I cannot say  that  I  have  been  initiated  into  the  latter,  for  the  very  good  reason  that  I  was  not   prepared to submit myself to the necessary sexual mutilation, an ordeal to which I  am not aware that any European, however keen on Anthropological Science, has  hitherto allowed himself to be subjected.33   

 Throughout the final chapter of Ethnological Studies, there is significant confusion as 

 to  what  exactly  Roth  saw  for  himself.  I  am  not  convinced  that  this  confusion  was  

 accidental. 

  In the light of these cautions, I want now to recall one of Roth’s “descriptions” of 

 genital cutting, in the Glenormiston area, as set out above. In this excerpt, Roth notes: 

 “her thighs are now drawn apart and her eyes covered so as to prevent her seeing the 

 individual, probably a very old man, who is beckoned up from some hiding-place to 

 come and operate directly everything is ready [my emphasis].” Similar formulations 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 16

 can  be  found  at  other  points  in  Roth’s  account.  For  example,  in  writing  of  the  

 preliminary  initiation  of  boys  in  the  Cloncurry  District,  Roth  writes,  “This  first  

 ceremonial may  be  described  somewhat  on  the  following  lines  [my  emphasis]”.34 

 Again, when Roth comes to mention the third and fourth, higher stages of initiation, 

 he notes, “Particulars of these are not so easily procurable as those of the preceding, 

 and  the  following  comprises  the  information  which  can  be  depended  upon.  Both  

 initiation  rites  would  appear  [my  emphasis]  to  take  place  on  the  same  occasions  as  

 when a novitiate is made a kati-kati maro”.35 Roth notes very little about these higher 

 stages,  other  than  that  they  involve  body  paint  and  ornamentation.  He  writes,  

 “Among the Kalkadoon, with the male, the third grade is constituted apparently [my 

 emphasis]  by  the  operation  of  introcision,  or  yel-la”.36  The  frequency  of  such  

 tentativeness in Roth’s work, I would argue, should restrain readers from too readily 

 concluding  that  his  account  is  a  simple  transcription  of  Aboriginal  practices  in  the  

 area. 

  Roth’s  focus  in  the  last  chapter  of  Ethnological  Studies  is on what he calls “this 

 locally-universal practice of lacerating the vaginal orifice, i.e., female introcision (sect. 

 316)”.  His  accounts  of  “female  introcision”  however  must  be  read  in  the  context  of  

 his  discussion  of  the  “introcision”  of  males.  After  painting  pictures  of  “female  

 introcision”  in  the  initiation  of  young  women  into  sexual  life,  Roth  comes  a  few  

 pages  later  to  discuss  introcision  on  men,  also  known  as  “Sturt’s  terrible  rite”,  

 

 33 North Queensland Ethnography Bulletin no 12: On Certain Initiation Ceremonies, in Records of the  Australian Museum, 166.  34  Roth,  Ethnological Studies, 173. 

 35  Ibid.,  177.  

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 17

 “whistling”  or  [artificial]  hypospadias.  At  this  point,  Roth  notes  his  purpose  in  

 adopting  the  nomenclature  of  introcision:  “I  have  designedly  introduced  the  term  

 ‘introcision,’  because  of,  and  so  as  to  include,  the  corresponding  mutilation  of  the  

 females  (sect.  305-309).”37  I  should  note  here  that  most  European  writers  on  the  

 genital  cutting  of  Aboriginal  men  preferred  the  term  “subincision”.  Roth  says  very  

 explicitly that he “invents” the term introcision precisely in order to assimilate male 

 and female genital cutting. 

  Roth explains that the introcision of men takes place subsequently to circumcision, 

 and “aims at the permanent opening up of a more or less considerable extent of the 

 penile  portion  of  the  urethra  by  incision  commencing  at  the  external  urinary  

 meatus.”38  Figure  429  in  his  book  is  a  sketch  of  a  post-introcision  penis.  Roth  has  

 clearly not witnessed the ceremony involved,39 as can be seen in this passage: 

 No  females,  and  no  males  who  have  not  already  been  themselves  introcised,  are   on any account allowed to witness the ordeal, the sight of which would probably  confirm  any  determination  of  their  part  to  exile  themselves  with  a  view  to   escaping  it:  thus,  in  the  Cloncurry  District,  I  came  here  and  there  across  an   appreciable  number  of  Pitta-Pitta  and  other  Boulia  Districts  males,  who   admittedly had left their own tribe on this account.40   

 Notwithstanding  this  clear  signal  that  he  has  not  viewed  it,  Roth  goes  on  to  give  a  

 detailed  description  of  the  operation  among  the  Pitta-Pitta.  For  his  purposes,  Roth  

 deems  it  necessary  to  set  out  a  detailed  account  of  the  introcision  of  men,  in  order  

 

 36  Ibid.  

 37  Ibid.  

 38  Ibid.  

 39 However, it seems that Roth claims to have direct knowledge of the effects of the operation,  particularly in the way it made it difficult for subincised men to ride horses. It also made them more  vulnerable to venereal disease in its more virulent strains.  40  Ibid.,  177-178.  

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 18

 thereby to cement his conjecture of its mimetic identity with the vaginal laceration of 

 women: 

 One  of  the  elders  will  lie  face  downwards  on  the  ground,  a  slight  excavation   having been made there to receive the protuberance of the stomach, and upon this  individual’s  back  the  victim  is  laid,  face  up,  very  much  after  the  style  of  the  first  

 female  initiation  ceremony  among  the  Yaroinga  (sect.  306  [figure  422]):  his  limbs  are   held  in  position  by  various  assistants,  and  his  body  fixed  by  another  who  sits   astride [my emphasis].41   

 The point of Roth’s conjecture here is to counter the theory commonly advanced by 

 European  writers  that  the  introcision  of  males  was  designed  as  a  contraceptive  

 measure to limit population. 

  Roth  briefly  notes  the  explanations  offered  by  Aborigines  themselves  for  the  

 practice  of  genital  cutting.  For  example,  he  notes  that  the  “commonest  reason  

 assigned by the aborigines themselves [for the genital cutting of women] is to make 

 him  ‘big-fellow’  not  only  for  the  convenience  of  the  escaping  progeny,  as  the  men  

 will allege, but also for the progenitor, as the women would say”.42 This reasoning is 

 supported  by  the  fact,  Roth  notes,  that  if  an  Aboriginal  woman  has  “already  

 undergone  sufficient  sexual  connection”  (say  by  being  used  by  European  men  and  

 then returning to her old group), she is not required to undergo the procedure.43 

  It is unclear at this point in his work exactly why Roth wants to assimilate the two 

 practices. Reading (and viewing) his account I would not use the words introcision 

 or  circumcision  to  characterise  the  practice.  What  I  “see”  in  Roth’s  account  is  

 

 41  Ibid.,  178.   42  Ibid.,  175.   43 However, Roth notes that Mr Craigie, the manager of Roxburgh Station, reported one case where a  woman over 40, originally from a coastal tribe, had been seized and lacerated (“despite all struggles  and protestations”) after the death of her husband: Roth, Ethnological Studies, 175. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 19

 involuntary  episiotomy  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  violent  rape,  something  like  

 the claiming of jus primae noctis. I want to emphasise that I am not conceding that this 

 is or was at any time ritual practice among Aborigines. Roth’s account might well be 

 partly or wholly fabricated. But even if we were to assume the fidelity of his account 

 to a ritual practice, the connection between the subincision of men and the cutting of 

 women is not at all obvious. 

  For example, take Roth’s comment: “the forcible laceration and enlargement if the 

 vaginal  orifice.  i.e.,  female-introcision”.  Here  the  “i.e.”  is  altogether  tendentious.  

 Roth’s  “i.e.”  here  links  the  genital  cutting  of  women  to  introcision  of  men  as  if  the  

 connection  were  self-evident.  As  noted  above,  the  term  “subincision”  is  far  more  

 prevalent than “introcision” in writing of the cutting of men’s penises. Roth’s usage 

 of the word “introcision” is designed to forward his own explanation of the genital 

 cutting of men, and to counter the explanation of the practice offered by other writers. 

 Roth notes that Europeans have commonly seen the purpose of mutilation of males 

 as  contraceptive,  as  a  means  of  limiting  population  and  hence  limiting  the  demand  

 for food. This appears to have been both a learned and a popular view. For example, 

 Alexander Kennedy’s biographer notes that 

 Kennedy  was  always  convinced  that  birth  control  was  practised  by  the   Kalkadoons.  He  would  often  see  a  fine-looking  gin  in  a  camp  without  a   piccaninny and would ask, ‘Why that one no piccaninny?’ ‘We makem that way,’  would  always  be  the  answer.  The  practising  of  ‘Sturt’s  terrible  rite’  no  doubt   assisted to keep the population somewhat in check.44 

 

 

 44  Hudson  Fysh,  Taming the North, 212. Fysh also notes repeatedly that the Kalkadoons were  enthusiastic cannibals of young children - and of adults both aboriginal and non-aboriginal (claiming  that “Hundreds of Chinamen were killed and eaten”, for example, at 184). 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 20

 Herbert Basedow provides a detailed summary of the views held by various writers 

 of the contraceptive purpose of the rite.45 

  Roth  however  counters  such  understandings  of  the  contraceptive  purpose  of  the  

 rite. He notes that Aborigines plead ignorance of the purpose or origin of the practice 

 among men, and he does not rely on their comments. Roth argues that the practice is 

 not  necessary  to  inhibit  procreation,  as  the  supply  of  food  to  progenitors  is  not  

 affected  by  the  number  of  their  offspring  under  paedomatronymic  principles;  

 moreover, he notes, such principles operate even where introcision is not performed. 

 And at any rate, Roth argues, the mutilation of men’s penises does not act to prevent 

 fertilisation, given the “peculiar method of copulation in vogue” in these districts. In 

 order  to  counter  the  explanation  of  the  purpose  of  male  genital  cutting  as  

 prophylactic,  Roth  sets  out  in  detail  this  “peculiar  method  of  copulation”,  and  

 provides a diagram of the position: 

 The female lies on her back on the ground, while the make with open thighs sits  on his heels close in front: he now pulls her towards him, and raising her buttocks  drags them into the inner aspects of his own thighs, her legs clutching him round  the flanks (Fig. 433), while he arranges with his hands the toilette of her perineum  and the insertion of his penis. In this position the vaginal orifice, already enlarged  by  the  general  laceration  at  initiation  (sects.  305-309),  is  actually  immediately  

 beneath and in close contact with the basal portion of the penis, and it is certainly  therefore a matter of impossibility to conceive the semen as being discharged for  the most part anywhere but into its proper quarter.46   

 

 45 Herbert Basedow, “Subincision and Kindred Rites of the Australian Aboriginal”, Journal of the  Royal Anthropological Society, 148-151. Beth Povinelli discusses related issues: see Elizabeth A.  Povinelli, The Cunning of Recognition: Indigenous Alterities and the Making of Australian Multiculturalism  (Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2002), esp. chapter 2. 

 46  Roth,  Ethnological Studies, 179. Roth further notes that Mr Craigie was able to show that children  had been conceived from introcised men. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 21

  Basedow supported Roth on this point, noting that as a method of contraception, 

 subincision  is  in  any  case  ineffective:  “Admitting  this  is  an  established  fact,  which  

 can be verified any day among the tribes still living, it becomes a matter of scientific 

 importance to know whether the aboriginal adopts a regular and peculiar method of 

 copulation.” Basedow notes that the “modus caninus” is frequently alleged to be the 

 favoured  method  of  copulation  among  Aborigines,  with  some  writers  even  

 suggesting  that  this  is  because  the  genitalia  of  Aboriginal  women  is  “located  more  

 posteriorly”. Basedow (M.D.) disputes this. He also counsels caution on the subject of 

 what is the regular and peculiar method of copulation among Aborigines, noting that 

 reports on the topic are unreliable: 

 Observations  upon  this  subject  are  scarce,  and  some  of  the  earlier  accounts  are   misleading. I do not mean to dispute the accuracy of early investigation, but it is a  well-known  fact  that  men  of  low  moral  character used to make a habit of giving  quantities of rum, gin, and other spirituous liquors to the natives who would then,  in a semi-intoxicated condition, be persuaded or forced to perform in a way which  may  have  satisfied  the  lustful  humour  of  the  white  villain,  but  was  opposed   entirely  to  the  sense  of  decency  and  modesty  of  a  primitive  people.  But  an   inspiration  emanating  from  the  mind  of  a  drunken  white  man,  under  conditions   such  as  these  could  never  be  admitted  scientifically  as  a  custom  of  the  colored   man, even though the latter had to carry it into effect practically.47   

 I have read this passage many times, wondering if Basedow means that white men 

 were  forcing  (or  persuading)  Aboriginal  women  to  have  sex  with  them  in  certain  

 positions.  But  I  think  the  phrase  “the  colored  man,  even  though  the  latter  had  to  

 

 47 Herbert Basedow, “Subincision and Kindred Rites of the Australian Aboriginal”, Journal of the  Royal Anthropological Society, 57 (1927), 123-156, at 151. I have read this passage many times,  wondering if Basedow means that white men were forcing (or persuading) Aboriginal women to have  sex with them in certain positions. But I think the phrase “the colored man, even though the latter had  to carry it into effect practically” leaves little doubt that what Basedow has in view here is not the  prostitution of Aboriginal women by white men, but entails white men in a position of voyeurism on 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 22

 carry it into effect practically” leaves little doubt that what Basedow has in view here 

 is not the prostitution of Aboriginal women by white men, but entails white men in a 

 position of voyeurism on Aborigines having sex with each other. I think this is a clear 

 case of enslavement, even by the understandings of the time.48 

 Roth  was  not  the  first  to  be  fascinated  with  the  sexual  positions  of  Aborigines,  

 whether  for  scientific  or  other  purposes.  Miklucho-Maclay  for  example  had  been  

 informed by “a pastoralist from Sydney” of the peculiar method, and reproduced a 

 sketch  in  some  respects  similar  to  Roth’s  sketch.  A  number  of  other  writers  also  

 corroborated this picture of the method, often in Latin.49 

  Roth notes that “the forcible laceration and enlargement of the vaginal orifice. i.e., 

 female-introcision”  is  only  practised  where  male  introcision  is  practised,  and  that  

 both men and women must undergo the “ordeal” as “an indispensable preliminary 

 to  marriage”.50  His  view  is  that  the  practice  was  universal: “The information which 

 on the one hand I have obtained from those reliable, and on the other which I have 

 collected  from  the  dozens  upon  dozens  of  personal  examinations  of  my  own,  is  

 conclusive concerning this matter of every adult male being so mutilated.”51 Hence, 

 says Roth, it could hardly be effective as a means of contraception. 

 

 Aborigines having sex with each other. I think this is a clear case of enslavement, even by the  understandings of the time.   48 This practice is the subject of my paper entitled “Men like us: Sexual Slavery on the Australian  Frontier”.  49 An extremely common way of presenting “obscene” material in the late 19th and early 20th century  (for example, see Barker’s translation of Aristotle’s Politics, Maurice etc.). A typical instance is the  account of R. Helms on the Warrina (Arrabonna): “His mihi enaravit quomodo se ponant. Mulier ut  videtur corpus ita ponit ut vir, genibus suppositis, manibus lumbum prehendere pos: sit: unde fit ut  genitalia quam proxime conjugantur; eo modo fieri potest ut semen in vaginam introire possit.”  50  Roth,  Ethnological Studies, 179.  51  Ibid.,  180.  

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 23

  Roth  hypothesises  that  the  practice  is  connected  to  marriage,  given  that  women  

 have “to undergo a corresponding mutilation”: 

 It  is  possible  that  the  cutting  of  the  perineum  and  general  laceration,  &c.,  of  the   female was originally a matter of convenience for the male, the mutilation in her  case subsequently coming to signify her fitness, capability, or experience, in the art  of  the  full  enjoyment  of  copulation,  and  that,  on  the  principle  of  a  form  of   mimicry,  the  analogous  sign  was  inflicted  on  the  male  to  denote  corresponding   fitness on his part. With this hypothesis, it is interesting to note that in the Pitta-Pitta and cognate Boulia District dialects the term used to describe the introcised  penis denotes etymologically the one with a vulva or ‘slit’ (see me-ko ma-ro in the  Pitta-Pitta vocabulary, sect. 44).52    

 This  passage  reflects  Roth’s  main  project  in  these  discussions:  to  show  that  the  

 introcised penis is a mimicry of the vulva, and that introcision is not performed on 

 men so as to inhibit conception. This is an inventive and interesting thesis, although 

 the  thesis  would  seem  to  be  sufficiently  illustrated  by  the  equation  of  subincised  

 penis  with  vulva  (and  not  necessarily  with  the  cut  vulva).53  As  Spencer  and  Gillen  

 wrote in response to Roth’s conjecture: “This still leaves unexplained the mutilation 

 of  the  women,  and  it  would  seem  to  be  almost  simpler  to  imagine  that  this  was  a  

 consequence of the mutilation of the men.”54 

  In  order  to  support  his  thesis  against  the  common  argument  concerning  the  

 efficacy  of  the  introcised  penis  in  inhibiting  procreation,  Roth  produced  a  trump  

 

 52 Ibid. See also Basedow, “Subincision and Kindred Rites of the Australian Aboriginal”, 147-148.  53 I cannot go into the competing explanations of the practice here. Basedow gives a good summary  of the various views held by European writers on the topic in fin de siÃ¨cle Australia. For more recent  presentations of the controversy, see J.E. Cawte, N. Djagamara, and M.J. Barrett, “The Meaning of  Subincision of the Urethra to Aboriginal Australians”, British Journal of Medical Psychology, 39 (1966),  245-253; Philip Singer and Daniel E. Desole, “The Australian Subincision Ceremony Reconsidered:  Vaginal Envy or Kangaroo Bifid Penis Envy”, American Anthropologist, ns, 69, 3/4 (June-August 1967),  355-358; and J.E. Cawte, “Further Comment on the Australian Subincision Ceremony”, American  Anthropologist, ns, 70, 5 (October 1968), 961-964.  54 Baldwin Spencer and F.J. Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia (London: Macmillan, 1899),  263. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 24

 card:  photographs  of  an  Aboriginal  couple  having  intercourse. These  were  the  

 photographs at the centre of the scandal in Roth’s term as Protector, and it is to the 

 incident of the photos that I now turn. 

 

 2. Roth and photography 

 The complaint against Roth in regard to the photographs was not the only matter in 

 dispute  during  his  term.  It  seems  quite  clear  that  the  chief  matter  in  dispute  was  

 Roth’s  perceived  animosity  to  the  interests  of  some  white  settlers.  As  one  

 complainant  noted,  it  was  Roth’s  “Pecksniffian  sympathy  for  the  poor  Blacks”  that  

 provoked opposition.55 Another complainant characterised Roth as “an incubus upon 

 us”.56 But Roth faced a litany of complaints, and there is no doubt that some of these 

 complaints were well-founded, as for example his disposition of the artefacts he had 

 collected in his official capacity.57 

  Some  of  the  specific  complaints  against  Roth  were  given  a  sexual  spin.  For  

 example, Roth was accused of inappropriate gynaecological examinations of women, 

 and of helping to abduct Aboriginal women.58 Roth’s recounting of the folklore of the 

 Aborigines was also in dispute. His rendition of the story, “Why the crocodile swims 

 upstream”, was ridiculed by some old hands in terms of the water taking “improper 

 

 55 F.W. Briggs to Minister for Lands, 25 March 1905, QSA A/58927.  56 New Endeavour Beacon, 14 July 1905, report on public meeting in Cooktown, clipping at QSA  A/58850. See Moreton Station documents from April 1902, A/58850 and notations on Dan.  57 See “Revelations - The Ethnological Specimens sold to Sydney Museum - Complete Official List -  Giving Dates and Localities” , Truth Sunday, 15 April 1906, clipping in QSA HOM/J20 1906/10295, and  QSA HOM/J20 1906/10754.  58 Hamilton to Minister for Lands, 27 July 1904, QSA A/58850. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 25

 liberties”  with  the  crocodile.59  Roth  was  accused  of  refusing  medical  help  to  some  

 Aborigines.60 

  The  incident  of  the  photos  of  the  peculiar  method  of  copulation,  moreover,  was  

 not  the  first  time  that  Roth  had  got  into  trouble  for  his  photography.  In  the  

 Queensland parliament in 1902, questions had been raised as to photos that Roth had 

 taken  on  an  island  off  the  coast  of  Queensland. The member of parliament claimed 

 (rightly it appears) that the women in the photos produced by Roth in order to attest 

 to their good health had in fact died shortly after the photo was taken.61 

  The  question  of  the  photographs  of  a  couple  having  sex  taken  by  Roth  was  first  

 raised  in  parliament  in  1904.  In  his  defence,  Roth  claimed  that  the  photos  he  had  

 taken were identical to the sketch of a copulating couple in Figure 433 of Ethnological 

 Studies.  And,  he  maintained,  the  book  had  been  sent  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  (thus  

 attesting  to  its  respectability).  In  response,  the  indefatigable  MP  Mr  Hamilton62 

 claimed that the diagrams were not included in the copy sent to the Prince of Wales, 

 and that the Prince most likely did not read the book anyway. Hamilton mused, “In 

 any  case  the  Prince  probably  never  saw  or  heard  of  it,  and  for  the  sake  of  

 Queensland, it is to be hoped he never will.” Hamilton continued that “a mere glance 

 at which would be a cause of shame and disgust, to any respectable man, leaving all 

 

 59 Roth first noted the story “Why Iguanas and crocodiles travel upstream in Flood-time” in his  Report to the Commissioner of Police from Cooktwon, 12 May 1899, p. 12, in QSA A/19898 [Roth  Estrays]. In Report no 5. See Hamilton to Minister for Lands, 28 July 1904. 

 60 Hamilton to Minister for Lands 28 July 1904, enclosing JT Dickson to Hamilton, 19 October 1902.   61 Mr Dunsford asked the Home Secretary a question, noted under the heading “Photographing of  Gins” in the parliamentary record. Dunsford claimed that Roth was passing around photos to show  how well aboriginal women were treated, but that the women were dead: QPD xc (1902), 904; see also  question of Mr Hamilton, 28 October 1902, QPD, xc, 958. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 26

 types  of  womanhood  out  of  the  question”.  Hamilton  concluded  that  “to  

 Queenslanders, it will be some consolation to know that Hungary is responsible for 

 [Roth’s]  existence,  and  that  Britain  is  mercifully  free  from  any  liability  in  the  

 transaction.”63 

  The  question  that  is  raised  by  Roth’s  defence  of  his  photo  on  the  grounds  that  it  

 was  the  same  as  the  diagram  anyway  is  for  what  reason  he  then  needed  the  

 photographs. Roth gave the following explanation in reply to a “please explain” from 

 his friend the Bishop of Carpentaria: 

 The  description  and  illustration  of  the  posture  assumed  in  the  sexual  act  was  of   the highest anthropological interest in that it in large measure defended my thesis  that  the  mutilation  known  as  Sturt’s  terrible  rite,  or  sub-incision  (by  Professor   Stirling) or intro-cision (by myself) did not act as had hitherto been supposed as a  preventive to procreation.   

 ...  The  photograph  was  taken  for  purely  scientific  purposes  only  and  is  one  of  a   series (defecation, micturition, tree climbing, sitting, standing) of natural postures  which every anthropologist makes inquiry about, with a view to ascertaining the  connections (if any) between the highest apes and the lowest types of man.64   

 In  writing  to  Bishop  White,  Roth  noted  that  he  first  saw  this  peculiar  method  of  

 copulation in 1894: 

 I  first  saw  the  peculiar  method  of  copulation  while  camping  out  westward  of   Boulia sometime in 1894, but knowing the natural modesty of the savage, which I  have  invariably  admired  and  respected,  and  knowing  that  I  should  lose  their   respect  were  I  to  attempt  to  put  any  of  these  uncivilised  blacks  in  the  position  

 

 62 In company with Lesina, who was given to interjections such as “Let them [niggers] die out!” in  Parliament: see QPD, lxxxvii (1901), 209.  63 Mr Hamilton to the Minister for Lands, 13 June 1904, in QPD, xcii (1904), 578-589. Also see Torres  Strait Pilot, 25 January 1902, clipping at A/58850: “He also objected to Britishers having to [go to] an  unaturalised alien to ask his gracious persmission to recruit [Aboriginal labour for boats].”  64 Roth to Bishop White, 19 June 1904, QSA A/58850, tabled in QPD, xcii, 13 July 1904, 585. Bishop  White wrote to Roth on 3 June 1904, and Roth’s reply is dated 19 June 1904. White telegramed that he  was satisfied with Roth’s explanation, letter of 8 July 1904. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 27

 necessary  to  take  the  required  photograph,  I  made  a  sketch  (which  as  I  have   already stated, was subsequently published) and put the matter out of my mind.65   

 However, when Ethnological Studies was published, Roth noted that he had received 

 several  communications,  written  and  verbal,  doubting  that  such  a  posture  of  

 copulation was physically possible. Meanwhile, Roth noted, he had found the same 

 posture  everywhere:  “I  thereupon  informed  my  scientific  friends  of  the  very  

 interesting  corollary  that  the  sexual  mutilation  now  met  with  [in  certain  parts  of  

 Australia]  was  probably  traditionally  practised  throughout  the  entire  Continent.”66 

 That is, for Roth, the incidence of the posture in certain areas was the sign that sub-

 incision had originally been practised there despite its contemporary absence. 

  Hence Roth’s perceived necessity to photograph the peculiar position. According 

 to  Roth,  his  scientific  opportunity  came  up  in  1900  or  1901,  when  an  aged  married  

 couple on a station “agreed to posture for me”. Roth wrote to Bishop White that the 

 woman  had  children,  presumably  so  as  to  emphasise  the  scientific  rather  than  

 prurient character of his photography:  

 Although  half-civilised,  they  were  a  bit  afraid  of  the  camera  at  first,  but  could   hardly refrain from laughing at the idea of my wanting to see them in the position  asked for. However Mr.   promised them I would give them money and tobacco  etc.   (I  think  flour)  which  I  did  -  they  were  both  contented.  Considering  the   scandal which certain individuals have been trying to sow, I am indeed thankful  that,  if  called  upon,  I  can  thus  bring  forward  a  European  witness  who  was  with   me at the time in question.67   

 Roth  concluded,  “I  have  been  guilty  of  no conduct unworthy of a gentleman and a 

 man of honour.” 

 

 65 Roth to Bishop White, 19 June 1904, QSA A/58850.  66 Roth to Bishop White, 19 June 1904, QSA A/58850.  67 Roth to Bishop White, 19 June 1904, QSA A/58850. 

 Helen Pringle: The Fabrication of Female Genital Mutilation 

 

 

 

 Page 28

 

 

 Conclusion 

 Roth’s controversial claims would appear to be a rather fragile basis on which to base 

 an  assertion  about  Aboriginal  practices  even  in  the  late  19th  century.  If  we  add  the  

 misreadings  of  Roth  by  Worsley  and  others,  what  is  at  issue  takes  on  the  colour  of  

 fraud. To claim, on the highest of authority of the United Nations, that introcision is 

 currently practised among a spuriously named tribe is to perpetrate a mischief of the 

 gravest order. The UN Fact Sheet on Harmful Traditional Practices gives no sources 

 for  any  of  its  other  claims  about  the  extent  of  such  practices  in  various  parts  of  the  

 world.  Combating  violence  against  women  is  not  helped  by  relying  on  fictitious  or  

 shaky claims. 

  What  the  documents  point  to,  however,  is  something  extremely  disturbing:  

 evidence  of  the  common  occurrence  of  practices  of  slavery,  taking  a  sexual  form.  

 Forcing, or persuading, Aborigines to perform sexual acts like performing bears for a 

 white male audience fits squarely even within then current criteria of enslavement, a 

 heinous crime that shocks the conscience of mankind then and now. 

