---
title: "Government report remains buried."
date: "2004-05-06"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
  - "Judicial review"
  - "Immigration criteria"
  - "Refugee Review Tribunal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211265751
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QJEC6%22
---

 

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 

 Nicola Roxon MP  Shadow Attorney-General  Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration   

 

 GOVERNMENT REPORT REMAINS BURIED   

 The Attorney-General has announced today a new process for dealing with immigration  cases, but he still refuses to release the full Migration Litigation Review Report  undertaken last year upon which he bases these changes.   

 The Attorney’s ongoing secrecy creates a concern that the devil will be in the detail of  this proposal.   

 Labor has previously indicated that we are prepared to look at sensible improvements to  the processing of immigration cases.   Streamlining of migration cases is important, but  not at the expense of justice.   

 Accordingly we will examine the detail of this proposal - and assess if the measures are  sensible and balanced.   

 However, Labor repeats its call for the public release of Migration Litigation Review  Report, which has now been with the Attorney-General for 5 months.  The need to  release this report is more urgent, now the Government is taking further steps in this area.   

 The parliament and the public are entitled to know if the Government is acting  consistently with this Report’s recommendations or not.     

 Labor has already announced its policy to abolish the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT)  and replace it with a Refugee Status Determination Tribunal (RSDT), with a legally  qualified Chair, and to provide appeals to the Federal Magistrates Court.  It appears the  Government might be adopting part of Labor’s policy in respect of the Magistrates Court.   

 Labor will measure the Government’s proposal against our commitment to have a  streamlined and fair system for the handling of migration matters.   

 Labor also supports steps to prevent vexatious and totally unmeritorious claims being  lodged by unscrupulous lawyers - but will want to look closely at the terms of these  provisions.  Labor will want to be satisfied that these provisions will not penalise the vast  majority of lawyers who act appropriately in the advice they give, even if a case might  ultimately fail. 

 

 Contacts:  Chris Black (Roxon’s office) on 0417 386 535  Courtney Hoogen (Smith’s office) 0414 364 651   6 May 2004   

