---
title: "Report from the Australian delegation to Nauru."
date: "2004-01-28"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211263324
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SZHB6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS 

 Report from the Australian Delegation to Nauru 

 VPS 023/2004

 The Australian Government has today received the recommendations from the Health Delegation sent to Nauru. The  Government supports all the recommendations. 

 In summary the Delegation is 'satisfied that the level of care capable of being provided at the Nauruan Off-shore Processing  Centre is appropriate for the primary health care needs of the asylum seekers.'

 I am pleased to note that the delegation undertook discussions with His Excellency the Acting President the Hon. Derong  Gioura MP and Dr Keke, the Director of medical services on Nauru. The delegation toured the Off-shore Processing Centre  (OPC) and met with residents to discuss their medical requirements.

 The Report highlights that 'asylum seekers who were met by the team seemed generally well and none showed obvious signs  consistent with recent prolonged lack of nutrition.' 

 Further, despite the claims of some advocates in Australia the delegation found 'no evidence supporting claims that the hunger  strikers were near death.'

 I again thank the International organisation for Migration (IOM) for the excellent level of health and mental care that they  provide to OPC residents. The difficult circumstances resulting from the hunger strike were clearly professionally handled by  the IOM and Nauru hospital.

 The recommendations, once implemented, will provide assistance to the Government of Nauru to meet additional medical  needs for OPC residents should the require care beyond that which can be provided by the IOM.

 The Australian Government has agreed to a clear process with the Government of Nauru for handling any future medical  requirements.

 It is expected that final costings for the package of assistance to be provided to Nauru will be finalised very shortly.

 For more information see the Health Team Report on Health Services for Asylum Seekers in Nauru: 12-14 January 2004.

 28 January 2004

