---
title: "Windsor wins top MP award."
date: "2004-10-06"
creators:
  - "Windsor, Tony"
source: "Office of WINDSOR, TONY, MP"
subjects:
  - "WINDSOR, Tony, (former Member)"
  - "Political representation"
  - "Awards"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211272210
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SAIE6%22
---

  TONY WINDSOR MP  INDEPENDENT  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND 

  PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

  MEDIA RELEASE  6 October 2004 

  All Mail: 

  Shop 5  259 Peel Street  TAMWORTH NSW 2340 

  PO Box 963  TAMWORTH NSW 2340 

  Ph: (02) 6761 3080 

  Toll Free: 1300 301 839  Fax: (02) 6761 3380 

  e-mail: Tony.Windsor.MP@aph.gov.au  Web Page: www.tonywindsor.corn.au 

  Windsor Wins Top NIP Award  The Independent Federal Member for New England, Tony Windsor, said today he was  somewhat humbled but honoured to have been name as “Best MP” by voters’ advocate,  FairCO-Voterlobb y . 

  Mr Windsor was recently named by FairGO as the most helpful Federal Member of  Parliament in responding to a wide range of issues which had been forwarded by the  organisation on behalf of concerned citizens to every MP in Australia during the last  Parliamentary term. 

  Mr Windsor said it was very important that individuals in the community should have the  right to be heard by their elected representatives in relation to issues of concern. 

  “I commend FairGO Director, Greg Bloomfield, for his ongoing efforts over many years to  help bring the community’s concerns to the attention of Parliamentarians across Australia,”  Mr Windsor said. 

  The following are transcripts of Media Releases issued by FairGO 

  Windsor Sets Political Benchmark - Wins Best MP 

  New England Independent MP, Tony Windsor set the benchmark for Federal Politicians in  the term just ended. Independent unaffiliated voters’ advocate, FairGO-Voterlobby helps  voters put their issues before every MP to see who will help solve them. Some Federal MPs  always do. That allows benchmarking of politicians to compare one against the other. 

  Since 2001, Mr. Windsor has outperformed every other Federal MP, many of whom have  party machines behind them. Mr. Windsor has helped many voters who will never be able to  reward him with a vote, according to FairGO director Mr. Greg Bloomfield, who said “In  setting this Benchmark Mr. Windsor has shown selfless devotion to Parliamentary duty and  the interests of all Australians. We applaud him and his effort.” 

  Issues raised with MPs via FairGO (Est 1986) by Australian voters during this parliamentary  term included Health services, Education in schools and universities, Nursing Home  performance, Road Safety, The Iraq War, Disability funding, Immigration, Illegal Immigrants  & Refugees, Capital city development and rural neglect, Rural services including mail, phone  and drought assistance, greater Rural and Regional tax concessions, proper recognition of  WWII Returned Service veterans, Parenting skills education, Free Trade Agreement and the  impact of alcohol on under age drinkers, crime rates, anti-social behaviour and youth suicide. 

  . . . .2/ 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  -2- 

  Mr Windsor led runner up, Democrat Sen. Natasha Stott Despoja and third placed Liberal  Sen Marise Payne by a substantial margin. 

  Others in the Top Ten Politicians, in descending order were Democrat Sen. Lyn Allison,  Liberal Sen. Richard Alston, Green Sen. Kerry Nettle, Bradfield Liberal Education Minister  Brendan Nelson, Democrat Sen. John Cherry, Pauline Hanson One Nation's Sen Len Harris  and equal lofh Labor's Sen. Jan McLucas and Berowra Liberal Attorney General Philip  Ruddock. 

  The most helpful political parties were First- Liberal, Second- Democrats and third Labor.  They were followed in Fourth place by Greens and in Fifth place Nationals. 

  Other Federal MPs who assisted voters with replies, but less frequently were:- 

  ALP- 

  Sen. Kim Carr, Mr. Mark Latham, Werriwa, Sen. Jacinta Collins, Sen. George Campbell, Ms.  Annette Ellis, Canberra, Mr. Martin Ferguson, Batman, Hon. Dr. Carmen Lawrence,  Fremantle, Ms. Tanya Plibersek, Sydney and Wayne Swan, Lilley. 

  Liberal- 

  Mr. Bruce Bilson, Dunkley, Hon. Jackie Kelly, Lindsay, Hon. Tony Abbott, Warringah, Hon.  Alan Cadman, Mitchell, Sen. Ross Lightfoot, Mr. David Hawker, Wannon, Mr. Michael  Johnson, Ryan, Mr. Peter Lindsay, Herbert, Hon. Trish Worth, Adelaide, Ms. Julie Bishop,  Curtin, Hon. Peter Costello, Higgins, Hon. John Howard, Bennelong and Andrew Southcott,  Boothby. 

  Democrats- 

  Sen. Andrew Bartlett 

  Greens- 

  Sen. Bob Brown and Mr. Michael Organ, Cunningham 

  Nationals- 

  Hon. John Anderson, Gwydir 

  Progressive Alliance- 

  Sen. Meg Lees 

  Some politicians ignore voters 

  Mr. Bloomfield said that any Federal MP not listed above did not, according to FairGO's  records, respond to voters working through it, on any of the issues listed above, appearing to  judge them or the voters as unimportant enough to warrant a response to mail. 

  . . . .3l 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  -3- 

  Vote for Windsor a Win for Voters 

  There is much debate as to how effective Independents are in parliament. The answer seems  to be "Very Effective" if Tony Windsor is any indication. 

  Windsor has set the Federal Parliamentary Benchmark for responding to voters. His record  has eclipsed the efforts of other MPs by a country mile. 

  Voters from all over Australia have put their concerns to every MP and voters' advocate  FairGO-Voterlobby has monitored who responded. 

  FairGO Director, Mr. Greg Bloomfield offered some comments on how an independent MP  could outpace all other MPs by such a huge margin as Tony Windsor's. 

  "First and foremost an independent is responsible to the voters, not to any party pre-selection  committee and so must perform well for voters to be re-elected. Secondly an Independent can  raise any voter's concerns in parliament whether or not that offends party leaders on either  side of the house. Thirdly, an Independent is not seeking promotion within a party and so can  freely campaign for voters regardless of any party policy. Lastly, no government would be so 

  silly as to reject a good idea or a good policy simply because it was suggested by an  Independent so the Independent with good ideas for Australia has as much chance as anyone  of getting them adopted." 

  Mr. Bloomfield went on to say "None of that means that an Independent will automatically  perform well. There are brilliant performers and hopeless performers in Parliament and many  shades in between, as in all walks of life. What it does mean is that when a high performer  like Mr. Windsor takes office he has every opportunity to both influence policy and address  to the concerns of voters. We are extremely grateful to Mr. Windsor for his outstanding  responsiveness during this term. FairGO has no individual or party favourites. We simply  believe that whoever is elected to Government should do what the voters want. Mr. Windsor  has certainly advocated that during his term in Federal Parliament." 

  MEDIA RELEASE - Further information from Greg Bloomfield Phone 02 9988 3312  Politicians Benchmarked on Actual Past Performance 

  It is not what politicians promise before an election that counts, but how they actually  perform when elected in dealing with voters' needs which change over time, according to one  of Australia's largest broad-interest community lobbying organisations. 

  Since the last Federal election in 200 1 ,  the politically independent Community and  Government Relations Consultant, FairGO-Voterlobby, has, on behalf of voters from around  Australia, put a number of issues and requests before all Federal Members of Parliament. All  MPs have had the same opportunity to respond, which enables them to be Benchmarked.  Actual post-election performance has been judged. 

  Consistent with the 20/80 rule, only 20% of politicians responded. 80% failed to do so! Mr.  Greg Bloomfield of Sydney, who founded FairGO in 1986 and is its National Director, says  "20% is plenty to get the job done and voters' problems solved, because they influence  others and all influence the Government and bureaucracy." 

  . . . .4/ 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  -4- 

  Top Ten Federal Politicians, when it comes to responding to voters 

  lSt Mr. Tony Windsor, Tamworth (Ind) - by a large margin 

  2"d Sen. Natasha Stott Despoja (AD) 

  3'd Sen. Marise Payne (Lib) 

  4'h Sen Lyn Allison (AD) 

  5th Sen. Hon. Richard Alston (Lib) 

  6'h Sen. Kerry Nettle (Gm) 

  7'h Hon. Dr. Brendan Nelson, Bradfield (Lib) 

  Sth Sen. John Cherry (AD) 

  gth Sen. Len Harris (PHON) 

  1 Oth Sen. Jan McLucas (ALP) & 

  loth Hon. Philip Ruddock, Berowra (Lib) 

  Other Federal MPs who responded to voters, but less frequently were:- 

  ALP- 

  Sen. Kim Can, Opposition Leader, Mr. Mark Latham, Werriwa, Sen. Jacinta Collins, Sen.  George Campbell, Ms. Annette Ellis, Canberra, Mr. Martin Ferguson, Batman, Hon. Dr.  Carmen Lawrence, Fremantle, Ms. Tanya Plibersek, Sydney and Wayne Swan, Lilley. 

  Liberal- 

  Mr. Bruce Bilson, Dunkley, Hon. Jackie Kelly, Lindsay, Hon.Tony Abbott, Warringah, Hon.  Alan Cadman, Mitchell, Sen. Ross Lightfoot, Mr. David Hawker, Wannon, Mr. Michael  Johnson, Ryan, Mr. Peter Lindsay, Herbert, Hon. Trish Worth, Adelaide, Ms. Julie Bishop,  Curtin, Hon. Peter Costello, Higgins, Prime Minister, Hon. John Howard, Bennelong and  Andrew Southcott, Boothby. 

  Democrats- 

  Sen. Andrew Bartlett 

  Greens- 

  Sen. Bob Brown and Mr. Michael Organ, Cunningham 

  Nationals- 

  Hon. John Anderson, Gwydir 

  . . ..5l 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  -5- 

  Progressive Alliance- 

  Sen. Meg Lees 

  Non-respondents Benchmarked at 0. 

  The 80% of MPs NOT listed in the 20% above, although elected and paid by voters, did not,  according to FairGO's records, respond on any of the following important issues raised, as  listed later. Mr. Bloomfield said "Perhaps they did not think that the voters or these issues  were important enough." 

  Party Benchmarks (sum of the score of all MPs in the party, thus favouring larger parties,  but also recognising that not all members of a party need to respond if one can solve the  problem) 

  1'' Liberal 

  2"d Democrats 

  3rd Labor 

  4th Greens 

  5'h Nationals 

  ISSUES RAISED WITH ALL MPS ON WHICH BENCHMARKS ARE BASED 

  Health services - including nurse education, the doctors' dispute & mental health services. 

  Education - School & University funding 

  Nursing home accreditation and performance bonding 

  Road safety - including truck crashes 

  Iraq war 

  Importance of disability funding for children 

  Immigration - asylum seekers; illegal immigrants; Baxter detention centre 

  Capital city over-development 

  Rural services - neglected regional & rural communities; inadequate country mail & phone  services; Regional and Rural Tax concessions to compensate for lack of facilities and  services; Drought & drought assistance; 

  WWII returned service people seeking proper recognition 

  Parenting skills courses to help children grow into healthy, well adjusted young Australians  free of abuse, loved and understood, educated with careers and free of criminal tendencies. 

  Australia/ US Free Trade Agreement, GATT, GM food 

  Alcohol sales to minors; alcohol fuelled youth crime, deaths and anti-social behaviour, road  safety impact 

  .... 61 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

  -6- 

  In announcing the benchmarking outcomes, Mr. Bloomfield urged "all voters, particularly  those not aligned to any political party, to work with the Parliament as a whole  towards building better government. Neither group can do it alone", he declared. Mr.  Bloomfield said "bureaucrats are often to blame for undermining relationships between the  politicians and voters by providing politicians, particularly opposition MPs, smaller parties 

  and independents, with totally inadequate staffing to do their job properly. Business leaders",  he said, "would not for a moment tolerate the inadequate staffing levels provided to Members  of Parliament. 'I 

  END 

  For further information contact Tony Windsor, Ph (02) 6761 3080 or 0427 668868 

