---
title: "Super yacht industry sets up in Cairns."
date: "2004-04-21"
creators:
  - "Boswell, Ron"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of BOSWELL, SEN RON"
subjects:
  - "Cairns"
  - "Shipbuilding"
  - "Tariffs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211558533
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CPGC6%22
---

 Senator Ron Boswell  National Party - Queensland   

 

 Super yacht industry sets up in Cairns   Media Release - 21 April 2004 

 

 Senator Boswell backgrounds media on the Australian supery yacht industry in  Cairns.    

 Visiting Cairns today for meetings with the Super Yacht Group - Great Barrier  Reef, The Nationals Senate Leader, Ron Boswell, said that the new Australian  super yacht industry was growing at an exponential rate, creating business  opportunities and local jobs, with the support of the Federal Government.    

 “Because of its excellent building and refit facilities, super yacht expertise and  location on the Great Barrier Reef, Cairns is ideally situated to take advantage of  the wealth and opportunities offered by the emerging super yacht industry,”  Senator Boswell said.    

 “Super yachts are classified as luxury pleasure vessels, power or sail boats, over  the length of 80 feet, and are typically owned by the top 5% of the richest people  in the world,” Senator Boswell said.    

 “But Australia’s fledgling super yacht industry is not all about playing to the tune  of the rich. It is about providing more jobs for Australians and injecting more  import dollars into the local economy,”    

 “With support from the Howard/Anderson Government, and industry groups like  Super Yacht Base Australia and the Cairns Super Yacht Cluster, the super yacht  industry is moving ahead in leaps and bounds in North Queensland.”    

 Senator Boswell said that the Government’s introduction of a GST in 2000 saw  the end of high import duties, enabling customs changes such as the removal of  GST on boats entering Australia.    

 “Assisting the growth of the super yacht refit and repair industry in the Cairns  region, a recent tax ruling clarifies that boats entering Australia with the intention  of undergoing refits and/or repairs can be serviced GST-free, enabling them to  incorporate travels in Australian waters before and after their refits, without  incurring the tax.”    

 “The tariff has also been removed on boats arriving in Australia as deck cargo, in  support of super yachts entering Australia on yacht transporters for refit and  repair.”    

 “To enable super yacht owners to charter their boats in Australia, the Australian  government has also deemed that they be classified as cruising boats, so that  they can avoid unnecessary red-tape and still be made available for charter.”    

 “Through Transport Minister, John Anderson, the Australian Government has 

 commissioned mapping for the recognition of overseas and local crew and  masters' qualifications, to help super yachts gain easier access to our waters.”    

 “All of these changes by the Australian Government have made it easier for  Australian tourism, boat-building, refit and other service industries to participate  in the competitive and highly lucrative international super yacht industry,”  Senator Boswell said.    

 Senator Boswell said that he and local MP, Warren Entsch, had supported the  emerging super yacht industry and that the investment being generated was  providing more jobs for Queenslanders.    

 Opportunities for expansion of the new super yacht industry in Australia are  extensive, with only around 300 of the world’s 6000 super yachts having ever left  the northern hemisphere.    

 ENDS    

 Media Contact - Paul Leven 07 3001 8150 

