---
title: "Address to the Monash Institute for the Study of Global Movements."
date: "2004-05-14"
creators:
  - "Hardgrave, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Immigration"
  - "Regional centres"
  - "Government expenditure"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211266321
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/99BE6%22
---

 A MOVING EXPERIENCE 

 Making a country a home…

 Australian Government 

 Address to the Monash Institute for  the Study of Global Movements

 by the Hon. Gary Hardgrave, MP  Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs Minister Assisting the Prime Minister 

 Melbourne, 14 May 2004



 INTRODUCTION

 SETTING THE CONTEXT

 BACKGROUND

 REAPING THE DIVIDENDS

 THE MIGRATION PROGRAM - THE CURRENT CHALLENGE

 THE HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM

 KAKUMA

 RISING TO THE CHALLENGE - SETTLEMENT SERVICES

 BUDGET ANNOUNCEMENTS

 HELPING YOUNGER REFUGEES

 HELPING REFUGEE FAMILIES

 AGED CARE

 INCREASED HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM

 VOLUNTEERS

 CSSS

 REGIONAL AUSTRALIA

 CONCLUSION 

 1

 1

 3

 4

 5

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

 10

 10

 10

 11

 11

 11

 13 

 CONTENTS

 1

  Sydney Morning Herald-AGB McNair poll published 19 June 1996. 

 1 

 INTRODUCTION

 SETTING THE CONTEXT

 Migration continues to play a very big role in the success  of the Australian nation.

 As we face difficult and troubling times, the work of the  Monash Institute both in Australia and on campuses  overseas is more relevant than ever.

 When we came to office we had a vision of how we wanted to go forward into  the next century with a united purpose for all Australians.

 Since then we have developed practical ways to invest in people in our society by  building the capacity of all to participate in the Australian way of life. This  investment means that apart from our strong economy, our society has also  become stronger. Our diversity has enriched our  past, secured the harmonious  unified society we enjoy today and it points to a future full of promise and  possibilities.

 The Howard Government has handed down its ninth budget. Within the budget,  an additional $267 million dollars over the next four years has been allocated to  the settlement of newly arrived migrants and refugees, and the delivery of an  increased Humanitarian Program.

 Today I will outline how this funding is going to help people settle successfully  into a new life in Australia.

 The Australian Government believes in a "fair go", where Australians of all  cultural backgrounds have the opportunity to contribute to our great nation.

 An Australia where we are united by our national identity and shared values.

 It is this strong national identity that is the key to protecting, securing and  building Australia's future.

 But this is not the environment we inherited when we came into office in 1996.

 Before 1996, new migrants had lost the support of the Australian people and  opinion polls showed 65 per cent of the Australian people were against  1migration . Less than 30 percent of our Migration Programs represented people with skills  able to quickly contribute to economic development.

 Before 1996, multiculturalism was seen as a policy of division pandering to some  noisy interest groups. It was a climate fertile for the emergence of intolerance.

 2 

 Our challenge then was to rebuild the confidence of the Australian people in our Migration Programs and a culturally diverse Australia by tailoring our policies to the national interest.By making these tough but necessary decisions, we have been able to demonstrate to the Australian people that the Australian Government is managing our migration and refugee programs for the benefit of all Australians.We have achieved this by balancing the program to meet economic, social and humanitarian objectives.By 2001 more than fifty percent of the program was migrants with needed skills. Econtech research showed that due to this and other changes, annual consumption per head would be around $257 higher by 2007-08 compared to if the 1995-96 Migration Program had continued.As a Government, we have recognised the importance of all these elements working in concert together to restore the confidence of the Australian people in the integrity of our migration program.With this renewed confidence has emerged an even stronger Australia, where our migrant history is recognised and highly valued as part of our national identity and ever-evolving culture.We have looked closely at how we can help our migrants more effectively in the early stages of their settlement to  help them in their goal of becoming active members of the community as quickly as possible.Most of you in the audience today contribute enormously to the success of Australia's migration programs in very practical ways.As service providers you work in partnership with the Government to deliver English Language tuition, the cornerstone of our settlement programs; translating and interpreting services; orientation and counselling services to name but a few.Indeed, to those migrants and refugees you help, you are a bridge to the broader Australian community.I have spent a great deal of time consulting with settlement providers to draw on their knowledge and experience on how we can improve our services to more effectively help our migrants in their early days in this country.In this year's Budget, we spell out how we will deliver the key recommendations from the Review of Settlement Services that will draw even greater success from our Migration Programs.It is through this initial investment in people that we are able to derive greater benefit from migration in the long term, through the generation of jobs, trade links, demand for goods and services, and the cultivation of skills, knowledge and innovation.

 3 

 BACKGROUND I firmly believe that migration is perhaps the single most important  determinant in the history and sociology of Australia.

 Consider for a moment.

 Australia has a proud record of settling migrants from around the world. For  example, the Government of Sir Robert Menzies assisted in the settlement of  over one million post-war migrants up to 1959.

 At the end of World War II, Australia's population was just over seven million  people, with around 90 per cent born in Australia.

  But since 1945, over six million migrants have come to Australia. More than  620,000 of these people have come under our Refugee and Humanitarian  Program.

 Today our population is about 20 million, with around 75 per cent born in  Australia; immigrants account for almost one quarter of us!

 We now boast around 200 ancestries and speak around 200 languages.

 We all have our own stories to tell and unless we are descendants of Indigenous  Australians, the original Australians who have a rich culture and a fantastic  series of stories to share, we are all part of the recent migration  experience.

 My personal story is a case in point and just one thread  woven into the Australian fabric. Some of my mother's  ancestors came in the 1790s and were fishermen in  Sydney's Cook's River and Botany Bay. The Hardgrave side 

 of my family moved to Brisbane in the 1840s and were  amongst that city's first free settlers.

 That's just one story - there are 20 million out there!

 The profile of Australia's population is almost a  microcosm of the whole world, and this has positioned  Australia to succeed in the global marketplace by using our  language, our cultural and our religious diversity as a  competitive advantage.

 By fashioning such a diverse nation we now combine the strengths  each individual has from his or her culture and add to the strength we have as a  society.

 We have learnt a lot from the experiences of migrants and refugees coming to  this country.

 4 

 REAPING THE DIVIDENDS Our Migration and Humanitarian programs must continue to be targeted in the  national interest to reap these rewards and the benefits.

 As I have said, the program must deliver returns for the greater Australian  community to ensure that the community will continue to accept migration in  large numbers.

 In Australia, I believe we have gone beyond this - many Australians now not only  accept migration, but also welcome it.

 We have one of the best migration programs in the world targeting the kind of  migrants Australia needs, and a Humanitarian Program that assists those in  most need of our help.

 Our immigration programs have been a remarkable success. Economic  modelling has proved this unreservedly.

 Research indicates that the continuation of the current Migration Program,  compared with no program, is estimated to deliver an increase in living  standards of around $850 per person annually by 2020-21. This is equivalent to  2 the effect of a $21 billion tax cut . Modelling by Access Economics estimates that the Migration Program will  contribute over $4 billion to the Commonwealth Budget over the next four  years. But make no mistake, public support for immigration will evaporate if  Australians see the integrity of our programs undermined or if they are not  convinced that immigration is providing clear and significant benefits.

 The true benefits of multicultural Australia can only be fully recognised when  we have a migration program targeted to the national interest, settlement  programs delivering assistance to those who need it, and a harmonious  community which actually welcomes new arrivals.

 But migrants are not numbers or economic units or demographic building  blocks, important as these dimensions of migration may be.

 Migrants are people who will become part of our society - people whose social  experiences are as important as their economic and demographic impacts.

 This Government is committed to a united Australia where we all share  common values, and people from all backgrounds are in a position to contribute  to the economic, social and cultural fabric of our nation. 

 2 Econtech 2004

 5 

 THE MIGRATION PROGRAM - THE CURRENT CHALLENGE

 THE HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM

  In this audience here today, it is appropriate to outline just how many people  Australia can expect to receive through our Migration Program in the coming  year.

 The likely outcome for the 2004-05 Migration Program will be around 120,000  places.

 We anticipate delivering the largest Skill Stream in Australia's history at around  77,000 people.

 Professor Ross Garnaut of the ANU recently wrote, "Immigration with a high  skill component tends to raise employment and lower unemployment of low-skilled established Australians."

 Parallel with the increase in the skill stream is a jump in the Humanitarian  Program.

 The 2004-05 increase in the Humanitarian Program from 12,000 to 13,000 places  includes an increase from 4,000 to 6,000 in refugee places.

  Our success in reducing the incidence of people arriving in Australia  without authority has enabled us to increase the size of this  program, take in those who most need our protection, and play  an even greater role in supporting the international fight 

 against people smugglers.

 Not only does Australia now have the third largest  dedicated annual humanitarian resettlement program in  the world (behind the USA and Canada). Our settlement  programs are looked upon as an international  benchmark.

 The Australian Government's focus on targeting those in  the greatest need of resettlement is reflected in the  changing focus of the program, which has recently shifted to  Africa.

 Africans now represent almost 75 per cent of our offshore refugee  and humanitarian places. These refugees have unsurpassed levels of  disadvantage including higher levels of poverty, lower levels of education and  English proficiency, and more serious health issues than those who have arrived  in the past.

 6 

 Our challenge for the future is to deliver programs to give assistance and support from day one to people from all corners of the globe so they can become fully contributing members of our society.KAKUMALast year I had the opportunity to travel to the UNHCR's Kakuma Refugee camp in Kenya, from which we draw a significant number of our African humanitarian intake.The Kakuma camp hosts around 83,000 refugees, mainly from the Sudan.The camp was established in 1992 after the arrival of 12,000 "Lost Boys of Sudan", a group of children who together with their caretakers undertook a hazardous five year odyssey fleeing the civil war in Sudan to Ethiopia, which erupted in war, and back to an insecure Sudan before they finally reached Kenya in 1992.My trip to Kakuma was a particularly important journey for me.Walking through the camp and seeing first hand the difficult conditions - it is a dry, dusty place, where thousands of tiny huts line the horizon as far as you can see. The water must be collected from wells a significant distance from the living areas, there are no natural resources as such that enable the settlement to grow their own food sources or feed livestock to become self sufficient. All the while it is at least 40 degrees.It was there that I met Mr Yirgu Chassa and his wife Etu, who I am delighted are here with us today with their daughter.Yirgu, who had fled Ethiopia with his family, was the Community Chairman of the Protection Unit at Kakuma. This is an area where particularly vulnerable refugees are placed within the camp by the UNHCR as their safety may still be in jeopardy.Those in the protection unit have come from the most dire circumstances with many women the victims of rape and other acts of violence and many other families desperately awaiting news of kidnapped loved ones.While he and his wife awaited news of their own son, who had been kidnapped in Ethiopia, he worked by building shelters for others and establishing support groups for women and youth, to give hope to many others in a similar situation. With Yirgu's leadership, camp life, which for many had been for a period of ten years or more, became a place where you could build opportunity.His story and the stories of so many others who have come to Australia under ur Humanitarian Program is one of hope and courage, and certainly one that has 

 7 

 our Humanitarian Program is one of hope and courage, and certainly one that has made Australia a far richer place for his being here.You will be impressed that those in Kakuma are very aware and very grateful that Australia provides resettlement places for refugees. I was particularly humbled to be greeted in the protection unit by singing and dancing with children bearing a sign, "God Bless Australia".You may also find it interesting that most of those living in Kakuma have no desire to be resettled in another country. Their true desire is to be able to return to the home of their birth, and to see it rebuilt with renewed stability.Yirgu's story provides an opportunity for us to more clearly understand a refugee family's journey.I also appreciate the challenges facing the UNHCR, which operates in a world environment where people smuggling is jeopardising their efforts to find a place for those refugees most in need of resettlement.People migrating to Australia in the 1940s and 50s received very little to help them settle and become participating members of our society.Settlement services have since come a long way. Although English classes were available to migrants way back then, we now offer help with a vast array of other services such as employment and housing, and access to early intervention services.We now make a considerable effort to help migrants and humanitarian entrants settle into our society.We want to ensure that a migrant's journey does not end upon arrival in Australia, but continues beyond to find fulfilment in their new home, with all the opportunities they had hoped for. Our settlement services are an initial investment in people returning enormous dividends to the social, cultural and economic life of our country.Settlement services focus on building self-reliance, developing English language skills and fostering connections with the broader Australian community and mainstream services in the early settlement period.Mainstream organisations, whether they are acting as direct service providers or as funders of services, have a responsibility to provide appropriate services for migrants and humanitarian entrants as part of their general services to all Australians. RISING TO THE CHALLENGE - SETTLEMENT SERVICES

 8 

 The responsiveness and flexibility of the Public Service to a culturally and linguistically diverse clientele is a key service issue for both new arrivals and longer-resident migrants, and has had a major impact on their capacity to fully participate in the economy and within the Australian community.We also invite those eligible for Australian Citizenship to take it up as soon as possible. We view citizenship as an integral and 'up-front' part of the settlement process, not something that becomes available many years after arrival.It was vital that as a Government we reviewed our long established settlement services with the input of settlement providers and considered whether they were still relevant and returning dividends for our migrants and Australia as a whole.I released the Review of Settlement Services for Migrants and Humanitarian Entrants Report in May 2003, which emphasised that Australia's settlement services are advanced by world standards.Many of you here today work in partnership with the Government in delivering settlement services and contributed enormously to the Review process, through submissions and through the consultation process.Having had the opportunity last year to visit both the United Kingdom and Canada, I can attest that Australia really is a world leader in providing settlement services.The United Kingdom is only now recognising the importance of the early investment through settlement programs to community cohesion.Canada is probably our best point for comparison - or perhaps even competition - in a world environment where developed countries are responding to ageing populations and rapidly declining birthrates through immigration, particularly skilled migration. Canada places an equally high level of importance on settlement programs, recognising the true value of a multicultural population.The Australian Government's commitment to settling new arrivals is backed up by some serious dollars in this week's Federal Budget. On Tuesday night, the Australian Government announced an additional $267 million over four years, across a range of agencies, to go towards delivering the increased Humanitarian Program and expanding settlement services.The Government is well placed after this Budget to deliver settlement services that will return enormous dividends to the social, cultural and economic life of our country.BUDGET ANNOUNCEMENTS

 9 

 $112.5 million over four years will fund initiatives arising from the Review of Settlement Services. Of the $112.5 , $11.6  will be provided to strengthen culturally appropriate aged care within the Department of Health and Ageing.This is in recognition of the importance of recommendations coming out of the review.The whole-of-Government response delivers funding to the Departments of Family and Community Services and Education, Science and Training as well as my department, and targets key areas of settlement need - English language and literacy proficiency, employment and access to early intervention services to help those at risk of not settling successfully, particularly families and youth.Learning English is one of the most important steps towards full involvement in Australian society.The groundbreaking Adult Migrant English Program, set up in 1948 to provide free English language classes to migrants, recognised that proficiency in the national language is the key to successful settlement.Since then, the AMEP as it is known has helped more than 1.6 million migrants to learn English and settle in Australia, with $468 million being invested in the past five years alone.Next financial year it will receive over $137 million.Over 20 per cent of the humanitarian intake is made up of 16-24 year olds. They are a particularly vulnerable group, with many having little or no formal education.Increased funding will enable humanitarian entrants with low levels of schooling in this age group to be offered up to 400 hours of tuition under the Special Preparatory Program, and supplement existing hours offered to those over 24 years.These measures complement the Government's recent initiative to remove the five-year time limitation on accessing the AMEP.In line with this emphasis on English language tuition, $4.1 million in 2004-05 will be provided to fund 1,300 additional places within the Department of Education, Science and Training's Language Literacy and Numeracy Program, providing a stronger pathway for migrants moving from the AMEP.  million  million

 HELPING YOUNGER REFUGEES

 10 

 These funds will help more migrant job seekers acquire the English language skills they need to be competitive in the employment market.Recognising the pressure on newly arrived young people, $8 million over four years will be provided to create 10 new service outlets that provide a combined Reconnect and Job Placement, Employment and Training service for these people.Service outlets will be based in locations where significant numbers of young refugees are settling and will be targeted to their needs.The services will provide early intervention assistance for young people, whose pre-migration experiences and significant challenges of making a new life in Australia put them at greater risk of homelessness.

 My Department will also be given significant additional resources to deliver the  increased Humanitarian Program, I mentioned earlier.

 HELPING REFUGEE FAMILIES

 AGED CARE

 INCREASED HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM

 Recognising the significant stress on families arriving in Australia from a  refugee situation, the Government will provide an additional $5.2 million over  four years to the Department of Family and Community Services under the  Family Relationships Service Program.

 This will engage community organisations to deliver culturally appropriate  information and support to humanitarian entrants and their families.

 Funding will expand services addressing family violence; men and family  relationships; relationship skills and family counselling; and, will enable  children, young people and adults to develop and sustain safe, supportive and  nurturing family relationships.

 The whole-of-Government response to the Review also recognises the needs of  our more established migrant communities with the creation of a new program  to strengthen culturally appropriate aged care within the Department of Health  and Ageing.

 I am delighted to announce that $11.6 million over four years will be provided to  expand existing services to established communities with aged care needs.

 The Australian Government is planning for the future. Projections show by 2011   22.5 per cent of older Australians will be from culturally and linguistically  diverse backgrounds. This reflects a growth of 66 per cent in the numbers over  65, compared with 23 per cent for the Australian born older population.

 11 

 This needs to be met by an equally strong commitment to settlement programs that ensure new arrivals are given the opportunity to succeed in Australia.Around $154 million over four years will be provided to deliver the additional program places.This includes some $71 million that will go towards DIMIA funded settlement services under the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy, tuition under the Adult Migrant English Program, and resources to the Translating and Interpreting Service, including new funding for interpreter training to small and emerging communities.Funding of $41.9 million over four years will also provide improved support for Humanitarian Program entrants and is part of our ongoing efforts under the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy to assist them to rebuild their lives in Australia.The new initiatives focus on Special Humanitarian Program entrants, people who are outside their home country who have experienced substantial discrimination amounting to a gross violation of human rights. These people have proposers in Australia, who are expected to provide ongoing support and assistance.The package also improves case coordination within the IHSS for both Refugee and Special Humanitarian Program entrants ensuring better use is made of existing services.An invaluable contribution in assisting humanitarian entrants to settle within Australia is also provided by a network of community volunteers and $1 million per year will go towards strengthening their role.A further $8.5 million over four years to the Community Settlement Services Scheme will deliver new and enhanced grants. Of these increased funds, $4.9 million in grants will be specifically targeted to improve settlement services in regional Australia.The Government is committed to having regional Australia share the benefits brought by our Migration Program through achieving a greater dispersal of our migrant and humanitarian entrants to regional areas.VOLUNTEERSCSSSREGIONAL AUSTRALIA

 12 

 Progressive future expansion of regional humanitarian settlement aims to double the number of refugees successfully settling in regional Australia by 2005-06.Increasing settlement in regional Australia will contribute to the long-term development aims of Australia's regional towns and cities, and will help to address the labour shortages that many regional employers are encountering.We recognise that it is not good enough to simply direct migrants to a particular region, where they may not have the same level of community support as those settling in higher density areas.We need to help them develop a sense of belonging within regional communities, and a long-term commitment to those areas.We can do this by ensuring that their initial experience of the area is positive, and that they see good long-term prospects within the region for themselves and their families.Regional Australia can also benefit from increased humanitarian settlement. In the coming program year I will be selecting four regional areas for increased humanitarian settlement.They will be carefully selected in consultation with state and territory Governments.Of course a settlement program as ambitious as this needs to be backed up with the right planning.$4.8 million will support a new regionally based settlement planning framework and improved settlement information.This framework will ensure more effectively targeted settlement services developed out of regional consultations involving local communities.I am sure those of you in the audience today who are service providers will welcome these measures, many of you having raised these issues with me personally. Importantly, this package builds on steps already taken in response to the Review to increase funding available through the IHSS, remove the time limits to access the AMEP, pilot pre-embarkation cultural orientation classes in source countries and pilot an employment assistance project for humanitarian job seekers through the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.

 13 

 These initiatives are vital investments in Australia's future that will ensure our migrants and humanitarian entrants are fully supported in their goals to achieve independence and fully participate in our community as soon as possible after arrival. Back to my friend Yirgu, whose story illuminates the new migration experience.  Thank you, Yirgu, for so generously sharing your story with me and allowing me  to talk to others. I was delighted to meet up with you again at a community  function in December last year.

 Since arriving in Australia around a year ago, Yirgu and Etu have been very busy  settling their children into school, and beginning English language classes.

 Yirgu is very proud to share how well his children are settling into Australia with  his two eldest children looking forward to graduating from year 12 at the end of  the year.

 I understand his daughter is hoping to study medicine or law and his son wants  to be a pilot or an engineer.

 Etu has very proudly completed the AMEP's course in Australian Citizenship,  and I understand the whole family is looking forward to the day that  they can apply to become Australian Citizens.

 Etu is also doing a course in aged care and Yirgu has  completed a computer course and obtained his forklift  licence.

 He is currently doing a lot of volunteer work for Anglicare  and St Vincent de Paul, helping to settle other refugees  arriving in Australia.

 They both continue to learn English in the evenings and  hope to obtain employment in the near future.

 To see the face of someone who has been assisted by our  resettlement program in two different worlds that are so far  apart is a privilege.

 To see him participating so actively in the community in Australia  is wonderful - although I am sure that for Yirgu and his family, there  is yet a long way to go in their journey.

 As with my friend Yirgu, the journey of a thousand miles, truly does begin with  just one step - that step is opportunity.

 CONCLUSION

 14 

 I am very proud to be part of a Government that has worked so hard to restore migration as a positive force in our country.We have achieved a lot since 1996 and in achieving this vision we need to work alongside people like yourselves - academics, researchers, community groups and service providers - to assess whether our strategy is heading in the right direction in a constantly changing global environment.Once again I would like to reiterate that migration is a driving force behind our economic, social and political development as a nation.Migrants have come to Australia because of the freedoms we all should cherish, our democratic system, and the values of equal opportunity and hard work on which our nation has been built.Our community harmony should not be taken for granted. It is the result of hard work and of the goodwill of the Australian people.It is this strong national identity, in the face of international uncertainty, that is our best defence against adversity.Diversity is our true strength that is the key to protecting, securing and building Australia's future.Thank you for joining me today.



 Australian Government

