---
title: "'Weapons overboard' inquiry must be public, independent and swift."
date: "2004-02-29"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Weapons of mass destruction"
  - "Iraq"
  - "Intelligence services"
  - "Committees and inquiries"
  - "Joint Committee on ASIO, ASIS and DSD"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211264394
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M8TB6%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  29 February, 2004                    MEDIA RELEASE                                04/113           

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

 

 ‘Weapons overboard’ inquiry must be public, independent and swift.   

 An independent inquiry into whether Australians were lied to about Iraq’s weapons of mass  destruction must report back before the federal election, the Leader of the Australian Democrats  said today.   

 Senator Andrew Bartlett said there must not be a repeat of the children overboard affair, where the  truth about Government claims of asylum seekers was not revealed until after the Howard  Government won the 2001 election.   

 “There needs to be an independent and open inquiry, and it needs to happen swiftly,” Senator  Bartlett said.   

 “Ministers and senior public servants should be publicly questioned. The inquiry should have the  powers to protect whistleblowers.    

 “There may need to be an additiona l broad-ranging review of intelligence procedures. But the first  step is to force the Prime Minister and Foreign Affairs Minister to face the fact they were talking  rubbish 12 months ago,” Senator Bartlett said.   

 “Before the war the PM and Ministers repeatedly told the Australian people and parliament that we  were going to war because there was no doubt Saddam Hussein had nuclear and other weapons.   Now it appears that was not true. How did the system fail so badly?”   

 The current inquiry held largely behind closed doors with extensive Ministerial control, is due to  report to parliament tomorrow, months after it was first due.   

 In mid 2003 the Democrats reluctantly supported this inquiry which has been conducted by the joint  parliamentary ASIO Committee, as the ALP refused to support an open Senate inquiry.    

 “The Democrats continue to call for an open and independent public inquiry.   

 “Intelligence on weapons of mass destruction were used by John Howard as reason to send  Australian troops to war.  The Australian people must know if that intelligence was faulty, if it was  skewed or embellished to justify war, or if there were straight-out lies.   

 Senator Bartlett said the Government must declare if it was aware of evidence the US had  spied on the UN Secretary General and if Australian Government offices are bugged.   

 “If US intelligence is bugging the UN Secretary General, they are probably bugging the Australian  Prime Minister. Has PM Howard ever said anything the US President didn’t want to hear? I doubt  it.”  For interview with Senator Bartlett contact Daele Healy on 0419 867 649 

