---
title: "Reassessment of Afghani nationals in mainland detention."
date: "2004-08-31"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211270626
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MNLD6%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Reconciliation 

  VPS 125.04 

  Tuesday, 3lSt August 2004 

  Reassessment of Afghani nationals in mainland  detention 

  Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, today announced the reassessment of  asylum seeker claims of Afghani nationals in Australian mainland immigration detention  had been completed. 

  “I announced in July that my Department would reassess asylum seeker claims by Afghani  nationals in mainland detention,” the Minister said. 

  “This followed updated country information being provided to the department by the  UNHCR. 

  “Of the 85 people reassessed, I have decided to allow 57 to lodge new applications for  temporary protection. Removing the legal barrier to new applications will allow these cases to  be individually assessed by my department in the usual way. 

  “Generally, these are cases where my department is satisfied on issues of nationality and  identity and where a reasonable need for protection has been established. 

  “I have requested further information in relation to two people, before deciding whether to  remove the legal barrier to new applications. 

  “I have asked the department to prepare ministerial intervention submissions in relation to  five people. These are people who are, or arrived as, unaccompanied minors. 

  “I have refused to consider removing the barrier to new applications in 21 cases. 

  “This reassessment process is consistent with Australia’s approach to ensuring people in  need of protection receive it under Australia’s generous Refugee and Humanitarian  Program which this year includes an increase of 2,000 in the number of refugees to be  offered protection by Australia.” 

  Minister’s Media Contact; Kevin Donnellan 0417 445 886 

