---
title: "Government must not let the people smugglers go."
date: "2004-03-04"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "People smuggling"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "VANSTONE, Amanda"
  - "Arrest"
  - "Ashmore and Cartier Islands"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211264584
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/23UB6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E   

 

 

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration  Member for Perth   

 

         4  March  2004  

 

 

 GOVERNMENT MUST NOT LET THE  PEOPLE SMUGGLERS GO   

 

 

 On Minister Vanstone’s own admission the government has no idea of where this boat  has come from and how it got there.   

 The government needs to explain how this occurred.  Where was the Coast Guard  protecting our border?   

 The arrival of a boat on Ashmore Reef should be a wake up call for the Howard  Government to adopt Labor’s tough stance on people smugglers.   

 If there are people smugglers on board the Howard Government must not let them go, as  it has done in the past.   

 A Labor Government will put in place tough new laws to deal with people smugglers  under Australian law and will impose life sentences on the worst of the people smugglers  and toughen a number of other penalties. 

 

 We have zero tolerance to people smugglers and we will put them where they belong - in  gaol.    

 If Minister Vanstone was serious in issuing a deterrent to people smuggling she would  adopt Labor’s tough stance on people smugglers.   

 The only way to stop people smuggling operations is to arrest the people smugglers and  confiscate their boats. Only then will people smugglers stop plying their evil trade. It is 

 illogical to believe that letting people smugglers get off scot-free will deter them from  returning to Australia.   

 If there are asylum seekers on board, consistent with Labor’s policy approach to excise  Ashmore Reef from Australia’s migration zone, their claims for asylum would be  assessed by the UNHCR or by Australian officials in accordance with UNHCR standards.   

 The suggestion by Minister Vanstone that Labor’s policy approach to smashing people  smugglers is somehow attractive to people smugglers is a complete nonsense.   

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

 

