---
title: "Reforms to the Migration Act to reintroduce time limits in federal courts."
date: "2004-03-25"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Migration Amendment (Judicial Review) Bill 2004"
  - "Court congestion and delay"
  - "Immigration criteria"
  - "Bills"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211265492
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/W15C6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Reforms to the Migration Act to reintroduce time limits in  Federal Courts

 VPS 058/2004

 Attorney-General Philip Ruddock and the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs Senator Amanda  Vanstone today announced the introduction of the Migration Amendment (Judicial Review) Bill 2004 to reintroduce time  limits in migration cases in the federal courts, including the High Court.

 This Bill is the first stage of the Australian Government's response to the recommendations of the Migration Litigation  Review.

 The Attorney-General established the Migration Litigation Review to inquire into and report on measures for the more  efficient handling of migration cases. The Government has been very concerned about the increased volume of migration  cases, associated delays and the very low success rate of this litigation. 

 The purpose of the Migration Amendment (Judicial Review) Bill is to decrease delays in migration litigation while giving  applicants an opportunity to challenge migration decisions.

 Applications for review of decisions of the Migration Review Tribunal and the Refugee Review Tribunal must be made  within 28 days of an applicant having been notified of the decision he or she seeks to review. The courts will have discretion  to extend this time limit for a further period of 56 days.

 The Bill will also confirm the role of the Federal Court and Federal Magistrates Court as the appropriate courts for review of  migration matters.

 The measures proposed in the Bill will commence as soon as is practicable after the legislation is passed, demonstrating the  Government's urgent commitment to implement effective reforms to the migration litigation system.

 The Government will provide a comprehensive response to the rest of the Review's recommendations in the coming months. 

 25 March 2004

