---
title: "Labor moving in the right direction on refugees but still a long way to go."
date: "2004-01-31"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "ALP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211263397
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K5JB6%22
---

 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett   Leader of the Australian Democrats  Spokesperson for Immigration  31 January 2004                    MEDIA RELEASE                                   04/033               

 

 LABOR MOVING IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION ON REFUGEES,  BUT STILL A LONG WAY TO GO   

 Leader of the Australian Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett, today said the refugee policy adopted  by the ALP conference was a step in the right direction, but needed to go much further.   

 “Mandatory detention is neither justified or necessary.  There are very good reasons why no other  country goes to the extremes that Australia does in locking up every asylum seeker.  Watering it  down is not sufficient,” said Senator Bartlett.   

 “Similarly, whilst reducing the duration of temporary protection visas is better than nothing, it still  leaves in place a policy that leaves genuine refugees unable to rebuild their lives, extending the  torment of uncertainty and the separation from family.   

 “Labor must also commit to reversing some of the disgraceful legislative changes they allowed  through the Senate before the 2001 federal election.   

 “The bottom line is that Australia’s laws and policies towards asylum seekers and refugees cost far  too much in human suffering, social division, taxpayers’ money and perversion of the rule of law.   That can only be addressed by reversing the damage and dishonesty that the Labor Party has  allowed to occur in the past.   

 “Mark Latham may want to focus on the future, but he has to acknowledge Labor’s mistakes of the  past on this fundamental issue,” said Senator Bartlett.   

 Senator Bartlett, who has just visited Nauru and New Zealand to examine the way our neighbour  deals with asylum seekers, said the experience of other countries showed that mandatory detention  was not a necessary part of having an orderly process, caused permanent damage to innocent people  and undermined basic legal principles.   

 “Adopting a humane approach towards asylum seekers isn’t just about being more compassionate,  it’s also about protecting some fundamental freedoms and rights that our society is built on.   Compromising these freedoms for some people puts them at risk for all of us,” said Senator Bartlett.   

 “The Democrats also indicate our willingness to work with Labor, and indeed the Government, in  an attempt to get the earliest possible resolution to the unacceptable situation of 264 people still  being stuck in indefinite, isolated detention on Nauru.   

 “This farce must end as soon as possible,” concluded Senator Bartlett.   

 

 For media inquiries please contact Serena Rogers on 0419 833 571   

 

 http://www.democrats.org.au/ 

  1032709

