---
title: "Hurricane Katrina: a tragedy we must learn from."
date: "2005-09-02"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT AND HERITAGE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211282725
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/966H6%22
---

 

 

 

  MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 Anthony Albanese MP  Shadow Minister for the Environment and Heritage  Shadow Minister for Water  Federal Member for Grayndler   

 

 Hurricane Katrina - a Tragedy we must learn from    

 

 Hurricane Katrina is a devastating tragedy that Governments around the world  must learn from.   

 According to the Boston Globe, Hurricane Katrina started as a relatively small  hurricane, but was supercharged with extraordinary intensity by the high sea  surface temperatures in the Gulf of Mexico.   

 The possibility that climate change contributed to the intensity of Hurrican Katrina  should send alarm bells counding around the world.   

 Scientists have warned that global warming, induced by human activity, will  increase the frequency and power of tropical storms.     

 A recent Government report on Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability estimates  Australia could be 2ºC hotter by 2030 and 6ºC hotter by 2070.  According to the  Report, a further 2ºC increase would be devastating for Australia, with more  heatwaves and bushfires, extended droughts, reduced rainfall in southern  Australia and extensive damage to the Great Barrier Reef.    

 In the same way a 2ºC increase in human body temperature will make us very  sick, climate change caused by the emission of greenhouse gases is making the  planet sick.   

 A 2004 US State Department Report outlined a potential scenario by 2050 of 150  million “environmental refugees” leaving coastal areas and islands vulnerable to  rising sea levels, storms or floods, or agricultural land that’s simply become too  arid.   

 The lesson of Hurricane Katrina may well be the sign that the abnormal has  become normal.     

 It is also a timely reminder that climate change isn’t just an environmental issue,  it’s also an economic and social issue, and an emerging humanitarian crisis.   

 The thoughts and prayers of the Labor Party are with those affected by Hurricane  Katrina.    

 

 

 

 Friday 2 September 2005 

 For further information/comment: Antony Sachs    0417 493 485

 

