---
title: "Arrival of Nauru refugees shows dangers of terrrorism [terrorism] laws."
date: "2005-11-01"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211285536
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C6SH6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 01 November 2005 Press Release Number: qvedomsz Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Arrival of Nauru refugees shows dangers of terrrorism laws

 ARRIVAL OF NAURU REFUGEES SHOWS DANGERS OF TERRORISM LAWS

 Democrats Spokesperson for Immigration Senator Bartlett welcomes the 25 refugees who are arriving from  Nauru today.

 "The fact that many of these people have been recognised as refugees and granted visas after four years of  detention on Nauru shows how easily gross injustice and harm can be inflicted on people when there are no  legal safeguards," Senator Bartlett said.

 "It is a stark reminder of the dangers inherent in the proposed anti-terrorism laws, which seek to allow people  to be locked up without proper recourse to judicial process. "These people have been detained unnecessarily for 4 years.

 They have suffered enormously, and their mental and physical condition has deteriorated considerably after  years of uncertainty and trauma.

 "The fact that even now they will only be getting temporary visas will just prolong their trauma and prevent  them from getting on with rebuilding their lives and recovering from the damage inflicted on them.

 "The Democrats call on the Government to recognise that temporary protection visas simply compound the  harm that has been done to refugees we have locked up unnecessarily for four years and convert them to  permanent visas immediately.

 "We also call on the remaining two asylum seekers still left on Nauru to be given the opportunity to  independently appeal the rejection of their cases. These men have been rejected on security grounds, but  have had no opportunity to appeal that finding. Given the many mistakes and injustices that have occurred in  assessing the cases of so many other Nauruan asylum seekers, it is essential that these two men have that  opportunity," concluded Senator Bartlett.

 

