---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 21 June 2005: Caucus meeting; foreign debt; skills shortages; R&D; infrastructure; Telstra; Newspoll; Immigration/Peter Qasim; Laurie Ferguson."
date: "2005-06-21"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "QASIM, Peter"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Shadow Ministry"
  - "Industrial relations policy"
  - "Balance of payments"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Industrial relations"
  - "Caucus meeting"
  - "foreign debt"
  - "skills shortages"
  - "R&D"
  - "infrastructure"
  - "Telstra"
  - "Newspoll"
  - "Immigration/Peter Qasim"
  - "Laurie Ferguson."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211556321
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/07FG6%22
---

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,  CANBERRA, 21 JUNE 2005   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:  Caucus meeting; foreign debt; skills shortages; R&D;  infrastructure; Telstra; Newspoll; Immigration/Peter Qasim, Laurie  Ferguson   

 BEAZLEY:  Thanks very much for coming along.  I thought I’d, as this  was the last regular Caucus meeting between now and July the 1st, and as this is  the last regular Caucus meeting of this session of Parliament, I thought I’d do a  bit of a Caucus report myself to let you know what I was talking to the Caucus   about.   

 What I wanted to do today with the Caucus was to talk about what we’ll be doing  strategically, what we’ll campaign around for the next six weeks during the  course of the break, and for a fair bit of the rest of this year.  I wanted to lay out  for the Caucus the strategic approach I intended to take.     

 We’re going to campaign on three issues.  The first is industrial relations and the  unfairness of the Government’s policies.  The second is the economic framework  that I outlined at the NSW Conference - that’s our problems with foreign debt  and our current account deficit and the related issues of skills, of innovation and  of infrastructure.  And the third is the privatisation of Telstra, which we don’t  accept as a done deal by any means, and on which we intend to campaign -  those three areas.  In the course of the next six weeks I’ll be campaigning on  industrial relations in Sydney, Brisbane, Gladstone, Melbourne and Adelaide - in  fact that’s next week - and in the course of the rest of the six weeks, I’ll also be  turning up at the Central Coast, regional Queensland and hopefully in Tasmania 

 as well -- and of course, my home State of Western Australia.  So, we’re going to  spend six weeks campaigning those themes.   

 I want to return to that second theme, that theme of foreign debt.  I’ve been in  Parliament for 25 years and I don’t think, in that time, as I look at the rate of  growth of foreign debt now, it’s relationship to the current account deficit and it’s  relationship to the fact that the Government’s dropped the ball on skilling this  country, on innovation -- particularly research and development in industry, and  in relation to our infrastructure -- the combination of all these factors pose, as I  said in my 25 years in politics, the greatest substantial threat to the future  prosperity, health and welfare of our nation.  That’s what we’ve got to focus on.    

 Our foreign debt is growing at the rate of the best part of $100 million a day.   Now government cannot simply sit by and complacently watch that, and have no  view on what you ought to be doing to deal with it.  This Government essentially  does that.  It dismisses the issue.  It dismisses the issue of the current account  deficit.  It dismisses the issue of our poor trade performance, held up only by  what we hope will not be the temporary, enormous terms that we get for our 

 resources exports, and that’s holding the prices up, that’s holding our foreign  trade position up at the moment.     

 These are the key issues which we must now confront.  There is very, very little  in Government policy which confronts these issues.  So, those three things we’re  going to campaign on - the unfairness of the Government’s position on industrial  relations; the serious concerns we have with the relationship with foreign debt,  our current account deficit, our poor trade performance and the issue of our  mediocre outcomes on skills, on investment in R & D, particularly in the private  sector and our infrastructure; and finally, on the privatisation of Telstra.  That’s  what I talked to Caucus about today.     

 I also talked about the polls.  Some of you have expressed an interest in  discussing the issue of the polls with me.  I’ve said on many occasions that I’m  not going to become a commentator on the polls, that there’ll be good polls and  there’ll be bad polls but the main feature of the polls is there’ll be a hundred of  them between now and next election.  So, a politician cannot afford to become a  commentator on the polls.  You, of course, would always rather that the polls  were good for you, but the most important thing is that the polls do not become a  distraction.    

 I just wanted to say that I took a tough stand on fairer tax cuts and I’m taking a  tough stand on this foreign debt issue and I’m not going to be distracted from  that.  We’re going to take those stands on principle and argue the case, that’s  what we’re going to do.  As far as I’m concerned, I’m prepared to let the Prime  Minister have the title of King of Spin and I’m prepared to let the Prime Minister  get out there and spin as magnificently and as effectively as the Liberals have  been spinning for 10 years.  I want to resolve the nation’s problems.   And 

 sometimes resolving the nation’s problems means that you’ll be talking about  things that people are interested in, and sometimes you’ll be talking about things  that they’re not interested in.  And sometimes in taking stands on principle, you’ll  take stands that everybody understands and agrees with, and is not spun  against, and sometimes you won’t.  The important thing for me as a political  leader is not to be distracted.  Over to you.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, is there a danger with the foreign debt and current  account that international markets will look at Australia’s situation and the net  result will be an increase in interest rates?  Do you envisage that sort of  scenario?   

 BEAZLEY: John Howard used to say, when he criticised Paul Keating  about foreign debt, that the more foreign debt, or the more you were dependent  on foreign investment, foreign resources, coming into your country, the more you  were dependent on that, the more it impacted on interest rates.  That’s what John  Howard used to argue back when our foreign debt was less than half what it is  now.  And, of course, it does have an impact on interest rates and that is one of  the many reasons, one of the many reasons why we’ve got to be concerned  about the level of foreign debt.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, in campaigning on industrial relations, what  alternative are you putting forward?  What are you saying the system should be  and how much detail are you going go into that?   

 BEAZLEY: I’m going into quite a bit of detail, Michelle.  If you take a look  at that speech that I delivered in Sydney and the one that I delivered in  Queensland a week or so ago, you’ll actually see the principals which will  underline the positions that we’ll adopt going into both in terms of the debate now  and going into the election campaign subsequently, because we assume the  Government will get something of what it wants through the Parliamentary  system while we actually campaign on that.  And there’s certain basic principles  that we’ll be committed to as we move the industrial relations issue forward.   They will be that people are entitled to an independent umpire, an independent  umpire presiding over fair wage bargaining and fair negotiations.     

 Secondly, that people be entitled to be represented collectively.  We do not see  that there is an equal power balance, if you like, in a negotiation between an  employer and an employee, and particularly not between an employer and an  employee’s who’s new to the game, young, whatever.  So, we don’t believe that  that equality exists and therefore, as well as having a decent independent  umpire, we believe people ought to be entitled to a decent collective bargain.  So,  we’ll support that proposition as well.  We’ll support the rights of people to  organise and we will support a real independent determination of the minimum  wage.  There are so many Australians dependent for their lives and happiness on  a decent outcome in that regard. 

 

 JOURNALIST: So, what would you do with a Fair Pay Commission, for  example, in government?   

 BEAZLEY: The Fair Pay Commission would not deliver that outcome,  frankly.  And let’s not get too premature here.  I mean, we obviously are going  see what the Government sets up and what it gets through.  But we believe in the 

 Industrial Relations Commission.  We believe that that is the independent  umpire.  We believe that is where minimum wages should be set.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, considering what the opinion poll is saying about  your own personal standing, do you worry that the current sitting of Parliament,  which closes on Thursday night, has been a wasted opportunity? 

 

 BEAZLEY: No, I stick by what I had to say there in the remarks that I  made to you a bit earlier on.  You know, I’ve taken a tough stand on fairer tax  cuts, and I’ve taken a tough stand on these issues which we’re now discussing  related to foreign debt and I’m not going to be distracted from that by focussing  on the polls. 

 

 JOURNALIST: How do you explain, though, the drop in your own approval  rating when Labor’s vote was static and the Government’s vote was actually  softer? 

 

 BEAZLEY: Actually the Labor vote went up.  The Labor vote, in the polls  today -- which emphasises the point I make -- polls are going to go up and down  and that’s why you can’t become a commentator on the polls, because it’s like  reading tea leaves, intricate operation, and in the end, irrelevant because there’ll  be a hundred more of them between now and the next election.   

 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the voters voted down your own approval rating  on the basis of the tough stand you took on tax cuts?   

 BEAZLEY: What I said earlier stands - not to be distracted.  I said that we  had to sharpen the differences when I took over as Leader of the Labor Party.   You’ve got to look to the long term.  You’ve got to look to what it is that you need  to do, to place before the Australian people an effective choice at the end of this  period of time.  And sometimes that means you’ll be talking about things that  voters aren’t focussed on, or voters don’t think are a big problem.  Sometimes  you’ll be talking about things in the interim between now and when the election is  called, that at that point of time you talk about that voters, either because of the  spin that’s put out there, or whatever, don’t necessarily agree with you.  The point  is; what is the content of your policy?  Because this is a marathon, it’s not a  sprint.  The election is not this Saturday; the election is two and a half years from  now, and at the end of that two and a half years from now our economic 

 argument needs to be there firmly in the public mind, coherent and accepted, and  that’s going to take a very long time.   

 JOURNALIST: So, you won’t be worried if the polls worsen and people aren’t  interested in what you’re talking about?   

 BEAZLEY: I’ll not be distracted by them.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, have you tidied up the tax business by  determining whether you’re going to move a disallowance motion on the  regulations, or the schedule regulations?   

 BEAZLEY: The Government’s set aside the legislation yesterday and that  ended the tax debate.  You know, they had the option of accepting the fact that  the Senate, apart from the Liberal Party and One Nation, agreed effectively in  toto with the Labor Party’s fairer tax package.  The Government refused, in the 

 end, to accept that fairer tax package and laid the legislation aside.   When the  Government did that, as far we were concerned, the debate was over.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with your Immigration spokesman that  (inaudible) Peter Qusim (inaudible) precedent?   

 BEAZLEY: I think it’s a good thing that the Government is about to let him  out.  I think that it’s an important thing for them to do and he’s been too long  behind bars and I welcome it.  We had a substantial discussion I might say, on  the Government’s bills today, which is pretty darn hard since the Government is  not exactly giving us a huge amount of notice on it.  I wanted to say two things  about the bills.  Firstly, the bills will advance the issue in a good direction and  therefore at the end of the day, we would want the bills to go through.  But the 

 bills will not advance the issue as it should be advanced, and therefore we will  also take the opportunity to move the Labor Party’s amendments which, I think,  will lead to a much more effective regime in relation to border protection and  clearing up the mess of departmental and ministerial decisions.  Now we will  move those amendments.  We will see whether or not others agree with us, but  at the end of the day, we recognise that this is something that has to be dealt  with by the end of the week, so we will ensure that it can be.   

 JOURNALIST: How did Mr Ferguson get it so wrong?   

 BEAZLEY: I don’t want to go into the ins and outs of what Mr Ferguson  was talking about, or what his main concerns were, in relation to whether or not  people had given information that allowed you to establish their identity.  That  was what his argument was revolving around when he made that argument  yesterday, and he was trying to point out that Mr Qasim - the difficulty that was  being experienced with him was because of difficulties of identifying him, who he  was, in order to run the necessary checks on him.  Having said that, seven years 

 is too long for somebody to spend in this situation and it was clearly time the  Government acted.   

 JOURNALIST: So Laurie Ferguson retains your confidence as Immigration  Spokesman, does he?   

 BEAZLEY; Of course he does.   

 JOURNALIST: How can that be when you just disagreed fundamentally with  what he said?  He agreed with the Government and said that Mr Qasim had been  uncooperative therefore and cast out on why he should be let out.   

 BEAZLEY: You’ll find that Laurie has revised his position.  And to give  him his due, he would still hold the view, of course, related to the technical  details, which I’m not going to go into here, because you rightly say that is itself a  distraction, it’s complicated, and all the rest of it.  The point is: he should be out.  Laurie believes that, so do I.   

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t this an example of the common criticism privately, at  least, Kim that Laurie buggers up everything he touches whenever he comments  about Immigration.  I mean, how could Labor have possibly havegot itself into  this situation about Peter Qasim?   

 BEAZLEY: Well Laurie is arguing for the Labor Party’s policy, which is a  detailed, effective and fair policy and the right policy for this country, now, if we’re  going to overcome the Immigration shambles and get a proper border protection  policy that balances humanity with border protection, and that ensures that kids  do not remain behind razor wire and barbed wire.  That’s the Labor Party’s  position.  We’ve been there for a couple of years, and Laurie, as our spokesman,  has been pointing that out.   

 JOURNALIST: You’re attacking the Immigration Minister on the basis of  competence, and then you’re at odds with your own spokesman I mean at the  very least it erodes your attack on the Government on competence.   

 BEAZLEY: I’m not at odds with my own spokesman.  I’ve made that point  quite clear.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think he’s doing a good job at articulating Labor’s  policy?   

 BEAZLEY: Laurie does a good job around the country in getting out an  argument in what is a very complicated area, when you actually come down to  the detail of it.  One of the reasons, I think, which you’re all struggling to cope  with, now, that you find it not easy to understand what it is that the Government  has decided over the course of last weekend.  I note that in the reporting of you.  

 It is because it is such a complicated area.  Different visa conditions, different  suggestions as to what should be processes that can be accessed in legal terms  by asylum seekers and others and different gradations of mechanisms of  detention.  I mean, it’s a very, very complicated area, which has been very, very  much confused and muddied by a stricken department, frankly, and an  incompetent Minister.  And Laurie has got to wind his way through this maze and  it’s not an easy thing for him to do.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you seriously expect people to believe that you’ve got the  best front bench you possibly could have?   

 BEAZLEY: Well, I’ve got a very good front bench.  I’ve got a very effective  group of performers across our front bench.  It’s a matter, of course, which we  always keep under review, but they’re a front bench whose talents, I think, has  been, at least in a number of areas, well on display over the course of the last  few months and I’m happy with it. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Will you be giving any thought to improving that front bench  line-up over the six week break?   

 BEAZLEY: There are always things you can do to improve a situation, but  I’ve made comments on this in the past and I’ll just simply refer you to them.    

 JOURNALIST: On foreign debt Mr Beazley, do you accept the Government’s  argument that the capacity to pay is much greater than it was during the late  ‘80’s, early ‘90’s and what, given that most foreign debt is now not government  debt, what is Labor’s plan to get it down? 

 

 BEAZLEY: The same level of risk applies now as applied then.  It  imposes an enormous burden on government to get things right and the higher  the burden rises, the more difficult it is.  And the burden now on Government is  much higher than it was then, not from its own level of debt, because whatever  they might say, by international comparison the ’96 levels of government debt  were quite small by international comparisons at the time.  It’s the level of debt  overall that counts, and John Howard and Peter Costello said that at the time too.   And the foreign debt truck was not just a debt truck dealing with the  Government’s component of foreign debt, it dealt with the lot, if you recollect, and  now it’s more than twice at what it was then.  

 

 What are the disciplines that it imposes on government?   Well, it does impose a  discipline on budget policy, but it imposes a more substantial discipline on what  the Government decides to invest in.  If you look at things like our trade  performance, which has simply been appalling, I think we’ve had 40-odd  successive months of trade deficits.  If you get yourself into a situation like that,  where the rate of growth of your manufactured exports has more than halved,  where the rate of growth of your services exports are flat-lining, which what has 

 come to happen over the course of the last five or six years, you know you have  to address that.  And when you look at what’s happened with your skills and the  fact that there’s a major blockage now to growth and investment that arises from  the lack of skills in the workforce, you’ve got to deal with that.  

 

 JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)    

 BEAZLEY: Yes you can.  Government policy has to address that.  I tell  you can address it in its education policy, what it favours in terms of higher  education, in what needs to be developed there to deal with what are identified  holes in tertiary sector, if you like, in employment.  It deals with it in  apprenticeships -- what you encourage and how quickly you encourage  apprentices to complete their course - what particular apprenticeships - it goes to  that.  It goes to the things like R&D tax concessions for people who do innovation  in industry and what you’re prepared to tolerate in supporting that.  These are the  areas of policy which we already have started to develop, and will continue to  develop over the next six months.  And I tell you this, if we don’t get this right as  a country -- and I’m not just talking about as a Labor Party -- if we don’t get this  right as a country, two or three years from now things will be very risky indeed.   

 JOURNALIST: Flagging more generous R&D concessions for business?   

 BEAZLEY: Flagging our considerations of all these issues and to bring  policy out steadily on them.  You’ve already seen some of them.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what are the risks to the economy of the high  level of foreign debt, apart from, you mentioned interest rates, but what are the  risks to the economy of the high level of foreign debt? 

 

 BEAZLEY: If you get into a situation where your currency goes, if you get  into a situation where you run into trouble internationally, you get into a situation  where there is a decision, and admittedly, it’s not necessarily going to happen  tomorrow, there is a decision by those who are investing in your country, lending  money to you from overseas, that you are risky ,and that you have a problem, in  the level of dependence that we have that becomes a serious issue.  Is that  going to happen tomorrow?  Probably not.  Is it going to happen a year from  now?  Maybe, maybe not.  But the point is, the risk is out there, and it’s not just  me saying it.  I saw one article the other day, which was criticising me and the  arguments I put forward on foreign debt, but the argument started, and it said  “Kim Beazley and the IMF say this, but they’re wrong because of x,y and z”.   Well, I didn’t think that Kim Beazley mattered all that much in the article, but the  IMF certainly did and it was quite an interesting argument.  And the OECD saying  things, you’ve got Standard & Poors out there identifying this as an area of risk in  the Australian economy why won’t the Government?  The Government won’t do it  because when the Government is presiding over $100 million a day, or  thereabouts, increase in the level of our foreign debt, naturally it wouldn’t want to 

 talk about it.  If you hand that one to the spin doctors and the spin doctors said:  don’t spin it all don’t even talk about it.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley is much of this foreign debt actually reflecting  foreign investment and would you want to discourage that?   

 BEAZLEY: I wouldn’t discourage foreign investment.  But do you want to  become so heavily dependent on it that you create a situation which is seen as  risky?  And it certainly imposes an obligation on you to improve your export  performance.  Absolutely imposes that obligation.  When we were in office, and  really up until the turn of the century, when we were in office, we were getting in  the manufactured area 12 to 14 per cent real growth in export per annum.  We’re  now lucky to get twos and threes.  We were getting the same percentages, tens  in exports of services, we’re now flat-lining.  This is not good enough, this has to  be dealt with.     

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, on Mr Ferguson who was it who set him straight  on Peter Qasim, was it you or one of the myrmidons?   

 BEAZLEY: I think you’ll find that we’ve had a discussion with Laurie,  Laurie’s has, I think, not fully comprehended by all of you in the things that he  was trying to say to you about that.  He was talking about the issues, and it is  important that those who come into this country correctly identify themselves so  there can be proper checks placed on them.  He also went on to say from that,  that seven years was obviously too long behind bars.  And that’s what he said to  Caucus and that’s the position.   

 JOURNALIST: On the polls, just one thing on the polls -   

 BEAZLEY: This is definitely the last.   

 JOURNALIST: Why should Labor supporters have the fear of God in them  today after your comments on the polls.  I mean if I’ve heard it right you had said:  on the one hand you weren’t going to comment, then you conceded virtually that  your slump in the polls was a result of the position you took on tax and your  outtake on that was that you can cop a slump in the polls as long as you feel as if  you’ve done the right thing.  Isn’t politics about taking a position that wins support  of the Australian voter?   

 BEAZLEY: And it’s also about a marathon.  It’s not about a sprint.   It’s  about laying down, and being prepared to stand for things that you believe in,  because people are sick of poll-driven politicians, absolutely sick of them.  And  it’s important not to be distracted.  Ask yourself the question: was our tax policy  right, not was it spun, or was it immediately what folk wanted to hear, but was it  right?  And our tax policy was right.  Is our position on foreign debt, raising it as a  serious issue, even if now the public is not necessarily talking about it as a 

 barbeque stopper.  You know, you’re taking up air space, you’re talking about  something that people, at this very moment, aren’t necessarily focused on.  Well  it’s right to talk about it, because it’s a serious problem.  It may not win you votes,  but it is important that the political process now enters into a serious debate  about this issue, and that we have serious solutions to it.  And the poll that  matters then, is the polls conducted two and a half years from now when  everyone goes into vote.  And to encourage Labor Party people about what  things might transpire, at that point, or what things may occur, I guess we can  point to the last three practical tests of the Labor Party’s strength which has  occurred this year.  The West Australian election, the Northern Territory election  and the by-election in Werriwa.  Those last three real tests, the Labor Party’s  come through well.  Thanks a lot.   

 Ends   

 

 

