---
title: "Payday for newest citizens."
date: "2005-10-06"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211284287
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZMIH6%22
---

 

 John Cobb MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

 

 Media Centre

 Payday For Newest Citizens

 6 October 2005

 Eight WAMMCO meat processing plant employees will receive a bonus in addition to their pay packet this Friday, when  they become citizens at the end of their work day.

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb, congratulated the new conferees, saying citizenship  was a unifying force in our culturally diverse society.

 A family of two adults and two children, former refugees from Sierra Leone, will form the majority of the small ceremony.  The conferees are part of the Government’s Rural Employment Initiative in which Humanitarian Refugees are placed in  employment in rural areas.

 ‘With an annual intake of 10 000 persons under the Refugees and Humanitarian program, those who choose to settle in  rural and regional areas can ease the chronic shortage of skilled and semi skilled workers,’ Minister Cobb said.

 ‘The idea, as it works in Katanning, means WAMMCO as the employer selects potential employees from those who have  expressed an interest and have, in turn, been made ‘job ready’ by a Job Network provider.’

 The other conferees, a man from Indonesia and three New Zealanders, were prompted to apply when news of this possible  ceremony was circulated amongst WAMMCO staff.

 The employees will be conferred citizenship by Phil Rae, Katanning Shire President.

 ‘I encourage all those who are eligible to take the final step and apply for Australian citizenship,’ Minister Cobb said.

 ‘Australian Citizenship represents our shared values - acceptance, equality, freedom of speech and religion, the rule of  law, Parliamentary democracy, our constitution and English as the national language.’ 

 For more information on Australian citizenship contact the Citizenship Information Line on 131 880 or visit  www.citizenship.gov.au

 It will be held on the Friday 7 October at the WAMMCO meat processing plant, Katanning, at 12:30pm. The  citizenship ceremony will feature the Fiddlestix entertaining the new citizens with the national anthem. Media are  welcome to attend.

 MEDIA CONTACT: Ron Kelly - 0417 862 924 

