---
title: "New sedition law to stifle artists."
date: "2005-11-01"
creators:
  - "Australian Lawyers for Human Rights"
source: "AUSTRALIAN LAWYERS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211285555
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EPSH6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 New Sedition Law to Stifle Artists   

 On  behalf  of  the  20,000  Australian  visual  artists,  galleries  and  other  support   organisations,  the  National  Association  for  the  Visual  Arts  (NAVA)  joined  with   Australian Lawyers for Human Rights (ALHR) today to call for changes to the Federal  Government’s proposed Anti-Terrorism Bill.    

 Tamara  Winikoff,  Executive  Director  of  NAVA  said  today  “Buried  in  the  back  of  the   Anti-Terrorism Bill are new offences under the heading of sedition which may severely  constrain  the  freedom  of  expression  of  visual  artists  such  as  painters,  sculptors,  video   makers and cartoonists.”   

 “We are concerned that the new sedition laws inhibit artists’ entitlement to exercise their  human right to represent, discuss and critique ideas, through their artwork or other forms  of public or private expression,” she continued.   

 As with all Australian citizens, they should remain free to continue to challenge current  orthodoxies - artistic or political” .   

 Because artists’ work is often oblique, using metaphorical imagery, quotation or allusion  and satire, many meanings can be drawn from it. Under the proposed law, artists could be  charged with sedition for influencing others in a loosely specified way.    

 The  Bill  makes  it  an  offence  punishable  by  7  years  imprisonment  if  a  person  urges   another to assist ‘by any means whatever’ an organisation or country engaged in armed  hostilities  against  the  Australia  Defence  Force,”  said  Simeon  Beckett,  President  of   Australian Lawyers for Human Rights.   

 “This then would make artists and galleries which show their work vulnerable to being  prosecuted  for  influencing  the  actions  of  others,  whether  this  was  intended  or  not,”  he   said.   

 Tamara Winikoff said “It is easy to imagine that if this law had been in force in the 20th  century,  the  work  of  great  Australian  artists would have been indictable, like S.T.Gill’s 

 1 November 2005

 comments on the Eureka uprising, Albert Tucker’s Images of Modern Evil and Sydney  Nolan’s post war angst paintings,”    

 She continued “Right now there are many highly respected artists who are making deeply  concerned and thoughtful comments on September 11, the detention of asylum seekers,  and the involvement of Australia in the Iraq war. Should they be jailed and silenced?”   

  “While there is a “good faith” defence it is so narrowly drafted that it will be difficult for  an artist to fall within it. In addition it is the artist who has to prove to the court that the  defence applies to him or her,” said Simeon Beckett. 

 

 

  “If this legislation goes through unchanged, self censorship is the likely course of action.  For  fear  of  possible  misinterpretation  of  their  work  or  abuse  of  power  by  government,   artists will be under pressure. The result could be the stifling of free visual inquiry and  expression and a consequent cultural blackout,” said Winikoff .   

 ALHR and NAVA called on the Federal Government to put in place safeguards for free  speech as exist in other similar Federal laws such as s.18D of the Racial Discrimination  Act 1975.   

 NAVA  is  the  peak  body  representing  the  professional  interests  of  the  Australian  visual   arts and craft sector. ALHR represents over 1000 Australian lawyers.   

 For media comment contact:  Tamara Winikoff : 0411 162 156 (mobile)  Simeon Beckett 0412 008 039 (mobile)   

