---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview of the Shadow Minister for Industry, Infrastructure and Industrial Relations: Parliament House, Canberra, 30 May 2005: Industrial relations changes, Infrastructure Taskforce Report, immigration."
date: "2005-05-30"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY, INFRASTRUCTURE AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "GEORGIOU, Petro"
  - "Industrial relations"
  - "Proposed legislation"
  - "Infrastructure"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279324
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OO6G6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E 

 Stephen Smith MP  Shadow Minister for Industry, Infrastructure  and Industrial Relations  Member for Perth   

 E&OE  T49/05   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE,  CANBERRA, MONDAY,     -      30 MAY 2005   

 SUBJECT: INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS CHANGES,  INFRASTRUCTURE TASKFORCE REPORT, IMMIGRATION    

 SMITH: It’s quite clear over the weekend that the more the Australian community  becomes aware of John Howard’s extreme proposals, the less they like them.     

 That’s no wonder because these are extreme proposals.  They are divisive, they’re unfair  and they will reduce the salaries of Australian employees, they will reduce their  conditions and they will reduce their entitlements.  So it’s quite clear the more the  community becomes aware of the detail the less they like them.   

 Just some brief comments on infrastructure today as well.  This week, with the COAG  meeting we eagerly await the release of the Government’s Export and Infrastructure  Taskforce Report.  It’s quite clear from some of the commentary surrounding that Report,  that that Report will be encouraging better cooperation between the Commonwealth and  the States and a national interest approach to infrastructure.  This is the approach Labor  has been arguing for some considerable time and certainly the approach we released on  Budget reply night with our Infrastructure Australia proposal.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that Bob Carr seems willing to hand over IR  powers to Canberra?   

 SMITH: That’s not what Bob Carr said to the Premiers on Friday night and it’s not  what he’s been saying publicly or is saying publicly, and it’s not what he said in the  actual article.  If I was interested in the comments of State politicians I would be much  more interested in the comments of the State Western Australian Liberal Leader, Matt  Birney, who over the weekend both before and after Kevin Andrews addressed the  Western Australian Liberal State Council made it clear that he is concerned about these  proposals, he sees risks in these proposals.     

 You simply have to ask yourself a straight forward question: if a Western Australian  Liberal Leader, if a State Liberal Leader sees risk and concerns in these proposals, why  wouldn’t the Australian community?   

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t that a bit disingenuous though?  He’s opposing them for  entirely different reasons than you are.  He’s not ideologically opposed to them at all,  he’s just worried that Labor will role them back if they got elected. 

 

 SMITH: That’s precisely the point.  Matt Birney says if you go down this road a  future Government could make changes that would be adverse to a State or adverse to the  people.  That’s the whole point.  Guess who’s got all power under the sun?  John 

 Howard.  John Howard with all power under the sun is now making extreme changes.   Having got the Industrial Relations Commission out of the way, he wants to get the States  out of the way.  That’s the whole point.  Matt Birney is saying if you go down this road,  if you remove all the checks and balances, if you remove the safety nets, if you remove  the minimum standards, then a future Government can do what it likes.     

 Well, this Government from 1st July has got all the power under the sun, and they can  and will do whatever they like.  What they have clearly flagged is a whole range of  measures which will be adverse to Australian working families and Australian 

 employees.   

 JOURNALIST: Is it up to the six conservative Senators isn’t it given the role of the  Senate are supposed to protect the interests of their States?   

 SMITH: There’s a clear message here to the six WA Liberal Senators.  It’s a clear  message from the Western Australian State Liberal Leader and a clear message from the  Western Australian State Liberal Council.     

 JOURNALIST: How do you think the mandatory detention push by Petro Georgiou  is going to work out and how might it play out in your Party as well?   

 SMITH: I haven’t seen the detail of Mr Georgiou’s private members bill but  certainly from speculation there are a whole raft of proposals which look very similar to  the proposals that Labor adopted on my recommendation at its last National Conference:  that we have an Inspector General of Detention and that we have automatic review of  people who have been in detention for longer than a 90 day period.  Under Labor’s  proposal, that would see a monthly review of people who have been detained for 90 days  or more.  We also have a proposal for independent medical access as a matter of course.   If these proposals had been adopted some time ago, Rau would never had occurred.     

 So obviously there are a range of similarities between our approach and what Mr  Georgiou is proposing.  For myself, I’m happy to wait until I see the detail of his bill as it  emerges and then treat the matter on its merits. 

 

 JOURNALIST:  What  about  Tim Costello comments that it’s morally repugnant  and that the policy have had the effect and it’s time to stop?   

 SMITH: Labor’s policy adopted at its last National Conference and taken to the last  election is a policy which treats people with civility and dignity, which wants to get  children out of detention and which wants to stop people being detained for long periods  of time without review.  It gives people a whole range of rights and access to independent  medial advice and gives them access to an Independent Inspector General of Detention.   If this policy approach had been adopted some time ago, the debacle that we now see 

 would not be there.   

 Ends   

 Contact: Courtney Hoogen on (02) 6277 4108 or 0414 364 651    

