---
title: "Towards justice and human development in the South Pacific: how Australia can do better [Don Dunstan Memorial Lecture, 13 September 2005]"
date: "2005-09-13"
creators:
  - "Firth, Stewart"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Enhanced Cooperation Program (ECP)"
  - "Pacific Islands"
  - "Economic development"
  - "International aid"
  - "Neoliberalism"
  - "Regional security"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Ethics"
  - "Free trade agreements"
  - "Don Dunstan Memorial Lecture"
  - "13 September 2005"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283209
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9SRH6%22
---

 

 

 Towards Justice and Human Development in the South 

 Pacific: how Australia can do better 

 

 

  Talking about the South Pacific is appropriate in a Don Dunstan memorial lecture. 

 Don  Dunstan  was  born  in  Fiji,  grew  up  there,  and  after  graduating  in  Law  in  South  

 Australia  returned  to  Fiji  for  a  short  time  as  a  practising  lawyer.  In  his  memoirs  he  

 describes  winning  cases  for  clients  in  Suva  through  knowing  how  local  ordinances  had  

 modified the English  common law, and he also says he came to  the conclusion that his 

 future lay elsewhere on a wider stage and not merely as a lawyer: 

 

  I believed then, as now, that it is possible to build a society in which individual 

  citizens  have  security  of  food,  shelter,  work  and  services;  which  will  celebrate  

  their worth as individuals and that peoples are made many, their differences their 

  strength,  where  all  citizens  have  an  equal  and  effective  say  in  their  own  

  governance  and  an  opportunity  to  participate  in  and  influence  the  decisions  

  affecting  their  lives.1 

 

 He  left  Fiji  in  1951  to  make  a  difference  elsewhere  and  his  vision  of  a  better  society  

 remains an inspiration.  

 

  The  Fiji  of  1951  was  very  different  from  the  Fiji  of  2005.  Sir  Ian  Thomson,  a  

 prominent British colonial civil servant, was later to write of Fiji in the 1950s: 'Respect 

 for authority, the Colony's institutions, and the different cultures was freely given on all 

 sides...Social harmony existed. There was no racial tension. Tolerance ruled. The Queen's 

 peace  prevailed'.  Things  were  not  quite  as  good  as  this,  but  Fiji  under  British  colonial  

 government was certainly a model of stability and steady economic progress. The British 

 

 1  Don Dunstan, Felicia: the political memoirs of Don Dunstan, Macmillan, Melbourne, 1981, p. viii.   

 

 

 had  effectively  split  the  colony  in  two  in  social  terms:  the  Fijians  were  still  living  a  

 largely traditional life under  the leadership of their hereditary chiefs, while the Indians, 

 no longer confined to being small sugar farmers, were beginning to move into business 

 and the professions. Europeans, and Australia’s Colonial Sugar Refining Company, were 

 at the top.  

 

  The  South  Pacific  in  general  was  very  different  fifty  years  ago.  Every  Island  

 territory was under colonial administration of some kind, and Australia was responsible 

 for  the  largest  such  territory,  Papua  New  Guinea.  Here,  as  in  Fiji,  the  future  looked  

 bright. Australia  was rebuilding Papua New Guinea after the destruction of World War 

 II,  the  Highlands  were  being  opened  up,  and  Australian  health  initiatives  through  a  

 network of aid posts, medical patrols and hospitals were saving lives in large numbers. If 

 education was less successful, no great harm was being done, the authorities in Canberra 

 thought; after all, Australia was committed  to  eventual  self-government  for Papua New 

 Guinea but would probably be administering the territory for many years to come. Next 

 door  in  Solomon  Islands  the  British  were  doing  much  the  same  in  a  small  Melanesian  

 territory where, if anything, the prospect of independence seemed even more remote.  

 

  A  half  century  on,  the  mood  is  much  less  optimistic.  Fiji  has  an  effective  state  

 structure  and  a  diversified  economy,  but  it  is  still  struggling  with  the  legacy  of  the  

 country’s third coup - in 2000 - when the constitution was abrogated, troops put on the 

 streets,  a  curfew  imposed  and  citizens  made  refugees  in  their  own  country.  The  army  

 commander  has  threatened  yet  another  intervention  if  the  government  proceeds  with  

 legislation  that  would  free  conspirators  such  as  George  Speight.  New  free  trade  

 arrangements threaten  the country’s sugar and garment industries, and more broadly its 

 social and political stability.  

 

  Papua New Guinea confronts much more serious problems, partly encapsulated in 

 this letter to  the Port Moresby Post-Courier in 2003: 

 

 

 

 

 

  I  live  in  Port  Moresby.  I  have  been  shot  at  four times, held  up  seven  times,  my  

  wife stabbed once, house looted six times, private property damaged four times. 

  The cost of living far exceeds our salary range. The economy is shrinking...2 

 

 Australian aid experts and consultants fly to Port Moresby, pray that they will be met at 

 the airport, make the dash to the Holiday Inn, and spend all their time there except when 

 the  car  comes  to  take  them  to  a  secure  destination.  Guests  of  the  Holiday  Inn  are  

 reminded to keep their windows and doors locked even on the highest floors of the hotel. 

 Expatriates employ locals to perform the risky task of filling up the car with petrol at a 

 service station. Some foreign enterprises respond as they do in other unstable parts of the 

 Third World: they fly their employees in six weeks at a time, and keep them safely in an 

 expatriate  bubble  until  they  are  flown  out  again,  keeping  contact  with  the  locals  to  a  

 minimum.  

 

  More  seriously,  hundreds  of  people  die  every  year  in  the  violence  of  Southern  

 Highlands  province,  where  tribal  groups  fight  each  other  with  thousands  of  weapons,  

 including  machine  guns,  most  of  which  are  sold  to  them  by  police  and  soldiers  of  the  

 PNG  Defence  Force.  High-powered  weapons  such  as  the  Australian  SLR  and  the  

 American M16 fetch high prices. Similar weapons are in the eastern Highlands, where a 

 recent  fight  between  two  clans  near  Kainantu  took  at  least  fifteen  lives.  An  Australian  

 missionary  reported that children of 12 or 13  were carrying guns ‘when they should be 

 carrying books in their hands and going to school’.3 

 

  The  police,  moreover,  are  seriously  indisciplined.  They  run  protection  rackets,  

 they  beat  people,  they  rape  and  they  even  torture.  Many  are  routinely  violent.  As  the  

 recent Human Rights Watch report on PNG points out: 

 

 

 2  Port Moresby Post-Courier, 29-31 Aug. 2003, quoted in Hank Nelson, ‘Dear Sir...: Evidence of Civil  Society in the Media of Papua New Guinea’, ANU/USP Symposium, 30 Sep. to 2 Oct. 2003.    

 3  The National, 7 Jul. 2005.   

 

 

  Papua New Guinea’s serious crime problem is being met with a violent police 

  response.  Children,  who  make up nearly half of the country’s some 5.6 million 

  people, are especially vulnerable...Brutal beatings, rape, and torture of children, 

  as well as confinement in sordid police lockup, are widespread police practices. 

  Although even high level government officials acknowledge this, almost nothing 

  has been done to stop it... 

 

  According  to  victims  and  eyewitnesses,  police  typically  beat  individuals  at  the  

  moment of arrest, during the time they are transported to the station, and often at 

  the  station  itself.  Beatings  are  so  routine  that  police  make  little  or  no  attempt  

  to  hide  them,  beating  children  in  front  of  the  general  public  and  international  

  observers.  A  man  who  said  police  beat  him  and  forced  him  to  fight  naked  with  

  other  detainees  in  a  police  station  when  he  was  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  old  

  noted: “We thought it was their job and we just had to accept it.”4 

 

 In  addition  to  this,  HIV/AIDS  has  taken  hold  in  Papua  New  Guinea  and  threatens  to  

 become a major epidemic. The National Research Institute is already anticipating loss of 

 skilled people because of AIDS.  

 

  There is much more to Papua New Guinea than violence and AIDS, and there are 

 good  things  to  report.  The  PNG  government  is  addressing  the  delivery  of  government  

 services.  Smallholder  crops  have  been  successful  in  recent  years,  peace  has  come  to  

 Bougainville,  which  is  now  autonomous,  while  churches  and  local  communities  are  

 undertaking development initiatives. But too many of the simple things that constitute a 

 working state do not happen, or do not happen often enough: teachers do not get paid for 

 months and they stop turning up to work; books do not reach schools; medicines do not 

 get to hospitals; electricity fails at regional centres because there is no money for fuel for 

 the generators;  bills for government services are not issued and not paid; in some places 

 public servants do not work at all, and haven’t for years. Above all, PNG does not have 

 

 4  ‘Making Their Own Rules’: Police Beatings, Rape, and Torture of Children in Papua New Guinea,  Human Rights Watch, Sep. 2005, vol. 17. no. 8 (C), pp. 5-6. 

 

 

 enough  of  the  one  simple  thing  that  constitutes  a  working  state:  law  and  order.  

 Conservative as it might sound to say so, law and order is the vital prerequisite for human 

 development and the observance of human rights. Without it, PNG is unable to create the 

 conditions that make possible what has been called the ‘moral purpose of the state’, and 

 must  abandon  some  parts  of  the  country,  mainly  the  Southern  Highlands,  to  the  best-armed clans.  

 

  Australia  recognises  that  Papua New Guinea is in serious trouble and that the root 

 of  it  is  insufficient  law  and  order.  That  is  why  Australia  has  attempted  to  come  to  the  

 rescue in the last two years with the Enhanced Cooperation Program, and why, for a few 

 months before being withdrawn, Australian police were recently patrolling the streets of 

 PNG’s capital city.  But we need to do more.  

 

  If  the  state  is  faltering  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  it  failed  altogether  in  Solomon  

 Islands following an armed takeover of the government in 2000. Cast adrift in 1978 with 

 minimal  preparation  for  independence,  Solomon  Islands  built  its  economy  to  a  large  

 extent  on  exporting  round  logs,  and  in  the  process  delivered  itself  into  the  corrupting  

 embrace of South-East Asian timber companies. At the same time rural-urban migration, 

 especially  from  the  island  of  Malaita  to  the  capital  of  Honiara  on  nearby  Guadalcanal,  

 fuelled  the  resentment  of Guadalcanal  landowners and  led  in  the  end  to  violent  clashes 

 and  the  forced  repatriation  of  20,000  Malaitans.  After  the  takeover  in  2000  Malaitans  

 dominated the police, who used their weapons to impose a protection racket on citizens, 

 businesses and  the public service. An Australian diplomat  described the Solomons as it 

 was  in  mid-2003:  ‘imagine  a  country  where  hospitals,  schools  and  clinics  have  simply  

 ceased to function for a lack of funds, imagine a country where public servants go weeks 

 without pay --- not surprisingly, some turn up to work, but many do not --- imagine roads 

 that  are  literally  falling  apart,  public  thoroughfares  that  are  the  preserve  of  drunks  and  

 thieves. Then, to complete the picture, add to the mix guns, ethnic tensions, rogue police, 

 corrupt politicians and business people, and armed criminals.’5 Australia has intervened 

 

 

 5    ‘Operation Helpem Fren: Rebuilding the Nation of Solomon Islands’, Speech to National Security 

 

 

 here,  as  in  PNG,  but  more  comprehensively  and  together  with  regional  partners.  The  

 Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (or RAMSI) took effect in mid-2003 as 

 a  police  operation  with  military  backing,  and  is  widely  credited  with  rapidly  restoring  

 stability.  RAMSI  has  established  an  Australian-led  protectorate  which  will  continue for  

 years in the hope of making Solomon Islands a workable modern state. 

 

  The outlook is brighter in other South Pacific countries. Nauru is the worst case of 

 misgovernment  and  financial  mismanagement  in  the  region,  its  Trust  Fund  having  

 dwindled  in  the  last  fifteen  years  from  $1.3  billion  to  nothing,  but  is  small  enough  to   

 recover  with  Australian  assistance.  The  Tongan  Kingdom  has  just  emerged  from a  six-week  strike  that  sought  both  higher  pay  for  public  servants  and  a  move  towards  

 democracy.  Tongans  are  no  longer  happy  with  the  royal  family’s  wealth,  power,  and  

 control  of  national  assets,  but  Tonga  is  the  only  South  Pacific  country  rated  as  having  

 high  human  development  in  the  UN’s  2005  index  (that  is  not  credible,  but  is  a  rough  

 indication of living  standards in  Tonga).  Samoa is a success story, with  its neatly kept 

 villages and growing tourist industry; Tuvalu is well governed; Kiribati lives in part off 

 its  foreign  investments;  and  the  Cook  Islands  and  Niue  benefit  from  the  fact  that  their  

 people are New Zealand citizens. In addition to that, the South Pacific has a network of 

 usually  effective  regional  institutions,  from the  Pacific  Islands  Forum Secretariat  to  the  

 University of the South Pacific and the Forum Fisheries Agency.  

 

  Tonga and Samoa improved their positions in the human development index this 

 year, while Fiji, Solomons and PNG all lost ground. Fiji has slipped from 81 to 92 in the 

 last two years.  

 

 UN Human Development Index 2005 (rank out of 177 countries) 

 South Pacific  

 

 

 Conference, 23 Mar. 2004.    

 

 

 

 

 Tonga  54  

 Samoa  74 

 Fiji  92 

 Solomon Islands 128 

 Papua New Guinea  137 

 

 

 

 South East Asia 

 

 Singapore  25 

 Malaysia  59 

 Thailand  76  

 Philippines  83 

 Indonesia  111 

 Cambodia  130  

 

 

 

  What,  then,  is  Australia’s  role  in  all  this?  What  is  Australia  doing  about  

 development and human rights in the Pacific?  

 

  Let me say at the outset that the Howard government’s South Pacific policy is not 

 like its approach to refugees or industrial relations. In the South Pacific, the government 

 is on the right track, and in the last two years has shifted towards a major and sustained 

 regional  engagement,  in  which  military  intervention  is  part  of  a  wider,  whole-of-government   policy  response.  Australia  is  giving  substantially  more  aid,  placing  

 Australians  in  key  positions  in  Island  bureaucracies  and  regional  organisations,  and,  in  

 the  case  of  Solomon  Islands,  has  assumed  full  responsibility  for  government  for  an  

 indefinite  period.  Australian  aid  to  PNG  increased  by  a  third  in  2004-05,  from  $334  

 million in 2003-04 to $436 million in 2004-05 and $492 million in the current financial 

 

 

 year. Aid to the South Pacific has more than doubled in the last two years and now stands 

 at  $463  million,  of  which  $247  million  is  going  to  Solomon  Islands.  The  total  is  $955  

 million. Under Australia’s  Enhanced Cooperation Program, worth $1.1 billion over the 

 five years from 2004,  Australians are occupying key positions in the PNG public service. 

 In Canberra the Attorney-General’s Department, Finance Department and Treasury now 

 have specialised South Pacific units, and the Australian Federal Police, who are playing 

 an  increasingly  important  role  in  the  region,  have  an  International  Deployment  Group.  

 The police commissioner in Fiji is Andrew Hughes of the Australian Federal Police, and 

 the  Secretary-General  of  the  Pacific  Islands  Forum  is  another  Australian,  Greg  Urwin.  

 Australia is becoming a hands-on supervisor of governance reform in the South Pacific.  

 

  Most  Pacific  Islanders  welcome  the  change.  Solomon  Islanders  cheered  John  

 Howard  through  the streets  of  Honiara  when  he  went  there in  2003,  and  most still  like  

 having the assistance mission there. Powerful politicians in PNG, it is true, successfully 

 challenged the terms under which Australian police were deployed in their country at the 

 end  of  the  last  year,  and  the  police  were  forced  to  withdraw,  but  ordinary  Papua  New  

 Guineans  wanted  them  to  stay  and  they  are  now  returning  on  a  different  basis.  Public  

 opinion  in  Fiji  is  strongly  behind  the  Australian  police  commissioner,  because  he  has  

 worked hard to limit crime and improve the police force.  

 

  Given  this  recent  record,  what  more  or  what  else  should  Australia  be  doing  to  

 bring development and stability to the region? 

 

  First, let’s remember that the Australian government these days tends to view the 

 South  Pacific,  above  all,  in  security  terms.  The  Howard  government  has  consistently  

 explained  its  policy  shift  in  terms  of  the  threat  of  terrorism.  We  had  to  go  into  the  

 Solomons, John Howard said in  2003, because 'we are dealing here with the potential of 

 a failed state. And it is not in Australia's interest for a country like the Solomon Islands to 

 fall over. It would then become potentially a haven for drug running, money laundering, 

 terrorism  ...  it  is  in  Australia's  interests  to  have  stability  in  the  Pacific  area  and  

 

 

 particularly amongst the small island states.' 6  

 

  The appeal to security has had advantages, because it has a special leverage over 

 policy makers in Canberra in the wake of 9/11 and the Bali bombings: without it, there 

 would probably be no new engagement by Australia in the South Pacific. Because of it, 

 Australia  undertakes  police  training  throughout  the  region,  especially  in  PNG  and  

 Solomons. But as a lens through which  to see the development problems of the region, 

 the appeal to security is limited, above all by its focus on Australia. If Australia is serious 

 about the security of the Pacific peoples, not just the security of Australians, it needs to 

 recognise  that  the  region’s  major  security  threat  is  in  the  Southern  Highlands  of  PNG,  

 where perhaps 600 people are dying every year in gun-related violence and payback, as 

 the  coming  of  high-powered  weapons  has  distorted  and  corrupted  an  older  tradition  of  

 group  solidarity  and  limited  inter-group  warfare.  Much  was  made  of  the  disorder  in  

 Solomon Islands, and an intervention rightly followed; yet many more people have died 

 in Southern Highlands province in the last year than in the five or so years of troubles on 

 Guadalcanal.  The  difference  was  that  the  violence  in  Solomons  was  undermining  a  

 sovereign state, whereas PNG can survive even with an entire province beyond the writ 

 of law. And the Solomons government invited Australia in, whereas the PNG government 

 would not do so. Bringing the state to the Southern Highlands should nevertheless be an 

 Australian policy priority.  

 

  There  is  a  second  point  that  ought  to  be  made  about  security.  Human  Rights  

 Watch  points  out  that  ‘Australia  does  not  condition  receipt  of  police  aid  [to  PNG]  on  

 respect for human rights norms and does not take a rights based approach to development 

 generally’.7  That  may  be  asking  too  much.  If  Australia  were  to  make  observance  of  

 human rights a condition of PNG receiving  aid for its police, our influence over events 

 there  would  probably  diminish.  The  right  way  forward  is  to  put  our  resources  fully  

 

 6       Interview on ABC, 7:30 Report, 25 June 2003.   

 

 7  ‘Making Their Own Rules’: Police Beatings, Rape, and Torture of Children in Papua New Guinea,  Human Rights Watch, Sep. 2005, vol. 17. no. 8 (C), p. 10.  

 

 

 behind the initiatives PNG is already taking to reform the police, such as the new juvenile 

 justice system and the suggested appointment of a Police Ombudsman. And since we are 

 putting a great deal of money into police training throughout the South Pacific over the 

 next five years, we should be ensuring that a highly disciplined approach to human rights 

 observance  is  a  fundamental  part  of  that  training.  We  need  to  give  teeth  to  our  claims  

 about developing ‘an ethos of police professionalism’ in the region.8  

 

  What about aid?  

 

  I am not one of those who thinks Australian aid to the Pacific has been a waste of 

 money from start to finish. But I do believe we need to re-think aid. 

 

   What really happens when an AusAID expert arrives in a South Pacific country 

 for a three-day workshop on good governance?  20 public servants are seconded to attend 

 it, they all go because it means time off work at a hotel or resort, they agree with all the 

 expert’s  suggestions,  and  at  the  end  of  the  workshop  there  are  smiles  all  round  and  

 speeches of thanks. The expert returns to Australia having spent another $100,000 of the 

 Australian aid budget. Then the public servants return to their offices in Port Moresby or 

 Suva, where they encounter the same political situation as before. The minister, if he is 

 the  minister  for  fisheries,  is  still  selling  fishing  licences  in  the  country’s  exclusive  

 economic  zone  for  $100,000  each;  or,  as  happened  in  PNG  and  Solomons,  he  may  

 ransacking the country’s superannuation funds. The public servant might well be honest 

 and efficient, but he or she must operate in a wider political context that is far less so, and 

 is not influenced by workshops on good governance.  

 

  We  should  rebalance  our  aid  priorities.  The  transfer  of  political  institutions  to  

 another  country  and  cultural  setting  is  difficult  enough,  given  the  extent  to  which  

 institutions depend upon our own ingrained attitudes and ways of thinking; the transfer of 

 ‘good governance’, which may be defined as making those institutions work in the public 

 

 

 8  AusAID Pacific Regional Aid Strategy, 2004-2009, Canberra, 2004, p. 17.  

 

 

 interest,  is  an  even  more  challenging  task  in  societies  where  loyalties  remain  highly  

 personalised. We should not abandon the good governance push but, in coordination with 

 other  donors,  we  should  return  to  emphasising  infrastructure  such  as  roads,  bridges,  

 electricity generation, water supply and communications, which are the basic sinews of 

 the  modern  economy  and  provide  economic  opportunities  for  ordinary  people  by  their  

 mere existence.  

 

  Then there is the contradiction inherent in any aid project to build state capacity. 

 Remember that capacity-building is a key objective of Australia in the Pacific. As Francis 

 Fukuyama points out, aid donors want to do two things at once: they want to increase the 

 capacity  of  a  government  to  provide  a  service,  but  they  also  to  provide  that  service  

 themselves.  But  by  providing  that  service  themselves,  they  undermine  the  local  

 government’s ability to do so once they leave. This can be called the problem of capacity 

 destruction.9 The reason is that local government officials never come to think of service 

 provision as theirs, but stand on the sidelines dealing with the foreigners, coordinating aid 

 projects  and  working  on  the  next  submission  for  funds.  There  is  a  great  danger  that  

 something of this kind might happen in Solomon Islands. The Australians who have gone 

 there have a natural impatience with the way things have been done in Honiara, and have 

 quickly assumed control over key functions of government. Canberra wants quantifiable 

 results,  and  that  is  why  it  wants  its  own  people  to  do  the  work.  Yet  Canberra’s  first  

 priority should be to ensure that Solomon Islanders can one day resume control over their 

 country  in  a  developmentally  useful  way,  and  that  means  much  more  emphasis  on  

 training  and  working  alongside  Solomon  Islanders,  with  Solomon  Islanders  being  

 appointed as counterparts to Australians in key positions.  

 

  The  new  Australian  engagement,  moreover,  needs  to  gain  legitimacy  over  the  

 long  term,  both  in  the  Pacific  and  here.  The  vast  bulk  of  the  $247  million  Australia  is  

 spending in Solomons this year will go to pay Australians. Australian public servants in 

 

 

 9  Francis Fukuyama, State-Building: Governance and World Order in the Twenty-First Century, Profile  Books, London, 2004, p. 53.   

 

 

 PNG  or  Solomons  are  paid  salaries  enormously  higher  than  the  locals’;  in  Solomons,  

 most  of  their  food  and  water  is  flown  in  at  great  expense  from  Australia;  their  office  

 facilities are vastly superior to local ones; and, on average, the more senior of them are 

 costing  the  Australian  aid  budget  $600,000  a  year.  These  disparities  are  already  

 undermining  the  legitimacy  of  the  Australian  engagement  in  the  eyes  of  the  local  elite,  

 and  may  eventually  make  it  unsustainable.  Australia  must  therefore  do  more  to  

 regionalise its engagement. The assistance mission to Solomons is already regionalised, 

 with Fijian and PNG troops deployed, for example, but we need more Pacific Islanders 

 working  alongside  us.  Australia  should  accept  the  recommendation  of  a  recent  Forum  

 mission to make ‘optimal use of the fact that the Pacific Islanders serving under the PPF 

 (Participating  Police  Force)  are  well  liked  among  Solomon  Islanders  as  they  can  relate  

 well  to  the  locals,  particularly  by  supporting  community  policing  initiatives...’.  10  The  

 enterprise  needs  to  be  seen  as  emanating  from  the  Pacific  Islands  region  itself  with  

 Australian  backing.  Here  at  home,  Australian  aid  has  increased  considerably  in  the  last  

 few years, but, at 0.28 per cent of gross national income, is still well below its level in 

 Labor’s last year in government. The Australian government needs to argue for more aid 

 and to broaden the justification from the appeal to security.  

 

  On  aid,  then,  we  should  spend  more  overall,  spend  more  on  infrastructure  in  

 particular, avoid capacity destruction, and further regionalise our interventions.  

 

  Then there is economic policy. 

 

  Like every other aid donor, Australia has been preaching the virtues of neo-liberal 

 economics  to  the  South  Pacific  for  years.  Island  governments  and  regional  institutions   

 accept  that  they  need  to  globalise,  deregulate  and  privatise.  Island  leaders  are  not  

 enthusiastic  about  the  change,  but  have  no  choice.  As  the  Samoan  prime  minister  

 Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi has said, ‘We now live in a so-called globalised world and 

 our efforts to reduce or adapt to its negative impacts, will continue to test our resilience. 

 

 10  Mission Helpem Fren: A Review of the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands, Report of the  Pacific Islands Forum Eminent Persons Group, May 2005, par. 90. 

 

 

 What  is  clear  is  that  globalization,  even  if  it  does  deal  an  unfair  hand  to  small  island  

 economies,  is  here  to  stay.  There  is  not  much  else  to  do  but  accept  the  challenge  and  

 exploit to the full opportunities globalization offers to our island nations’.11 Australia has 

 pushed  hard  for  the  most  recent  regional  economic  initiative.  This  is  the  Pacific  Plan,  

 which is intended to  deepen regional economic integration, leading eventually, perhaps, 

 to  a single South  Pacific currency  (the Australian  dollar) and  a single central  bank (the 

 Reserve Bank). The Pacific Islands Forum will unveil the Pacific Plan at the end of this 

 year.  

 

  At  the  same  time  trading  arrangements  are  changing.  By  2012  there  will  be  

 complete  free trade between  the fourteen  Island  countries  of the Pacific Islands Forum, 

 and some time after that the entire Forum region, including Australia and New Zealand, 

 will be a free trade area. The European Union is also in the process of removing all tariffs 

 on trade between the South Pacific and Europe, and, more importantly, it is dismantling 

 what  is  called  the  Sugar  Protocol  in  order  to  conform  with  WTO  requirements.  The  

 Protocol  provides  for  19  ACP  countries  (Barbados,  Belize,  Congo,  CÃ´te  d’Ivoire,  Fiji,  

 Guyana, Jamaica, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, St. Kitts & Nevis, Suriname, 

 Swaziland, Tanzania, Trinidad & Tobago, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe) to supply the 

 European  Community  with  agreed  quantities  of  cane  sugar  at  guaranteed  prices.  Each  

 country  holds  a  quota  and  Fiji  holds  one  of  the  largest.  That  is  why  Fiji,  together  with  

 Guyana,  Mauritius,  Swaziland  and  Belize,  stands  to  lose  most  among  ACP  countries  

 from  free  trade  in  sugar,  both  in  absolute  terms  and  in  proportion  to  GDP  and  export  

 income.12 

 

  The  EU’s  price  for  preferential  raw  sugar  will  fall  by  37%  over  the  next  three  

 

 

 11  Prime Minister Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Speech at the Opening Ceremony of the 35th Pacific  Islands Forum, 5 August 2004, Apia, Samoa.    

 

 12   Ian Gillson, Adrian Hewitt and Sheila Page, Forthcoming Changes in the EU Banana/Sugar Markets: A  Menu of Options for an Effective EU Transitional Package, Overseas Development Institute, London,  2005, p. 54.    

 

 

 years  and  disappear  altogether  sometime  after  2008,  leaving  the  Fiji  sugar  industry  to  

 sink  or  swim  at  the  much  lower  world  price.  Meantime  the  EU  is  contesting  a  WTO  

 ruling against the export subsidies paid to European sugar farmers. The sugar market will 

 be  reformed  to  some  extent  within  Europe,  but  the  EU  will  not  impose  neoliberal  

 solutions on itself with the enthusiasm it has imposed them on the developing world. For 

 Fiji, the most likely outcome is accelerating decline of the Fiji sugar industry, displacing 

 thousands of Indo-Fijian farmers and forcing many of them into the squatter settlements 

 clustered to the north of Suva.  

 

  The  impact  of  the  move  to  free  trade  can  already  be  seen  in  Fiji’s  garment  

 industry. Until this  year  the  Multi  Fibre  Arrangement (MFA) gave Fiji an export quota 

 for garments exported to the USA. Within a few months of the end of the MFA, Ghim Li  

 Garments,  a  major  garment  manufacturer,  closed  down  its  factories  in  Nadi,  Ba  and  

 Lautoka  with  the  loss  of  3,000  jobs.  The  Fiji  government  then  revised  its  growth  

 predictions for the economy sharply downwards, from the 3.8% achieved in 2004 to 1.5% 

 in  2005  and  0.7%  in  2006.13  Fiji’s  Prime  Minister  Laisenia  Qarase  saw  ‘a  chill  wind  

 blowing from the direction of the World Trade Organisation. The unrealistic policies of 

 the WTO have created a crisis in our garment industry, which provides employment for 

 many  Fiji  people.  Because  the  US  must  conform  to  WTO  rules  we  no  longer  have  

 assured entry into that market for our garments...If this is globalisation, then it is fatally 

 flawed. It is making a mockery of our efforts to reach national standards of governance 

 we have set for ourselves and which the international community expects of us.’ If Fiji 

 lacked  export  markets,  Qarase  said,  ‘we  will  face  an  increased  danger  of  instability,  

 social breakdown and higher crime rates’.14  

 

 

 13      Fiji Times, 2 Feb. 2005; Republic of the Fiji Islands Country Brief, January 2005, at   

 

 

 

 

 14  ‘Qarase Prods Australia on Garment Quotas’, Pacific Islands Report, 14 Mar. 2005.   

 

 

  Free trade might be desirable for the Islands in the long term, though even that is 

 a  questionable  proposition.  In  the  short  term  free  trade  definitely  has  destabilising  

 potential, in Fiji above all. Island countries tend to depend heavily on tariffs for revenue, 

 for  example,  and  are  having  to  introduce  or  increase  valued-added  taxes.  Major  

 restructuring of the economy of the kind Fiji now faces, moreover, is almost beyond the 

 limited bureaucratic capacity of a small state.  

 

  PNG  and  Solomons  are  resource-based  economies.  PNG  has  mining,  together  

 with  oil  and  gas,  and  the  $3.9  billion  gas  pipeline  from  PNG  to  Australia  now  seems  

 likely to go ahead, with ExxonMobil agreeing to sell gas to Alcan’s Gove refinery in the 

 Northern  Territory.  Solomons  has  logging  companies  and  little  else.  The  result  in  both  

 countries  is  an  unhealthy  dependence  on  foreign  investors  in  resource  projects.  Since  

 government  funds  come  largely  from  multinational  companies  and  donors,  rather  than  

 from  taxes  paid  by  the  villagers,  the  line  of  accountability  between  government  and  

 village  is  thin.  The  elite  cream  off  the  rents  from  natural  resources  and  look  after  

 themselves, while the ordinary people get little. The phenomenon, observed elsewhere in 

 the developing world, has been called the resource curse. Not only that: mines come to an 

 end, and so do forests if you cut them down fast. The Misima gold and silver mine closed 

 last  year  after  15  years,  the  copper  mine  at  Ok  Tedi  in  PNG’s  Western  Province  will  

 close  in  2012,  and  Porgera  gold  mine  in  Enga  Province  will  probably  not  last  beyond  

 2015.  Both  countries  badly  need  more  diversified  economies  alongside  their  large  

 subsistence sectors. 

 

  Having  done  so  much  to  encourage  Island  countries  to  globalise,  what  can  

 Australia do for them economically?  

 

  We are rightly focusing on broad-based growth but we need to reject the idea that 

 Pacific  countries  should  abandon  customary  land  tenure  systems  and  convert  them  to  

 individual freeholds. Recent research in PNG shows that production of food crops and of 

 vanilla, betel nut, coffee and cocoa has increased on customary land in recent years and, 

 apart  from  palm  oil,  agricultural  production  has  declined  on  alienated  land,  flatly  

 

 

 contradicting  the  ideological  view  advanced  by  Helen  Hughes  and  the  Centre  for  

 Independent Studies that the salvation of the Pacific lies in individualising land tenure.15 

 In  Helen  Hughes’s  view,  we  should  make  our  aid  conditional  on  Pacific  countries  

 adopting her ideas about individual land tenure. As the economist Chris Lightfoot points 

 out: 

 

  None  of  the Pacific  Island  economies  can  afford  comprehensive  state-sponsored  

  social security systems; the right of access to land provides most Pacific Islanders 

  with  a  degree  of  security  that  the  dispossessed  peasants  of  South  America,  the  

  Philippines and many other countries can only dream of.16  

 

  Then there is the question of labour mobility. The Samoan prime minister raised 

 the issue at the Forum last year:  

 

  Given that Forum Island Countries have agreed to integrate into a free trade area 

  over  the  next  decade,  with  Australia  and  New  Zealand  to  follow  at  some  point,  

  where might that take us as a regional community? Is unrestricted access to each 

  other’s investment and labour markets an ultimate objective? Is travel within the 

  Forum  region,  perhaps  via  a  Forum  visa  at  some  point  in  time  a  realistic  goal?  

  How  can  we,  as  members  of  the  Forum  family,  have  a  more  clear  identity  as  

  citizens of the Forum community?17 

 

 Tuilaepa was referring to what Pacific Islanders most want from Australia: in return for 

 giving unrestricted access to Australian exports of goods and services to the region, they 

 

 15  Jim Fingleton, ed., Privatising Land in the Pacific: a defence of customary tenures, Australia Institute  Discussion Paper, No. 80, June 2005.    

 16   Chris Lightfoot, ‘Does customary land ownership make economic sense’, in Jim Fingleton, ed.,  Privatising Land in the Pacific: a defence of customary tenures, Australia Institute Discussion Paper, No.  80, June 2005, p. 25.   

 17   Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, Speech at the Opening Ceremony of the 35th Pacific Islands Forum. Apia,  Samoa, 5 Aug. 2004.   

 

 

 want access to Australia’s labour market. Australia makes much of encouraging the ‘free 

 movement of people, goods, capital and ideas’ in an era of globalisation. In practice   we 

 discourage  the  free  movement  of  people.  When  someone  tries  to  cross  our  borders, we  

 invoke an exception to the rhetoric of neoliberal globalisation. That is a reasonable thing 

 to  do  within  limits,  but  unreasonable  if  taken  too  far  and  politicised  as  the  Howard  

 government has done.  

 

  The best-performing South Pacific economies are the ones that export people and 

 benefit  from  the  remittances  they  send  home.  Tonga,  Samoa,  Kiribati,  Tuvalu,  Cook  

 Islands  and  Niue  all  have  large  populations  overseas,  and  they  are  all  doing  well  on  

 remittance  income.  Contrary  to  expectations,  Pacific  Islanders  send  money  and  goods  

 home for many years after coming to Australia and New Zealand, and often send more as 

 time  goes  on.  Fiji  is  now  joining  its  neighbours  as  a  remittance  economy.  American  

 security  companies  contracted  to  the  US  government  in  Iraq  are  recruiting  Fijians  in  

 record numbers, and the British Army now has a Fijian complement of about 3,000. This 

 year income from remittances will probably exceed income from sugar. 

 

  A  Senate  inquiry  into  Australia’s  relations  with  the  Pacific,  chaired  by  Senator  

 Peter  Cook,  investigated  special  migration  access  to  Australia  by  Pacific  Islanders,  and  

 recommended  a  pilot  program,  supported  by  the  ACTU,  to  allow  Pacific  Islanders  to  

 enter Australia as guest workers to undertake seasonal agricultural work. Guest workers 

 are  not  immigrants  and  are  less  likely  to  overstay  if  they  know  they  can  return  to  

 Australia the following year or if some of their income is retained in their home country. 

 Nor do the numbers have to be very great to make a difference, especially in the Pacific 

 countries  outside  PNG.  If  we  insist  the  Islands  take  our  goods,  we  should  let  some  

 Islanders work here on short-term contracts.  

 

  Finally,  let  me  join  others  in  calling  for  more  resources  to  be  devoted  to  

 developing Australian expertise on the Pacific Islands. Those of us academics who were 

 there  in  the  independence  years  are  in  our  sixties,  and  while  there  are  some  excellent  

 

 

 

 

 people following behind, there are not enough of them. The ANU is the only university in 

 the country with concentrated Pacific expertise, and even there funding focuses on China, 

 the rest of North-East Asia and South-East Asia at the expense of the South Pacific. The 

 few  PhD  students  we  supervise  have  no  career  path  and  must  head  in  other  directions  

 after  graduation.  At  the  same  time  the  constituency  of  Australians  with  close  personal  

 links  to  the  region,  especially  to  Papua  New  Guinea,  is  smaller  than  it  used  to  be.  Yet  

 Papua  New  Guinea  and  the  rest  of  the  South  Pacific  is  the  only  part  of  the  developing  

 world where Australia can contribute on an important scale to what Don Dunstan called 

 ‘security of food, shelter, work and services’ and to the justice and human development 

 to which he devoted his political life.  

