---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: ABARE Outlook Conference 2005: 1 March 2005: Warren Truss explains his vision for mapping the future of Australian agriculture."
date: "2005-03-01"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY"
subjects:
  - "Agricultural industries"
  - "Agriculture policy"
  - "Advisory bodies, Government"
  - "Rural and regional policy"
  - "Long range planning"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211275907
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YDKF6%22
---

 Doorstop interview - 1 March 2005

 ABARE Outlook 2005 - The Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries  and Forestry, Warren Truss, explains his vision for mapping the  future of Australian agriculture

 Date: Tuesday, 1 March 2005

 Minister: Well, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Outlook 2005. During  the opening remarks, I made mention of the launch of the Stocktake  document which is now available for you all to peruse. I think you'll find it  a useful reference document. It'll give you a lot of facts and information  about agriculture and the various commodities and I think that may be  useful as an ongoing resource. It also poses some challenging questions  affecting the future of agriculture and they will be taken up by the  reference group which I've also announced today. 

 The media release includes a list of the names of the people who will be on  the reference group under the chairmanship of Peter Corish. They'll set  about their take immediately. They'll be inviting public input and  consultations with various industry bodies and I also hope to spend some  time speaking with industry organisations in the development of this stage  of the review document. 

 As I indicated, I'm keen for them to report back to me by about the end of  the year so that we can report in more substance to Outlook 2006 on the  outcome of this year's work. 

 Journalist: What do you think we'll get out of this sort of thing?

 Minister: We want to review and examine the policy approaches towards  agricultural issues. We will seek to respond to some of the new challenges  confronting industry and look at developing strategies to ensure that  agriculture is able to meet those challenges and that it can therefore, it  can remain profitable into the years ahead. There are some new issues  and a new environment in which agriculture is operating. Clearly, it's  important we be well focused both as a government and as industry  organisations and as farmers on how to address those issues.

 Journalist: Why now, Minister? Why not 12 months ago?

 Minister: Well, this is the beginning of a new term of Federal Government  so it's a good opportunity for us in relation to agenda setting. I announced  during the election campaign that we would be undertaking an exercise of  this nature so it's a fulfilment of that commitment. There has, of course,  simultaneously comments by the National Farmers Federation that we  needed to move in this direction. 

 So we're responding also to industry demands in that regard. It's about 10  years ago that there was a policy review, not as comprehensive of what  we're proposing now but 10 years, I think is a reasonable time frame in  which we undertake an exercise of this nature. In addition to that, I think  the rise of things like the environmental extremists, animal rights  extremists, those who want to challenge the rights of farmers to exist, 

 some of the new pressures in relation to the high-cost of land, labour  shortages etc - they're all key new issues that would not have been  addressed 10 years ago when this sort of review took place. 

 Journalist: It seems very wide reaching. Will that not mean in the future,  studies into specific areas?

 Minister: There have been, from time to time, studies on particular  industries that face a particular crisis and I guess that will inevitably also  be the case in the future. This is a broader ranging cross-sectorial study.  We'll be looking at issues affecting agriculture in general rather than  specific commodity issues.

 Journalist: Minister, how much is it going to cost?

 Minister: We haven't really put a budget figure on it. There'll obviously be  some cost associated with getting people together, with making sure that  we adequately resource their work but these sorts of costs will be  absorbed within the normal activities of my department and the various  agencies.

 Journalist: You mentioned a lot of the challenges ahead with investment  in infrastructure, in land and water, a lot of rural people in say the profits  from the resale of Telstra should be used to help pay for those sorts of  things, what are your thoughts on that?

 Minister: We haven't decided yet to sell Telstra and so it's far too early to  spend the proceeds when they haven't yet been earned.

 Journalist: Is it likely though that this is where the money could go?

 Minister: This exercise is not about a new shopping list for agricultural  expenditure or infrastructure expenditure. It's about dealing with the  policy issues. Certainly the constraints that affect the capacity of rural  industries to achieve their potential will be on the agenda but this  shouldn't be seen as a shopping list for new expenditure in the sector.

 Journalist: The National Party already has a shopping list though?

 Minister: Everybody, all Members of Parliament, have a list of things that  they want to achieve for their electorate and they take every opportunity  to promote the importance of those things. Let me tell you, there are  some things in my electorate I want as well, including upgraded roads and  the like. The Auslink proposals will help to respond to many of those  concerns but a Member of Parliament, who's alive to the wishes and needs  of his or her electorate, will always want to bring forward proposal for  expenditure in their area.

 Journalist: How soon will you be hoping to address policy to address the  field worker shortage?

 Minister: Well, we want stop still while this work is underway. If things  need to be done in the interim, well, obviously we'd seek to do that as  quickly as we possibly can. There are a number of issues that have  already been taken to deal with labour shortages but I think that will be  one of the issues that we'll want to deal with in the development of this  policy document.

 Journalist: There are some people talking about the decline in the  number of farmers in Australia, is that something that you're going to look 

 at?

 Minister: There has been a steady reduction in the number of people full-time engaged in farming, as farmers, farm owners and mangers, really  since the 1920s and 1930s. There are a lot of people, in fact, the number  of people employed in agriculture has actually gone up in the last decade  or so but that's largely associated with the expansion of the horticulture  sector and labour-intensive industries of that nature. 

 I think there is, because of the high cost of land, a desire for a peri-rural  lifestyle. There pressures that are placed, particularly on land values  anywhere within half an hour's drive or an hour's drive from the coast and  probably three hours' drive to a capital city, is altering the nature of the  farm workplace. In the US and for that matter in Europe, something like ¾  of all the farmers have off-farm incomes and I think that trend is growing  in Australia.

 Journalist: What sectors is the peri-rural lifestyle affecting?

 Minister: Really, any farming sector that is close to a metropolitan area  or the coastal lifestyles are the ones that are traditionally most affected. I  guess the problems in the dairy industries in NSW and Queensland and in  WA as an example, have seen a significant flow of retirement investment  into what were once dairy farms. Now, most dairy farms are located  relatively close to an urban area. 

 They're generally pretty picturesque countryside and they're the sort of  location that many retiring urban lifestyle people want for their retirement.  So we have the situation where people are taking their redundancies or  their superannuation, buying a property for a price way beyond what a  farmer seeking to make a return on agriculture is able to afford and that  does therefore, have a significant affect on agriculture. Now, it has some  positives as well, a lot of those people who come with significant  superannuation funding in their back pocket are innovative. 

 They're people who introduce the new investment. They're people who try  new things. They've also been people who've opened up a lot of the  wineries and the olive groves and I guess, some less successful things,  like ostriches and aloe vera and the like. Now some of those things can,  and will, make a significant contribution to agriculture in the future. So we  shouldn't consider that this investment is investment wasted but it does  significantly alter the traditional way in which our agricultural land is  managed.

 Journalist: Sugar farming would be in there as well, wouldn't it?

 Minister: There are an increasing number of sugar farmers who have off-farm jobs. That's particularly in the case in areas like around Mackay  where there are some very high-paid mining jobs within close proximity.  But the sugar industry probably had a lower proportion of people with off-farm jobs up until the recent problems in the industry, than did other  sectors and yet it's an industry that lends itself to second jobs because  most of the cane farming areas are close to urban areas. 

 They're all close to the seaside where the Sunbelt and sea change  phenomenon is occurring. So, there are opportunities for many in the  sugar industry to do that. Another thing that's perhaps relevant to the  cane industry is that growing cane perhaps lends itself to being a part-time job more than many other industries in agriculture. Now a lot of the  work on cane these days is done by contract, contract planting, contract 

 harvesting. 

 The crop is more forgiving than others. If you don't do the job this week,  well often, next week is just as good. So people are often able to manage  a cane farm on their weekends or during their rostered days off from a  second job. It's not so easy, it's impossible, if you're a wool grower way  out west or you're a grazier. It makes it much harder where you've got the  larger areas and only small rural towns nearby. The world-wide trend in  developed countries is for more and more farmers to have off-farm  income.

 Journalist: In your speech, you talked about the problem of a lot of  refugees working in rural communities and then moving to the city, would  you be after the Immigration Department or the Minister to look at  tightening the allowance given to refugees in these situations?

 Minister: The issues that have been raised with me in recent times are  that once they've got their permanent residency that they then have left  the abattoir or the country area where they're working and have gone to  live in the cities. I think that is disappointing. That is very disappointing  but once they've been given permanent residency I'm not quite sure what  more can be done. It is my intention certainly to talk with the Minister  about experiences that have been passed on to me in recent times.

 Journalist: Minister, what would be the impact on farmers of an interest  rate rise?

 Minister: We'll it increases their costs. Many farmers have debts,  particularly in times of drought. They have interest bills that are a  significant part of their cost. The second impact will be, and I note a  reference this morning when the Australian dollar went over 79c, this was  attributed to speculation that interest rates might go up. A higher dollar  means lower returns for farmers. Probably the impact on farmers of a  higher dollar is greater even than the cost that they would actually bear,  in a practical sense, than higher interest rates.

 Journalist: Is it justified or not justified as the moment?

 Minister: The Reserve Bank has to take into account when making its  decisions the conditions in the entire economy but there'll be no farmers  cheering if interest rates go up today.

 Journalist: What was the message you gave the Reserve Bank Governor  when arguing against an increased rate hike?

 Minister: I pointed out to the Governor that when taking into account the  various factors that influence their decision, they should remember that  not all of the borrowings are from people speculating in the property  market. Some are because they're battling drought, some are borrowing  because they want to improve their productivity and to boost their  capacity to export for Australia and those are important national objectives  that should not be discouraged.

 Journalist: Is this an assault on the independence of the Reserve with a  senior Federal Minister explaining this to them?

 Minister: There are plenty of people giving advice to the Reserve Bank  over recent times about what they should do in relation to interest rates. I  hope that the Reserve Bank will listen to all of that advice but ultimately,  they are independent and they will make their own decisions. Well, it's 

 

 after 9 o'clock, they've probably make their decision and I think that we'll  learn about that tomorrow.

 Journalist: Minister, will this policy review impact some of the major  policies you've already got on the go such as National Action, the National  Water Initiative etc?

 Minister: I wouldn't rule that out but obviously we've got well-established  policies that are quite fresh and recent in their development. Nothing is  out of bounds in relation to this review but I would really expecting them  more to look at other issues where there has not so far been such a  comprehensive response.

 Journalist: Given that the Federal Government has at times disagreed  with the States over things like water and vegetation, will you be asking  the States to participate?

 Minister: The States are welcome to participate in this review and if they  want to make a contribution or if they want their own policy areas to be  covered by the review, well, I'm certainly happy to listen to them. But we  think this is an important exercise and we'll be proceeding whether or not  the States want to be a part of it but they're certainly welcome to  participate if they wish.

 Journalist: Will some of those more controversial stakeholders come  under the examination of this new group?

 Minister: Again, I couldn't rule out that some of the issues that will be of  concern to the reference group will fall largely within the jurisdiction of the  States but we're not directing them in that regard. I'm anxious for them to  develop proposals that are deliverable so in some instances, we're saying  at the Commonwealth level that we're keen and ready to deliverable  where there's demonstration that there needs to be an action on our part. 

 The States must see themselves as partners in a strong and vibrant rural  industry and I have been disappointed at the way in which the States, one-by-one, have been walking away from their responsibilities to rural  Australia. Now over recent years, I think that that is having an impact at  the local level. And let me say also that farmers can't expect that the  Commonwealth is going to pick up the tab every time the state walks  away from their responsibility. 

 I'm getting a bit sick and tired of farm industry organisations coming to  me saying, 'well, the State used to do this and they won't do it anymore,  so will you do it'. The reality is that the Commonwealth is not there to pick  up the tabs for the States, all of whom are absolutely flushed with cash at  the present time. They've got enormous revenue boosts from GST, from  the property boom, from mineral royalties if they're in one of the mineral-rich states. They've never been in a better position to provide significant  investment in rural and regional Australia and yet in virtually all cases,  that investment has been absent.

 Journalist: Minister, just back on rates, would you agree that a group of  farmers experiencing hardship for whom an interest rate increase could  make the difference and force them out of business?

 Minister: Every cost increase is unwelcome. An interest rate rise in itself  would only put out of business a farmer that was obviously already  perilously close to the edge. Now increases in prices, in fuel and in  fertiliser and in a whole lot of other farm inputs also have significant 

 impacts on their costs in the price squeeze. So it would depend on the  nature of a farmer's cost structure, how much debt he has, if his debt  levels are low, then the impact will be small, that's self evident. 

 He'd be more worried about, in those circumstances, the fact that a high  interest rates may lead to a higher dollar which would reduce then his  income on the other side. When the dollar's up, most farmers are affected  by higher interest rates but not all - some have equity, some actually  benefit by earning a little bit of interest on their investments. And  remember, there's $27billion worth of farmers' money in Farmers  Management Deposits. 

 So, those investments will actually appreciate higher interest rates but  overall, farmers appreciate an environment where the dollar's low, where  interest rates are low, where they can get the maximum value for their  products.

 Journalist: Minister, you talked about picking up the tab, some people in  urban areas claim funds can [inaudible] will that be addressed?

 Minister: I can't help what people in the urban areas may say and in fact,  I was attempting to make the point in my address earlier that the  environment is changing for farmers in that the fundamental sympathy  that was once in urban communities for the rural sector is dissipating -  that there are less people now that have the direct links with the land that  they once had. In the past, almost everyone had an auntie or an uncle or  a grandma or somebody or other on the land where they went for school  holidays and the like and so they got a bit of an appreciation of what life  was like in regional Australia. 

 Today, their image of a farm is perhaps a rural/residential block outside  the city with couple of llamas and a Dexter and a couple of chooks or even  worse, what they've been told by PETA or some animal welfare  organisation about what's going on on the land. People in the cities have  difficulties too; I acknowledge that some of that fundamental sympathy  that was there when there was drought and troubles in regional Australia  is much harder to tap. 

 So, farmers have to be aware of those changes and I think one of the  important things that I hope will come out of this review is a realisation  that the industry has to be stronger in putting its case to other  Australians. They need to be conscious of the need to ensure that the  children in our schools get a balanced education when it comes to looking  at rural issues, that they see farmers not just as rapers and pillagers of  the land, of people who abuse their animals, who pinch the water that  could otherwise be flowing into the sea, and all the other negative  stereotypes that are sometimes being pursued these days. Now I'm not  saying that everybody in the cities is clearly anti-farmer, that's clearly not  a fact. 

 But it is a concern to me that the Labor Party at the last Federal Election  didn't think it was necessary to offer any policies that were attractive to  rural and regional Australia, they thought that they could take 1500  gigalitres out of the Murray-Darling Basin and consider it to be an election  plus. That you've got a Premier like Beattie introducing the most draconian  land clearing laws in the country and doing it in the context of an election  campaign because he thought it was an election plus. Now, a federal Labor  Party that has downgraded the post of Agriculture Minister to the outer  Shadow Cabinet. 

 So, there is clearly a view in some sectors of the community that they can  win elections, not only without offering any inducements or  encouragements to rural and regional Australia, but actually to confront  them aggressively - to say negative things about farmers and win votes in  the city. I think that is a disturbing trend that the industry is going to have  to address.

 Journalist: Minister Truss, [inaudible] is it likely that there are large  number of farmers in drought and hanging perilously close to the edge  and that an interest rate rise could push them out of business and that  they need to go to your Government for help?

 Minister: Well, those receiving Exceptional Circumstances Assistance get  intra-subsidies and so therefore, the Commonwealth would effectively  meet half of any interest rate rise that there are for those farmers  receiving the EC assistance.

 Journalist: So you think you'd be able to help them back on to their feet?

 Minister: That helps a little bit, doesn't it? It reduces the impact of any  increase. Look the banks have been pretty good at standing behind  farmers during this drought. In the past we have found it necessary and  there's been good reason to criticise banks for their failure to support  farmers in tough times. Now I think the banks' position has been made  easier because of the increase in farm values which has meant that equity  that many farmers have in their properties is actually increased during  these tough times because farm values have gone up. 

 And again, farm values have gone up not necessarily because of their  capacity to return on investment but because of the general increase in  property values and the influence that urban buyers are having on  property values. So, whilst an interest rate rise is never welcome, I don't  expect that a small rise would have too much impact on the capacity of  farmers to stay in business.

 Journalist: Minister, one of the papers this week has referred to the  National Australia Bank and the comment that there'd be 100,000 farmers  less in this country by 2020, that's only 15 years away. [inaudible]

 Minister: I made some comments about that earlier and let me make one  comment - it's interesting that the paper's coming from the National Bank.  They can make a useful contribution to ensuring that their own prediction  doesn't occur by standing by farmers and making sure that they are given  every opportunity. 

 I mentioned earlier that there is a change occurring in agriculture across  the world with a larger proportion of farmers having off-farm jobs and I  think that's the kind of thing that the National, I haven't seen their paper,  but what they're referring to that many farms will be managed by people  who are perhaps working in town or their spouse is working in town or  they've got some passive investment that's assisting their cash flows.

 Further media inquiries:

 Minister Truss' office: Tim Langmead (02) 6277 7520 or 0418 221 433

 

 

