---
title: "Transcript of press conference, Parliament House, Canberra, 17 June 2005: mandatory detention; ALP National Executive/Victorian."
date: "2005-06-17"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Victoria"
  - "Party branches"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Royal Commissions"
  - "ALP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211556191
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D3GG6%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,  CANBERRA, 17 JUNE 2005   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:  Mandatory  detention;  ALP National Executive/Victorian  Branch   

 BEAZLEY: Thanks for coming out at this very late notice.  There are only  two ways to deal with an incompetent Minister and a dysfunctional Department  and that is to put in place, in the first instance, a Royal Commission to examine  that incompetence and, secondly, to change the Government.     

 Now, what we have here is a set of circumstances where an incompetent  Minister and Department have been given more powers.  That is not the answer.   The answer to the problems that we have now is not to further empower Senator  Vanstone and her Department.  There is no place for babies and children behind  razor wire - no place at all for babies and children behind razor wire.  And putting  your faith in Vanstone and this Department to resolve it is misplaced.     

 Now, as far as the Opposition is concerned, we are going to be monitoring the  process carefully and the legislation that comes forward.  We will be dealing with  that legislation on the basis of our very well worked out policies.  I repeat - there  is only two ways to deal with a dysfunctional Department and an incompetent  Minister in these circumstances and that is to organise, first, a Royal Commission  to properly examine them and, secondly, to change the Government.   

 JOURNALIST:  There’ll be no change of government in the next two years.   Probably, you see some merit in these changes?   

 BEAZLEY: Look, we have put down, and I think we had reason to expect  a series of quite explicit effective legislative changes that would establish a  situation were children were taken out from behind the razor wire; that would  ensure a proper inspectorate was put in place; that would ensure that the glut of  cases clogging up the Federal Court would be removed by the establishment of a  proper magistracy to deal with these matters in the Federal Court.  You see,  these are all part of the processes that would guarantee that we would have that  inspection process proceed and be completed within a period of, say, 90 days  and would ensure that subsequently, for those few not capable of being dealt  with in that framework, being placed in a situation where the onus would be on  the Department to demonstrate that that is where they ought to stay because 

 they would be absconders.  And none of that is here.  None of that is here in the  propositions that have been put forward by the Government.  Nothing in this  deals with the circumstances which created the Cornelia Rau scandal, the  Alvarez-Solon scandal and, as far as we can see, at least 30 other scandals like  them which have yet to be revealed in public.  Nothing of this covers any of that.   A Royal Commission would.  A Royal Commission would cover all of that and a  change of government would ensure that those procedures that I just described  were put in place.   

 JOURNALIST: But Petro Georgiou is not going to press ahead with his  Private Member’s Bill.  Hasn’t Howard effectively put a cap on what was a big  problem within his own Party room? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  The Government’s business is its own.  We’re not party to  the procedures that take place between Petro Georgiou and his Prime Minister.   All sorts of issues and influences will be acting upon them.  What we have to be  concerned about is what is right; what establishes effective border protection;  what ensures that we can do border protection with humanity; what ensures that  the mess that this whole issue has become is cleared up; what gives the  Australian people confidence that this dysfunctional Department and incompetent  Minister have had their decisions and processes properly inspected.  Now, a  Royal Commission would do that.  So, the Opposition is here about good public  policy and good protection for Australia and humane treatment of people who are  in Australia’s duty of care.  Now, nothing in what Mr Howard has had to say deals  with all of this.  I don’t know what Mr Georgiou’s views are on it but I do know  what our views are.  We’ve had a chance to have a look at this for a very lengthy  period of time and we’ve come to detailed clear-cut policy decisions and they are  better than these.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed in Mr Georgiou that he’s come to this  compromise?   

 BEAZLEY:  I don’t believe that this establishes the right way to go.   Whatever the improvements, the right way to go is to get this problem now fixed.   We’re not interested in the resolutions of the Liberal Party’s internal problems.   We’re interested in the resolution of the border protection mess.  That’s what  we’re interested in.  This does not achieve that objective.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, talking about internal Party squabbles, your  National Executive today dealt with a matter involving the Victorian branch, in  which the Victorian Right called on the National Executive to effectively intervene  and to overturn some proponents of the existing rule changes put in place by the  Centre Left.  As I understand it, the National Executive said the Victorian Branch  has got two weeks to resolve it or there will be a ballot with the National Exec.   Are you concerned that the Victorian Branch, as you can gather, spill over  (inaudible) will provide problems for you? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  No.  And if you actually want a description of the discussion,  ring Tim Gartrell and have a chat through with him.  But about the particular  concern that you raise, no. 

 

 LEWIS:  But you’re the Parliamentary Leader.   

 BEAZLEY:  Quite right and that’s the National Executive and that’s the  Victorian Branch and they’re going through the processes of resolving those  issues which are basically machinery issues by an appropriate Party process and  I’m quite satisfied with that.   

 

 ends   

 

