---
title: "Mental Health Committee visits Baxter."
date: "2005-09-27"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283836
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/T0FH6%22
---

 

 

 senator.allison@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA      (05/476)     TUESDAY 27 SEPTEMBER 2005  SENATOR LYN ALLISON  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS LEADER   

 MENTAL HEALTH COMMITTEE VISITS BAXTER  With the Government admitting it does not readily know the mental health status of detainees, a Senate  Inquiry heads to Baxter for their own assessment of the impact of incarceration on asylum seekers. 

 Democrats Leader and committee chair, Senator Lyn Allison says there is evidence that the Howard  Government's policy of incarcerating people who are legally seeking asylum in Australia is an abuse of human  rights, and leaves lasting mental scars. But, the Government won’t say just how many are affected. 

 Senator Allison asked for the number of detainees who had sought mental health treatment; the number  diagnosed with mental health conditions; the average wait for treatment; and the availability of mental health  staff. Immigration Minister Senator Amanda Vanstone response was that "the department does not have this  information readily available".     

 "This is from a Minister who is described the sad practise of self-harm attempted by 900 asylum seekers over  the past three years as an 'unattractive type of protest'," Senator Allison said. 

 "It is only when there is a public outcry, such as in the Cornelia Rau and Vivian Solon cases, that the  Government acknowledges there is a problem. Until then, the anguish experienced by detainees was hidden  behind the wire fencing." 

 Senator Allison said numerous submissions to the mental health inquiry, including that of the Rau family,  condemn the lack of mental health services in detention centres and explore how the environment  exacerbates depression, psychosis and psychological distress. 

 The Rau family's submission characterises Cornelia’s treatment in Baxter as punitive, prejudicial to her  physical and mental health and brutal given she spent three out of four months as the only female in an  isolation compound. 

 The committee will arrive at Baxter Immigration Detention Centre at 9.15am tomorrow, tour the facility  and meet with detainees before proceeding to the Pika Wiya Clinic to talk with community members  and Aboriginal health workers. 

 Media contact - Katrina McGrath 0408 056 167  

