---
title: "Old men's nostalgia. Speech [at] Spring Graduation Ceremony: The Commonwealth Star of Liberty."
date: "2005-11-23"
creators:
  - "Kirby, Michael"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "High Court judgments"
  - "Legal profession"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211286664
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/O94I6%22
---

 

 

 Speeches  THE COLLEGE OF LAW  

 SYDNEY, 23 NOVEMBER 2005  

 SPRING GRADUATION CEREMONY  

 THE COMMONWEALTH STAR OF LIBERTY  

 The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG* 

 OLD MEN'S NOSTALGIA  

 It is the fault of old men (and perhaps old women too) that they tend to live  in the past. It is such a comfortable world. The awkwardness,  embarrassment and self-doubts tend to be forgotten in a miasma of  nostalgia about the good old days.  

 The great Irish poet, W B Yeats warned about listening too much to old  men, as you now have to do. The warning certainly applies to old judges:  

 "An aged man is but a paltry thing,  A tattered coat upon a stick, unless  Soul clap its hands and sing, and louder sing  For every tatter in its mortal dress,  Nor is there singing school but studying  Monuments of its own magnificence"[1]  

 As a monument of my own magnificence, I am happy to share it  generously with the graduates of this College. They are embarking at this  graduation on their future. For a person of my age, the future is less  certain. My father, nearing ninety, advises his children not to buy any more  long playing records.  

 I was recently reminded of the transience of legal magnificence. Justice  Michael McHugh reached his seventieth birthday at the beginning of this  month. We had worked together, with only a short interruption, from the  time we were both appointed judges of the Court of Appeal, within a month  of each other, late in 1984. Suddenly, the removalists were at the High  Court. His personal books were packed. His familiar pictures were taken  off the wall. The CD player, with its never-ending stream of Bach Cantatas  was put away, ready for a new home. In little more than three years, I  thought to myself, the same fate will befall me. All that effort and energy in  the service of the law and the judiciary will suddenly come to a  constitutional full-stop. That is how it is in our profession, at least for those  plucked from private practice to join the judiciary, there to exercise part of  the governmental power of the nation. Suddenly, the power is gone. All  gone. Symbolically enough, a feather-duster lay on Justice McHugh's old  desk, in his empty office. It symbolised time's inexorable march.  

 For young lawyers at the brink of their careers, the images are quite  different. I know because I have been there. Especially in the spring days  of graduation, it is impossible to think forward and contemplate the end of  one's career. Where will you all be when you're sixty-four? Well, I can tell 

 you.  

 Some will, in Rumpole's words, have got their "bottoms on the bench".  "Trotters in the trough" he described it in his bitterer moments. Some, like  Tom Hughes QC (who turned up at Justice McHugh's last sitting to bid him  farewell) will still be practising as barristers. Some will be working as  lawyers in the big and small legal firms that bring the law to people with  problems. Increasing numbers will be working in the public service, in legal  aid and in private corporations. Some will be working in international  tribunals and United Nations agencies or for the Foreign Service. A handful  will have become beachcombers - worse still, like two of my co-graduates -  wine correspondents for newspapers. On the statistics, one may have  been struck off the roll - make sure that this is not you. A few noble types  will become law teachers to spread the word of the rule of law to the next  generation. Some will have given the law away completely. Occasionally, I  meet law graduates amongst Qantas stewards. Four weeks ago at the  United Nations Office in Vienna, I met a graduate of this College planning  a move from UNCITRAL to a position in the International Court of  Arbitration.  

 The opportunities for lawyers today are so many. Half of those who  graduate in law do not even enter the legal profession. Our discipline  promises remarkably rich pickings and, generally, much job satisfaction. I  congratulate the graduates on their achievements. I thank their families  and supporters for seeing them through to this moment of justifiable self-satisfaction. I hope their lives will be full of happiness and success,  whatever course they follow. My message to young lawyers is simple:  Remain optimistic. Remain idealistic. Law is not an ordinary job. It is made  special by its commitment to justice. This is what gives law a moral  dimension. Never forget that special feature of the vocation you now enter.  Of course, law often fails. But failures should only encourage us to try  harder.  

 REMAINING IDEALISTIC  

 I never really had any other view of law. Call it naïve or marshmallow as  you will. I was always optimistic and idealistic about law's functions. I still  am.  

 Forty-three years ago, when Chief Justice Gleeson and I graduated  together in this city, we both became young solicitors. He went to the Bar a  few years earlier than I. I received my first judicial appointment before he. 

 Through all those years, the work has been demanding, absorbing and the  clients and the litigants pressing with their problems. A six or seven day  week became the norm. With the privilege of the exercise of judicial power  came obligations of disciplined service that still continue.  

 But people ask me: How can you remain idealistic? Have you not seen so  many defects in the law and in society that you now feel cynical about the  law? Or at least sceptical about law's capacity to deliver justice to ordinary  folks?  

 These are fair questions. My decade in the Australian Law Reform  Commission in the 1970s and 80s certainly taught me the many defects in  the rules and procedures of the law. I have no illusions about the defects. I  realise, better than most, that ordinary people cannot generally afford a  day in court - or even a visit to a lawyer, in a palace of glass and marble, to  ascertain their rights. Our system has many of the qualities of a Rolls  Royce - perfect, but only if you can afford it.  

 Yet for all that, legal aid has expanded in my lifetime, especially in criminal 

 trials following the High Court's decision in the Dietrich case[2]. Specialised  aid bodies and many individual lawyers support worthwhile cases without  change. Pro bono work has become a much more common feature of legal  practice than it was forty years ago. Law Reform Commissions and like  institutions continue their vital activities aimed at improving the law. Judges  are now more transparent about the reasons for their decisions. The  discredited mythology of "strict and complete legalism"[3] has been all but  abandoned. In appellate courts lawyers worth their salt analyse statutes  and past decisions but also add submissions on legal principle and policy  to help the courts to reach a just and lawful result. The mysteries have  given way to greater candour and realism.  

 There are, it is true, decisions (including some in which I have participated)  which disappoint me and which I think are wrong. Cases upholding  prolonged powers of preventive detention by the Executive[4]. Cases  expanding the powers of military tribunals[5]. Cases denying prisoners full  and equal rights before the courts[6]. Cases dismissing moves towards  equality in the franchise[7]. Cases diminishing the accountability to  effective parliamentary scrutiny of governmental appropriations[8].  

 For me, these and many other decisions are disappointing. But even  disappointing decisions never shake my belief that, in the end, in Australia,  we eventually work our way to just laws and fair procedures. We generally  correct legal wrong turnings.  

 I learned that lesson for the first time when I was just twelve years old. It  has never left me. In 1951 the High Court in the Communist Party Case[9]  struck down as constitutionally invalid the federal law to dissolve the  Australian Communist Party and to impose civil restrictions on  communists. Because my grandmother's new husband was a communist,  the law had a specific and frightening reality for our family. The decision of  the High Court and the decision of the Australian people in the subsequent  referendum, were a marvellous affirmation of civil liberties, pluralism,  diversity of viewpoints, the rule of law and restraint on governmental  power. I have always kept that decision before me. I have never ceased to  cherish its values. And to believe in them.  

 I remember, a little later, how the law affecting Aboriginal Australians  began to change - most notably in the decision of the High Court in the  Mabo Case[10]. When you hear attacks on the Mason High Court, pause  to think, if you will, how diminished our country would have been if that  Court had not reversed the factual and legal errors that had denied rights  to land to the indigenous people of this nation[11].  

 In my lifetime, I have also seen many changes in the opportunities  available to women - including women lawyers. The appointment of Justice  Susan Crennan to replace Justice McHugh has restored a female voice to  the High Court, which was missing after Mary Gaudron retired. Of course,  there are still glass ceilings and other obstacles in the legal profession and  in legal rules that unfairly burden women[12]. But we have begun an  irreversible journey towards correcting them.  

 The White Australia Policy has been dismantled and we have rid ourselves  of the dictation test that was used to enforce that policy and to reinforce  racist prejudice. True, our country, like many others, sometimes exhibits  xenophobia. We see that occasionally in attitudes to refugee applicants.  But we have also seen a great shift from the legal policy of exclusion on  the ground of race to the national commitment to multiculturalism. I pay  tribute to the politicians of all the major political parties, who brought these  changes about in our law.  

 When I was embarking on my legal journey, laws still criminalized  homosexuals and bisexuals in a way that we can now see as an affront to  science, truth and basic human rights. All of those criminal laws have now  been swept away in Australia, the last of them, in Tasmania, with the help  of a United Nations treaty[13]. There remain discriminatory laws on this  score. And there are still discriminators. They are the usual suspects. But I  believe that the remaining unjust laws on this subject will also be changed.  That is the nature of our country and the character of its legal system.  

 Courts and parliaments in Australia are in a constant dialogue striving, for  the most part, for rationality, justice and pluralism. We have, until now,  cherished the belief that democratic governance is a temperate and  moderate form of government with many checks and balances to save it  from extremes. A belief in the majoritarianism of parliamentary votes,  sustained by nothing more than triennial visits of citizens to the ballot box,  with uncontrolled power thereafter, is an infantile conception of a modern  democracy[14]. Lawyers know that the reality is more complicated and  more nuanced.  

 THE COMMONWEALTH STAR  

 Lawyers also know that we cannot assume that the moderate features of  the past will last forever. In living memory great and civilised nations have  lost their democratic and law-abiding character. Vigilance is therefore 

 constantly required to preserve Australia's liberties. Because of their  greater knowledge about legal history and institutions, and of the fallibility  of legal processes, lawyers have a special duty to raise their voices and  act as they can whenever they believe that the fundamentals of the  Constitution are endangered by extreme laws or governmental actions out  of harmony with our liberty - respecting traditions.  

 Some critics will show impatience when lawyers warn against departures  from time-honoured rights. But lawyers see the cases of excess close up.  They know the mistakes that are sometimes made by officials. Their  training makes them sensitive to injustice. This is why lawyers, more than  most, have an obligation to speak up for civil liberties, even when other  voices fall silent in the land.  

 All Australians should keep the star of the law before them. It is a national  icon. We should never cease to take our bearings from that star. The star  is on our flag. It is the seven pointed star of the Commonwealth. That star  tells the world about our Constitution. It is a charter that holds in balance  representative parliamentary democracy, sustaining the will of the majority  and also the independent courts which protect everyone, including  minorities. That star reminds us every time we see it of our temperate and  libertarian traditions. It is our duty to preserve those traditions. Think of this  the next time you see the Commonwealth star on the Australian flag. It is  the Commonwealth star of liberty and we should keep it so.  

 These are solemn words. Yet this is an occasion for joy and celebration.  Yeats put pontificating old judges in their place. In the same poem that I  have quoted, he said[15]:  

 "That is no country for old men.  The young in one another's arms, birds in the trees -  Those dying generations - at their song.  The salmon-falls, the mackerel-crowded sea,  Fish, flesh, or fowl, commend all summer long."  

 I commend to the graduates all summer long, and throughout their lives,  joy and personal fulfilment and happiness. I beckon them forward into their  lives in the law. I hope that they will be as fulfilling as mine has been. And 

 my closing words are the same as those I opened with. Remain optimistic.  Remain idealistic all your days. Make the most of the achievement marked  by this graduation. Resolve here and now to render the law and its  profession stronger, truer, braver and more just for your participation in it.  Never doubt that each one of us can make a difference. Make it happen.  Make a difference.  

 Footnotes  

 (*) Justice of the High Court of Australia.  

 [1] W B Yeats, "The Tower - Sailing to Byzantium" in W B Yeats Collected  Poems (1987 reprint, Macmillan, 217).  

 [2] Dietrich v The Queen (1992) 177 CLR 292.  

 [3] Swearing in of Sir Owen Dixon as Chief Justice (1952) 85 CLR xi at p  xiv.  

 [4] cf Al-Kateb v Godwin (2004) 78 ALJR 1099, 208 ALR 124; Baker v The  Queen (2004) 8 ALJR 1483, 210 ALR 1; Fardon v Attorney-General for the  State of Queensland (2004) 78 ALJR 1519, 210 ALR 50.  

 [5] Re Colonel Aird; Ex parte Alpert (2004) 78 ALJR 1451, 209 ALR 311.  

 [6] Muir v The Queen (2004) 78 ALJR 780; 206 ALR 189.  

 [7] Attorney-General (WA) v Marquet (2004) 217 CLR 545.  

 [8] Combet v The Commonwealth [2005] HCA 61.  

 [9] Australian Communist Party v The Commonwealth (1951) 83 CLR 1,  see esp 187-8, 193.  

 [10] Mabo v Queensland [No 2] (1992) 175 CLR 1.  

 [11] P H Russell, Recognising Aboriginal Title: The Mabo Case and  Indigenous Resistance to English-Settler Colonialism, Uni of Toronto,  2005.  

 [12] See eg U v U (2002) 211 CLR 238.  

 [13] cf Croome v Tasmania (1998) 191 CLR 119. The reference is to the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Art 17.1 considered in  Toonen v Australia (1994) 1 Int Hum Rts Reports 97 (No 3).  

 [14] cf A F Mason, "Democracy and the Law. The state of the Australian  political system:, Law Society Journal (NSW), November 2005, 68; G E  Fitzgerald, "Unjust laws an abuse of Power", Australian, 4 November 2005,  14.  

 [15] Yeats, above n 1.   

 

