---
title: "World Refugee Day: a time of courage and change."
date: "2005-06-20"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "VANSTONE, Amanda"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Day, year and decade programs"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211556278
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4KEG6%22
---

 LAURIE FERGUSON MP          SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR REID  20 JUNE 2005 

 

 WORLD REFUGEE DAY:  A TIME OF COURAGE AND CHANGE   

 “Courage is rightly esteemed the first of human qualities because it is the  quality which guarantees all others”  - Winston Churchill   

 Labor’s Shadow Minister for Immigration, Laurie Ferguson expressed his support  for the many refugees who have shown courage in adversity and in the  challenges of embracing a new life in Australia.    

 On today’s World Refugee Day, Laurie Ferguson has saluted the endeavours of  the UNHCR and a myriad of NGO’s helping the victims of Convention related  persecution in Australia, and around the world.    

 A multitude of repressive regimes, military conflicts, and ethnic and religious  divisions demand world compassion, and action. The UNHCR believes that there  are around 17 million refugees. Their crisis is exacerbated by unequal trade  patterns, natural disasters, massive foreign debt and poor governance.    

 Whilst recognising the increase from 12-13,000 in Australia’s upcoming  refugee/humanitarian intake, this is not the whole picture. The deterioration of  foreign aid, and the decrease of the refugee proportions of the total immigration  intake from 18% to 9% under the Howard Government are of concern. 

 

 World Refugee Day provides an opportunity to remember the often disregarded  offshore claimants and Australia’s offshore intake, as well as related settlement  processes. Labor acknowledges and admires the courage of people fleeing 

 persecution and seeks a humane processing system onshore, as well as  transparency and justice for those who under the current Government have been  left to languish on areas outside Australia, or left in legal limbo.   

 

 The Government is not serious about refugees, with a careless attitude towards  potential refugees. Speaking of courage, its time Howard had the courage to face  the failings of his Immigration system which are evidently exposed on a daily  basis. Its time faced the real problem: His Immigration system is a shambles and  fundamentally flawed with bureaucratic bungling; an incompetent Minister; and a 

 malfunctioning Department.  Its time he had the courage to sack his incompetent  Minister and call a Royal Commission.    

 Laurie Ferguson (02) 6277 4920              20 June 2005 

 Aisha Amjad 0413 511 666   

 

