---
title: "The other long term detainees: what can be done?"
date: "2005-02-01"
creators:
  - "Rights Australia"
source: "RIGHTS AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Human rights violations"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Statistics"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211274784
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2BHF6%22
---

  The Other Long Term Detainees -  what can be done? 

  Australia’s detention centres now accommodate many people awaiting removal who  have no realistic prospect of being sent to any other country. W i l e  the migration  laws may make things complex, a simple guide to the human rights standards that  are breached can be found by a quick reading of the Universal Declaration of Human 

  Rights (WD !Iwww ufi ora/,~verviewinghts ntrnt). 

  The Cornelia Rau case has brought welcome attention to the situation of other  people kept in immigration detention for long periods. For many years, widespread  concern has been expressed about fundamental conflicts between the key principles  of human rights and the operation of the Australian immigration detention system.  This paper gives an overview of the current situation, and outlines the elements of a 

  solution which could be swiftly implemented. 

  We do not believe that this case is an isolated one. The mistreatment of people in  immigration detention is a chronic and systemic problem. It is a well documented  principle that ignoring the basic rights of one group of people is the first step towards  losing one’s own rights. 

  in this paper, we outline: 

  1. How many long term detainees?  2. What solutions have been proposed and why?  3. Surely the long term detainees can just go home?  4. What does the High Court say? 

  5. Has the Government rejected our proposals?  6. What are some points raised by the Rau case?  7. What are the solutions, and the issues that the current inquiry won’t address? 

  8. Who should be allies in the Parliament? 

  1. How many long term detainees?  Using figures from DIMIA, which oversees detention in Australia, and the  International Organisation for Migration (IOM), which manages Nauru on DIMIA’s  behalf, some details of the long term detainees can be calculated. 

  The table below indicates the nationalities of those in detention at 2 February 2005  (figures dated 27 January for those on Nauru, but unchanged). 

  The table identifies 198 people who have been detained for over three years,  recognised by their nationality as people who arrived by boats before December  2001. There are no publicly available statistics on the period of detention, and the  three year milestone has been chosen purely because that is the period for those  who arrived by boat, but who are still in detention. We are aware of some detainees  who have been kept for much longer periods, and are concerned about any detention 

  for immigration purposes for substantial periods without judicial review. 

  -1 - 

  Summary of persons in immigration detention facilities (centres and RHPs) by  nationality (excludes those at “other” facilitiesA) (includes Nauru) 

  Nationalities Adult Child Total 3 yrs + 

  Afghanistan 58 2 3 3 66 66 

  Bangladesh 25 0 0 0 25 2 

  Male Female Male Female 

  China, PR 177 48 6 a 239 

  Fiji 26 11 3 2 42 

  India 33 2 1 0 36 

  Indonesia 29 9 4 3 45 

  Iran 71 3 1 0 75 75 

  Iraq 31 2 0 0 33 33 

  Korea, South 19 15 1 1 36 

  Malaysia 20 5 2 2 29 

  Pakistan 19 0 0 0 19 1 

  Philippines 9 3 0 0 12 

  Sri tanka 21 0 0 0 21 21 

  Tonga 9 5 9 9 32 

  Vietnam 43 15 6 4 68 # 

  Other 123 17 6 4 150 

  Nationalities  Tota I 713 137 41 36 927 198 

  “Excludes 69 people held in ”other facilities” such as hospitals, alternative detention pilot  programs and correctional facilities - at 2 February  #36 of these people have been on Christmas Island since being moved there from F’t Hedland  in June 2003 

  The following table shows that, of these 927 people in detention facilities on 2  February 2005, 222 were kept at Baxter. These figures include Ms Rau, one of the 3  women of other nationalities at Baxter on that day). 

  2. What solutions have been proposed and why? 

  In June 2003, when the numbers of long term detainees was higher, but the period in  detention shorter, A Just Australia released a paper recommending some practical  solutions. 

  Entitled “Make the Righf Choice - Humane solutions for long term detainees”, it  outlined:  0 The great majority of people who amved by boat, and are still in on-shore 

  immigration detention, are not asylum seekers awaiting determination of their  claims for protection but rejected applicants awaiting removal.  Among those awaiting deportation are Palestinians. In almost all cases, the  Israeli Government has refused to permit Palestinian asylum seekers to return to 

  -2- 

  Israel or the Occupied Territories. The Federal Court ordered the release of some  of those who have no prospect of immediate return. The Government has  introduced legislation to overturn the Federal Court's release orders - meanwhile  a dozen releasees are living without any financial support. r h e  High Court ruled  in October 2004 that this indefinite detention was lawful, which clarified the law, 

  not the probiern.]  Others are Iranian, including many that if returned face discrimination, but not, in  the Australian Government's view, persecution. Iran rarely takes back unwilling  returnees. The recently announced memorandum of understanding with Iran aims 

  to provide a "credible threat" of involuntary return to Iranian detainees, hoping  that detainees will request voluntary return. These threats and deceptive  inducements are not backed up by any safeguards or monitoring of returnees.  They are being made against people who have been in arbitrary detention so 

  long that their state of mind, legal representation and connection with their  country of origin have all been diminished. [Despite the then Minister's claim in  March 2003 that there was an agreement to allow deportation of these people,  they are still here. We are still convinced that the agreement was not what it  purported to be, but was rather an agreement to discuss various situations on a 

  case by case basis].  So Austraiia's detention centres now accommodate many people awaiting  removal who have no realistic prospect of being sent to any other country. Third  country resettlement options do not appear to have been pursued by the  Government, which has taken a legalistic, simplistic, and extremely dangerous  view - that if they have failed their refugee claims, it is safe to return them to their  country of origin.  The situation of non-removable deportees is an urgent humanitarian crisis that 

  needs to be discussed and resolved satisfactorily. In the normal course of events,  Australia is not required to permit unauthonsed arrivals that are not refugees to  stay, but for the long term detainees, the system has failed. The absence of fair,  credible and rapid determination systems, the policy of detention for the entire 

  period of assessment, and the politicisation, even demonisation, of refugees, all  contribute to this system failure.  Credible, rapid and transparent processing systems would lead to more rapid  return of failed applicants - who in many cases would suffer no more than shame  at the failure of having been rejected. The current delays compound the problems  immeasurably.  The lengthy detention and the trauma that this has caused create an obligation, 

  inciuding for rehabilitation. Humanitarian visas, complementary to refugee visas,  need to be issued to those who the system has failed - even temporary  humanitarian visas in these circumstances, until a more permanent return or  other migration option can be explored.  Those who have committed a crime under Australian law and been sentenced to 

  imprisonment by an Australian court may require detention. But others in  detention awaiting deportation, the great majority, have committed no crime and  their continued detention is unreasonable and inhumane. 

  At that time (June 2003), we recommended that the Government  a. Establish an Asylum Seeker Claims Processing Review Committee - a  committee of experts to review the cases, starting first with the people who have  been detained longest, that is, those who have been detained for over four years. 

  If there are no threats to the security of the community, the detainees must be  permitted some freedom. They cannot be detained indefinitely until  circumstances change to permit their deportation. 

  b. 

  C. 

  d. 

  e. 

  Empower the committee to recommend special humanitarian temporary or  permanent visas, as appropriate in particular circumstances, to rejected asylum  seekers who remain in detention and whose return to their country of origin is not  possible for the immediate future. Although temporary protection visas are  inappropriate for refugees they could be used quite appropriately to peimit the  release of persons awaiting deportation who are unlikely to be able to be  deported within a short time.  Allow the committee to offer third country resettlement, with support from 

  Departmental officials and non-government organisations to set up third-country  options on a case-by-case basis.  Do not force asylum seekers who have been in long-term detention to return  home and refrain from actively promoting the return of asylum seekers unless  and until there are fundamental, durable and effective changes of circumstances  in countries of origin. 

  Immediately bring those on Nauru to Australia and include them in the processes  of the Asylum Seeker Claims Processing Review Committee. 

  3. Surely the long term detainees can just go home? 

  The Government argues that these people are in detention only as long as they  choose to be -that they can return “home” at any time. The Government keeps them  in maximum security, cut-off from scrutiny, threatens them with deportation, opposes  their legal applications, and gives them no option but to stay or go. Friends and 

  advocates for these detainees keep urging them to fight on - exploring legal  avenues, appealing to Ministerial discretion, in some cases, advising them to protest  through hunger-strike. 

  ‘Stay or go” might be an easy sounding set of options, but it ignores crucial points 

  Among those who have been determined not to be refugees, there are  nevertheless many with real and well-founded fear of persecution on return  home. So the choice to “go” is not easily open to them.  Among the long-term detainees are some who do not have the choice to “go” 

  since there is no other country which recognises their citizenship to which they  can be repatriated.  The experience of the long term detention has damaged the judgement of the  detainees - mental illness, depression, pride, fear, unreliable or mistrusted 

  information about their home circumstances, and chronic commitment to their  claims - their story - whether true or false to begin with.  The remaining long term detainees have seen thousands of others eventually  given permanent or temporary refugee status - and there is a spark of hope, 

  fanned by their supporters, that they might too if they stick it out. So the “go”  option is not that likely for these who remain. 

  0 

  0 

  More importantly, the “stay” option involves an abandonment of responsibility from  Government to fundamental human rights standards. Rights to liberty, fair and rapid  assessment, judicial review, presumption of innocence, special consideration for  children - all went out the window into the desert some time ago. 

  Hofding people in detention simply as a deterrent to others and to maintain the  “integrity” of the refugee program - and to continue to keep these same individuals  for years on end, constitutes arbitrary detention. The independent expert bodies, set  up to monitor the human rights treaties that Australia signed up to, have concluded  this. 

  -4- 

  4. What does the High Court say? 

  Even the High Court, in finding that immigration detention was lawful as long as the  government said that it was planning to remove people one day, expressed concern  that this power was in breach of human rights standards. As noted in a  Commonwealth Parliamentary Library Research Brief, The High Court and indefinite  detention (Parliamentary Library, 16 November 2004): 

  This is confirmed by the decision in AI-Khateb and AI Khafaji. The majority  rejected the idea that immigration detention laws were limited to what was  ‘reasonably capable of being seen as necessary’. As long as the laws were  for a purpose related to the ‘aliens’ or immigration powers in the Constitution,  it did not matter whether they were ‘unjust or contrary to basic human rights’ 

  (Justice McHugh), contravened the ICCPR (Justice Hayne) or infringed the  common law’s ‘fundamental and ancient‘ protection of personal liberty  (Justice Callinan).  Justice McHugh said the outcome for Mr AI-Khateb and Mr AI Khafaji was 

  ‘tragic’and suggested the remedy lay in adopting a bill of rights for Australia.  Without this there was little the High Court could do about indefinjte detention:  “As long as the detention is for the purpose of deportation or preventing aliens  fmm entering Australia or the Australian community, the justice or wisdom of  the course taken by the Parliament is not examinable in this or any other  domestic court. It is not for courts, exercising federal jurisdiction, to determine 

  whether the course taken by Padiarnent is unjust or contrary to basic human  rights”. 

  This recent case on indefinite detention, was one of a number of others pursued over  the years by lawyers with great publicity, which have failed for their clients, but have  had the effect of confirming several of the migration laws. It is now clear that the  Government can largely do whatever it wants with people it deciares to be “unlawfui 

  non-citizens”. And because its actions have been found to be lawful, the Government  considers them to be justified. Deportation with chemical or physical restraints - in  plain language, injecting drugs and using gaffer tape and handcuffs - is lawful.  Intimidation, lying, neglect, abuse of children, denial of care - are all lawful. 

  Worst of all, there is no higher authority or ticking clock. The Minister doesn’t wake  up each morning worrying that she has to account for 200 prisoners still in detention  for another day. 

  5. Has the Government rejected our proposals? 

  We’ve put the same proposal to the Minister and the Department a number of times  over the last year - let NGOs help sort out the last couple of hundred long term  detainees - starting with the ones detained for over three years. 

  The lack of concern or urgency for these individual prisoners is brutal. 

  Through meetings and correspondence with the Minister since a public stoush over  the Nauru hunger strike, New Year 2004, we have been proposing that there should  be alternatives considered to the “stay or go” approach. 

  Minister Vanstone agreed to meet with Howard Glenn and Ian Anderson of A Just  Austraiia, and the meeting was held on 12 February 2004. The meeting discussed  her decision to review the Afghan detainees on Nauru (which led to some 

  -5- 

  reconsidered refugee status for many) and also had some outcomes for Iraqi people  on Temporary Protection Visas; other issues were referred to a future meeting with  Departmental officials. 

  The meeting with Departmental Officials was held on 10 June 2004. We proposed to  work with an Iranian NGO to explore whether there was any prospect of monitoring  and assisting safe return of Iranian detainees, if the Department would agree to  support this trial. Undertakings were given to respond on this issue. 

  On 21 June 2004, we wrote to Minister Vanstone, specifically seeking agreement to  develop alternatives for the long term detainees, arising from the Departmental  meeting . 

  On 21 September 2004, we received a reply from a Departmental officer apologising  that the letter hadn’t been dealt with, and that the government couldn’t answer now  that it was pre-election period 

  On 25 October, Howard Glenn wrote back to Minister Vanstone, congratulating her  on her reappointment, and raising the same issues for discussion. 

  On Friday 12 November, “Alex” from Minister Vanstone’s office rang to say that  Minister would like Howard Glenn to meet with Principal Advisor John Nation and  Senior Advisor Paul Giles to discuss letter, on first day of Parliament sitting, 16  November. As that date was not convenient, it was agreed that I would ring back and 

  make a time for the next sittings. 

  Since that time, no return of phone calls despite many messages to Paul Giles and to  John Nation. When this raised in December sittings with other Government MPs -  “oh they never return our calls either!” 

  I O  January 2005, letter from a junior Departmental official “noting” representations in 

  our letter to Minister. 

  6. What are some points raised by the Rau case?  0 We don’t have Federal prisons - and for very good reason. If we were to, then  one would want a whole range of checks and balances established - such as  Official Visitors - professional medical services, etc - not to mention judicial 

  review of sentencing, presumption of innocence and detention as last resort.  Having Baxter, a maximum security facility in the SA desert, without any of these  checks and balances - has given public servants a lot of responsibility, without  any accountability. With an accidental Federal prison in the mix, missing persons 

  registers don’t work.  There are no Inspectors, Visitors, and really low level commercial management  and health management contractors, under the supervision of pretty low level  public servants.  The media commentary started as “how can an Aussie have been treated like an 

  illegal immigrant?” Well as we said at the time of launching the A Just Australia  campaign - if government gets away with abuse of human rights like this for  these people, it‘ll be doing the same to us one day. That‘s probably just  philosophical and rhetorical - except that it’s starting to happen. 

  But more disturbing is why we’re treating illegal immigrants like this anyway -just  because our Constitution allows “aliens” to be treated any which way - standards  of decency and human rights laws don’t. 

  0 

  e 

  -6- 

  0 There’s at least 198 people who’ve been in detention now for over three years -  the remaining boat people of 2001. 54 of them are on Nauru - docile thanks to  massive doses of anti-depressants and other treatments - and most of the rest in  Baxter. 

  Of the 222 in Baxter on 2 February (see above) - 44 of them were described as  “other nationalities” - Ms Rau was included in that figure that day - who are the  rest? 

  e 

  7. What are the solutions, and the issues that the current inquiry won’t  address?  We’ve put the same proposal to the Minister and the Department a number of times  over the last year - let NGOs help sort out the last couple of hundred long term 

  detainees -the ones over three years to start with. 

  The remaining Afghans on Nauru and in Australia; the Iraqis and the other state-less  and assorted nationals, could face a simple process, based on the principle that “if  we didn’t owe them protection when they arrived, we owe them something now that  we’ve detained them for over three years”. 

  A simple review process, perhaps conducted with a cross-party appointed panel,  could establish whether, after all this time, it is safe to return them, or not. If yes, then  involve NGOs and advocates in a return plan, if not, release them into community  care, with an individual rehabilitation and monitoring plan. The Minister has very wide 

  discretionary powers, plus a Parliament that will give her anything else she needs if  necessary. And a community that already thinks that these issues have been  resolved so won’t oppose this becoming a reality. 

  It is now clear that the Government can largely do whatever it wants with people it  declares to be “unlawful non-citizens”. And because its actions have been found to  be lawful, the Government considers them to be justified. Deportation with chemical  or physical restraints - in plain language, injecting drugs and using gaffer tape and  handcuffs - is lawful. Intimidation, lying, neglect, abuse of children, denial of care - 

  are all lawful. Worst of all, there is no higher authority or ticking clock, no bill of rights,  or international sanction. 

  We’ve never believed the former Minister‘s claim that he had negotiated a treaty with  Iran to allow for the removal of all the Iranian detainees - and with almost two years  since that claim and still 73 Iranians in detention, that view hasn’t changed. 

  We proposed exploring whether NGOs in Australia, working with NGOs in Iran, can  make monitored arrangements for those who choose to return - offering a safer  landing than the current “piss-off or we’ll deport you anyway” nonsense. With the  deterioration of relations with Iran, it may be too late for this. 

  The 21 Sri Lankans who are sticking it out in detention with appeals and hunger  strikes might have a better sense of their possible future back in Sri Lanka if some  NGOs worked between the two countries to explain how the lie of the land has  changed since the recent cease fire. 

  8. Who should be aliies in the Parliament?  During the 2004 Election, candidates for seats in the House of Representatives and  the Senate, from all political parties, were asked by A Just Australia - directly and  through follow-up by individual supporters - whether they would sign the “Refugee 

  Guarantee”. 

  -7- 

  The text of the Refugee Guarantee read: 

  I provide this guarantee, that whatever else I am involved in, I will support the  effort to:  ensure that the mistreatment of refugees and asylum seekers for political  purposes never happens again; 

  work for a just refugee program based on the human rights standards that  Australia has developed and endorsed;  remove the remaining children and their families from immigration  detention; 

  provide a secure future to proven refugees;  0 immediately review the cases of all asylum seekers detained for longer 

  than 90 days, aiming to provide non-custodial supervision or options,  unless a court is convinced that there is a threat to the community from  that individual. 

  The following Senafors signed the guarantee: 

  Senator Andrew Bartlett, Queensland, Democrats  Senator John Cherry, Queensland, Democrats *  Senator Trish Crossin, Northern Territory, ALP  Senator Brian Greig, Western Australia, Democrats*  Senator Gary Humphries, Australian Capital Territory, Liberal  Senator Joe Ludwig, Queensland, ALP  Senator Aden Ridgeway, New South Wales, Democrats*  *(term finishes 30 June 2005) 

  The following candidates who signed the Refugee Guarantee were elected to the  Senate for terms commencing on 1 July 2005: 

  Anne McEwen, South Australia, ALP  Rachel Siewert, Western Australia, Greens  Chris Milne, Tasmania, Greens  Helen Polley, Tasmania, ALP 

  The following candidates who signed fhis guarantee were elected: 

  Bird, Ms Sharon, Member for Cunningham, ALP  Burke, Ms Anna, Member for Chisholm, ALP  George, Ms Jennie, Member for Throsby, ALP  Hall, Ms Jill, Member for Shortland, ALP 

  Hoare, Ms Kelly, Member for Charlton, ALP  King, Ms Catherine, Member for Ballarat, ALP  Lawrence, The Hon Dr Carmen, Member for Fremantle; ALP  Macklin, Ms Jenny, Member for Jagajaga, ALP  McMullan, Mr Bob, Member for Fraser, ALP  Plibersek, Ms Tanya, Member for Sydney, ALP  Sercombe, Mr Bob, Member for Maribyrnong, ALP  Smith, Mr Stephen, Member for Perth, ALP  Tanner, Mr Lindsay, Member for Melbourne, ALP 

  296 candidates for the House of Representatives and 46 candidates for the Senate  signed the Refugee Guarantee. 3,874 supporters scattered across every electorate  in the country also put their names to it. 

  -8- 

  It should be noted that there were many members of the House of Representatives  and some Senators, who have worked consistently with A Just Australia on the  issues, but who did not sign the guarantee, and some continuing Senators not up for  re-election who were not asked. It should also be noted that efforts to follow-up  questionnaires were patchy across the country, and weak towards minor parties. It 

  may be that many other candidates would have signed if pressed. Those who  received an award from A Just Australia, for their appreciation of the refugee and  asylum seeker issues, and who are currently in the Parliament are:  Bruce Baird, Judi Moylan, Petro Georgiou, John Forrest, Kay Hull, Patrick Secker,  Marise Payne, Andrew Bartlett, Penny Wong, Carmen Lawrence, Duncan Kerr,  Tanya Piibersek, Julia Gillard, Nicola Roxon, Jennie George and Stephen Smith. 

  We believe that the reports of Backbench MP unease wifh the handling of the  Rau case is an opporfuniiy f o  consolidate bipartisan understanding of the  human rights of all detainees. 

  Prepared by Howard Glenn, Executive Director, Rights Australia (Formerly National  Director, A Just Australia). 

  Rights Australia, PO Box 559, Surry Hills NSW 2010  www . rightsaustralia.org .au 

  -9- 

