---
title: "Immigration culture club will do repeat performances."
date: "2005-07-17"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Immigration policy"
  - "Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs portfolio"
  - "Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee"
  - "Migration Act 1958"
  - "ALVAREZ, Vivian"
  - "RAU, Cornelia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211280680
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PPOG6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs 

 Dated: 17 July 2005

 Press Release Number: 05/373

 Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Immigration Culture Club will do Repeat Performances  UNTIL THE MAJOR PARTIES PROVIDE A DIFFERENT TUNE   

 Democrats Deputy Leader, Andrew Bartlett, says both the major parties have to commit to  reforming the Migration Act and mandatory detention if they genuinely want to fix the culture of the  Immigration Department and put an end to the gross injustices suffered by Cornelia Rau and  Vivian Solon.   

 "Statements over this weekend by both Immigration Minister Vanstone and her Labor Party  counterpart Tony Burke show they are continuing to avoid the real issue. The culture of the  Department is driven by the law and policy - until these change, the culture will not."   

 Senator Bartlett welcomed news that Australias longest serving immigration detainee, Peter  Qasim, will finally be released after nearly 7 years in detention.   

 "This is very welcome news for Peter Qasim, but it doesnt alter the fact that our laws still enable  this injustice to happen again and again. I first visited Peter Qasim in detention over three years  ago it is a disgrace it has taken this long for him to achieve freedom.    

 "There are also well over 100 hundred other long-term detainees who have been unnecessarily  imprisoned for years."   

 "We normally require a charge, a trial, due process and a legally qualified Judge to be involved  before taking away peoples freedom for extended periods of time, but the Migration Act gives this  power to public servants and politicians, while specifically precluding natural justice and  independent review in a range of areas.    

 "Any group of people who are given enormous powers like these without proper checks and  balances will commit injustices.    

 "The Prime Minister is the main songwriter for the Immigration culture club, with his 2001 hit We  will decide who comes into this country still resonating throughout the Department.    

 "However, the Labor Party has also played a significant role as a backing band, continuing to  support mandatory detention and assisting to force changes to the law through the Senate  allowing extreme measures such as the Pacific Solution and temporary refugee visas.   

 "It is time for both major parties to change their tune and recognise it is the Immigration Act itself  that is dysfunctional and has completely lost the normal checks and balances on misuse of power  that we expect in the law in a democratic country.    

 "The Senate Committee Inquiry into the administration of the Migration Act, initiated by the  Democrats last month, should play a valuable role in identifying some of the changes that may be  necessary," Senator Bartlett concluded. 

 

 Printed: 18 July 2005 

 Authorised by: J. Wood, 711 South Road, Black Forest, SA 5035.  http://www.democrats.org.au/news/index.htm

 _

