---
title: "New community arrangements for families in detention."
date: "2005-07-28"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Alternative detention measures (Immigration)"
  - "Family"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Visas"
  - "Nongovernment organisations"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211281159
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OMSG6%22
---

  Media Release  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for lmmiqration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs  I Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Indigenous Affairs - - ~ ~ ~  ~ - _ ~  ~ 93.05 Thursday, 28‘h July 2005 

  New community arrangements for families in detention 

  Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, announced that families in detention had today started moving  into residence determination arrangements within the community as a result of her department’s, and others’  hard work and determination to put in place appropriate arrangements for these families. 

  “As of this morning there were 42 children from 20 families in immigration detention centres. By the end of  this week, there will be none,” the Minister said. 

  “ I  can confirm that seven families have, or are in the process of, moving into the community today from 

  Villawood in Sydney. Some of these families may initially move into temporary accommodation in the  community, given the difficulty of finding appropriate housing in the Sydney market as quickly as possible.  However, this will ensure they are removed from detention centres as soon as possible.” 

  The Minister said that when the Prime Minister announced the changes for families in detention on 17 June,  there were 59 children in immigration detention. 

  “However, since then, 14 children have been granted visas, two are in alternative detention and one has  turned 18. Those in alternative detention will be converted to residence determination arrangements by the  end of the week,” Senator Vanstone said. 

  V/ith this new, flexible approach for families, the Government is maintaining its strong stance on border  control while being sensitive to the special needs of families in detention. 

  “The residence determination arrangements have been put in place in partnership with non-government  organisations, which will be funded by my department to take care of housing and living expenses for the  families. 

  “The NGOs will also provide case officers to assist these families and to ensure they have access to  appropriate services.” 

  “I would like to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the Australian Red Cross and the other NGOs with  whom they are working for the care role they are playing and their continuing commitment to working with us  and the families. 

  “Under the new arrangements, families will live in the community at a specified address, with reporting  conditions, while remaining available to the department.” 

  While there is nothing to prevent the families talking to the media, the Minister asked that their privacy and  dignity be respected. 

  Senator Vanstone said that using her new Ministerial intervention powers she had decided to grant  Temporary Protection Visas to the remaining Christmas Island caseload. 

  There are currently 11 people, including three children, on Christmas Island whose visas will take effect from  tomorrow, when they are expected to arrive in Perth. 

  In addition, there is one adult currently in alternative detention in Perth, while another is on a Bridging Visa.  Both will also receive TPVs. 

  Minister’s media contact: 041 7 445 886 

