---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview of the Leader of the Opposition with Jenny Macklin: Kensington Primary School, Melbourne: Respect in schools; Mark Stewart; Telstra; US Jet Fighter incident; Senator McGauran & Senator Heffernan's finger gestures."
date: "2005-08-12"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Macklin, Jenny"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "STEWART, Mathew"
  - "Multicultural education"
  - "Schools"
  - "Social values"
  - "Islam"
  - "Nongovernment schools"
  - "al Qaeda"
  - "Telstra Corporation"
  - "Privatisation"
  - "Australians overseas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211281814
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EGYG6%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP WITH JENNY MACKLIN, SHADOW MINISTER  FOR EDUCATION, TRAINING, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH, KENSINGTON  PRIMARY SCHOOL, MELBOURNE,    

 12 AUGUST 2005   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects: Respect in schools; Mark Stewart; Telstra; US Jet Fighter  incident; Senator McGauran & Senator Heffernan’s finger gestures   

 BEAZLEY:  I’m here with my Deputy Leader, who is also our Education  spokesperson, in this school.  I’m grateful to Kensington School, which is a  fabulous example of multicultural Australia, and also a fabulous example of  teaching children respect and having that integrated into the school curriculum.     

 What we’re calling for today is this: the Prime Minister must include schooling as  a key element of the counter-terrorist strategy when he has his meeting with the  State Premiers, when he has his meeting with the Muslim leadership.  The  school curriculum and school values must be a focal point of the conversation.   

 

 It’s important that kids are taught by their parents respect for themselves, respect  for their parents, and respect for the community.  It’s important that teachers  teach the children who are in their care respect for themselves, respect for their  institutions, and respect for the community.   

 These are critical to Australian values.  The value of respect is important to all  Australian values.  It must be part of the process by which we engender, in our  community, an atmosphere that does not provide a basis for encouraging an  outlook which encourages terrorism.     

 Now, there are lots of things that you can do to ensure that respect is part of the  values stream that goes through a school curriculum.  We’ve just witnessed as  we’ve gone around the classrooms here a school with an excellent program  doing exactly that.  There are lots or things you can think of.     

 Firstly, of course, the teachers themselves and the parents who serve on the  school councils need to absorb teaching respect as a primary component of their  expectations of school.  Teachers themselves will need in-service training to  assist them in that process.  Many schools do it very well.  Now it needs to 

 become available more broadly and it’s tremendously important it gets included  in all schools, but Muslim schools and Christian schools as well.    

 It has to be said that under our system some schools are uni-cultural.  It’s  tremendously important therefore that a program of respect includes, within it, a  buddy system.  It would be a terrific thing if the kids in Muslim schools and the 

 kids in Christian schools had an opportunity, in a formal way, to meet together to  learn about each other, to learn about the need to respect each other’s culture, to  learn about the need to respect each other’s community.  It’s a very important  thing that this now starts to take place.     

 It’s so important that it would be entirely legitimate for the Government to see it  as part of what standards are expected when they pass out taxpayers’ dollars  through the education system.  It would be very important to start to incorporate  within their expectations of what schools will do, as they pass out taxpayers’  money, that they will reinforce the community in which the taxpayers live by  teaching those values of respect.   

 

 Now, as I said at the outset, Jenny and I wanted to be here in a school that  already does the job.  I congratulate Mark Ryan (school principal) and his  teachers here on an extraordinary performance, in integrating into our community  a large number of refugees who are the children of refugees who are from  Islamic countries.     

 What you see in the classroom here is the ideal in terms of ensuring that we  respect each other’s cultures and we respect each other.  However, of course  this is a public school which is multicultural.  There are a lot of schools which  aren’t but that doesn’t matter.  Programs can be devised for them and it’s  important that they are.   

 JOURNALIST: Is this a policy that’s specifically aimed at Islamic schools?   

 BEAZLEY:  It’s aimed at all schools. But the context in which we’re now  holding these discussions and launching this initiative of course is in the context  of what is going to be a Prime Minister’s conference with Premiers on the subject  of terrorism more broadly and what our responses should be, and the Prime  Minister’s announcement that he intends to meet with Muslim leadership.  So,  though, this of course applies to all schools, not just Muslim schools, it’s  obviously being floated at a time when that’s an issue. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Is it your concern that some kids in some Muslim schools  don’t actually get that opportunity to mingle with children of other faiths?   

 BEAZLEY:  The schools are beautiful schools. The schools have got  dedicated teachers and the schools teach good values but I think it’d be an  additive of some significance that included within their curriculum or their school 

 activities, things like buddy programs so they had an opportunity to meet their  fellow Australians. I suggested the possibility of buddying with a Christian school.   But they could buddy with the local public school, whatever, just the opportunity  to spread the idea of respect, to spread the idea of tolerance.   

 JOURNALIST: Can you really enforce the idea of respect, though?   

 BEAZLEY:  You have to create an atmosphere.  If you create an  atmosphere where respect is inherent, respect for yourself, respect for your  community, respect for other cultures - you clearly create an atmosphere in  which it is more likely to be imbued in the hearts and minds of the students who  are involved.   

 JOURNALIST: It’s emerged that former Australian Army private, Mark  Stewart, is the key suspect as the masked terrorist with the Australian accent.   What course of action do you think should be taken with him? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  I’ll take this one and then I’ll see if we’re exhausted on the  respect front and then we’ll take the broader questions.   

 I’m not in a position to know whether or not he is the person.  His mum says no,  other people seem to be saying yes.  I actually do think that the intelligence  studies ought to be done privately, that you’re more likely to be effective when  you do things privately.  So, I don’t know if he is the person involved.  Obviously  somebody is involved and perhaps if that person had been taught and gone  through the system with a deliberate effort to inculcate a sense of respect in him  in the community in which he was part of, he wouldn’t be pursuing these criminal  activities.  But who it is, we don’t know.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that this buddy system you’re proposing would  have equal benefits for young Muslims and also young Christians?   

 BEAZLEY:  I would hope so.  If you’re teaching respect you’re not just  saying ‘this part of the community ought to be showing respect’, you’re saying  that this is how we ought to treat each other.  So, I would hope that that would be  the impact.    

 JOURNALIST: What schools would it range from?   

 BEAZLEY:  Everyone.  We’ve got a summit coming up in which they’re  going to think through various problems.  They’re going to talk a lot about laws.  I  hope they’ll actually talk about practical measures and this is one of the practical  measures they should talk about.   

 MACKLIN:  For example, there’s a Muslim school not far from here up in  Coburg, the King Khalid School, and they already have this buddy system with a 

 Jewish school and a Catholic school and so there are practical examples of this  happening.  Of course, in public schools like this terrific school in Kensington,  where it can happen in the classroom because you’ve got a wide range of  children in the classroom already, but there have been excellent examples of  schools trying to do this across different religions.  So, there already are practical 

 ways in which other schools can follow their example.   

 BEAZLEY:  What we’re talking about here is taking best practice and  making it universal.  We don’t have to start from the ground up here.  Already in  Australia there are examples of what can be done which, if made general, would  do the job.   

 JOURNALIST: If schools aren’t teaching respect, should the Government  withhold funding?   

 BEAZLEY:  That’s putting the cart before the horse.  The Government  should go to school and say ‘this is what we expect of you’ and then they should  assume the best, that they will respond sensibly to that.  I believe they would. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think many parents would be angry at that sort of  enforcement if they’ve sent their children specifically to a private school?   

 BEAZLEY:  I think it’s very important that everybody who sends their  children to school, all families, understand why we would do this.  But we do  expect in this country that we tolerate each other and we respect each other and  that it’s a fine thing for a school system to, as well as teaching the basics well, to  teach a set of cultural values which you’re prepared to make a financial  contribution to ensuring that they are taught.  So that’s the Islamic religion or the  Christian religion or the Jewish religion - inculcated into the curriculum.  But we  say, as a community, there’s something more that we want. That’s fine, that’s all  part of our tolerance - but we also want emanating from all our schools and from  all our parents, respect for the whole community and the whole community, if you  like, setting a standard on one value which ought to be taught, many other values  will be as well, but one value which ought to be taught - respect. 

 

 JOURNALIST: On another issue, the Government says it’s planning to fine  tune telecommunications and competition issues there.  What should happen?   

 BEAZLEY:  The Government should fix Telstra, not sell it, simple as that.    The dissident Members of Parliament should obey the electorates who elected  them and the promises that they made to them.  And the promises that people  like Barnaby Joyce and the Queensland Nationals made was, ‘we’re not going to  sell Telstra’.  We in the Labor Party say don’t sell it, fix it.    It’s not just a question of regional Australia.  You go around the metropolitan  areas of Melbourne or anywhere else in our community and you’ll find yawning  gaps in broadband and in services that everybody ought to be entitled to receive.  

 You will not achieve the services we all need and the roll out of the program that  the boss of Telstra was talking about yesterday if you sell it.   

 JOURNALIST: It’s emerged that a weapon from a US jet fighter has  dropped on a Northern Territory weapons range.  Is this of concern, and if so,  what should be done?   

 BEAZLEY:  Well, it wouldn’t be bad if it dropped on the weapons range  but as I understand it, it missed the weapons range and dropped on someone  else.  That’s not a good thing to happen and obviously due care has to be  exercised when there is an exercise taking place.  Generally speaking, it is.   Luckily, it seems that nobody was hurt.  I would think that people go back to the  drawing board on this one and make sure it doesn’t happen again.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Senator McGauran’s finger gesture was  inappropriate in the Senate?   

 BEAZLEY:  Well, it certainly wasn’t respect.  It certainly was not respect  and I guess it doesn’t make it terribly easy for people like myself to stand up here  and talk about respect when there are blokes behaving badly in Parliament.  So,  perhaps Mr McGauran and Mr Heffernan - I understand is in it as well - would  benefit from the authors of the curriculum that would be developed here.  They’d  certainly benefit from a visit to this school, I can tell you, polite kids.   

 

 ends    

 

