---
title: "Minister to speak at conference on culture and care."
date: "2005-11-18"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Australian ethnic groups"
  - "Catholic Church"
  - "Welfare measures"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211286492
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ESZH6%22
---

  Hon JO-HN COBB MP'  Minister- f o r  C i t i z e n s h i p  a n d  M u l t i c u l t u r a ' l  A f f a i r s  

  MnVISTER TO SPEAK AT CONIZWNCE ON CULTURE GND CARE 

  1.8 November 2005 

  The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb, will speak abour the Australian  Government's genemus settlement services at the One in Christ Jesus national conl-emce on Pastoral  Care in a Culturally-Diverse Austdia, this Frid3y. 

  "As 40 per cent of Catholics itl. Austnlia were either born overseas or one of their parents  immigrated, the need for multicultuI-dj. pastoral worlces has never been greater," said Minister Cobb. 

  The conference is being organhed by the Auslxtlian Catholic Migrant and Refugee Office  (ACMRO), which was established in 1995 by the Australian Catholic Bishops' Coaference. ACMRO  aims to be the official church voice on issues relating to miganrs and refugees, arul to make  appmpriate representations to governments and other bodies. 

  "The Australian Government provides a range of services to help our new entrants settle successfully,  includhg mainstream services like health, education (including english languge training) and  employment. The main aim of these services is to enable new arrivals to become active members of  Australian society*. 

  "Australia's settlement services are ammg the 

  The l3rector of ACMRO, Father John Murphy, will lead the conference with speaken including:  Mr Benjamin Chow (Chairman of the Council for Multicultural Australia)  cardinal Stephen Fumio Hamao (President of the Pontifical Council for Pastoral Care of Migrants  and Itinerant People) and 

  .Father Murizio Pettena (Coordinator of the Gmre for Multicultural Pastoral Carz). 

  There are about five M i o n  Catholics in Australia comprising 27 per cent of the population  according to the 2001 Census. 

  The conference will be held at the Randwick Racecourse Function Centre over Thurshy and Friday,  17 and 18 November, and should be of particul ar interest to priests, religious and ay peopIe involved  in the pastoral care of migrants and refugees. 

  Minister Cobb will address delegates at the lucch on Friday. 

  'Through this support, migrants and Efbgees develop a sense of belonging and are able to contribute  to their c m u n i t y  socially and economically," Mr Cobb said. 

  Media Enquiries Toni Chesscln 02 6277 7890 or Mob 0418 415 597 

