---
title: "First offers of new removal pending visa to be made."
date: "2005-05-30"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Visas"
  - "Repatriation"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279281
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8A9G6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 First Offers of New Removal Pending Visa to be Made 

 VPS 066/2005

 Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, said she had today decided the first offers of the new Removal Pending Visa would be made to 17  people.

 The group comprises 10 long term immigration detainees and 7 people who are already in the community on bridging visas. The new visa will  extend to those people in the community, access to a range of benefits such as access to Centrelink special benefit and the right to work.

 ‘I am still awaiting further information in the case of four additional people.

 ‘As a result of my decision today, my department will now make contact with the people affected and formally put the offer to them. There is no  time limit on how long they can consider the offer.

 ‘This visa, which I announced in principle in late March and was drafted in April, came into effect earlier this month. It is available to people who  have been cooperating with my department’s efforts to remove them but who, for a variety of reasons, cannot be removed in the near future and  who have also concluded all legal and review processes.

 ‘After this initial round of offers, I expect that I will be able to consider offering the visa to other long term detainees, as they complete legal and  review processes.

 ‘My department will continually review the detention caseload to identify and bring to my attention for consideration, further cases where it may  be appropriate for me to offer individuals the new visa.

 ‘There is no formal application process for the new visa and access is dependent on an invitation from the Minister. Grant of the visa is subject to  character checks.’

 The Minister said the key element of the Government’s policy to remove people with no lawful basis to remain in Australia remains unaffected by  these new measures which apply only to those people found not be owed protection, who have exhausted their appeal processes and who, through  no fault of their own, cannot return to their home country in the short term.

 30 May 2005

 See:

