---
title: "International Literacy Day: fighting poverty through education."
date: "2005-09-08"
creators:
  - "Billson, Bruce"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283011
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VC8H6%22
---

 

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 The Hon Bruce Billson MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs    

 AA 05 76                                                                                                                  8 September 2005 

 International Literacy Day - fighting poverty through education   

 More than 860 million people in the world are illiterate, including one fifth of people aged over 15,  and 200 million in our neighbourhood, East Asia and the Pacific, the Parliamentary Secretary to the  Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Bruce Billson, said today on International Literacy Day.   

 ‘Basic education is the right of all people and Australia is committed to helping people in  developing countries get better access to education and training,’ Mr Billson said.   

 ‘Literacy is a powerful tool in the fight against poverty and investment in mass education,  particularly at the primary level, is one of the most effective ways to achieve sustainable  development.    

 ‘Australia is also committed to the Millennium Development Goals, which includes achieving  universal primary education and we have spent more than $280 million on basic education since  1999.   

 ‘Without the ability to read and write people cannot participate fully in the community and access  the benefits of a society striving to achieve its economic and social potential.   

 ‘Australia’s overseas aid agency, AusAID, is increasing literacy in the Asia-Pacific region by  supporting partner countries’ school systems and through adult literacy programs.   

 ‘In Indonesia, AusAID programs are currently helping 2,144 schools and improving the quality and  accessibility of basic education. This includes funding for the Creating Learning Communities for  Children initiative which is giving more than 105,000 Indonesian children a brighter future through  education.   

 ‘In Papua New Guinea, AusAID is providing nearly $40 million this year to support further  educational reforms which have seen adult literacy climb to nearly 64 per cent, student enrolments  increase by 55 per cent and the development of a more relevant curriculum with better-trained  teachers.     

 ‘Australia has committed more than $1.3 billion for education in the past five years and continues  to work closely with countries in our region to improve school and adult literacy programs and give  communities in need a better standard of education.   

 ‘To mark International Literacy Day, I am also pleased to launch a publication on the role of  literacy in Australia’s aid program,’ Mr Billson said.   

 To access the publication, Australian aid - Approaches to literacy, please visit the AusAID  website: www.ausaid.gov.au    

 Media inquiries: Shane Fairlie (Mr Billson’s office) 0408 680 442     AusAID  (Public  Affairs)  0417  680  590 

 Media releases and speeches are available on AusAID’s internet site www.ausaid.gov.au   

 Australian aid: Approaches to literacy September 2005

 www.ausaid.gov.au

 ‘WITH 95 PER CENT OF THE WORLD’S ILLITERATE  PEOPLE LIVING IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, ILLITERACY  IS A MAJOR OBSTACLE TO ECONOMIC, POLITICAL  AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT. LITERACY IS AN IMPORTANT  WEAPON IN THE FIGHT AGAINST POVERTY. THE ABILITY TO  READ AND WRITE OPENS NEW HORIZONS FOR PEOPLE,  THEIR FAMILIES AND THEIR COMMUNITIES. COMBATING  ILLITERACY IS ONE WAY AUSTRALIA IS HELPING PEOPLE  IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES PARTICIPATE MORE FULLY IN  SOCIETY AND ACCESS THE BENEFITS OF DEVELOPMENT’.’

 Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade Alexander Downer MP

 THE FACTS

 Throughout the world 860 million people, or one in five people aged 

 15 years or over, are illiterate. Seventy per cent of these people live in sub-Saharan Africa, South and West Asia, the Arab States and North Africa. 

 East Asia and the Pacific contain an illiterate population of almost 200 

 million people. Current indications are that progress in improving literacy 

 rates is slow and that by 2015 there will still be 800 million illiterate adults 

 in the world. 

 In 2000, over 100 million school-age children were not in school; 57 per 

 cent of them were girls and 94 per cent were in developing countries. 

 The Millennium Development Goals have set a difficult target - by 

 2015 all children everywhere should be able to complete a full course 

 of primary schooling. 

 There is a growing body of evidence 

 to suggest that literacy increases the 

 productivity and earning potential of a 

 population, and therefore can directly 

 reduce poverty. 

 A World Bank study found that in Thailand, 

 for example, farmers with four years of 

 schooling were more likely to use new 

 fertilisers and other inputs than those with 

 lower levels of schooling. This difference 

 is attributed to the fact that better educated 

 farmers absorb new information better and 

 are more innovative.

 In addition, there is evidence to suggest 

 that literate people are more aware of 

 health and nutrition issues and that literate 

 women tend to have fewer and healthier 

 children. It is also possible that literacy in 

 one generation leads to greater literacy and 

 reduced poverty in the next. 

 Low levels of adult literacy are largely 

 a result of historical - and continuing 

 - weaknesses in national education systems. 

 Many countries have failed to provide 

 schooling to all their children, and the 

 quality of the education provided can be so 

 poor that a significant proportion of children 

 who complete their schooling still cannot 

 read or write. 

 Poor and marginalised groups, including 

 women and girls, ethnic minorities and 

 remote rural communities, have tended 

 to suffer most from these weaknesses in 

 education, making it more difficult for them 

 to escape poverty. 

 AUSTRALIA’S INTERNATIONAL  LITERACY STRATEGY

 Australia’s development assistance program 

 focuses on Asia and the Pacific - a region 

 with wide variations in literacy rates. Because 

 education and training are fundamental to 

 the development process, Australia aims 

 to assist developing countries to meet the 

 educational needs of their people. 

 Our approaches to education and literacy are 

 guided by individual country circumstances 

 and country-led strategies. 

 Australia provides support to improve 

 literacy through:

 > partner countries’ school systems, and 

 > adult literacy programs. 

 Examples of approaches adopted in 

 AusAID-funded activities that have been 

 successful or innovative in developing 

 countries follow. These are preceded by best 

 practice principles drawn from international 

 literature and Australia’s own experience in 

 implementing literacy-related activities.

 SUPPORT FOR SCHOOL SYSTEMS

 Investment in mass education, particularly 

 at the primary school level and especially 

 for girls, produces the most sustainable 

 development impacts.

 It is estimated that in Indonesia at least 

 15 per cent of school-age children are 

 enrolled in schools within the religious 

 education system. 

 In 2002 this equated to about 5.7 million 

 children enrolled in Islamic day schools 

 (madrasah), which teach the national 

 curriculum, and a further 2.7 million 

 enrolled in Islamic boarding schools. 

 Typically a madrasah pupil is a child of poor 

 parents who live in a rural or remote area 

 and are disadvantaged by the quality of their 

 education. Fifty-one per cent of madrasah 

 junior high school pupils are female. 

 The sheer number of poor children 

 attending Islamic schools in Indonesia 

 makes it imperative that support is provided 

 for both the state and the Islamic education 

 systems. Australia’s Learning Assistance 

 Program for Islamic Schools (LAPIS) 

 provides support for Islamic schools to teach 

 the national curriculum and complements 

 our support for the state education sector. 

 In Samoa two of the main issues in 

 education relate to the quality of educational 

 outcomes and the quality of service delivery. 

 Recent monitoring of literacy results by the 

 Government of Samoa shows a decline in 

 English literacy standards for those currently 

 in or recently leaving the school system. 

 Australian support for the development 

 of a new long-term education strategy 

 should address some of the issues relating 

 to the quality of educational outcomes.  

 The strategy will concentrate efforts in 

 developing a framework for a core primary 

 curriculum with common goals for 

 primary education. It will also include clear 

 guidelines for assessing learning outcomes 

 such as literacy and numeracy skills. 

 In Pakistan female literacy rates in rural 

 communities are as low as 2.4 per cent. For 

 many girls, social and physical access to 

 education remains a major problem. There 

 are fewer schools for girls, fewer teachers 

 to teach in girls schools, and sociocultural 

 barriers that prevent the enrolment of girls. 

 Since 1999 Australia has supported an 

 activity through UNICEF that aims to 

 increase girls’ access to high-quality primary 

 education in Balochistan. 

 This activity focuses on four districts in 

 a region with the lowest level of female 

 education in Pakistan and one of the 

 lowest in the world. The initial phase of the 

 activity was successful in increasing the 

 enrolment of girls by 48 000. The second 

 phase will place a particular emphasis 

 on improving the quality of education to 

 build on increased retention rates and 

 improve learning outcomes. The activity will 

 promote the development of more child-friendly classrooms by reducing class sizes, 

 recruiting additional teachers and providing 

 basic learning materials. 

 Bangladesh has one of the largest primary 

 education systems in the world with 

 approximately 19.6 million school children 

 aged between 6 and 10 years. Although 

 Bangladesh has achieved high enrolment 

 rates over the past few years, only 68 per 

 cent of enrolled children complete their 

 primary schooling. The issues of primary 

 education revolve around quality, access 

 and equity. Only 28 per cent of all children 

 who complete Grade V attain the minimal 

 levels of competency in reading, writing, 

 numeracy and life skills. In addition, 

 primary schooling is still far from inclusive. 

 Children with special needs, extremely poor 

 and working children, ethnic and linguistic 

 minorities, and refugees lack access to 

 primary education. 

 To try to address some of these problems 

 and close the gap between enrolments and 

 completion rates, Australia is contributing 

 to the multi-donor Primary Education 

 Development Program (PEDP) being 

 implemented by the Government of 

 Bangladesh with the assistance of UNICEF. 

 A key achievement of the first phase of the 

 PEDP was achieved through the Intensive 

 District Approach to Education for All 

 (IDEAL) activity. This aimed to improve the 

 quality of education by introducing child-centred learning processes and by promoting 

 the participation of students and teachers 

 in school planning. IDEAL covered more 

 than half of the 39 700 primary schools in 

 Bangladesh. More than 150 000 primary 

 school teachers were trained in interactive 

 teaching methods and 10.3 million children 

 have benefited from IDEAL.

 During armed conflicts, education provides 

 a sense of belonging and stability for the 

 whole community.

 In Sri Lanka Australia has contributed to 

 the program Humanitarian Assistance to 

 Children and Women in Conflict Affected 

 Areas, which is run by UNICEF. The aim of 

 this program is to increase access to quality 

 health and education services, particularly 

 for school drop-outs, and to strengthen 

 and build protective services for children. 

 The program works in the conflict-affected 

 districts in northern and eastern Sri Lanka. 

 Under this program Australia has supported 

 the construction and rehabilitation of water 

 supply systems and toilet facilities in over 

 200 schools, delivered catch-up education 

 for 26 000 students whose studies were 

 disrupted by the conflict, repaired the 

 roofs of 135 temporary school rooms and 

 commenced the construction of 10 new 

 school buildings.

 Getting children back to school reduces the 

 negative impact of disasters.

 Following the Indian Ocean tsunami in 

 December 2004, Australia deployed 15 

 volunteer teachers to the Maldives for an 

 initial six-month period to help open and 

 operate schools from the start of the school 

 year in January 2005. This meant that 

 children, many traumatised by the tsunami, 

 were able to return to a relatively normal 

 school routine.

 In Indonesia Australia provided basic 

 education supplies for Aceh and North 

 Sumatra. Additional assistance has since 

 been committed to help rebuild the schools 

 in Aceh that were destroyed by the tsunami. 

 SUPPORT FOR ADULT LITERACY PROGRAMS

 Increasing basic literacy and numeracy can 

 be an important adjunct to activities aimed at 

 increasing the incomes of the poor.

 A number of Australia’s projects aimed at 

 improving livelihoods have components 

 directed at improving functional literacy. For 

 example, in Burma Australia is supporting 

 the CARE Australia project Rakhine Rural 

 Household Livelihood Security. It includes 

 a six-month basic literacy and numeracy 

 course for leaders and management 

 committee members of women’s savings 

 moblisation and income generation groups. 

 This course will enable the women to 

 manage the financial operations of their 

 group. Overall, the activity should directly 

 benefit more than 10 000 households and 

 80 000 people.

 In Solomon Islands Australia is supporting 

 an activity that targets the former conflict-prone provinces of Malaita and Guadalcanal. 

 The activity aims to empower communities 

 and promote the development of livelihoods 

 by providing functional literacy and basic 

 numeracy skills, training in small business 

 record keeping, business and marketing 

 skills, as well as health education.

 FURTHER INFORMATION AND RESOURCES

 GENERAL INFORMATION ON EDUCATION

 www.unesco.org/education/en (the United 

 Nations Literacy Decade)

 www.efareport.unesco.org (the UNESCO 

 EFA Global Monitoring Report, which 

 contains information on education 

 indicators, including literacy, for 

 all countries)

 www.developmentgateway.com (education 

 sector links to a number of sites)

 www.ginie.org (the Global Information 

 Network in Education)

 MORE INFORMATION ABOUT  AUSTRALIAN AID

 Further information about the Australian 

 overseas aid program is available online at 

 www.ausaid.gov.au

 Australian Agency for International 

 Development (AusAID)

 GPO Box 887

 Canberra ACT 2601 Australia

 Telephone (02) 6206 4000

