---
title: "Newest citizens rock Floriade [ACT]."
date: "2005-09-16"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283426
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/91DH6%22
---

 

 John Cobb MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

 

 Media Centre

 Newest Citizens Rock Floriade

 16 September 2005

 Some fifty seven people will celebrate Australian Citizenship Day tomorrow when they are conferred citizenship by the  Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Andrew Metcalfe, in the Rock ‘n’  Roll Diner at Floriade in Canberra.

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb, congratulated the new conferees, saying citizenship  was a unifying force in our culturally diverse society.

 Floriade, Canberra’s celebration of the new season, spring, is a perfect background for the new citizens, from 31 countries,  to celebrate their new life as Australians.

 The ceremony will feature a former refugee from Sudan, Jacob Mamer Maker Gureec, who became an Australian citizen  on Refugee Day, 20 June this year. He will speak about his journey to Australian citizenship and what it means to him.

 The ceremony will open with an Indigenous ‘Welcome to Country’ dance performed by a group of Indigenous children  and entertainment will be provided by the Sing Australia Blokes Choir. 

 ‘Australian Citizenship represents our shared values - acceptance, equality, freedom of speech and religion, the rule of  law, Parliamentary democracy, our constitution and English as the national language,’ said Mr Cobb.

 ‘Australia Citizenship Day, now in its fifth year, is emerging as a key date on the national calendar for citizenship and  affirmation ceremonies.’

 ‘I would also encourage people who are already Australian citizens to take part in the national Citizenship Day  celebrations by participating in an affirmation ceremony,’ Mr Cobb said.

 For more information on Australian citizenship contact the Citizenship Information Line on 131 880 or visit  www.citizenship.gov.au

 The citizenship ceremony will be held on the 17 September at 10am. 

 MEDIA CONTACT: Ron Kelly - 0417 862 924 

