---
title: "Rights for all community-based asylum seekers."
date: "2005-08-11"
creators:
  - "Burke, Anna"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of BURKE, ANNA, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211281742
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BRZG6%22
---

 

 Anna Burke MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CHISHOLM   

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  Thursday August 11, 2005   

 Rights for all community-based asylum seekers   

 Federal Member for Chisholm Anna Burke has lodged a notice of motion calling on the  Howard Government to give all community-based asylum seekers work rights and  Medicare access.   

 “It is estimated that forty per cent of community-based asylum seekers have no income  support, work rights or health benefits,” Ms Burke said.   

 “The Howard Government expects these people to live on oxygen alone.   

 “It is only through the good work of various church groups and charities that asylum  seekers living in the community are able to survive.   

 “Senator Vanstone has ensured that families released from detention as a result of the  Howard/Georgiou compromise have income support and access to healthcare, but  countless asylum seekers already living in our society have no such rights.   

 “The Howard Government’s immigration policy is as inconsistent and heartless as ever,”  Ms Burke said.   

 Contact Jehane Sharah on 0417 140 935    

 47 MS A. E. BURKE: To move—That this House:   (1) recognises the plight of the thousands of community-based asylum seekers in Australia who are  denied  income  support,  work  rights  and  Medicare  access  as  a  result  of  the  Government's  unfair  and   inflexible  immigration  policy,  making  survival  nearly  impossible  without  the  assistance  of  various  

 church and charity groups;   (2) acknowledges that in many cases this breaches the Refugee Convention and the UN Convention  on the Rights of the Child; and   (3) calls on the Government to: 

  (a) abolish the 45 day rule, which prevents community-based asylum seekers who make visa  applications outside that period from receiving any form of income or health benefits; and   (b)  give  all  community-based  asylum  seekers  in  Australia  work  rights  and  access  to  

 Medicare.  (Notice  given  9  August  2005.  Notice  will  be  removed  from  the  Notice  Paper  unless   called on on any of the next 8 sitting Mondays after 5 September 2005.) 

