---
title: "Senate Inquiry told Bakhtiari case not unusual."
date: "2005-09-28"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283886
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AYFH6%22
---

  A u s t r a  I ia r i  Senate 

  Kerry Nettle 

  Australian Greens Senator for NSW 

  28.09.05 

  Senate Inquiry told Bakhtiari case not unusual  Greens Senator Kerry Nettle said today t h a t  the current Senate Inquiry into the  Migration Act has heard evidence of bad, illogical, poor a n d  random decision  making occurring throughout the refugee determination process. 

  "Reports i n  today's media t h a t  decisions about the Bakhtiari case were flawed  a n d  influenced by government policy is consistent with the evidence presented t.o  the Senate Inquiry about refugee decision making," said Senator Nettle 

  "An adversarial, illogical and sometimes random system has been making  victims of people just like the Bakhtiaris for years now. 

  "This government's asylum seeker policy and administration of t h a t  policy fails  basic tests of fairness and must be scrapped. 

  "We have heard expert evidence t h a t  decision making on asylum claims a t  the  primary, review and ministerial level is deeply flawed. 

  "One witness said there was 'randomness all the way through' the system. 

  "Other witnesses have given evidence t h a t  family members with identical claims  have been given different decisions. 

  "Several witnesses have provided evidence that DIMIA seems to be implementing  a n  adversarial system designed to exclude people on the slightest inconsistently. 

  "'The structure of the Refugee Review tribunal has come under sustained  criticism during the inquiry as contributing to illogical and inconsistent refugee  determinations. 

  "The Bakhtiari case is a n  example of poor decision making by DIMIA a n d  the  Inquiry h a s  not heard any evidence t h a t  there has been substantial change to  IIIMIA decision making procedures." 

  Contact: Max Phillips 0414 338 526  or Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

