---
title: "Young Australian of the Year announced."
date: "2005-01-25"
creators:
  - "Patterson, Kay"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Khoa Do"
  - "Australia Day"
  - "Australian of the Year"
  - "Awards"
  - "Youth"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211274599
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/N41F6%22
---

 

 Minister for Family and Community Services

 Media Release

 Young Australian of the Year announced

 25/01/2005

 Film maker, writer, director, actor and law student, Khoa Do, is the winner of the 2005  Young Australian of the Year Award. 

 The Minister for Family and Community Services, Senator Kay Patterson, today  congratulated 25-year-old Khoa Do, from New South Wales, for his contribution to the  community. 

 "The Young Australian of the Year Awards are a great opportunity to recognise and celebrate  the outstanding achievements of young Australians who have made a substantial  contribution to their communities," Senator Patterson said. 

 "Khoa Do has already made a name for himself in the Australian film industry. In 2001, Khoa  was nominated for an AFI Award for his screen play for the short film Delivery Day. 

 "In 2002 he was asked to teach film and video production to at risk youth in Cabramatta.  The experience was documented in the acclaimed film, The Finished People.

 "At such a young age his achievements, strong sense of character and willingness to help  others is an inspiration for all Australian youth.

 "Over 2,300 people from across Australia were nominated for the 2005 Young Australian of  the Year Awards. The finalist list includes disability advocates, medical officers and a former  legal protection officer for the United Nations Refugee Agency. 

 "Previous winners of the award have come from sporting fields, the corporate sector and the  science field, and include Scott Hocknull for achievements in palaeontology, Ian Thorpe for  his contribution to Australian sport through swimming, Bryan Gaensler for astronomy,  including winning NASA's prestigious Hubble Fellowship and Tan Le for her community  service to Vietnamese Australians. 

 "All these young Australians, including Khoa Do, have contributed enormously to their  community and are a great inspiration to all young people across Australia. Australians can  feel confident that if this year's finalists and winner are anything to go by, the future of this  nation will be in capable hands," Senator Patterson said.

 Information on the finalists is available from the National Australia Day Council on 02 7273  8666 or at www.australianoftheyear.gov.au.

 Related information

 ●     Australian of the Year [ http://www.australianoftheyear.gov.au/]

