---
title: "BHHP (Baulkham Hills Holroyd Parramatta) MRC opens doors to new arrivals - and citizens."
date: "2005-09-29"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283991
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RMIH6%22
---

 

 John Cobb MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

 

 Media Centre

 BHHP MRC Opens Doors to New Arrivals - and Citizens

 29 September 2005

 The Baulkham Hills Holroyd Parramatta Migrant Resource Centre (BHHP MRC) opened its doors today to draw attention  to the help provided to thousands of migrants and refugees successfully resettled in Sydney every year.

 The Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb, was the guest of honour at the Open Day and praised  the work the centre does with newly arrived migrants and refugees. 

 ‘I recognise the importance of settlement services and initiative such as MRCs in helping newly arrived refugees and  migrants settle successfully in Australia.

 ‘Australia’s settlement services are amongst the world’s most generous and the government is committed to ensuring these  people have the support and assistance they need to build a successful life in their new home,’ Mr Cobb said.

 Sydney is now home to communities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Burma, Bosnia, Somalia, Palestine and the Sudan.

 The Minister said the Open Day was an opportunity for the MRC to showcase its diverse programs, projects and cultural  diversity to the wider community. 

 ‘Migrant Resource Centres create a vital link between the incoming settlers and their new community by providing  assistance in a variety of areas including language skills, housing and employment.

 ‘Through this support, migrants and refugees develop a sense of belonging and are able to contribute to their community  socially and economically,’ Mr Cobb said.

 The event will begin at 10am and entertainment will include a Chinese choir, an African extravaganza, Children’s corner  and high profile guest speakers.

 MEDIA CONTACT: Ron Kelly - 0417 862 924 

