---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Treasury Place, Melbourne: 23 March 2005: Commonwealth/State taxes; euthanasia; trade unions; asylum seekers; branch stacking."
date: "2005-03-23"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Branch stacking"
  - "Trade union membership"
  - "Federal state finances"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Goods and services tax"
  - "Euthanasia"
  - "Commonwealth/State taxes"
  - "euthanasia"
  - "trade unions"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "branch stacking."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211277134
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IUJF6%22
---

 FEDERAL LABOR LEADER  KIM BEAZLEY   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, TREASURY PLACE, MELBOURNE,   23 MARCH 2005   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:   Commonwealth/State  taxes; euthanasia; trade unions;  asylum seekers; branch stacking   

 BEAZLEY:   Today the highest taxing Treasurer in Australian history,  Peter Costello, is reading the States a lecture on tax.  While the Commonwealth  got an extra $12 billion over and above where they thought they’d be when they  put the GST in place, the States were left at $2 billion. So clearly, if anyone has  got room to move on tax it’s Peter Costello, room to put incentive back into the  taxation system.  That’s there on Peter Costello’s table.  What Costello is telling  the States to do is to spend the money twice, give an extra round of tax cuts and  at the same time do all the things they need to do on infrastructure.  No wonder  they’re confused in dealing with this fellow.  What he ought to be doing and what  they will be saying to him, I hope, is this: Peter Costello, you’ve got $12 billion  extra, do the right thing by the Australian taxpayer.  Off you go.   

 JOURNALIST: So, you don’t buy the argument that the States are being  greedy with the GST and still keeping their State taxes?   

 BEAZLEY:  Let me say very clearly.  The States are being maligned by  Peter Costello.  They stuck to their agreements.  A couple of weeks ago Peter  Costello was out there saying the States have breached their agreements.  They  have not.  The States have introduced all the reductions in taxes that the  Commonwealth asked of them and the additional taxes that are being talked  about by Peter Costello now were there for review, not for automatic elimination.     

 Many of the States take the view that the public, if they were going to use any of  this money for tax cuts, would rather see it in areas where Peter Costello doesn’t  mind what they do - like in land tax.  That’s not included in the Peter Costello  taxes for review.  They say it might be more sensible to make changes in the  rates of land tax, which affect everybody, rather than transaction taxes which  affect a few businesses.  So, that’s for them to work out.     

 The point is Peter Costello cannot point fingers at them.  Peter Costello has  gained six times in unanticipated revenue what the States have gained.  And that  is what has made him the highest taxing Treasurer in Australian political history.   

 JOURNALIST: Victoria and NSW say that the carve-up of the GST isn’t fair.   What do you think about that?   

 BEAZLEY:  There’s an argument amongst the States about who gets  what and how fair it all is.  I’m afraid that argument’s going to go on until the cows  come home.  That’s the nature of it.  It precedes, it predates arguments about  GST revenue and goes to the carve-up that was made in financial assistance  grants.  So, that’s an argument the States have got to have amongst themselves.   What I say is the States are being subject to undue pressure by Peter Costello  and hypocritical pressure.  He’s saying on the one hand they should fix  infrastructure and on the other hand they should give his particular version of the  tax cuts.  They can’t do both.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you not wanting to buy into that carve-up argument  because it’s WA itself which Victoria and NSW always complain about in the  carve-up debate?   

 BEAZLEY:  No, it’s Queensland they complain about.     

 JOURNALIST:  No,  WA.  

 

 BEAZLEY:  In the case of WA, there has not been, since Charlie Court  wrote us out of being a beneficiary State about 30 years ago, in WA that hasn’t  been the case.  In fact, an awful lot of the country is carried on the back of  Western Australian exports.  So, nobody really insults the West Australians in  these sorts of things.  They get too much out of them and the West Australians  don’t like it much, let me tell you.     

 So, the argument’s always between Victoria and NSW on one hand, Queensland  on the other, Queensland argues that we’re a decentralised State with  substantial problems outside Brisbane and so the argument will go on.  I hope  one day, in three years time, I’ll have the opportunity to adjudicate the argument.   

 JOURNALIST: On another issue, Mr Beazley, euthanasia.  I understand  there’s a Communications bill coming before the Parliament where heavy fines  would be imposed for anyone who publishes information on euthanasia on the  internet.  Would you support that legislation? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  Sorry, you’ve caught me on the hop there.  I don’t know that  particular piece of legislation.  I’ll have to go away and check it before I comment  on it.   

 JOURNALIST: Where do you stand in general on euthanasia?   

 BEAZLEY:  I oppose euthanasia.  I voted against it when it came before  the Commonwealth.  I do think that the issues in relation to euthanasia would see 

 undue pressure placed on folk if it was effectively legalised.  So, at the same  time, however, I think that there is a requirement for the Commonwealth and all  sections of the community really, not just Government, to do more for people who  find themselves in circumstances where it’s an issue for them.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, on another issue, are you concerned that  there’s been a significant drop-off in trade union figures?   

 BEAZLEY:  Trade union figures in some areas have been coming down  for a while, in other areas they’ve been strengthened.  Some of the unions are  going up in numbers like the Shop Assistants’ Union has been going up, I think  lately.   Just lately the Metal Workers’ have been too.  I’d encourage everybody  to join trade unions.  I think trade unions make a major contribution to economic  life in this country and social justice.  I think it’s important that people have  choices here.  One of the issues that is going to come up when the  Commonwealth legislation on industrial relations comes into place is whether or  not Australians have a right to organise themselves collectively if they wish to do  so.  It’s going to be an issue.  I believe that Australians do have that right and  ought to keep that right.   It’s an essential part of our democracy.     

 So, I say this about the Government on industrial relations.  The Government is  being driven by ideology, not prosperity.  When we were in office we put in place  the basis for productivity-based wage rises at the enterprise level.  We did that  when we were in office.  That’s the only change that needed to be made to  ensure that we had the right structure in the labour market to encourage 

 prosperity in this country.  What the Government is doing is reaching back in time  and well beyond what the facts of the current situation are now and they’re doing  it for reasons of ideology.  I think that’s a very bad way to go.   

 

 There’s one major labour market issue in Australia now and it is utterly critical  and it threatens our prosperity and that is a low level of skills, or numbers of  skilled people, in the workforce.  If governments do not solve that problem the fat  will be in the fire for this country.  It’s not as though this is a new thing to us.   We’ve been arguing that for years.  John Howard discovered it a couple of  months ago.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, what’s your reaction to the Government’s  decision to allow long-term asylum seekers into the community who’ve been  refused refugee status? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  The Government’s policy is fraying at the edges and has  been for some time and is now a source of massive dispute within the  Government.  We have put forward a sensible proposal on what ought to happen  with illegal migration that gives assurance that people are properly tested in  relation to security and health threats, gives that assurance, but also means that  processing is done quickly and efficiently and so we don’t have people effectively 

 locked away for very long periods of time.  We need to keep that deterrent  element there and that mandatory detention element there but we also need to  do it with humanity and expedition.  This Government mucks around with it, 

 always looking for a political opportunity and now their chickens have come  home to roost.     

 JOURNALIST: Does it make sense that they’re not granted refugee status  yet, it’s deemed that they’re not safe to be going home?   

 BEAZLEY:  Those are the arguments that obviously have to be had  before a proper tribunal.  But you’ve got to say after seven years, really, you  know, this is not good enough.  What we’ve said is this: everybody ought to be  processed within 90 days and 90 per cent would be, I think, processed within 90  days.  After that they ought to be subject to a monthly review with the onus being  on the Immigration Department for them to be sustained in detention and they  would have to make an argument that they were people likely to abscond or that  there is still unresolved health issues or still unresolved security issues in regard  to the individual.  Otherwise it’s not an appropriate mechanism to see them in  detention.  If the Government was systematic, instead of being political, we’d  have solved this problem a long time ago.   

 JOURNALIST: On branch stacking, is that just part of the furniture and we  have to learn to live with it or do you recognise it is a serious problem in Victorian  branches and it needs to be addressed? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  It’s not part of the furniture or it should never be regarded as  part of the furniture.  It’s an argument that’s raised in every political party in this  country.  The difference between the Labor Party and everyone else is we’ve  gone through, in the last couple of years, a huge federal conference in which all  the rules have been changed in relation to it, in which independent dispute  procedures have been put in place.     

 Now, what I’d say to anyone who’s got any grievance with any aspect of any  functioning of the Party is that they’ve got an obligation, if they’re concerned  about it, to take it to the disputes committee.  If the disputes committee does not  provide them with satisfaction at the State level, to then take it on to the relevant  section of the National Executive process.  There’s another disputes committee  that operates at that level.  So, that’s the first port of call, not the State Premier or  the Federal Leader.  If you’ve got a grievance we’ve now got new rules in place.   If you are convicted in the Labor Party of branch stacking you’re out, gone,  finished, never to return.  So, it’s a serious issue as far as our Party rules are  concerned and the rules we’ve put in place, I think, are pretty good deterrents.   

 JOURNALIST: So, you don’t think those mechanisms themselves have  been captured by the factions and are not working?   

 BEAZLEY:  As far as I’m aware nobody’s tested them.  Now, that could  be wrong, something may have happened in recent times, but as far as I’m  aware that’s the case.   

 

 

 ends   

 

