---
title: "Out of Nauru but still in limbo."
date: "2005-10-14"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211284696
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8GLH6%22
---

 

 

 senator.bartlett@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA                         FRIDAY 14 OCTOBER 2005 

 SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS SPOKESPERSON FOR IMMIGRATION 

 

 OUT OF NAURU BUT STILL IN LIMBO   

 The Australian Democrats have welcomed a decision by the Minister to allow 25 out of 27 detainees  on Nauru to arrive in Australia. 

 Spokesperson for Immigration, Senator Andrew Bartlett said, "This is an indeed a positive step with  13 being recognised as refugees.  The remainder are still being processed but they will be  transferred to Australia while this happens. 

 "This result has been made possible by the tireless efforts of Marion Le and her staff, and the many  refugee and community support groups who have continually given hope to detainees through letters  of support,” Senator Bartlett said. 

 Senator Bartlett is the only federal politician to have visited Nauru three times to meet and speak  with detainees about their experiences. 

 "The fact that a majority of these people have been granted visas goes to show that they have been  refugees all along. They have been unnecessarily detained and damaged as consequence of the  Government's policy of mandatory detention.  

 "The physical and emotional suffering that they have endured is palpable with most having fled  tyrannical regimes and been victims of torture, only to find themselves in indefinite limbo on Nauru.  

 "While I welcome the granting of visas to these 13, the fact that they have been only been granted  TPVs will only further add to the sense of uncertainty they have been feeling. 

 "The Democrats call on the Government to grant all refugees permanent protection visas and to  abolish TPVs,” concluded Senator Bartlett.  

 

 Media contact - Senator Andrew Bartlett - 0418 743 789   

