---
title: "Richard Niyonsaba."
date: "2005-12-29"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288337
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4SFI6%22
---

 

 John Cobb MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

 

 Media Centre

 Richard Niyonsaba

 29 December 2005

 The Minister for Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship, John Cobb, today expressed his sympathy to the family of Richard  Niyonsaba, who died shortly after his arrival in Australia in November.

 Minister Cobb said the death of Richard Niyonsaba was a tragedy. 

 ‘Far from being abandoned upon arrival, the family has been provided with extensive support and assistance, including  extensive medical treatment and case-management from the Refugee Health Clinic and the Fairfield Hospital.’

 The Minister said he had been informed of the following events:

 The family were living in the Mtendeli Refugee Camp in the Kibondo District of Western Tanzania. Following the grant of  their refugee visas, on 24 August 2005 the family flew from Kigoma to Nairobi en route to Australia. While in Nairobi,  Richard Niyonsaba was hospitalised for several weeks. 

 On 26 October an International Organisation for Migration (IOM) doctor reported that Richard Niyonsaba’s medical  condition had stabilised, and Richard was medically cleared to fly to Australia pending the outcome of a pre-departure  medical examination. On 31 October on the basis of this pre-departure medical examination, an IOM doctor issued a  health manifest clearing the family to fly to Australia, but noting that Richard Niyonsaba suffered from health problems 

 that would require follow-up upon arrival in Australia.

 On 28 October 2005 DIMIA NSW referred the family to ACL, a NSW Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy  (IHSS) service provider. Accompanying this referral was a follow up email (also sent on 28 October) noting that the  family would require ‘extensive medical follow-up in Sydney.’ 

 The family flew to Sydney on 3 November 2005 (via Dubai) and arrived at Sydney Kingsford Smith Airport at 8.45 am on  4 November 2005. They were met at the airport by a caseworker from ACL, who took them to short term accommodation  in Fairfield. The caseworker is from the same community and language group as the family.

 Upon arrival, the caseworker asked Mr Niyonsaba if anyone in the family was sick and needed to see a doctor. Mr  Niyonsaba advised that no one was sick, they were all just tired and wanted to sleep.

 The caseworker stayed with the family until around 3pm on Friday 4 November, returning at 6pm with some friends of the  family that had been in the same refugee camp.

 In the early hours of Saturday 5 November 2005, Richard Niyonsaba passed away. The ACL caseworker was alerted to  Richard’s death later that morning. Fairfield police were subsequently notified and Richard’s body was taken to Fairfield  hospital for formal identification. 

 Protais Ntirantibagira issued a statement to Fairfield Police later in the day.

 The remainder of the family underwent medical examinations on Monday 7 November and have attended both the  Refugee Health Clinic and the Fairfield Hospital on several further occasions.

 ‘The department has been aware since November 4-5 of the death of the young Burundi child and has been looking into  the issue with the provider, ACL,’ the Minister said.

 ‘The death of this young child was investigated by NSW Police and it will possibly become the subject of a coronial  inquest. 

 ‘The department will be cooperating fully in any coronial inquiry and will be guided by the findings of any coronial  inquiry.’

 Minister Cobb said Australia settled, under its refugee and humanitarian program, more than 13 000 people in 2004-05. 

 ‘This tragedy is a rare and highly unusual circumstance and it would be most unfair and unwise to draw conclusions from  it at this time. The department views any and all complaints about service provision seriously and will investigate any that  are lodged with it,’ Minister Cobb said.

 ‘On a personal note I am deeply saddened that a family, who have escaped the horrors of a refugee camp to start a new life  here, have had to deal with such a tragedy so soon after arriving in Australia,’ he added.

 ‘I am appalled that this tragedy has been so shamefully manipulated by the Opposition Spokesman, Tony Burke,’ Mr Cobb  said.

 ‘As usual, Mr Burke has completely misunderstood how settlement services have been delivered in this country.

 ‘The provision of refugee settlement services has always been outsourced. The only thing that has changed in the last few  months has been the tendering process and the awarding of the contract to a new service provider,’ Mr Cobb said.

 MEDIA CONTACT: Tom Chesson - 0418 415 597

