---
title: "Absurd Christmas Island refugee policy."
date: "2005-04-26"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Christmas Island"
  - "Vietnam"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211557324
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/G5UF6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator  for Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration  and Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 26 April 2005

 Press Release Number: 05/199

 Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Absurd Christmas Island Refugee Policy

 Democrat Immigration Spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett says the Governments denials  about future uses of a detention centre on Christmas Island will never be believed because their  current position is so utterly ridiculous that it could not possibly be true.

 Senator Bartlett, who last visited Christmas Island late last year, said The Governments current  policy is to spend close to a quarter of a billion dollars to build an 800 person capacity detention  centre on a remote island with a community of less than 1500 people, when we already have  empty detention centres all around Australia. This is so inherently ridiculous that it is no surprise  people keep looking for some other explanation that the Government isnt admitting to.

 Thanks to changes to the Migration Act made by Liberal and Labor and still supported by both  parties Christmas Island is outside the Migration Zone. This means that asylum seekers who  have not reached the Australian mainland are denied the protection of Australias legal system.

 There are 35 Vietnamese asylum seekers who have been jailed on Christmas Island for nearly  two years, despite the fact they did reach the mainland. These people were transported to  Christmas Island, using the Navy as a glorified, and very expensive water taxi, even though  their boat landed on the doorstep of a detention centre at Port Hedland, 

 Given this record, it is quite logical to suspect that the Government will transport all the existing  long-term detainees from the mainland out to the isolation of Christmas Island once a new  asylum seeker jail is built.

 It is enormously isolating for detainees on Christmas Island, which just adds to the asylum  seekers suffering. There are only two, fairly expensive, flights a week into Christmas Island.

 Even though the local community is very ethnically diverse, it is so small that there is unlikely to  be significant numbers with the ethnicity and language of asylum seekers to offer local support.  For example, I believe there is only one person of Vietnamese background currently living on  the Island, although many others from the community do visit and provide support.

 It is a pity the Government doesnt want to spend this money on positive uses on Christmas  Island. It has a magnificent and unique environment, including spectacular coral reefs within  metres of the shore, which is under threat. There is also a social and cultural mix and history  like nowhere else in Australia which could do with funding to help them guarantee their long-term future.

