---
title: "Mandatory detention in the dock: Vanstone and Ruddock must accept responsibility."
date: "2005-08-29"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211282532
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5X4H6%22
---

 30 August 2005   

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle today renewed Greens calls for the abolition of the government's  mandatory detention regime following news that traumatised former detainee, 10 yr old Shayan  Badraie, is suing the federal government for damages.  

 

 "A 10 year old refugee living in Australia should not have to take the Federal Government to court  to receive compensation for the harm the government's mandatory detention policy has caused  him," Senator Nettle said.    

 "The only way the government can ensure that more cases like Shayan's do not end up in the court  is to scrap the system of mandatory detention that locks people up and has disastrous mental  health consequences.    

 "The government's policy of mandatory detention is in the dock. Shayan Badraie's case is the tip of the iceberg. There are thousands of people who have been brutalised by detention experiences  which this government is responsible for.    

 "Psychiatrists and psychologists have said for years that immigration detention as practiced by  this government damages people's mental health.    

 "The government should be scrapping its mandatory detention policy and compensating the  victims, but instead they are sending them bills.    

 "The Minister for Immigration is ultimately responsible for the harm caused by the government's  mandatory detention policy and its implementation.    

 "How many more people need to be deported, traumatised, injured or suffer a premature death  before the Minister takes responsibility and resigns?"    

 "The policy of mandatory detention should be scrapped along with the Minister."    

 

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146  

 Mandatory Detention in the dock: Vanstone and Ruddock must accept  responsibility

 Senator Nettle, 29th August 2005

 

 Privacy Policy

