---
title: "2005-06 Aid Budget: Australia commits record levels of resources to overseas Aid."
date: "2005-05-10"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211278207
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JW7H6%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 ALEXANDER DOWNER  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   

 

 AA 05 029  10 May 2005 

 2005-06 Aid Budget: Australia Commits Record Levels of  Resources to Overseas Aid   I am pleased to announce that Australia will provide an estimated $2.491 billion in Official  Development Assistance (ODA) in 2005-06, an increase of $358 million over the 2004-05 Budget figure  ($2.133 billion). This represents a real increase of 5.8 per cent over the  2004-05 expected outcome of $2.253 billion, or an 11.7 per cent increase budget-to-budget. It is the fifth  successive budget where the Government has delivered real growth in ODA. Australia's ODA/GNI ratio  is estimated at 0.28 per cent for 2005-06, placing Australia above the 2004 donor average of 0.25 per  cent. 

 Australia's aid programme plays a central role in an integrated, whole-of-government approach to  developing sustainable and long-term solutions to the challenges facing our region. The aid programme  is responding to the challenges posed by fragile states, and is helping our neighbours realise the benefits  of good governance and economic growth and cope with humanitarian crises. 

 Australia's commitment extends beyond next financial year. From 2005 through to 2009, the  Government will provide an additional $2.054 billion in ODA on top of Australia's existing aid  programme. This includes multi-year commitments to the Australia-Indonesia Partnership for  Reconstruction and Development (AIPRD), to the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands  (RAMSI), additional assistance for reconstruction in Iraq, and debt relief for the most heavily indebted  poor countries. These increases represent real and sustained commitments to our development partners. 

 Budget Highlights  Australia will further strengthen its partnership with Indonesia, to help the country rebuild following the  Indian Ocean disaster and meet longer-term development challenges. The new $1 billion AIPRD will  support priority reconstruction efforts, through $500 million in grant funding and $500 million in highly  concessional loans. The AIPRD will be complemented by expanding ongoing programmes to Indonesia,  which will continue to strengthen economic and financial management, support governance, promote  stability and security, and improve the quality and accessibility of government service delivery. This  will increase Australia's total assistance to Indonesia to an estimated $302 million in 2005-06. 

 We will continue to promote stability and growth in Papua New Guinea and the Pacific. Total ODA to  PNG will increase to $492 million. A new medium-term aid strategy with PNG will be finalised.  Through the five-year, $1.1 billion Enhanced Cooperation Programme (ECP), and a new Sub-National  Initiative, Australia will deepen its commitment to helping PNG consolidate the rule of law, enhance  public sector management and deliver basic services. A major new programme to help PNG fight the  spread of HIV/AIDS will commence. 

 ODA to the Pacific will increase to $463 million in 2005-06. In Solomon Islands, a new four-year, $841  million commitment to RAMSI will support the impressive gains made in restoring law and order and  stability, and assist with the transition from stabilisation to building national capacity. Total funding for  Solomon Islands in 2005-06 will increase to $247 million. Aid flows will also be increased to other  Pacific countries, including Vanuatu (to $34 million) and Fiji (to $31 million). 

 Across the Pacific there will be an increased emphasis on regional approaches and regional cooperation  to promote economic growth. Australia will work with the Pacific Islands Forum to develop a 'Pacific  Plan', which will provide a framework for the effective sharing of resources. Through a new, $11  million Fragile States Initiative, the aid programme will work closely with the World Bank and bring  together development, security, economic and political perspectives on fragile states from across  government. This will boost Australia's capacity to engage with fragile states, and enhance Australia's  lead role internationally on approaches to fragile states. 

 Assistance to East Asia, excluding Indonesia, will increase to $344 million in  2005-06. The priority will be to enhance regional capacity in economic integration, and address  transboundary threats like HIV/AIDS, illegal drugs and Avian Influenza. Funding for regional  programmes will increase to $40 million. This will include a new $5 million, three-year regional  communicable diseases initiative to help build capacity to combat diseases including Avian Influenza,  and a $2 million, three-year anti-drug initiative in Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Burma. The  Government will double its existing $15 million counter-terrorism assistance to the Philippines and  Indonesia over the next five years. Assistance to Vietnam will increase to $77 million as Australia  continues to support its international economic integration. Australia will also maintain existing levels  of funding to East Timor. 

 Australia is playing a leading role in fighting the spread of HIV/AIDS in the Asia-Pacific. In 2004, I  launched the Government's $600 million international HIV/AIDS strategy. In support of the strategy,  funding for HIV/AIDS activities is estimated at $70 million in 2005-06. This includes $20 million for  the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as part of a $50 million, three-year  commitment to the Fund, and a new $5 million HIV/AIDS partnership initiative which will strengthen  the capacity of regional HIV/AIDS organisations through partnerships with Australian organisations.  Australia's Special Representative on HIV/AIDS will continue to promote strong coordinated action on  HIV/AIDS in the Asia-Pacific region.  

 Targeted assistance will continue in Africa and the Middle East. Aid to Africa will increase to $77  million, including the ongoing response to the crisis in Sudan. In Iraq, the Government will commit an  additional $45 million over two years to help build stability and democracy and support Iraq's transition  to an open, market-based economy. In the Palestinian Territories, Australia will work with multilateral  agencies to support the peace process and will continue humanitarian work in partnership with UN  agencies and NGOs.  

 Australia will continue its efforts to help the world's poorest countries, and those recovering from  conflict and disaster, to alleviate their debt burdens. We will contribute an additional $34.8 million over 

 three years to the World Bank's Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. Australia is also  joining with other Paris Club countries to place a twelve-month moratorium on debt repayments from  Indonesia and Sri Lanka following the Indian Ocean disaster, and forgive 80 per cent of the more than  $1 billion owed to Australia by Iraq. 

 The recent Indian Ocean disaster and earthquake in Indonesia have highlighted the vulnerability of  countries in our region to disasters. Many countries also remain vulnerable to conflict and instability. In  2005-06, Australia will increase its funding for humanitarian, refugee and emergency programmes by  $24 million to $170 million. Support will be provided for the establishment of a tsunami early warning  system for the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and the aid programme will continue to respond to crises both  within and beyond our immediate region. 

 Australia is keen to maximise the strategic impact of its aid programme, and ensure it is utilised in the  most effective way possible. Strategic partnerships between key Australian Government agencies, and  non government and community organisations are being expanded. The Australian Government will  provide $24.5 million over four years for the expansion of the Australian Youth Ambassadors for  Development (AYAD) programme. This increases the total funding for the AYAD Programme over the  four years to $52.5 million. 

 I will table during 2005-06 a white paper outlining a medium-term, strategic blueprint for the aid  programme. Coupled with the aid programme's existing record of achievement, and the funding  increases announced in this budget, the white paper will provide a sound platform for future aid  delivery. 

 Media inquiries:  Chris Kenny (Mr Downer's office) 0419 206 890  AusAID (Public Affairs) 0417 680 590 

 

 

