---
title: "Transcript of Joint Doorstop interview with the Leader of the Opposition and Laurie Ferguson, MP : Opposition Leader's Courtyard, Parliament House, Canberra: 31 May 2005: Petro Georgiou Bill; Sydney Airport Security; Tax legislation; MPs Pay Rises; Industrial Relations."
date: "2005-05-31"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Immigration policy"
  - "Proposed legislation"
  - "GEORGIOU, Petro"
  - "Children"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Drought relief"
  - "ALP policy"
  - "Members remuneration and allowances"
  - "Sydney (Kingsford Smith) Airport"
  - "Tax rates and margins"
  - "Social Security payments"
  - "Security"
  - "Committees and inquiries"
  - "Australian Customs Service"
  - "Petro Georgiou Bill"
  - "Sydney Airport Security"
  - "Tax legislation"
  - "MPs Pay Rises"
  - "Industrial Relations."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279360
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HA7G6%22
---

 FEDERAL LABOR LEADER  THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT DOORSTOP WITH LAURIE FERGUSON, MP,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION , OPPOSITION LEADER’S  COURTYARD, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANERRA, 31 MAY 2005 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects: Petro Georgiou Bill; Sydney Airport Security; Tax  legislation; MPs Pay Rises; Industrial Relations   

 BEAZLEY: Caucus today had an opportunity to consider the utter  shambles the Liberal Party’s migration policy has become.  Consider it in the light  of what is obvious, that incompetence is weakness.  And this shambles produces  weakness in a critical area of policy, not only just to the character of Australian  society but also to our border protection.    

 Specifically the Caucus had before it a report from the Shadow Minister which,  circulated to Caucus Members, what he’s been able to discern from the  dissidents Bill put into the Liberal Party room identified with Petro Georgiou.  And  Caucus having talked it through agreed with the Shadow Ministry submission on  this matter which is that the Labor Party is basically supportive of the content of  the Bill that’s been put out by Petro Georgiou because it complies with what is  now long-standing Labor Party policy in a number of areas.   

 The idea of kids out of detention, the idea that, after 90 days people should have  been successfully processed, and if they’re not, then their situation should be  subject to independent review.  The idea there should be some certainty there for  those on temporary protection visas, the idea that we shouldn’t get ourselves into  a situation where we are deporting Australian citizens.  So, we are sympathetic  and supportive of the direction in which the Georgiou Bill is going.  The Caucus  further authorised the Shadow Minister to discuss the Bill with Petro Georgiou.   

 If it comes into the House we will have an opportunity to consider it again of  course, but, basically what we want to be doing is facilitating debate on it.  If it  doesn’t come into the House, if the Bill, which is circulated amongst all of you is  not placed before the Parliament, then the Labor Party will continue to pursue its  efforts to ensure that the issues that relate to kids and the issues that relate to  proper processing of long-term detainees and the other matters I mentioned, that  the Parliament has full opportunity to discuss and debate those matters. In the  meantime, we want to see this Bill we want to see it emerge in the Chamber.  We  want to facilitate it and we want an end to the shambles that Liberal Party  migration policy has become.   

 

 JOURNALIST: What can the Opposition do to force the Government MPs to  make a public expression of their opinion of this legislation?   

 BEAZLEY: The legislation is circulated and the legislation is there for  tabling in the Parliament we would have thought.  It has appeared in that form  and we would seek to see it put into the Chamber where we’d have an  opportunity to discuss it.  There’d be no better opportunity for the Opposition  members to whom you refer to discuss it than if it was in the Chamber.   

 JOURNALIST: If the Bill isn’t introduced would you bring on you own one?   

 BEAZLEY: We’ve already put Bills in on these things.  You may recollect  that Nicola Roxon put forward a Bill on detention of children some time ago.  On  that occasion, twice, Liberal dissidents voted to keep the kids behind bars.  We  will keep doing that sort of thing until we get into office when we’ll have an  opportunity to put our whole policy into effect which is exactly the policy the  country now needs.   

 JOURNALIST: If they don’t put it into Parliament there’s nothing you can do to  have it debated on the floor of the House?    

 BEAZLEY: There’s plenty we can do and we have been doing it and we’ll  continue to do it.  We’ll be taking parts of our policy that meets contemporary  needs and putting then into the Parliament, sometimes by resolution, sometimes  by legislation.  We’ll keep going on this because this situation now is a complete  shambles and somebody has to do something about it, so we will.   

 JOURNALIST: Does Labor want some changes to these Bills and if so, what  are they?   

 BEAZLEY: This is something for our spokesman to discuss with Petro.  I  don’t want to get into nitpicking on particular parts of the Georgiou Bill.  The basic  thrust of it is in a form that we can be supportive of and where we have  differences of emphasis or structure we’ll be able to talk that through as it goes  through the Parliament.   

 JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible)  giving  temporary visas holders permanent  residency, do you agree with that and releasing detainees after 90 days and  releasing all children and their parents, do you agree with those?   

 BEAZLEY: What we’ve said is: we basically want a process in place that  resolves the issues for at least 90 per cent of detainees within 90 days.  We want  then to apply from that point on an inspection regime and an independent review  regime that gives them a chance to be investigated, their circumstances to be  investigated monthly.  Well before that happens we want the kids out. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, (inaudible) are you signalling that if the Bill comes  into the Parliament and after Mr Georgiou speaks for five minutes that Labor will  move to suspend Standing Orders to bring on the Bill?   

 BEAZLEY: Permit us our tactics.  We will pursue whatever tactics are  appropriate to ensure that this matter is moved through to finality.   

 JOURNALIST: That would make the vote for a referendum would it not?   

 BEAZLEY: I give you credit for pressing us on this but really what you  need to know from me is that we will do everything that we can, if Standing  Orders permit, give the Parliament an opportunity to declare itself on this.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the Customs report that’s come out  today detailing the problems at Sydney airport and what’s not been done?   

 BEAZLEY: More of the shocking shambles.  That is a very serious report  that emerged in one of the newspapers today, it emphasises a point that we’ve  been making.  Anderson, John Anderson, took out of the firing line an absolutely  critical part of our transport security structure when in order to protect John 

 Howard’s back he took Mick Palmer out of the Transport Inspection role and put  him into the Rau case.  Previously, they’ve been out there saying things like: well  it was only drugs, it wasn’t national security matters and in any case he’s just  reactive when in fact he was an important part of the responsive process.  And if  those reports in the paper today are correct, it was not just about drugs, it did  concern national security matters, this is a very serious situation.  Now, the John  Howard Government is a government that is all spin and no substance, great 

 politics.  They’re always out there with terrific political positions but when it  comes to really protecting Australian security, really organising an effective  migration system, it’s a mess.   

 JOURNALIST: If the Georgiou Bills are introduced as they stand, if they  were, would the Labor Party support them without amendments?   

 BEAZLEY:  We’ll be supportive of those Bills.  Of course, there are ways  in which we’d think they could be improved.  But we will bring those Bills on, we  will work through those Bills with Mr Georgiou.  Be sensible about this.  It’s  another fellow’s Bill, we’ve got our own well established positions which are  supportive of his directions and we’ve got some intelligent ideas and we’ll pursue  them. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Ferguson, you’ve been criticised by refugee advocates  and some people within your Party for taking too hard a line on this issue.  Are  you comfortable with the decision today, particularly the four broad elements that 

 are mentioned there?  Do you commit Labor to going forward with those four  elements to the next election?   

 FERGUSON:  I am guilty of believing that we should process claims and  investigate them and we should not, per se, just accept everyone’s claims.   However, I’m very comfortable with it.  I’ve brought it forward and it’s been very  strongly supported unanimously by the Caucus.  It’s my effort and it’s been  endorsed. 

 

 JOURNALIST: You’ve suggested though in the past these people are queue  jumpers.  Should these people who could be queue jumpers, in your words,  really be fast-tracked through detention?   

 FERGUSON:  I don have a very strong concern that people in off-shore  camps who trying to utilise our off-shore provisions.  We have a situation here  where people can be investigated, they can be processed, decisions are made.   As I say, the situation is essentially that Labor says that after 90 days if people  are still in detention they should be looked at by an independent committee and if  the government of the day doesn’t like the decision that they should be released,  then the Minister should come forward and give his reasons why and each month  after that there should be a justification by the Department as to their continued  detention.  That’s Labor Party policy and I’m extremely comfortable with it.   

 JOURNALIST: What is the certainty for people on temporary protection  visas mean?   

 FERGUSON:  You can understand our policy.  We support, in round terms,  to be honest with you we don’t have particular difficulties with Petro’s provisions  on temporary protection visas but I don’t want to go through each and every item.   If you want to know, we’re very comfortable with Petro’s provisions.   

 JOURNALIST: So you’d give them permanent refugee status?   

 FERGUSON:  I said we are comfortable with his provisions.  You can see  what’s in there and we agree with what he’s saying.   

 JOURNALIST: Why can’t you just say the words?   

 FERGUSON:  Our current policy is that the overwhelming majority of them  would receive permanent residence after two years, which is in strong contrast to  the Government’s current provision of rolling over people for years in limbo land.  

 There is a slight distinction at the moment between what Petro’s saying.  He  wants to automatically give them permanent residence.  Labor’s current policy  says that after two years, not after four or five years, six years like the current  Government, the Department would have to reverse the onus and say their  original decision was wrong and people shouldn’t be protected.  We are very 

 close to Petro and we’re not going to quibble and argue about some minor  difference between the two of us.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, you said before that, “permit us our tactics”.   There’s a poll published today that suggests that Labor’s going backwards.  How  much is that a reflection that your tactics haven’t worked so far? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  I’ve said to you before in these gatherings, I’m not going to  comment on polls.  You get hundreds of them, some of them good, some of them  are not so good, but there’ll be hundreds of polls between now and when the  next election occurs.  We are in a struggle with the Liberal Party and the soul of  middle Australia and for their political allegiance and we’re in a battle with them.   This is a political party in office now that’s in fact enormously damaging to the  lifestyles, the aspirations of middle Australians.  This tax package is part of it.   They get nothing out of it.  The industrial relations reforms, or changes, that  they’re putting place, that’s part of it, they get nothing out of it.  What we’re going  to do over the course of the next couple of years is to contest that ground with  the Liberal Party and polls will come and go through the course of it and I’m  satisfied with our positioning now.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the whole of the nation, the Prime Minister says  that the farmers are part of our national character, our heritage, if you like and  they need to be preserved on that basis.  What do you say to that? 

 

 BEAZLEY:  He said again yesterday, the Liberals out there, marvellous  spin, little substance.  They’re still not back to the level of support for the interest  rate subsidy that was there under Labor and yet he says this is the worst drought  ever.  Basically, what they did yesterday in resources was to push it up to a little  bit ahead of where it had been if they hadn’t cut it during the Budget.  I mean,  really.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you have any concern about claims of double standards  between the Government’s treatment of farmers when you compare that to the  way they want to treat the Budget provisions to treat parents, sole parents for  example, or disability people?   

 BEAZLEY:  We disagree with the Government’s intentions with regard to  people with disabilities and people who are sole parents and we’ll pursue that  with great consistency.  We’re also sympathetic to the situation the farmers find  themselves in.  We don’t agree with the Government’s efforts to make life harder 

 and provide no effective support while they do that to some of the most  vulnerable people in our society and we also think that the Government needs to  do a decent job for the farmers. 

 

 JOURNALIST: You were raising questions in Parliament yesterday about  the contrast in the tax cuts with the pay rises for MPs.  That being the case, why 

 won’t you move in the Senate to disallow the increase in the Remuneration  Tribunal’s increases to MPs?   

 BEAZLEY:  We support the position of tribunals and their  recommendations.  What we don’t like is what the Government has done to the  particular tribunal that considers the minimum wage cases.  That’s the point we  were making yesterday.  Not only have they opposed an increase that would  keep the minimum wage up with changes in the cost of living.  They’ve said to  the Industrial Relations Commission, ‘look, don’t give them anything because  they’re getting a $6.00 tax cut’.  We think that that is where the inconsistency in  all this lies.  The Government should have a different position before the  Industrial Relations Commission in regard to the minimum wage.  The  Government should be more generous to people of these income levels when it  comes to tax cuts as we are now giving the opportunity to be in the amendments  that we are moving in the Senate and that’s where we want to place the pressure  on the Government.  That’s what affects everybody.  So that’s why we ask  questions like we did yesterday, contrasting the endless hypocrisy of this  Government when it comes to dealing with its closest supporters against the  interests of those of the vast majority of the Australian people, some seven  million of them missed out on a decent tax cut this time.   

 JOURNALIST: Could you clear up for us then whether you will move to  disallow those tax cuts in the Senate as well as vote against the legislation?   

 BEAZLEY:  No, Jim.  What it means is that we will continue to press the  point about the Government’s complete lack of generosity when it comes to  dealing with people on the minimum wage and point out to the public generally 

 what the Government intends to do to them with the Industrial Relations  Commission changes.  Those Industrial Relations Commission changes have at  their very heart an effort to gut this limited process and hold back people on  minimum wages and we will pursue that matter until Hell freezes over.   

 JOURNALIST: That means then that it is conceivable that you will allow the,  or not oppose, the actual tax cut regulations?   

 BEAZLEY:  We understand exactly what Costello’s doing with that.  He  had Parliamentary measures open to him to avoid any of that if he so chose but  he wanted a distraction.  He has put that in as a distraction from the main point  because what they do not want to discuss is the fact that the Labor Party is there  with a reasonable tax cut for everybody and a really decent tax cut for people  who are middle income Australians.  Costello doesn’t want to discuss that.  He  wants to discuss Parliamentary tactics and we say to him, you’re not going to get  a discussion from us on that, sport.  We’re going to deal with these bills first and  then we’ll worry about your regulations.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you support the independence of the Remuneration  Tribunal?  Can you see how the man in the street might wonder how these  decisions can be arrived at when they’re not getting anything like that?   

 BEAZLEY:  I think the people have got every reason to wonder about  this Government.  They’ve got reason to wonder about them on tax and reason  to wonder about them on the IRC.  So we support them in their wondering. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Regarding your (inaudible) isn’t there a convention whereby  the Labor and the Government agrees not to have divisions on Private Members’  Bills?  Are you willing to break that gentleman’s agreement when it comes to  Georgiou’s Bill?   

 BEAZLEY:  Once a bill’s in the House anything can happen to it.  Yes,  there are certain conventions which apply to the discussions on Mondays.   There’s nothing that particularly says that’s the only day we’re allowed to talk  about some efficiencies in migration.   

 

 ends   

 

