---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: Wednesday 25 May 2005: OECD economic outlook; tax debate; Coalition split on detention policy."
date: "2005-05-25"
creators:
  - "Swan, Wayne"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Economic conditions"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Tax rates and margins"
  - "OECD"
  - "Forecasting"
  - "ALP"
  - "OECD economic outlook"
  - "tax debate"
  - "Coalition split on detention policy."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279082
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LZ4G6%22
---

 Wayne Swan MP  Federal Labor Shadow Treasurer 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 SUBJECTS: OECD Economic Outlook, Tax debate, Coalition split on  detention policy   

 

 SWAN: Well, yet another OECD report has exposed the Government’s economic  complacency, its failure to invest in the future to generate productivity growth that’s  required for future prosperity.  The OECD report points to the skills crisis in the  Australian workforce, infrastructure bottlenecks, failure to put incentive in the tax  system and failure to deal with the competition policy.  So coming just a week or so  after the federal Budget, it shows that the Budget has squandered an opportunity to  invest in the future and to generate strong productivity growth and to keep downward  pressure on inflation and therefore interest rates.  It points to the fact that we have  among the highest long term interest rates in the western world and the fact that  they will be rising faster here than many other parts of the world.  These are all  serious concerns and point to risks in the Australian economy in terms of our future  growth and prosperity.   

 Journalist: But there’s nothing there that the Government itself hasn’t acknowledged  in the past.   

 SWAN: I don’t think that’s true.  The Government denies there’s a skills crisis, the  Government has been in denial about infrastructure bottlenecks and the  Government, most of all, is in denial about the need for genuine tax reform and the 

 need to put incentive into the tax system.   

 Journalist: Should Labor back these private members bills being put forward by Petro  Georgiou?   

 SWAN: There’s no doubt that the Liberal Party room is in revolt.  There is a vote of no  confidence there, both for John Howard and Amanda Vanstone.  I’ve watched  Amanda Vanstone closely over the last six to seven years, very closely.  She is clearly  one of the most incompetent ministers this country has ever been unfortunate  enough to have.  She should be removed immediately.   

 Journalist: How will you vote?   

 SWAN: Well, I will leave that to my colleagues who have responsibility for that.  I don’t  know whether they’ve yet to see the bill but I’m sure they’ll be able to talk to you 

 about it.   

 Journalist: The ninety day processing and release is broadly consistent with the  position that Labor had before the last election.  Would that not give it basis for  support?   

 SWAN: Well Labor has a very progressive position particularly when it comes to  children in detention but I’ll leave that to my other colleagues to outline our policy.    

 Journalist: What’s your personal opinion?   

 SWAN: My personal opinion is that children should be in the community not in  detention.  You see every time Amanda Vanstone gets into trouble with her policy she  makes a concession, but then goes on to continue with the same harsh policy.  This  is a vote of no confidence in Amanda Vanstone and John Howard and I really think it  says something about the lack of heart, compassion at the very core of the Howard  Government.   

 Journalist: It’s not really a conscience vote is it?  Would you concede it’s more of a  policy vote?   

 SWAN: Look, I think it goes to the heart of our values, all these debates that we’re  having.  The debates about fairness in the tax system, the debates about fairness in  our border protection policies.  They go to the heart of our values and that’s what it’s  about.   

 Journalist: There are reports that in order to block the Government’s tax cuts there  might be a disallowance motion in the Senate.  What is Labor’s position?   

 SWAN: Labor’s position will be on show in the House of Representatives this morning  when Kim Beazley will put forward our amendments, our positive changes to the  legislation that will give seven million Australians a fair go in the tax system.    We’re going to shame all those backbench members of the Liberal Party into  exposing their position where they’re going to deny a fairer deal to their constituents.   That’s what will be going on in the House of Representatives this morning.   

 The other thing that we see this morning is that the Government’s silly political  tactics, silly political games have been exposed by the Clerk of the Senate.   The  highly respected independent Clerk of the Senate has exposed Peter Costello’s  games that he’s playing with the withholding schedules for the Tax Act.  What the  Clerk of the Senate has said this morning is that if the Government wants to it can  push its schedules through from the 30th June with no disruption out there to the  business community or anyone else.  What we’re about is first things first.  We’re going to amend that legislation in the House of Representatives, we’re going to  amend that legislation in the Senate and put forward a fairer alternative for seven  million Australians.  So, Peter Costello’s rantings about disallowance motions and so  on have been completely exposed by the comments from the Clerk of the Senate this 

 morning.   

 Journalist: Are you going to insist on your amendments?   

 SWAN: Absolutely, we have made this clear from day one.  We can’t carry the vote in  the House of Representatives but we’re going to go out there and fight like hell for a  fairer go for seven million Australians.  We’ll go up into the Senate and do the same.   We have 28 votes in the Senate to fight for our better deal for seven million  Australians and we hope we can attract the support of the minor parties for our  amendments and we will continue to press our amendments in the Senate and we  hope we get them up.   

 Journalist: Are you afraid the Democrats might cave in?   

 SWAN: I don’t know what the Democrats are doing on this.  You might have noticed  that they issued a statement last night.  I think you should ask the Democrats what  they’re doing.  I think you should ask the other minor parties in the Senate.  But  there’s one thing you can be sure that Labor will do.  We’ll be moving our  amendments and fighting for a better deal for seven million Australians left behind by  John Howard and Peter Costello.  We’re not going to play their silly political games.   

 Journalist: (Inaudible.)   

 SWAN: Well we will, and the Democrats can see our amendments and they can either  support them or they can vote with the Government.  But when people are voting with  the Government on this, they’re voting to deny seven million Australians a fair deal in  the tax system.  We’re going to fight these amendments in the House of  Representatives.  That’s where Kim Beazley will be first thing this morning and in 2  weeks time they’ll go to the Senate and we’re going to fight all of the way there.  But  when Peter Costello’s going on about disallowance motions, I think the comments  from the respected independent Clerk of the Senate expose his political game and  his political tactics.   

 Journalist: Seeing the Democrats would normally also oppose … (inaudible)?   

 SWAN: We’re happy to talk to the Democrats, but we are still two weeks away from  the Senate vote.  We have not even had a chance to argue our amendments in the  House of Representatives.  That’s what will commence today.  That’s the whole point  and that’s the position that we took to caucus yesterday.  The first thing we have to  do is fight the Bill to get some fair amendments in it.  After we’ve done that we  consider other matters.   

 ENDS.   

 Wednesday 25 May 2005  Contact Jim Chalmers 0417 141 676   

