---
title: "Greens not satisfied with internal inquiry into Cornelia Rau case: reissue call for royal commission."
date: "2005-02-08"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "RAU, Cornelia"
  - "Missing persons"
  - "Mental disorders"
  - "Committees and inquiries"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211275017
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6V5F6%22
---

 Senator Kerry Nettle  Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Greens not satisfied with internal inquiry into  Cornelia Rau case: reissue call for royal  commission 

 8th February 2005 

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle has rejected the government's internal  inquiry into the Cornelia Rau case as inadequate and foreshadowed  The Greens intention to move for a royal commission.   

 "The Greens, Ms Rau's family, the Opposition and refugee advocates  have all called for a full public inquiry but the government has  refused," Senator Nettle said.   

 "Their needs to be a judicial inquiry with the power to subpoena  witnesses, to ensure that the full facts are disclosed about Ms Rau's  treatment and the treatment of other detainees in immigration  detention centres. Otherwise it looks like a whitewash.   

 "The terms of reference Senator Vanstone has proposed are far too  narrow. They should allow for the investigation of the immigration  detention system as a whole.   

 "The serious allegations concerning the conduct of detention centre  guards, are unlikely to be addressed by the internal investigation  Minister Vanstone has announced.   

 "The public will see this move as a cover up by the government. A  reporting date the day before Easter holidays reinforces this view.   

 "The Greens will continue to seek the Senates support for our call for a  royal commission or other judicial inquiry."   

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

 

 NOTICE OF MOTION   

 08.02.05   

 I give notice that on the next day of sitting I will move:   

 That the Senate:    

 A) Notes:   

 I. The circumstances and treatment of Cornelia Rau   

 are appalling and highlight systematic problems in the administration  of Immigration Detention;    

 II. The Rau family have called for a full judicial   

 inquiry;   

 III. Ms Rau's case is just one example of how mental   

 health and physical health is being inappropriately   

 diagnosed and treated in detention centres;    

 IV. several studies have concluded that detention   

 itself exacerbates and creates mental illness in   

 detainees;   

 V. independent monitoring of operations in   

 detention centres has been totally inadequate;   

 VI. the conditions of isolation unit at Baxter   

 Detention are inhumane and not appropriate for any   

 person, be they Australian or non-citizen; 

 

 B) Calls on the government to:   

 I. Apologise to Cornelia Rau and her family immediately;   

 II. Arrange appropriate compensation for Ms Rau for her   

 treatment in immigration detention;   

 III. Instigate a Royal Commission to investigate:   

 a) how a permanent resident came to be placed in   

 immigration detention;   

 b) the mistreatment of Cornelia Rau and other   

 detainees in immigration detention;   

 c) conditions in detention centres around Australia   

 and off-shore.   

 

 

 SENATOR KERRY NETTLE 

 

