---
title: "Transcript of a partial doorstop interview of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, India, 8 June 2005: [Allegations about China operating a spy ring in Australia]."
date: "2005-06-08"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "CHEN, Yonglin"
  - "Foreign diplomats"
  - "Espionage"
  - "Refugees"
  - "China"
  - "Allegations about China operating a spy ring in Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279757
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7PAG6%22
---

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   

 

 DATE: June 8 2005  

 

 TITLE: Doorstop India - Partial Transcript   

 Journalist: (inaudible) allegations about China operating a spy ring in Australia, my question  is will the two defectors be granted asylum in Australia.  And what impact will their  allegations and their claims for asylum have on Australia’s relations with China?   

 Downer:  Well first of all I don’t think that they should have any impact on Australia’s  relations with China -it’s a very substantial relationship, we have good relations with China.  Any claims for asylum in Australia are treated consistently with our obligations under the  1951 Refugee Convention. And these applications will be considered in the light of those  obligations that we have under the 1951 Refugee Convention. There will be, a determination  will be made by an officer or officers at the Department of Immigration - the Government  itself doesn’t make those determinations. And we’ll, you know we’ll just take things as they  come.   

 Journalist: (inaudible)   

 Downer: No I don’t think it’s going to have a significant impact on Australia - China  relations. I really don’t. It is a relationship which is broad and a deep relationship. We have  very substantial political relations now with modern China, we have a strong economic  relationship. We have common interests in seeing a secure and stable East Asia. When one or  two people apply for asylum, you know, regardless of the outcome of the process of  considering those applications I don’t think it’s going to have a big impact one way or  another. And I’m confident about that.   

 Journalist: Mr Downer Geoff Thomson from ABC, sorry to get you here but obviously there  are some questions that some people want some answers to in Australia. You said yesterday  that there was no formal application for asylum from Mr Chen -I’ve got a letter here that is in  circulation in Australia in which he has applied for political asylum on the 25th of May. What  (inaudible) if so why and what constitutes a formal or informal application or rejection?   

 Downer: Well look, there are two things to say about this. First of all I don’t think we should  get bogged down in the semantics here. I mean it’s clear that Mr Chen applied on the, I think  the 27th of May to stay in Australia. He didn’t make a formal application to me for political  asylum. He made and that letter illustrates an application to the Department of Immigration. 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 And if you read the whole of the letter you would see that in that letter he asks the Department  of Immigration if it would be prepared to vary his visa. Look this is a quite a semantic point  because he certainly applied to stay in Australia and the only semantic and minor point that I  would make is that he didn’t make a direct application to me as the Foreign Minister for  political asylum, that’s the only point I am making. But he certainly made an application to  stay in Australia. As time went on it became clear to us that the best way for him to apply  would be through an application for a protection visa, so that the case that he wanted to put  could be objectively considered. It doesn’t make - and I’ve made this point before - it doesn’t  make as much sense for people to just apply for political asylum and expect the Foreign  Minister to just make a decision with a stroke of a pen. It’s much wiser to have a considered  process which can be worked through by the Immigration Department, they’re the experts in  considering these cases. If you (inaudible) asylum in Australia you have to put a case that if  you were returned to your home you would suffer persecution because of your political or  religious or philosophical views- that’s all articulated there in the 1951 Refugee Convention.  And it certainly seemed to us that that was the best way for it to be handled rather than there  to be a formal application to the Foreign Minister, for simply the Foreign Minister to make a  decision. Well obviously under those circumstances the Foreign Minister would be expected  to consult his colleagues. But nevertheless it seemed to me and it seems to the government to  just make a lot more sense in terms of handling due process. I don’t think he is in anyway  disadvantaged by this, I think on the contrary I think this is a good process, it’s a fair way of  doing it and I think all Australians would expect us to handle this application in an open and a  fair way.   

 Journalist: But this new application is a resubmission of the original application for political  asylum (inaudible) does that mean that (inaudible) that political asylum is rejected or not?   

 Downer: Well we have clearly discouraged that application for political asylum on the  grounds that an application for a permanent protection visa is the much more appropriate way  to go because an application for political asylum as such - in other words for some sort of  territorial protection as it is sometimes called or a territorial visa, it’s only been granted twice  that I’m aware of in Australian history - is done by administrative fiat. I think it would be,  I  personally think it would be much more appropriate for the Immigration Department to make  the appropriate judgements about the merits of the case, rather than for the Minister to make  an administrative decision without reference to the facts. So I think the Immigration   Department will handle this well and effectively and I do quite openly say that I think that is t  he best way to go. So no matter how the applications are made and formal and informal  applications and requests, I’ve personally been of the view that the way we’re handling it the  best way to handle it.    

 Journalist: Along with Chen Yonglin we now have another application for some sort of  asylum for Hao Fengjun, so there is two Chinese people in Australia seeking asylum - this is  building it seems, he backs the claims of widespread spying, is this proving to be  embarrassing for Australia in its relationship with China?   

 Downer: This is the difference here and I’m criticising the media here by the way, (inaudible)  there is no argument on that. If I was in the media I would be running it but let me just point  out that w get something like 3000 applications a year for protection, I think for protection  visas of one kind or another. And you know occasionally they succeed and often they don’t 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 but we get an enormous number of applications and it’s true some of those applications come  from China. And it’s always (inaudible) for a long time being that, probably not always but  certainly for a very long time been that. And so all of these applications whether they are from  China or from wherever they may be from, anywhere else, they’re all just considered on their  merits and if they is meritorious case to be put then we respond positively to that case. I don’t  think this is a cause for any controversy, I don’t think either of these people need to think that  we will, (inaudible) make this point - let me make this point quite strongly - I don’t want  either of these people to think that we would handle these applications unfairly. We will look  at the applications on the basis of their merits and the Department of Immigration will make a  determination. Obviously if the applicants don’t like the determination and it’s a negative  determination they can then appeal to the refugee review tribunal. That’s part of the due  process we have and I don’t want to see this handled in an unfair way but I don’t see any 

 particular cause for controversial and any rational for controversy.   

 Journalist: Just to be absolutely clear, does the discouragement of political asylum mean  rejection of political asylum?   

 Downer: Well I’m just making the point that when you consider through the options of the  best way to handle this I repeat what I’ve said. I think, obviously people can make formal  applications for political asylum, it’s never happened in my time as the Foreign Minister and  this particular case the original letter which Bob Brown has released a part of but not all of  was a letter not addressed to me it was addressed to the Immigration Department. I know that  the applicant used the expression “political asylum”, that he asked the Department of  Immigration to vary his visa. And you know clearly in these circumstances the Government  has to reflect on how best to handle these kind of issues and I think you know in the time I’m  the Foreign Minister I stick pretty solidly with my view that it’s much more appropriate for  the Department of Immigration with al its experience to make the appropriate determination  on the basis of the facts presented to it rather than Foreign Ministers making impulsive  decisions just on the basis of representation from one of an argument. I mean I think we have  to look at all sides of the argument.   

 Journalist: Is the question of political asylum still open though?   

 Downer: Well the application is now been made for a - you know I don’t want to get into the  semantics of formal and informal applications -  but clearly a quite formal application has  been made for a protection visa and we’ll see how that goes.   

 Journalist: (inaudible)   

 Downer: We don’t speak about intelligence matters that is a standard procedure of the  Australian Government.    

 

 

