---
title: "22 pad up for Australia at Adelaide oval."
date: "2005-01-26"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Australia Day"
  - "Cricket"
  - "Adelaide"
  - "Citizenship"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211274635
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XI1F6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS  AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 22 Pad Up for Australia at Adelaide Oval

 VPS 025/2005

 Twenty-two people will become Australian citizens before an audience of around 30,000 people at the Adelaide Oval during a  break in the International one-day match between Australia and the West Indies today. 

 Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, said the ceremony would be part of an historic Australia Day where more than  12 000 people will become citizens - the greatest number ever on Australia Day. 

 ‘Given that some of these conferees are from cricketing nations such as India, Pakistan, the United Kingdom and South  Africa, it seems highly appropriate that they become citizens during a one-day international cricket match,’ the Minister said.

 ‘I am delighted to be presiding over this ceremony, which will be conducted during the change of innings.’ 

 As a memento of the occasion, the 22 new Australian citizens will receive a small engraved bat commemorating the ceremony  and their part in this historic day.

 ‘I invite the crowd to also celebrate their commitment to Australia by participating in an Affirmation ceremony. Our  citizenship is something we should actively celebrate on Australia Day,’ the Minister said. 

 ‘To the many conferees around the nation who have come as refugees and found sanctuary here, I offer a special welcome on  the day Australia celebrates its beginnings as a new nation.

 ‘I thank all of those people taking part in ceremonies today - there will be close to 12 000 across Australia - for their  commitment to the Australian community,’ the Minister said.

 26 January 2005

