---
title: "There's no place like home: but only if you have one."
date: "2005-04-11"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "ALP policy"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Housing"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211277766
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A4PF6%22
---

 LAURIE FERGUSON MP             SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION 

         FEDERAL MEMBER FOR REID   

 Electorate Office: Level 3, Granville Towers, 10 Bridge St, Granville NSW 2142  Ph (02) 9637 4713 Fax (02) 9682 6320   

 11 April 2005 

 THERE’S NO PLACE LIKE HOME - BUT ONLY IF YOU  HAVE ONE   

 Labor today welcomed the report by The Australian Housing and Urban Research  Institute on Housing Need and Provision for recently arrived refugees in Australia.    

 “The fact that 30% of refugees and TPV holders have experienced homelessness is a  wake up call for the Government and highlights the much needed reform of settlement  services”, stated Laurie Ferguson, the Shadow Minister for Immigration.  

 

 “What the Minister doesn’t understand is that by simply granting refugee visa’s her work  in not done. There are serious integration issues at the fore which the Government and the  Department fail to realise. What is the point of having displaced persons coming to  Australia, to find themselves denied proper access to a home?”   

 “This would never happen under a Labor government, because Labor believes everyone  deserves a fair go. Labor believes families deserve stability in their lives.   Most importantly, Labor understands the special settlement needs of new arrivals.   Labor advocates that a dedicated, streamlined and consistent approach is needed to assist  integration within the broader Australian community.”    

 “Labor recognises the contributions refugees can make to our community. A Labor  government will introduce a single one off TPV period of two years, and offer permanent  residence if ongoing protection is required. We will also offer permanent residence to  TPV holders where it is found the person has made economic, social, community and  family links beneficial to the Australian community. 

 

 “Under a Labor Government, we will diminish the uncertaintly of TPV’s and address the  needs of culturally, politically and linguistically diverse groups. Labor believes in access  and equity for resettlement of all new arrivals. We will also actively implement  Employment assistance and greater access to English language training, which the  Government has failed to do. Unemployment rates among refugees are at a 64% high,  and ESL resources are failing African refugees.”    

 “The Howard Government has failed to face up to the unsustainable problem of effective  resettlement:  now refugees are not only helpless, but homeless,” Laurie Ferguson  concluded.   For further information, please contact:  Laurie Ferguson on 02 9637 4717 or Aisha Amjad on 0413 511 666.   

