---
title: "Transcript of a doorstop interview of the Shadow Minister for Health: Parliament House, Canberra: 13 June 2005: Minister for Health, tax cuts, Guantanamo Bay, East Timor, Bill Farmer AO medal, Chen inquiry."
date: "2005-06-13"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH"
subjects:
  - "Ministerial responsibility"
  - "Health care"
  - "Tax rates and margins"
  - "Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia Rau"
  - "Minister for Health"
  - "tax cuts"
  - "Guantanamo Bay"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Bill Farmer AO medal"
  - "Chen inquiry."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279915
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J7CG6%22
---

 JULIA GILLARD M.P.   

 Shadow Minister for Health  Manager of Opposition Business   

 TRANSCRIPT DOORSTOP     -      PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  1:45PM  13 JUNE 2005   

 ISSUES: Minister for Health, tax cuts, Guantanamo Bay, East Timor, Bill Farmer AO medal,  Chen Inquiry   

 JULIA  GILLARD:  We  are  here  to  talk  about  health.  Obviously  Labor  has  been  keeping  the   pressure  on  Tony  Abbott  about  the  lies  he  has  told  about  the  Medicare  safety  net.  Today  I   want to announce that Labor in the coming sitting weeks will also be keeping the pressure on  the Minister for Health about all of the things he is not doing in his portfolio. Minister Abbott  has  simply  lost  control  of  health.  The  Treasurer  is  reviewing  the  big  issue  of  medical   workforce  and  when  asked,  Minister  Abbott  didn’t  seem  to  know  anything  about  it.  The   Treasurer is looking at PBS sustainability and once again, Minister Abbott is out of the loop.  The Minister for Finance, Nick Minchin is dealing with the sale of Medibank Private and once  again, Minister Abbott didn’t seem to know what was going on.   

 And  most  importantly  of  all  Minister  Abbott  didn’t  appear  to  know  what  is  happening  with   health reform. He campaigned against health reform in the lead-up to the last election the   Prime Minister then dumped his Health Minister on this issue and called the Podger Review.  Now the Podger Review has been replaced by the COAG process. And when questioned last  week Minister Abbott simply didn’t seem to know what was going to be in the COAG process  and falsely claimed that the major problems with mental health would be addressed by the  COAG process, a claim that simply isn’t true. Now Australians deserve a Health Minister who  tells  the  truth  and  gets  the  job  done.  Minister  Abbott  is  doing  neither  and  Labor  will  be   making sure there is a focus on those issues in this Parliamentary fortnight.   

 JOURNALIST:  I  was  just  going  to  ask  you  as  Manager  of  Opposition  Business,  has  Labor   determined its position on whether it will move a disallowance motion on the tax schedule?   

 JULIA GILLARD: I think you would know from all of the statements Kim Beazley has made and  all of the statements that Shadow Treasurer, Wayne Swan, has made that our view is that we  want to have a debate about fair tax cuts and have that debate first. That debate has been  had in the House of Representatives; it will now be had in the Senate. And the question for  the Government is simply why it won’t endorse a fair tax cut, a fair tax cut for ordinary and  middle  income  Australians,  why  it  thinks  it  is  good  enough  to  give  them  $6  a  week  when   politicians in Parliament House are going to get $65 a week and why it wont endorse Labor’s  plan to give those Australians a $12 a week tax cut.   

 JOURNALIST:  So  even  thought  Parliament  resumes  tomorrow  you  still  don’t  know  whether   Labor, or Labor still hasn’t determined whether or not it will move a disallowance motion? 

 

 JULIA GILLARD: The position remains, as articulated by both  Kim Beazley and Wayne Swan  on many an occasion last week, we will have a debate about fairness of tax cuts first, that  has  happened  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  it  has  obviously  happened  in  the  public   domain and it will happen in the Senate this week.   

 JOURNALIST: Does the Greens stance on it change your idea at all on that, the fact that they  are not going to support or move a motion?   

 JULIA  GILLARD:  The  position  remains  as  articulated  by  both  Kim  Beazley  and  Wayne  Swan   last week.   

 JOURNALIST: Is it the case that Labor has made up its mind that it wants to have the debate  before it says what it will do?   

 JULIA  GILLARD:  I really can’t take it further than what I have just said. We have always  wanted to contest the fairness of these tax cuts on their substance. We have always wanted  to have a debate on what was fair for middle income Australians that debate is about a $6  tax cut versus a $12 tax cut, that is the debate we have been having that is the debate we  will continue to have. 

 

 JOURNALIST: But the debate has been going on since Budget week, which  is over a month   now, we have had Mr Beazley’s reply speech, we have had numerous debates in the House  of Reps as well isn’t it time to just let the tax cuts begin on July 1?   

 JULIA GILLARD: Well on issues as major as this, about fairness in the Australian community,  you  have  the  debate  and  you  have  the  debate  and  you  have  the  debate  and  we  are   continuing to have that debate. This debate of course could be ended by Treasurer Costello  finally  agreeing  to  pick  up  his  swaggering  arrogance  and  do  the  right  thing,  and  the  right   thing would be to endorse Labor’s plan for a $12 tax cut for most Australians, indeed for 7  million Australians. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Well most Australians aren’t interested in the debate, they want a tax cut and  they probably rather a $6 one they are going to get than a $12 one they aren’t going to get,  why wont you give them a $6 one, its better than nothing?   

 JULIA GILLARD: Well the Government has its plans as announced on Budget night, obviously  Labor  has  its  alternative  and  we  will  continue  to  argue  for  our  alternative  that  is  what  you   would expect us to do.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think you made a mistake in determining that position?   

 JULIA GILLARD: The position that was determined, I am very happy with that position. I think  we  are  out  there  in  the  community  arguing  a  very  basic  issue  of  fairness.  That  debate  has   been had and will continue to be had.   

 JOURNALIST: On  another  issue  there  are  more  concerns  yesterday  about  the  treatment  of   prisoners at Guantanamo Bay and new calls for David Hicks to be bought home and for the  whole facility to be closed down. Is it time Guantanamo Bay was closed down, what is Labor’s  position?   

 JULIA  GILLARD:  Labor  has  consistently  articulated  a  position,  about  assisting  an  Australian   citizen, David Hicks, it is not for us to determine what the US should or shouldn’t be doing  with facilities like Guantanamo Bay but obviously we have an interest in the welfare and fair  treatment  and  particularly  access  to  hearings  for  Australian  citizens.  That  is  obviously  a   matter that has been dealt with by Kevin Rudd, and dealt with by him consistently since Mr  Hicks was first apprehended and put in Guantanamo Bay.   

 JOURNALIST: And on another issue, the troops are coming out of East Timor today, there will  be  a  hand  over  in  Dili,  is  it  time  for  our  troops  to  come  out  or  do  you  think  we  should  be   staying there a little longer?   

 JULIA GILLARD: look this is not really an issue I can give a comment on, that is one you would  have to address to Kevin Rudd, obviously I think all Australians were happy to see our troops  play a big role in securing East Timor and the act of self determination that finally occurred  by  the  East  Timorese.  Supporting  East  Timor,  I  think  is  a  genuinely  popular  call  with  the   Australian  community  and  particularly,  I  know  from  my  own  electorate,  a  very  popular  call   with those who served in World War II and often relied very greatly on the assistance of the  East Timorese.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Bill Farmer deserves the medal that he has been awarded today?   

 JULIA GILLARD: Well there does seem to be a bit of a tendency for the Howard Government to  reward public service conduct that it approves of  presumably  with recommendations about  medals I would simply say this, there is a real contradiction that we could have on the one  hand  a  Minister  for  Immigration  indicate  the  degree  of  concern  she  apparently  now  has   about the culture of the Immigration Department and on the other hand to see many of the  leading  lights  in  the  Department  of  Immigration  and  including  today  Bill  Farmer  being   rewarded with these sorts of medals, I think that does raise a question in peoples’ mind.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think he should accept the medal?   

 JULIA GILLARD: That is a matter for Mr Farmer really, I don’t want to focus this issue on him  but clearly there is a major issue and a great deal of community concern about the conduct  of the Department of Immigration. I think if you said to people, twelve months or two years  ago that our Immigration Department would be deporting an Australian citizen, people would  have shaken their head and said no that couldn’t possibly happen. Well it has happened and  it  has  given  real  concerns  of  the  Australian  people  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  Immigration   Department, it has to change, the Minister has indicated it should change and one wonders  in  those  circumstances  just  how  well  various  Immigration  officials  believe  they  have   performed their jobs.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do  you  think  it  is  ironic  given  the  Palmer  Inquiry  is  apparently  recommending   that Bill Farmer may no longer, that his head may be one that rolls?   

 JULIA  GILLARD:  It is hard to know exactly will come out of the Palmer Inquiry, I have seen  some press speculation which would lead you to believe it is going to recommend a number  of  things  which  are  actually  on  all  fours  with  Labor’s  refugee  and  asylum  seeker  policy.   Particularly  independent  oversight  of  detention  and  independent  review  of  long  term   detainees and Labor defines that as people who are in detention for 90 days or longer but  this, at the moment is in the realm of speculation we would need to see the complete report.  And we may never, who knows. 

 

 JOURNALIST: is Labor planning to support a Senate Inquiry into aspects of the Chen matter  or  the  Democrats  full  blown  inquiry  into  the  Immigration  Department,  would  you  support   that? 

 

 JULIA GILLARD: That is one for Kevin Rudd I am afraid, you would have to ask him that. I am  sure you can find Kevin you will have to give Kevin a call.   

 END  Contact: Kimberley Gardiner 0401 533 002   

 

