---
title: "Detainee vigil highlights mental anguish."
date: "2005-04-23"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
  - "Maribyrnong (Vic)"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Victoria"
  - "Mental health"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Surveys"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211557275
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LEVF6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator Lyn Allison Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Victoria Australian Democrats spokesperson for Health and Ageing

 Dated: 23 April 2005

 Press Release Number: 05/195

 Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Related: Health and Ageing

 DETAINEE VIGIL HIGHLIGHTS MENTAL ANGUISH 

 The Government's inhumane policy of mandatory detention is creating long-term psychological damage for  detainees, Democrats Leader Senator Lyn Allison told supporters at a vigil held today at Maribyrnong  Detention Centre.

 Senator Allison, a regular visitor to Maribyrnong, said asylum seekers are suffering depression resulting from  the trauma of being detained.

 "I have spoken with detainees in Maribyrnong who were fit and healthy before their incarceration, but after  prolonged detention and often solitary confinement, are taking cocktails of medication to treat their mental  illness," Senator Allison said. 

 "One Iranian detainee told me he has had no access to a psychologist or psychiatrist because he will not  comply with a condition requiring him to be handcuffed when he leaves the detention centre.

 Senator Allison said there is limited research into the impact of detention on the mental health of asylum  seekers because of the difficulty in getting access to the evidence. Evidence that does exist shows that  detention contributes to high levels of anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, self-harm and  suicidal behaviour.

 "A study reported in the Medical Journal of Australia found that all but one of the detained asylum seekers  who participated in the study displayed symptoms of psychological distress, 85% reported chronic  depression, 65% had pronounced suicidal ideation and 20% exhibited signs of psychosis," Senator Allison  said.

 Senator Allison is chairing the National Mental Health Inquiry, the terms of reference of which include the  overrepresentation of people with mental illness in detention and in the criminal justice system. 

 Submissions are now being received and the Select Committee on Mental Health will report its findings by  October 6, 2005.

 Senator Allison said today's multi-party vigil was organised by the Democrats in an effort to show support for  detainees and send a message to the Howard Government that not all Australian support its barbaric  immigration detention policy. Detainees shared a BBQ with supporters.

 PHOTOS:

 Maribyrnong Detention Centre Vigil

