---
title: "Government incompetent on immigration."
date: "2005-06-01"
creators:
  - "Ellis, Kate"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of ELLIS, KATE, MP"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "GEORGIOU, Petro"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Proposed legislation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279424
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6E8G6%22
---

 Media Release 

 Kate Ellis MP  Federal Member for Adelaide 

 1 June 2005 

 

 Government incompetent on immigration   

 All Australians know the country’s immigration system desperately needs reform and that children do  not belong behind barbed wire - everyone except members of the Howard Government.   

 The Howard Government’s incompetence is making our immigration system weak and placing  Australians at risk, but John Howard is incapable of showing any leadership on the issue.   

 With breath-taking arrogance in Parliament today, the Howard Government gagged debate on two  proposed bills drafted to reform the immigration system - bills drafted by the Liberal Party itself.   

 The bills, drafted by Liberal MP Petro Georgiou, aim to remove children from detention, speed up  the processing of those in detention and to give certainty to people on Temporary Protection Visas.    

 I sought to have the bills introduced into the house and to debate the bills drafted by Liberal MP  Petro Georgiou.   

 The Labor Party says bring on the debate, because Mr Georgiou’s bills closely reflect Labor’s stated  position on immigration.   

 Labor supports an immigration process which is tough, responsible and compassionate. That does  not include keeping children behind razor wire.   

 But spineless Government MPs used their numbers in the house to gag any debate and to keep the  same immigration system that is lurching from one scandal to another.   

 I will always speak out against Australia’s immigration system because it is poorly managed, weak and  inhumane. The Government’s incompetence in immigration is making the system weak and placing  Australians at risk. 

 

 Unfortunately, Government MPs - including those reported to support Mr Georgiou’s bills - may be  lions in their own party room, but they are pussy cats in the House.   

 It  is  shameful  for  any  member  of  this  parliament  to  vote  against  even  debating  this  important  issue  and  of   creating a fairer system   

 

 

 

 Further comments:  Kate Ellis 02 6277 4256   

 

