---
title: "Child migrants and human rights in our time: address at the 4th World Congress on family Law and Children's Rights."
date: "2005-03-20"
creators:
  - "Ozdowski, Sev"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Child migrants"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Asylum"
  - "People trafficking"
  - "UN High Commissioner for Refugees"
  - "Convention on the Rights of the Child"
  - "UNICEF"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211277005
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IDVF6%22
---

 “Child Migrants and Human Rights in our Time”  

 Address by Dr Sev Ozdowski OAM, Human Rights  Commissioner at the the 4th World Congress on Family Law and  Children’s Rights, 20 - 23 March 2005, Cape Town South Africa. 

 

 1. Introduction 

 Today I am going to talk to you about the global movement of separated children within the  context of 4 constructs or pillars:  

 ? the first pillar is the size of that global movement of children and the different factors  that lead to its creation;  

 ? the second pillar is that notwithstanding the Convention on the Rights of the Child,  domestic laws in most mainstream industrialised countries are failing these children  and Australia is one of these;  

 ? the third pillar is that punitive responses to stem the flow are proving ineffective/or  exact too high a cost;  

 ? the fourth pillar suggests that a co-ordinated response by mainstream industrialised  nations, under the umbrella of the UNHCR/UNICEF, is urgently required to meet this  growing challenge.  

 I should add, at this point, that my work over the past few years and my inquiry on children in  immigration detention (CIDI), in Australia, the report of which “A last resort?” was tabled in the  Australian Federal parliament in May of 2004, has made me even more keenly aware of the  fragility of child asylum seekers. But more on that later!  

 2. The Global Movement of Children 

 Separated minors are children and young people under 18 years of age outside their country  of origin. They have been separated voluntarily or involuntarily - from their parents or care  givers.  

 This is not a new problem.  

 From the Old Testament, we know that the child Joseph in Canaan was sold to a party of  Ishmaelite traffickers who took him to Egypt where he was compelled to work as a slave.  Unusually, this story had a happy ending, because he became the Pharaoh ’s trusted adviser,  saved Egypt from famine and ultimately was reunited and reconciled with his family. He also  provided the source material for the hit Broadway show, “Joseph and the Amazing  Technicolour Dreamcoat”!  

 In 1618, a group of 100 boy 'vagrants' (to use the vernacular of the day) were shipped from  the London area to Virginia, their passage arranged by London’s City fathers. There they  were forced to work on tobacco plantations under what must have been shocking conditions.  Arguably, this was the first example of state-sponsored child migration.  

 Through to current times, where in 2001, a 15 year old girl in Benin City, Nigeria,  hypothetically named Sarah, is forced to take part in “voodoo” cult rituals. Terrified, Sarah  agrees to go to London where she is compelled to work as a prostitute under slave-like  conditions, until luckily, she is rescued by British police; incidentally this incredible story is  really true.  

 So, this snapshot covering several thousand years shows that child migration is not new. 

 Lamentably, these examples demonstrate that if anything, conditions are now as bad as they 

 ever were, despite international legal mechanisms designed to protect separated children.  

 Categories of Separated child movement 

 When one looks at different child movements throughout history one can distinguish four  different categories of child movement:  

 ? State sponsored migration  

 ? Refugee  

 ? Humanitarian  

 ? Trafficking  

 State Sponsored Child Migration 

 I have already referred you to the seventeenth century example of British children sent to  Virginia. The migration of these so-called “Orphans of the Empire” ultimately numbering  130,000 trafficked by their own government was mercifully halted in 1967.  

 The Canada Home Children scheme, from 1869 until the last arrival in 1948, involved  100,000 unaccompanied children sent to Canada from Britain.  

 Once Canada stopped its program, the Australian government escalated its own, which had  been temporarily suspended during the Second World War.  

 From 1947 to 1967, around 3,000 children from Britain and Malta (under British jurisdiction)  were forcibly sent to Australia and put into the care of charitable organisations - Dr  Barnardo ’s Homes, the Catholic Church, Salvation Army, YMCA, Boy Scouts Association and  so on.  

 Whatever the intention - settling the Empire with “good British stock” or “rescuing” children  from poverty - the facts speak for themselves. From Catholic agencies alone, 87% of those  children came to Australia without parental consent and 96% of them had one or both parents  alive in Britain. In May 2002, the Australian government announced a “benefits package” of  US$2m for the former child migrants, along with a statement of regret.  

 Whatever the “humanitarian” motives behind such policies, it is now universally agreed that  the negative effects flowing from these large scale government-sponsored activities far  outweighed the alleged positives. Accordingly the practice may be deemed to have ceased.  

 Child Refugee Movement 

 The separated children of today may be seeking asylum because of fear of persecution or  lack of protection due to human rights violations in their country.  

 In other words, children who fulfil the classical definition of “refugee” under the Refugee  Convention. 

 For instance in Austria in the first half of 1999, 265 applications for asylum by separated  children were received in Vienna alone, while Sweden received 137 such applications in the  same period. In Australia, the most obvious recent examples of this category would be the  group of young unaccompanied Afghanis in the period 2000 - 2002.  

 Child Humanitarian Movement 

 Examples could also include children caught outside their home country because of  circumstances of war or civil unrest who may not qualify as refugees.  

 For instance, in 1939, 20 children from the Vienna Boys Choir were touring in Western 

 Australia when WWII broke out. Rather than being interned by the Australian government, the  boys were given safe haven for the duration of the war, with Melbourne families. The foster  care was arranged by the Archbishop of Melbourne. After the war, all the boys except one  chose to stay in Australia and take citizenship.  

 There are other historical examples of creative efforts to save children in times of war.  

 These include the 1944 exodus of Polish children from Stalin ’s forced labour camps through  what was then Persia to New Zealand. The New Zealand government invited 733 children to  migrate there, and paid for their care and education. Most were unaccompanied but some  came with their mothers.  

 Among several thousand Holocaust survivors who came to Australia after the war, 300 of  them were orphans, brought to Australia by the Australian Jewish Welfare Society between  1947 and 1950.  

 Official resettlement programs are another example. In 2002-03 Australia ’s Department of  Immigration accepted 388 unaccompanied humanitarian minors (UHMs). However some of  these were accompanied by adults, who provided the Department with undertakings they  would be responsible for ‘their ’ children in Australia. The rest, not so covered, became wards  (the legal responsibility) of the Immigration Minister and received state welfare assistance.  

 This small UHM intake varies from year to year. Other mainstream industrialised nations have  similar, limited programs. Its existence permits a medium to long-term response to either  man-made or natural catastrophes - the recent Tsunami Disaster is a case in point; ultimately  some of those children, established as orphaned, may well form part of a future UHM intake.  This point is more fully articulated in the UNHCR ’s January 2005 ’s “Unaccompanied and  Separated Children in the Tsunami-Affected Countries - Guiding Principles”. 

 Or, they may be separated children who travel internationally, seeking to escape conditions of  serious hardship, for a better life. Typically, they would qualify for humanitarian protection, by  virtue of their special vulnerability as separated children.  

 This paper focuses on separated children crossing international boundaries in the absence of  either State or UN sponsorship.  

 Trafficking 

 Or, they may be the victims of trafficking.  

 It is important upfront to note the essential difference between trafficking and smuggling.  

 Trafficking is moving children without their informed consent; it applies whether a child was  taken forcibly or voluntarily. The US Government defines it as:  

 “all acts involved in the transport, harbouring, or sale of persons within national or across  international borders through coercion, force, kidnapping, deception or fraud, for purposes of  placing persons in situations of forced labour or services, such as forced prostitution,  domestic servitude, debt bondage or other slavery-like practices”.  

 Smuggling, on the other hand, is where the child or parents knowingly buy the service of a  people smuggler to move them illegally to another country. This often results in an application  for protection under either the refugee or humanitarian categories within the target country.  For example, most of the Afghan unaccompanied minors (UAMs) in Australia would fit into  this category.  

 The child victims of trafficking are overwhelmingly girls, whereas unaccompanied smuggled  children may be of either sex but are usually boys. This distinction might require the  international community to look at “gender specific” solutions that recognise the subtle, but  important, variations at work here.  

 3. Current trends 

 Today, the annual figures of separated children crossing international borders dwarf all  historical figures of child migration.  

 The globalisation of the world economy, including much improved communication and  transportation, has increased flows of people across borders. Transnational organised  criminals have taken advantage of the freer movement to open new markets for their trade.  So today, children can literally travel across the world undetected.  

 At this point I should add that there are many different sources of figures and comparisons  are difficult to make. But the key reality is that the figures are large; very large!  

 Child - Refugees and Humanitarian Claimants 

 In 2003, the most recent year for which UNHCR has some numbers on this, a little under  13,000 (data from 28 industrialised countries, but excludes some important countries - USA,  Canada, Australia, France and Italy) separated children applied for asylum.  

 This figure is estimated to be a welcome reduction of about 11% from the 2001 peak  (20,000).  

 But this may be just the tip of the iceberg; in Sandy Ruxton ’s year 2000 work: “Separated  Children Seeking Asylum in Europe: A Program for Action”, he estimates that there may be as  many as 100,000 separated children in Europe alone, hidden from official view because they  have not applied for asylum!  

 Incidentally, to deviate even further for a second, an article in the March 2004 edition of the  ABA Journal by Margaret Graham Tebo, sheds some light on the current separated children  figures in the USA. The article quotes officials as asserting that approximately 5,000 UAMs a  year end up in the Unaccompanied Minors Program, which is overseen by the US Office of  Refugee Settlement within the Department of Health and Human Services.  

 But back to the big picture: considering the total refugee figures it is not surprising that  separated children figures are also high. In June 2004, UNHCR estimated that at the end of  2003, there were 38 different “protracted situations” accounting for some 6.2 million refugees  in total (a protracted refugee situation is one in which refugees find themselves in a long-lasting and intractable state of limbo).  

 This represents a substantial increase since 1993, when the total stood at 27, although the  absolute number of refugees living in protracted situations has fallen since 1993 from 7.9 to  6.2 million.  

 To amplify, separated children crossing borders may be refugees, humanitarian asylum  seekers, trafficked girls like Sarah forced to work as prostitutes, or simply children lost in the  aftermath of war or natural disaster. Their relatives may have paid a people smuggler to  transport them to a place where they believed the child would be safe.  

 They can be from all corners of the world, but in general, the flows are from south to north  and from east to west; from the poorer to the wealthier states.  

 The majority of unaccompanied refugee and humanitarian asylum seeker children who make  it to the west go to Western Europe (especially the Netherlands, the Nordic countries and  Switzerland), the USA and Canada. A small number end up in Australia and New Zealand.  

 Trafficked Children 

 The majority of trafficking victims, on the other hand, are sent to Western Europe, the Middle  East, Thailand and India - and also to the US. According to the US Congressional Research  Service and the State Department, between 245,000 and 700,000 children are trafficked each 

 year through international borders. It is estimated this figure could rise to as high as one 

 million this year.  

 Mostly they are girls, trapped in debt bondage and forced to work as unpaid prostitutes.  

 Every year, 300,000 women and girls are trafficked into Thailand alone, to be exploited in the  commercial sex trade. They come from Burma, Laos, Cambodia and southern China  (reputedly a major element of Triad commerce).  

 Every year, between 5,000 and 7,000 Nepali girls are trafficked to India. Most of them are  deceived into a life as sex workers. According to UNICEF, approximately 200,000 Nepali  women, most of them girls under 18, work in Indian cities.  

 Child trafficking from the former Soviet Union has reached epidemic proportions.  

 From Ukraine alone, in the first decade after the collapse of communism, 400,000 women and  girls were trafficked into international commercial sex markets (Western Europe, Israel, the  US). That is the Ukrainian Interior Ministry estimate; NGOs and independent researchers  believe the number could be much higher.  

 From the African continent, children are trafficked to Western Europe and the Middle East to  be sold as sex slaves. They are also trafficked to neighbouring countries.  

 In the mid-90s in Uganda, for example, the “Lord's Resistance Army ’ ’, a heavily-armed rebel  group that has been fighting the Ugandan government, systematically abducted between  6,000 and 8,000 children. Most were between the ages of 10 and 17, and were marched to  southern Sudan. They were forced to take part in combat, carry heavy loads, act as personal  servants to the rebels, and, in the case of girls, serve as “wives” to rebel commanders.  Roughly half the children escaped but the remainder probably died in captivity.  

 As an aside, it should be noted that UNHCR remains committed to resolving this hotspot. The  September 2004 report of the ‘Inter-Agency Internal Displacement Division Mission to  Uganda ’, gives a graphic account of the challenges faced in permanently resolving these  issues.  

 Finally, with regard to the last point, time does not permit here, but a whole speech could be  devoted to the terrible practice of inducting children to serve as ‘child soldiers ’. In some parts  of the world it is endemic.  

 I think this little snapshot unhappily demonstrates the extent of “cultural pluralism” at work  here!!!  

 4. The difference between the past and current movements 

 There are significant differences between the past movements of children across borders and  current migration. One common theme, however, is that the parents (and children) often have  no idea of what really awaits their children at the end of their journey.  

 One key difference between the past and today is the sponsorship of this mass movement of  children.  

 State Sponsorship  

 In the past it was dominated by state sponsorship, with very heavy NGO involvement, such as  the Catholic Church or Barnardo ’s.  

 Now, transnational criminal syndicates, and small-time people smugglers such as fishermen  and truck drivers, dominate this market.  

 Heavy Costs 

 So, a second difference is that many children (or their families) now bear the cost of their own 

 movement. They incur huge debts that must be repaid. Many of you here would be familiar 

 with the use of children as ‘anchors ’. This is where the family is prepared to pay a high price  to send a child, via people smuggler to a target country, in the hope that once ‘anchored ’, they  can sponsor the rest under family reunion visa conditions.  

 Dangerous transport methods 

 A third difference is that in the past, children were moved in relatively large groups and by  secure transportation. Now, they come in small groups, under inherently dangerous  transportation, either crammed into trucks or leaky boats, or walking alone for thousands of  kilometres over dangerous terrain.  

 Different ‘push-factor’ motives 

 Perhaps the key to these differences lies in the fact that the motives for sending children  across borders are also very different now from previously.  

 Britain ’s motivation for sending its children abroad was perhaps as much about empire-building as about securing the best interests of the child. There is no doubt, however, that  most people believed they were saving children from poverty by sending them to the open air  and spaces of the colonies.  

 Nowadays, any government placement of “at risk” children into alternative care is done purely  with a child protection motive, and always within the broadly defined local community. No  western government today would allow export of its “at risk” children overseas.  

 Parents - not governments - now send their children away in an attempt to save their lives or  to earn money.  

 Poverty 

 For instance, extreme poverty can force desperate parents to sell their daughters to traffickers  to avoid paying a future dowry. Or the child ’s parents may have died forcing them to leave the  country in order to survive.  

 Official greeting on arrival 

 A key feature of today ’s arrival, at a particular country, by a child is the lack of official “meet  and greet”. Past movements were the opposite, although subsequent “abuse” in institutional  care, especially religious, is sadly well documented. In Australia, official parliamentary  inquiries about an institution in Western Australia, revealed shocking abuse.  

 International Conventions 

 Finally, a key difference is that, in the past, there were no international legal protections  specifically for children. Since the mid-1980s, a sizable body of international children ’s rights  instruments (treaties, guidelines, rules) have developed.  

 Now I will briefly examine the various relevant international instruments, such as the  Convention on the Rights of the Child.  

 5. International legal instruments 

 In 1989, the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)  formally established children ’s legal rights to special protection and assistance.  

 The genesis of this treaty was recognition by the world community that the existing legal  framework failed to adequately recognise child-specific human rights. The adoption of the  CRC was a watershed in UN-inspired painstaking negotiation.  

 It became the most ratified human rights treaty in history.  

 Its subject matter is wide, covering everything from the child's right to protection from sexual 

 exploitation to the right to play.  

 It covers the child ’s civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.  

 The principles articulated in Article 20 of the CRC apply to all unaccompanied children.  

 Article 20(1) states:  

 “A child temporarily or permanently deprived of his or her family environment, or in whose  own best interests cannot be allowed to remain in that environment, shall be entitled to  special protection and assistance provided by the State.”  

 Article 20(3) provides guidance on long-term solutions for unaccompanied children over  whom a state has assumed care:  

 “ …When considering solutions, due regard shall be paid to the desirability of continuity in a  child's upbringing and to the child's ethnic, religious and linguistic background.”  

 Article 22 and especially sub-section (2) is also relevant due to its positioning the UN, via its  various agencies, as the key focal point, especially with regard to refugee children.  

 In addition, the UNHCR has developed a set of Guidelines on Policies and Procedures in  Dealing with Unaccompanied Children Seeking Asylum. 

 Finally, the ongoing work of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, in developing ‘general  comments ’ that will further assist member states, in how their policies should evolve to  appropriately discharge their obligations to separated children, in connection with the CRC, is  also instructive.  

 But let us now examine how these fine principles are applied in practice.  

 6. Government reactions to the unlawful child arrivals 

 Some western countries have established systems or programs for the safe return of  unaccompanied children to their home country, pursuant to these international Conventions,  but most have not.  

 The UNHCR points out that western governments:  

 “ …vacillate between stringent control measures, including locking children up in jail, x-raying  them to assess their age or shipping them back to ‘safe ’ third countries, and serious efforts to  care for the youngsters in the spirit of …the Convention on the Rights of the Child which  requires signatories to provide adequate protection and assistance to children, whether alone  or with their families.”  

 Let us look for example at what Australia does.  

 Australia’s Domestic Laws unhelpful to child refugees 

 There have been a number of important court cases where HREOC has used its intervention  power to argue for either common law remedies or applicability of relevant international  conventions, to assist child asylum seekers in Australia.  

 The high water mark in this respect was the High Court decision in Teoh in 1995, where the  court held that visa applicants could entertain a reasonable expectation that immigration  officials would apply relevant international conventions when considering their application.  

 Unfortunately it has been downhill since then, in a human rights/international convention  sense.  

 In 2002 the Federal Court found against two child asylum seekers Odhiambo and Martizi, in  their argument that there was an irreconcilable conflict of interest between the Minister for 

 Immigration acting as both the determining visa authority and their legal guardian.  

 Re Wooley; Ex parte Applicants M27/2003 by their next friend GS [2004] 49 has upheld the  operation of the immigration detention regime in relation to children, notwithstanding that it  contravenes basic requirements of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and attracts the 

 consequences revealed in the HREOC Report ‘A last resort? ’  

 Interestingly in this case the High Court also found that children could not rely on the writs of  habeas corpus and prohibition to effect their release from (the arguably) adverse immigration  detention camp conditions.  

 While in B and B the High Court absolutely found that the protective child custody provisions  of the Family Law Act (regulating all divorce issues within Australia, including child custody  and by extension welfare) could not be extended to include protection of children in  immigration detention.  

 Some legal commentators in Australia even believe that when the High Court considers a  Teoh situation again that the ‘legitimate expectation ’ principle will also be overturned.  

 But the biggest difficulty is the operation of the Migration Act 1958 (Cth). This was examined  in detail by HREOC over two and a half years, in relation to its compliance with international  conventions, like the CRC and child asylum seekers.  

 “A last resort?”  

 In Australia, since 1992 the Migration Act has imposed a regime of mandatory immigration  detention for all unlawful non-citizens, including children, whether accompanied or  unaccompanied.  

 My inquiry into this regime vis a vis compliance with CRC found the following:  

 First - we found that the mandatory detention policy itself breaches the Convention on the  Rights of the Child because it makes detention the first and only resort, not the last resort.  

 The policy also fails to ensure that there is an individual assessment of the need to  detain and there is no effective review of detention in the courts.   Second - we found that children have been in detention for long periods of time. The longest  a child has been in detention is five years, five months and 20 days.  

 Third - we found that children in detention for long periods are at high risk of serious  traumatisation or even mental illness.  

 In fact, some of these children and their parents have developed in detention serious mental  health issues which have required specialised, on-going medical help - help they often cannot  get and are not getting in the detention environment.  

 For example, some children have been diagnosed with clinical depression, post traumatic  stress disorder and developmental delays. Many children have showed symptoms like  nightmares, bed-wetting, muteness, lost appetite and suicidal ideation - the list goes on.  

 The Inquiry found that the Department ’s failure to implement the repeated recommendations  of mental health professionals to release children with mental problems amounts to cruel and  inhumane treatment under article 37(a) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  

 This is the most serious finding that the Inquiry made.  

 Fourth - we found that the conditions in detention centres:  

 ? failed to provide sufficient protection from physical and mental violence;  

 ? failed to provide the appropriate standard of physical and mental health;  

 ? failed to provide adequate education until late 2002;  

 ? failed to provide appropriate care for children with disabilities; and  

 ? failed to give unaccompanied children the special protection that they needed.  

 This directly relates to the fact that the Minister for Immigration is both the guardian and jailer  of unaccompanied children.  

 Key Inquiry Recommendations 

 Having found these breaches of human rights the question is: Where do we go from here and  what should be done in the future to avoid ongoing breaches?  

 Recommendation 1: Release 

 The Inquiry said that the first step is to get the children who are in detention centres and  residential housing projects out of there.  

 While many of the children who were the subject of my Inquiry have been released,  unfortunately as I stand before you today there are still children in immigration detention.  

 But releasing the children who are in detention now, only solves the immediate problem. We  need to make sure that asylum seekers who arrive in the future don ’t end up suffering under  this same system again.  

 Unless Australia ’s laws change, children will continue to be locked up in places for indefinite  periods of time. That is why we went on to make a second recommendation.  

 Recommendation 2: Change the law 

 So what kind of laws do we need?  

 We need new laws that make detention of children the last resort - NOT the first and only  resort.  

 We need new laws that make detention of children for the shortest appropriate period of time  - NOT for indefinite periods of time.  

 And we need new laws that make the best interests of the child a primary consideration -  NOT laws that force a choice between family separation or indefinite detention. This is a false  dichotomy.  

 Overseas Experience 

 Many countries immediately deport children, simply turning them around at the border,  especially if the child has not explicitly sought asylum. Trafficked children are deported to their  countries of origin, sometimes literally dumped over the border with no assistance.  

 There is a particular unwillingness to offer protection to young boys over 13 who are often  deemed by officials as “adult” or simply too difficult to handle.  

 Some countries detain unaccompanied children while their circumstances are investigated.  For instance, police raid a city ’s brothels, arrest and detain girls and women, possibly  subjecting them to human rights abuses in detention. Trafficked girls in these countries under  this scenario are often not treated as children in need of protection, but as criminals. They do  not get support, health care or the opportunity to testify against their traffickers - they are just  quickly deported.  

 On the other hand there are countries whose laws and practices are more supportive of child 

 migrants:  

 In Canada, unaccompanied minors are treated as children in need of protection and are  looked after by provincial social services.  

 In Denmark, unaccompanied children stay at one of the Red Cross children ’s centres while  the authorities process their claim.  

 Other countries presumptively give unaccompanied children permission to stay. In the UK,  any child is entitled to protection under the Children Act 1989. If the child is unaccompanied,  the immigration authorities have the power to grant temporary admission (“exceptional leave  to remain”).  

 In America, referring again to the Tebo article, the situation also seems positive for UAMs.  After a difficult period post 9/11, the ORR ’s (Office of Refugee Resettlement) goal is to ensure  that every child in the Unaccompanied Minors Program is in a placement that reflects the  needs and circumstances of that child.  

 However, the trouble is countries are not sufficiently sharing their experiences of dealing with  children in a way that systematically protects and assists them.  

 7. Need for Best Practice Model for Refugees or other Separated 

 Children 

 So with that in mind, it is worth spending a little time examining some more key principles that  should apply to separated children:  

 1. Do not turn them around at the point of arrival.  

 Provide appropriate time to establish their circumstances. The Danish model is a good  example, where in practice no child under the age 15 arriving at the airport is refused entry to  the country. 15 to 18 year olds and land border arrivals are assessed on a case-by-case  basis.  

 2. Do not detain them for longer than absolutely necessary.  

 Although international law prohibits the detention of children except as the last resort and  even then only for the shortest period of time, few governments enact laws that ensure this.  However, in the UK, it is government policy not to detain any unaccompanied child unless in  exceptional circumstances, and then only overnight before they can be collected by a social  worker in the morning.  

 3. Appoint a guardian for each child.  

 In Sweden, all separated children are appointed a guardian known in Swedish as ‘the good  man ’. The guardian ensures that all decisions are in the child ’s best interests, and that he or  she has suitable care, legal assistance, interpreters etc.  

 4. Provide a lawyer for each child.  

 In Austria, the Minister of Interior issued instructions in October 2000 to improve the  conditions of detention, by mandating that unaccompanied children receive legal assistance.  

 5. Processing should occur in child-friendly accommodation.  

 Unaccompanied children should be cared for by suitable professionals who understand their  cultural, linguistic and religious needs. For instance, in Finland, provision is made for children  to be placed with private families or residential centres, supported by specialised professional  help as necessary.  

 When processing unaccompanied children, countries should be motivated by child protection 

 principles, not migration or crime control measures.  

 Time does not permit me to provide you with more than an overview of these key issues in  regard to child migrants in either the refugee or humanitarian category. For additional ideas in  this area the October 2004: ‘Separated Children in Europe Program (SCEP) - Statement of  Good Practice ’ a joint venture of UNHCR and International Save the Children Alliance  provides a comprehensive list of good practice procedures.  

 8. What about Trafficking?  

 The current deficiencies with regard to treatment of child refugees pale into insignificance  when compared with the problems evident in trying to deal with trafficking of children.  However, there has been a recent attempt to improve the situation.  

 In November 2000, the UN General Assembly adopted the Convention on Transnational  Organized Crime (CTOC). This included a Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish  Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (The Trafficking Protocol).  

 In Australia there is currently a bill before Parliament titled the: Criminal Code Amendment  (Trafficking in Persons Offences) Bill 2004.  

 My Commission has welcomed this legislation as a significant step in meeting some of the  obligations Australia will assume when it eventually ratifies the Trafficking Protocol (although  further domestic law amendment would then be required for Australia to be fully compliant). At  this point Australia has only ‘signed the Protocol ’ (11 December 2002).  

 Unfortunately, however neither the Convention on Transnational Organized Crime nor its  protocols have entered into force, because not enough countries have ratified them.  

 Ratification would require countries to undertake in-depth measures to combat the buying and  selling of women and children for sexual exploitation or sweat shop labour.  

 Countries would have to treat separated children as victims in need of protection like any  other homeless child, rather than as criminals.  

 But even if they do ratify, we know from experience with the Convention on the Rights of the  Child that governments must improve their domestic laws in order to breathe life into the  treaty.  

 It is all very well to set up an international protection system for separated children, but it is  largely ineffectual unless countries enforce it via their domestic laws and policies. Unless a  country has done this, or submitted itself to the jurisdiction of an external court (e.g. Britain is  bound by decisions of the European Court of Justice in Strasbourg), the rights enshrined in  the treaty cannot actually be legally enforced.  

 This is the reality at the heart of the international treaty system: there is no international  enforcement method, no “international crimes against children tribunal” to make findings on  violations of international treaties to which a country is a party.  

 9. How effective are governments’ current policies in managing 

 the migration of separated children?  

 At present, the world ’s response to separated children who cross borders uninvited, ranges  from the humanitarian to the highly inappropriate. But either way, the numbers keep growing.  

 Try as they might, most governments are not able to control their borders effectively.  

 Their response to this problem is the creation of more and more sophisticated methods of  detecting and repelling illegal entrants. Some argue that this acts as an effective deterrent;  others say it is the “push factor” (war, poverty), not the “pull factor” (peace, prosperity) that 

 counts.  

 Whoever is right, the perceived “pull factor” produces policy responses that are mostly ad hoc  and frequently draconian. Instead of nurturing children as victims of trafficking or smuggling,  they are often criminalised.  

 When law enforcement officers raid a brothel, you can be sure that the best interests of the  child prostitute are not of paramount importance in all subsequent actions and decisions  concerning the child. When immigration officials detain “illegal entrants”, there is no legal  requirement to house separated children in foster care as a matter of course.  

 Separated children who arrive uninvited are not treated in the same way as citizen children  who are wards of the host country. They are not even treated at the level of invited refugee  children - that is, those who are chosen from refugee camps as part of a country ’s official  migration program. Such discrimination goes to the heart of what the Convention on the  Rights of the Child is about.  

 It is also uneconomic; consider again Australia ’s mandatory immigration detention policy. 93%  of the children so detained are ultimately released into the Australian community with some  form of visa. Because of the length of detention, some of the mental problems suffered by  some children will be exacerbated. In the medium to long term the general Australian  community will foot the bill for treatment of those problems.  

 Arguably, there will always be movement of children across borders, clandestine or otherwise.  

 Combating trafficking and smuggling through better detection and policing methods will not  stop children trying to enter western countries. Only the elimination of the “push factors” such  as religious persecution, war, famine and poverty could possibly achieve this. Unfortunately,  this outcome does not look likely in the immediate or even distant future. So where do we go  from here?  

 10. Where do we go from here? - International Co-ordinated 

 action under UNHCR/UNICEF mandate.  

 The long-term strategy has to be a reduction in the “push factors” such as war, poverty and  famine, which I freely acknowledge will not be easily achieved and is outside the scope of  what I am trying to say today.  

 In the meantime, mainstream industrialised countries must develop short-term strategies that  acknowledge the reality of this continuing flow of separated children, and treat them as the  children they are.  

 Some countries must be prepared to show leadership and a co-ordinated international  response must be developed. It is not good enough for first world countries to use their  domestic laws to try and shift the problem on to other countries, by denying children refugee  status. Interestingly, there is an Australian precedent.  

 In 1979 the Fraser Government was at the forefront of diplomatic efforts to solve the  Vietnamese boat people crisis. In the aftermath of North Vietnam ’s victory in 1975 more than  half a million Vietnamese boat people left the country, many of whom perished at sea.  

 Recognising the potential scale of the disaster the Australian Government assisted with  brokering an agreement - the ‘comprehensive plan of action (CPA) ’ whereby 65 nations  established orderly departure points inside Vietnam with legal, organised queues. South East  Asian nations were designated as countries of first asylum and Western nations, such as  Australia, guaranteed to more than double their refugee intakes. Time does not permit a  comprehensive analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the CPA, and it should be noted  that the UNHCR did not consider the Vietnamese exodus, resolved until the mid to late 1990s  - however it is a good template to start with.  

 This is the kind of international response I ’m talking about, under the auspices of the 

 UNHCR/UNICEF. Only then can we truly say with regard to child migration that the CRC has 

 meaning! It is also the direction in which the European Commission is moving.  

 In the limited time available to me today, I have attempted to outline what constitutes the best  implementation of that Convention, and other applicable international instruments, in this  regard.  

 For those of you who are overwhelmed by the magnitude of this problem, let us take heart  from one of the good lessons that history provides us.  

 I refer here to Wilberforce ’s eighteenth century campaign to abolish the slave trade which led  to the abolition of slavery itself in British overseas possessions.  

 That campaign surmounted hurdles similar to those we now face: the immensity of the slave  trade, the substantial economic interests that were dependent on its continuation, its  international nature, and the difficulty confronting existing resources (transport,  communications) to effect its abolition.  

 Surely the success of that campaign is an inspiration to us all.  

 Even the biggest international challenges can be successfully tackled if sufficient numbers of  people work towards the desired outcome.  

 The movement of separated children is a reality that cannot be swept under the carpet. If we  are to learn anything from the past, it is that separated children must not be allowed to  become someone else ’s problem. They are the world ’s children and we all share collective  responsibility for their care and protection.  

 As a symbolic first step in this direction I call on the United Nations to establish an  “International Child Migrants Day”.  

 Thank you.  

 

 © Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission   

