---
title: "Immigration detention: safeguards must be in place."
date: "2005-02-07"
creators:
  - "Amnesty International"
source: "AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Human rights violations"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs"
  - "RAU, Cornelia"
  - "Mental disorders"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211274968
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0AHF6%22
---

  amnesty inter national a ust ra I i a 

  Media release Monday 7 February 2005 

  Immigration Detention: Safeguards must be in place 

  Amnesty International Australia says the case of Cornelia Rau, a mentally ill woman detained in  immigration detention for 10 months, reinforces the need for automatic and periodic judicial  review of those in immigration detention. 

  “The rights of innocent people are at risk when the government can detain people without judicial  review,” said Dr Graham Thom, Amnesty International Australia’s Refugee Coordinator. “What  we have seen in Ms Rau’s case is an unfortunate but possible consequence of Australia’s  detention po I icies ” . 

  “Detention should be a last resort. For those who are detained, there must be sufficient  safeguards put in place to ensure that their rights and dignity are protected. The detention of Ms  Rau highlights that those safeguards are not in place,” said Dr Thom. 

  Amnesty International Australia considers that the current Australian policy of automatic  mandatory detention for people considered to be so-called ‘unlawful non citizens’ is a direct  breach of Australia’s international human rights obligations. 

  “Currently the Department of Immigration can detain anyone they consider to be a so called  unlawful non-citizen forever,” said Dr Thom. “Australian courts do not have the opportunity to  determine the need or appropriateness of that detention. The denial of such a fundamental  human right means that a person in Australia can be detained without end.” 

  Amnesty International Australia calls on the Minister to reconsider the appropriateness of placing  those Baxter detainees who are mentally ill or are experiencing psychological distress in  isolation in the centre’s Management Support Unit,. Such procedures must be in strict  accordance with the Immigration Detention Standards, which the Australian Government and its 

  service provider Global Solutions Limited, are obliged to meet. 

  A necessary safeguard would be to ensure that any decision to place a detainee in the  Management Support Unit only be made by a panel which comprises an independent observer  and following independent psychiatric assessment. Sufficient independent review and appeal  mechanisms should also be made immediately available for the detainee and their counsel to  challenge that isolation. At present there is no formal opportunity to defend or refute the 

  allegation which gave rise to that person being placed in isolation. 

  Amnesty International Australia supports calls for a public inquiry into the detention of Cornelia  Rau and would hope that any inquiry examine the broader operations of the Management  Support Unit. The organisation also calls for the Immigration Detention Advisory Group (IDAG),  which reports to the Minister on detention issues, to be able to make independent public  statements on its findings in all instances. 

  Dr Graham Thom is available for comment. Please call 041 1 140 077. 

