---
title: "Young artists to showcase talents."
date: "2005-10-24"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211285136
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VRQH6%22
---

 Media Centre  Young Artists to Showcase Talents 

 24 October 2005 

 Young artists from 12 Southern Tasmanian schools will showcase their  talents when the art exhibition Welcome to Tasmania is launched by the  Migrant Resource Centre of Southern Tasmania at the Moonah Arts  Centre today. 

 The exhibition, which is part of Tasmania’s Refugee Week program, is the  culmination of a DIMIA funded Living in Harmony project.  

 The event will be attended by President of the Senate, Senator Paul  Calvert, who will be representing the Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb. 

 ‘I would like to thank Senator Calvert for attending the launch of the  Welcome to Tasmania art exhibition in my place,’ Minister Cobb said. 

 ‘Almost 1 300 refugee and humanitarian entrants have settled in  Tasmania in the past five years. The Tasmanian school community plays  an important part in welcoming refugees in this State. 

 ‘The cultural diversity of Tasmania is evolving rapidly. In the year 2004-05  more than 33 per cent of new settlers in Tasmania were refugee and  humanitarian entrants, with the majority originating from Sudan, Ethiopia  and Sierra Leone. 

 ‘The Welcome to Tasmania project is an initiative of the Migrant Resource  Centre Southern Tasmania. The participation of approximately 700  students from 12 schools in Southern Tasmania helps to affirm the values  of understanding and goodwill in our community,’ Minister Cobb said. 

 ‘I particularly want to thank the students and people from the African  community involved for their enthusiastic contribution. 

 ‘I hope that future refugee and humanitarian settlers to this State will feel  welcomed by the display of these art works in their on-arrival  accommodation.’ 

 MEDIA CONTACT: Tom Chesson - 0418 415 597 

 [Media Release index

 Home  Copyright & Disclaimer  Privacy  Site Map  Immigration Department   

 Home 

 John Cobb MP  Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and   Multicultural Affairs 

 

