---
title: "Public Sector Governance and the Senate. Will Government control of the Senate change its relationship with the Public Service? Speech at the National Institute for Governance."
date: "2005-11-09"
creators:
  - "Murray, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of MURRAY, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Public service independence"
  - "Public service management"
  - "Senate"
  - "Parliament Executive relations"
  - "Public Service Act 1999"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211285980
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9G1I6%22
---

 Speech Display   

 Portfolio: Public Service 

 Dated: 9 Nov 2005 Location: Canberra

 Speech : National Institute for Governance : Public Sector  Governance and the Senate. Will Government control of the Senate  change its relationship with the Public Service?

 Tempting  as  it  is  I'm  not  going  to  start  by  talking  about  the  Murray  motion  which  deals  with  proper  contract   disclosure and confidentiality provisions.    

 Except to say that this accountability mechanism is now strongly supported by the Department of Finance, and  Government, yet it would never have seen the light of day if the Coalition had the Senate majority when it was  first proposed. The point being that the instinctive 'No' of the Executive is not always the right decision.    

 "Public sector governance and the Senate: Will government control of the Senate change its relationship with  the public service?"    

 Before I try to answer the question let me pick the question apart a little.    

 The ANAO has said that   Public Sector governance has a very broad coverage, including how an organisation is managed, its corporate  and other structures, its culture, its policies and strategies and the way it deals with its various stakeholders. The  concept  encompasses  the  manner  in  which  public  sector  organisations  acquit  their  responsibilities  of   stewardship  by  being  open,  accountable  and  prudent  in  decision  making,  in  providing  policy  advice,  and  in   managing and delivering programmes.    

 Mostly  these  matters  are  determined  by  the  Executive  and  not  by  the  Parliament  or  the  Senate.  For   bureaucracies  the  Executive  means  their  political  masters  the  Prime  Minister  exercising  his  will  through  the   Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the responsible Minister and their powerful personal advisers who  often act in an executive capacity, and their management.    

 My experience is that Parliamentarians consider bureaucracies the province of the political Executive. Although  a Senate always has power over the enabling or prime legislation it is a rare Senate, even when the Governing  Party is in a minority, that would contemplate opposing a Government plan to structure an agency in a particular  way. In fact, few examples come to mind other than some restructures of primary industry bodies.    

 A Senate may fiddle with some details, but that is all.    

 The governing legislation for the whole bureaucracy is the Civil Service Act, its first version being 1922 and its  second incarnation being 1999. There were real worries expressed then, the tone of which is well captured by  Labor's Senator Faulkner in his second reading speech:   the  opposition  had  very  serious  concerns  with  the  government's  original  proposals.  Our  assessment  was  that   these  would  have  led  to  a  Public  Service  which  would  have  been  too  susceptible  to  pressures  from  the   government of the day and less willing  to offer critical  advice.  If  implemented  unchanged,  the  bills'  provisions   would have undermined the independence, the professionalism and the efficiency of the Public Service.    

 In 1999 Labor the Democrats and the cross-benches undoubtedly acted to restrain the Government's intentions  to control and command. That would not have happened if the Coalition had the Senate majority.    

 Once the law is set there is the question of money. In theory he who pays the piper calls the tune. In practice  again it is a rare Senate, even when the Governing Party is in a minority, that would contemplate opposing a  Government appropriation for an agency in a particular way. In fact no examples come to mind.    

 What has happened is far worse. And it has been a long-term trend, probably given more bite by the events of  1975.    

 Fears of the Constitutional powers given to the Senate to block supply meant Governments and bureaucracies 

 for decades sought ways to insulate themselves from that potential danger. Their solution is a device known as  standing appropriations.    

 Over the decades a sleepy or unaware Senate has allowed this to happen with hardly a murmur.    

 Scattered  through  the  statute  books  of  the  Commonwealth  are  hundreds  of  acts  of  Parliament  which  contain   standing appropriations, usually and misleadingly called special appropriations.    

 These  are  provisions  which  appropriate  money  from  the  Consolidated  Revenue  Fund,  usually  of  indefinite   amount and for an indefinite duration. Often they consist simply of this sentence: "The Consolidated Revenue  Fund is appropriated as necessary for the purposes of this Act", or words to that effect.    

 The  significance  of  standing  appropriations  from  an  accountability  perspective  is  that,  once  they  have  been   enacted,  the  expenditure  they  involve  does  not  require  regular  parliamentary  approval  and  therefore  escapes   parliamentary control.    

 The numbers of special appropriations and the amounts of expenditure involved have steadily grown over the  life  of  the  Commonwealth.  From  a  low  of  10%  in  1910  to  56%  in  1970,  they  now  amount  to  over  80%  of  all   Commonwealth government expenditure.    

 In 2002-03 they authorised $223.2 billion of expenditure on this basis.    

 Comparable  jurisdictions  have  not  allowed  standing  appropriations  to  expand  to  this  degree.  In  the  United   Kingdom they amount to about 25% of total government expenditure.    

 In a report on the financial management of special (standing) appropriations in November 2004, the Australian  National Audit Office found widespread illegalities and lack of accountability and control in the management of  these  appropriations.  More  than  half  of  the  appropriations  were  not  properly  reported  by  departments  and   agencies in their annual financial statements.    

 No  particular  scrutiny  is  given  by  the  Parliament  to  the  constant  procession  of  bills  containing  standing   appropriations.  Such  provisions  in  bills  normally  pass  without  comment.  No  consideration  is  given  to  whether   standing appropriations are appropriate for the purposes for which they are proposed to be enacted. They are 

 inserted in bills simply as matters of administrative convenience.    

 All this occurred whether Governments had the numbers in the Senate or not.    

 It is still open to the Senate to amend bills to remove provisions for standing appropriations, or to restrict them in  amount or duration, depending on the purpose for which they are intended.    

 With the Government having the numbers in the Senate that is unlikely to occur.    

 If the Senate has not significantly affected public sector governance in its enabling legislation and the provision  of money, how has it done on calling the public sector to account?    

 The answer is not badly.    

 Firstly it is vital to understand that the conventions and principles of our parliamentary democracy put great and  effective pressure on Cabinet Ministers and their bureaucrats to design public sector laws and practices to meet  democratic expectations.    

 Secondly, the Senate is effective in putting great emphasis on the manner in which public sector organisations  acquit  their  responsibilities  of  stewardship  by  being  open,  accountable  and  prudent  in  decision  making,  in   providing policy advice, and in managing and delivering programmes.    

 Some of you may know that I have spoken at length in the past on corporate governance, and have championed  the  idea  that  the  governance  of  the  corporate  sector  in  Australia  should  be  modelled  on  the  very  notion  of   democracy itself. So in discussing corporate governance, our political and constitutional language is a helpful  tool:  best  practice  regular  elections;  compulsory  voting;  representative  bodies;  independent  institutions  and  

 people; appointments on merit; the separation of powers; transparency, accountability and full disclosure.    

 Some of these may not apply to public sector governance, but be wary of command and control political policies  that diminish the independence of the bureaucracy; that do not make appointments on merit but with a political  motive; that seek to diminish the separation of powers by making the bureaucracy an extension of their political  masters; or ones that limit transparency, accountability and full disclosure.  

 

 The important features of public sector governance are: restraint in the use of power, the notion of checks and  balances and regular and public testing of decisions and actions.    

 This requires the public sector to recognise that it is ultimately accountable not to the government of the day, but  to the people, through their parliamentary representatives.    

 Some years ago at a seminar on the Senate I tested this notion on middle level public sector participants. Asked  to rank to whom they were accountable they invariably put Ministers ahead of the people and parliament.    

 I suggest that the culture of the public sector is focussed on the Political Executive. The Public Service Act and  the  regulations  and  directives  that  flow  from  the  Act  reinforce  this.  This  means  that  in  a  choice  between  a   Senate  requirement  for  transparency,  accountability  and  full  disclosure  and  Ministers,  or  more  likely  their   advisers, wanting them to be less than frank, then you are fairly certain that mortgages and a career will compel  their choice.    

 Fortunately  in  most  circumstances  there  is  no  ministerial  interference  in  full  disclosure  to  Senate  Estimates   Committees, but on key political issues there very definitely is.    

 I want to turn to the Senate Estimates Committees. They allow Senators, on behalf of the Australian people to  keep a detailed check and balance on the actions of the public sector.    

 In  recent  years  there  has  been  an  increasing  number  of  occasions  where  the  departmental  representatives   cannot,  or  dare  I  say  will  not,  answer  questions  put  to  them  by  Senators.  They  generally  agree  to  supply   answers later and they do eventually, but that is not the point of Estimates Committees.    

 This  leads  naturally  onto  a  discussion  of  Ministerial  responsibility  for  the  actions  of  the  department  in  their   portfolio. An important aspect of public sector governance is the role of ministerial responsibility for the actions  of government departments. In the past, full ministerial responsibility was presumed.    

 That is if it was found that the department had done something wrong, then the minister took responsibility for  the action and stepped down. That is not the case now. In 1998 the Prime Minister put out a Guide on the Key  Elements of Ministerial Responsibility and on page 13 it states:   This does not mean that ministers bear individual liability for all actions of their departments. Where they neither  knew, nor should have known about matters of departmental administration which come under scrutiny it is not  unreasonable to expect that the secretary or some other senior officer will take the responsibility.    

 On page 14:   A  close  and  productive  relationship  between  a  ministers  staff  and  the  department  maximises  the  ministers   effectiveness.  Ultimately  however,  ministers  cannot  delegate  to  members  of  their  personal  staff  their   constitutional, legal or accountability responsibilities.    

 These guidelines put even more pressure on Agency CEO's themselves to be accountable responsible and to  operate to a high standard of governance.    

 The  sentiments  of  the  Guide  would  be  greatly  enhanced  if  they  were  supported  by  an  enforceable  Code  of   Ethical Conduct for Ministers and ministerial advisers.    

 Given  the  complexity  of  modern  governing,  I  am  willing  to  presume  that  Ministers  can  only  be  aware  of  what   they  are  briefed  on  by  their  department  and  staff  advisers.  However  that  does  not  in  any  way  mean  that   Ministers can abrogate their responsibility.    

 I advocate a Code of Conduct for Ministers and Members of Parliament. My proposal is outlined in the Charter  of Political Honesty Bill 2000 [2002].    

 The  Bill  outlines  the  establishment  of  an  Ethics  Commissioner who,  in  consultation  with  parliamentarians  and   ministers, creates an enforceable Code of Conduct.    

 The Code would include a complaints system, an investigative process by an independent body, the body could  make findings and recommendations, and the Code would be enforceable by penalties.    

 Once a code of conduct is in place, agreed to by ministers and parliamentarians, there should be no problem in  having an independent investigator who can examine any breaches of the code.    

 One way to look at the public sector is to compare it to the private sector. The principal governance watchdog 

 for the private sector is the Australian Securities and Investment Commission, ASIC.    

 There  is  no  equivalent  in  the  public  sector,  and  there  should  be.  The  ANAO  cannot  fulfil  that  role,  the   Ombudsman cannot fulfil that role, and the Department of Finance cannot fulfil that role.    

 What  is  needed  is  an  independent  public  sector  regulator  and  investigator  with  ASIC-like  powers  and   responsibilities,  which  could  ensure  that  the  bureaucracy  fulfilled  its  governance  requirements  and  to  which   Ministers and the Parliament could refer matters as required.    

 Other information upon which the electorate bases many of its decisions is information leaked to the media by  members of the public sector.    

 There is little protection of public service whistleblowers from victimisation. Whistleblowers are individuals who,  by reason of their employment, come across information that reveals corruption, dishonesty or improper conduct  at any level of government and by any government. When such people bring this information to the attention of  others, including Senators, they must be protected from retribution.    

 Whistleblowing is often the only way that impropriety can be exposed. However, this can and often does come  at  a  significant  personal  and  career  cost  to  the  whistleblower.  The  often  justified  fear  of  reprisal  can  stop   potential  whistleblowers  from  coming  forward.  As  a  result,  corruption  or  improper  conduct  can  continue   unchecked.    

 There  is  a  problematic  relationship  between  section  70  of  the  Crimes  Act,  which  is  broad  in  scope,  and  the   application of section 16 of the Public Service Act 1999, which is very restrictive in scope. Section 70 makes the  unlawful  disclosure  of  documents  or  facts  an  offence.  There  is  no  defence  available  in  the  statute  that  the   information is in the public interest.    

 The limited scope of section 16 of the Public Service Act does not provide any real defence against a section 70  charge. Section 16 provides limited protection against reprisal, no protection if disclosure is made to the wrong  recipient, and protection only where the whistleblower discloses breaches of the Public Service code of conduct.   

 Under  this  section,  a  public  servant  has  no  legal  immunity  from  civil  action  or  criminal  prosecution.  Immunity   from legal action would provide protection and act as an incentive to whistleblowers in properly argued matters.  Such immunity is covered in most states legislation for the protection of whistleblowers.    

 Section 16 also does not provide any protection against victimisation or reprisals, leaving only the option of a  tribunal or court for the whistleblower to bring an action, which is a prohibitively expensive, lengthy and stressful  process for an individual.    

 Section 16 strictly limits to whom the disclosure can be made. In its current form, it falls well short of disclosure  legislation in the various states and the proposed disclosure provisions in my Public Interest Disclosure Bill.    

 Section  70  of  the  Crimes  Act  is  so  broad  that  even  where  matters  are  covered  by  section  16  of  the  Public   Service Act, a whistleblower can still be prosecuted. Another aspect of section 70 of the Crimes Act is that it is  up  to  the  defendant  to  prove  his  or  her  innocence  in  publishing  or  communicating,  without  lawful  authority  or   excuse,  any  fact  or  document  which  came  to  their  knowledge  by  virtue  of  their  position  as  a  Commonwealth   officer. This is a reversal of the onus of proof for a criminal offence, and reversals of the onus of proof should be  regarded circumspectly.    

 There  have  been  several  incidents  during  this  governments  several  terms  where  it  has  been  in  the  public   interest,  but  obviously  not  in  the  governments  interest,  for  matters  to  be  raised  in  the  public  arena.  I  refer  in   particular to the Tampa crisis, where public servants, fearful of the type of action that occurred, kept quiet until 

 well after the event. They were matters of the utmost public importance that affected an election outcome. The  same is true, in many respects, of the scandals about refugees and their treatment.    

 In another case in the Federal Court of Australia in 2003, Mr Justice Finn, who was considering Public Service  regulation  7(13)now  regulation  2.1  and  similar  in  terms  to  section  16  of  the  Public  Service  Actheld  that   regulation 7(13) contravened the implied constitutional freedom of political communication. Justice Finn was of  the opinion that the regulation:   impedes  quite  unreasonably  the  possible  flow  of  information  to  the  communityinformation  which,  without   possibly prejudicing the interests of the Commonwealth, could only serve to enlarge the publics knowledge and  understanding of the operation, practices and policies of executive government.    

 If  we  are  looking at public  sector  governance  and we champion  the  idea  of  full  disclosure,  why  is  there  such   weak Public Service Act protection against stringent sections in the Crimes Act which punish public servants for 

 providing information to the media even when it is in the public interest?    

 Isnt it in the best interests of the electorate to be made aware of information that may impact adversely upon  them? If they were shareholders of a company, they would anticipate being advised of any adverse events that  were likely to impact on shareholder value. How is that different in the public sector?    

 In this regard, public sector governance, if it is to function in an appropriate manner, would be assisted by an  Accountability  or  Ethics  Commissioner.  This  would  be  an  independent  position  external  to  the  public  sector,   where  whistleblowers  could  go  without  fear  of  reprisal  to  disclose  information  or  behaviour  that  they  believed   was in the public interest that it be made public.    

 I  am  only  talking  about  matters  which  are  in  the  public  interest,  I  am  not  talking  about  people  with  an  axe  to   grind or people motivated by political malice or people searching for media attention.    

 This independent entity would be able to make an assessment of the information, whether there was malice or  political  bias  present  in  the  whistleblower  or  whether  it  was  truly  in  the  public  interest  that  the  information  be   made  known  to  the  electorate.  Such  a  decision  maker,  external  to  the  public  sector  and  independent  of   government influence would have an important role in ensuring full disclosure, accountability and transparency.   

 This would also have the effect of reducing the stress on those public sector employees who are too fearful of  reporting wrongdoing because of the fear of reprisal or prosecution.    

 The Auditor General has a strong and significant role to play in public sector governance. The AGO takes its  role  very  seriously  by  providing  Better  Practice  Guides  to  the  public  sector.  The  fact  that  the  AGO  reports   directly to the Parliament rather than the Government is another safeguard for good governance.    

 However the Auditor General does not focus on ethical concerns.    

 The Department of Immigration is an example of a department which appears to have had a particularly poor  culture.    

 The  Senate's  efforts  to  expose  some  nasty  occurrences  were  supported  by  strong  media  and  community   concern.  That  translated  into  political  pressure  and  inquiries  resulted.  Not  until  the  reports  of  Mr  Palmer  into   Cornelia  Raus  detention  and  Mr  Comries  report  into  Ms  Vivien  Solon  Alvarezs  deportation  was  transparency   served.    

 How could things have become so bad, why wasnt the Parliament aware of exactly how bad things were within  the walls of DIMIA? It was not for want of asking because questions were asked in the Parliament and at the  Senate Estimates Committees but the answers provided proved obfuscatory, not elucidatory.    

 Another  area  on  which  I  have  previously  expressed  concern  is  that  Ministers  from  one  House  are  not   accountable to the other House.    

 The legal persona of a Minister is separate from the legal persona of a Member or Senator. I have no problem  with the long established view that members of one house should not be held accountable in another House as  members of Parliament.    

 But  as  members  of  the  Executive,  Ministers,  if  they  are  in  the  Senate,  should  be  accountable  to  House   committees  in  that  capacity  and  Ministers  in  the  House  of  Representatives  should  be  accountable  to  Senate   committees.    

 The present practice is inherited from 19th century Britain where ministers from one House of Parliament could  not be compelled to appear and answer questions in the other House.    

 That was fundamentally a result of members of the House of Commons, who were elected representatives of  the people, declining to be scrutinised by the unelected upper class in the House of Lords.    

 It was never meant to have anything to do with the ministry, and it is not, I think appropriate in a country with a  democratically elected upper house.    

 This convention is being used in Australia to protect House of Representative Ministers from the scrutiny of the  Senate and vice versa. It is an avoidance of full accountability.    

 Although  there  are  ongoing  reviews  of  the  Public  Sector,  I  believe  that  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  for   Senators, the  media and members of the community to  fully scrutinise the  actions of the  sector. Mechanisms 

 

 which were previously in place to aid transparency of government decision-making are slowly being eroded.    

 One such is FOI.    

 The  Commonwealth  Freedom  of  Information  legislation  was  introduced  in  1982  and  some  of  the  purposes   articulated in section 3 of that legislation were   to improve the quality of decision-making by government agencies in both policy and administrative matters by  removing unnecessary secrecy surrounding the decision-making process;   to  enable  groups  and  individuals  to  be  kept  informed  of  the  functioning  of  the  decision-making  process  as  it   affects  them  and  to  know  the  kinds  of  criteria  that  will  be  applied  by  government  agencies  in  making  those   decisions;    

 These were laudable aims, but 20 years on, few would suggest that they have been fully realised.    

 It  has  become  increasingly  difficult  to  obtain  information  from  the  government.  .  There  was  a  short  halcyon   period in the 1980s when you could request information for nothing. A couple of years after the introduction of  the Freedom of Information Act fees were introduced.    

 In  1997  the  Herald  Sun  newspaper  were  advised  it  would  cost  $1.25million  to  get  information  about  federal   politicians  travel  expenses  because  apparently  it  would  take  62,840  public  service  hours  to  process  that   request.    

 Fortunately intense media and political pressure now means those  expenses are  routinely provided, and very  cheaply too.    

 The  spirit  of  FOI  was  to  ensure  open  and  transparent  government,  accountability  and  full  disclosure  to  the   public.  However,  the  transparency  has  been  eroded  by  prohibitive  costs,  the  exclusion  of  some  public  sector   entities  from  the  scope  of  the  Act  passive  resistance  by  some  Government  departments,  and  resistance  by   Ministers.    

 Most recently News Limited requested information under FOI about bracket creep, but their request was denied  and a Ministerial Certificate issued to ensure that they could not obtain the information.    

 Conclusive certificates are a bad idea, especially if the discretion granted is shielded from judicial review, which  should incline to openness, not to secrecy.    

 Instead of giving reasons as to why it is not in the public interest to release information, the minister responsible  can  issue  a  conclusive  certificate.  In  these  circumstances  the  court  does  not  have  to  look  at  the  reasoning   behind the decision to refuse the release; it must simply accept the conclusive certificate.    

 This device allows the government to prevent the electorate from being fully informed about issues which impact  upon it economically and socially. The information the newspaper requested was and is of real importance to  everyone in Australia, and is a matter of genuine public interest.    

 News Limited is currently appealing the decision to the High Court, so upholding the role of the Fourth Estate it  may be the last time we see such costly tenacity in pursuit of information.    

 I  have  previously  tabled  a  Private  Senators  Bill  before  the  Parliament  entitled  Freedom  of  Information   Amendment (Open Government) Bill 2003 [2004] which incorporated recommendations from the joint Australian  Law Reform commission/Administrative Review Council report tabled in parliament in 1996.    

 The Councils recommendations were never taken up, and I won't get the numbers to pass my Bill.    

 So, in conclusion, will government control of the Senate change its relationship with the public service?    

 The  answer  is  no  with  respect  to  the  traditional  common  executive  instincts  of  Senators  who  are  part  of  the   Government  and  the  alternative  Government,  the  Opposition.  The  answer  is  yes  with  respect  to  increasing   Executive dominance of Senate process and the bureaucracy.    

 That is a negative development.    

