---
title: "Chen Yonglin [Chinese National seeking asylum]: joint statement."
date: "2005-06-08"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY"
subjects:
  - "CHEN, Yonglin"
  - "Foreign diplomats"
  - "Refugees"
  - "China"
  - "Ministerial responsibility"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211279761
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KGAG6%22
---

 

 JOINT STATEMENT 

 

 KEVIN RUDD, MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  &  LAURIE FERGUSON, MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION   

 8 June 2005 

 CHEN YONGLIN 

 

 

 It has now been five days since the Opposition first requested Foreign Minister  Downer make public servants available to brief the Opposition on the facts  relating to the Chen Yonglin case.   

 That request to Mr Downer has been repeated in writing on three occasions.  Yesterday it was formally declined by Mr Downer’s office which instead referred  us to Immigration Minister Senator Vanstone. 

 

 The decision to refer the Opposition to Senator Vanstone is incompatible with  Westminster conventions given Mr Downer has primary responsibility for  determinations on territorial (or political) asylum.    

 Furthermore, Mr Downer is responsible for providing advice to Senator Vanstone  on circumstances in China in the Immigration Department’s evaluation of the  grounds for issuing such a protection visa. 

 

 Mr Downer’s decision to pass responsibility to Senator Vanstone is also  unacceptable given that, when asked why Mr Chen had not been granted  territorial asylum, Senator Vanstone has on multiple occasions said all questions  should be directed to Mr Downer. Mr Downer’s response has been to direct all  questions to Senator Vanstone. Their handling of this matter had been less  coordinated than the Keystone Cops.   

 Finally, as of 5pm today, Senator Vanstone’s office has refused to set a time for  any briefing of the Opposition on the Chen Yonglin case. And so we continue to  go round in circles.   

 It has been the Opposition’s view to date that we should reserve judgment on the  question of whether Chen Yonglin should be granted a protection visa until we  have been fully briefed by the Government on all facts surrounding the case. 

 

 The Opposition now has no option but to conclude that the Government is not  handling its dealings with the Opposition on this matter in good faith.  Perhaps  the Government has concluded it has something to hide.    

 The conclusion the Opposition has reached is that in the absence of any new  and compelling evidence, there is a strong prima facie case that Chen Yonglin  should now be granted an appropriate protection visa.    

 Australia has international obligations under the United Nations Convention  Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 and the 1967 Protocol - obligations  which are reflected in the relevant sections of the Migration Act 1958. 

 

 The Opposition notes that 77 such onshore protection visas were issued to  Chinese nationals in 2003/04 (this was on top of 106 granted to Iranian nationals  and 41 granted to Afghan nationals during the same period).   

 The Opposition notes these protection visas were issued in the absence of any  recognisable damage to the Australia China bilateral relationship.   

 As for the case of Hao Fengjun which became public last night, the Opposition  has lodged a briefing request with the offices of Senator Vanstone and Mr  Downer.  We await their response.    

 

  8 JUNE 2005   

 

 Media contact: Alister Jordan (Mr Rudd’s Office) 0417 605 823                             Aisha Amjad (Mr Ferguson’s Office) 0413 511 666 

 

 

