---
title: "Citizenship for six refugees."
date: "2005-06-18"
creators:
  - "Mcgauran, Peter"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Day, year and decade programs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211556238
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UZFG6%22
---

 

 Peter McGauran MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs

 

 Media Release 

 Citizenship for Six Refugees

 18 June 2005

 Six refugees will celebrate World Refugee Day by becoming Australian citizens at a special citizenship ceremony in Jingli  Gardens on 19 June. 

 The Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Peter McGauran, said the conferees were  refugees who have built new lives in Australia.

 'Our newest citizens have come from Iraq and Somalia. I am delighted they are taking the final step in becoming full  participants in the Australian community,' Minister McGauran said.

 'The theme for World Refugee Day 2005 is Courage and this citizenship ceremony is a celebration of the spirit, courage  and determination that characterises humanitarian entrants. It will be presided over by the Lord Mayor, Peter Adamson.”

 The ceremony will be followed by drama, song and dance performances by refugee groups, and individual refugees telling  their life-stories on stage. 

 Children’s entertainment will be provided and an evening picnic will conclude the day’s celebrations. 

 'Australia has one of the largest dedicated refugee and humanitarian resettlement programs in the world. In the past year  the Northern Territory has welcomed 118 arrivals under the Refugee and Special Humanitarian programs.

 'Citizenship is the unifying force in our culturally diverse society. I encourage all those who are eligible to apply for  Australian citizenship.”

 Citizenship information is available at www.citizenship.gov.au or from the Citizenship Information Line on 131 880.

 MEDIA CONTACT: Gemma Allman - 0408 971 708

