---
title: "Mental trauma exacerbated by immigration policy."
date: "2005-09-08"
creators:
  - "Allison, Lyn"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of ALLISON, SEN LYN"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Mental health"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211282966
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B98H6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press  Releases

 Senator Lyn Allison Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Victoria Australian Democrats spokesperson for Health and Ageing

 Dated: 08 September 2005 Press Release Number: 446 Portfolio: Health and Ageing

 Related: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Mental trauma exacerbated by immigration policy

 While long-term detainees continue to bear the mental scars caused by the Howard Government's inhumane  policy of mandatory detention, it is only when there is a public outcry, such as in the Cornelia Rau and Vivian  Solon cases, that the Government acknowledges the problem, the Australian Democrats Leader told a  human rights conference held in Canberra today.

 Senator Lyn Allison today addressed the third national conference on Human Rights and Mental Health.  Senator Allison is also chairing the National Mental Health Inquiry to which the Rau family yesterday made a  public submission. 

 "The current policy of incarcerating people who legally seek asylum in our country is an appalling abuse of  human rights," Senator Allison said. "We are locking up people who may have fled persecution, undergone  traumatic experiences including torture, imprisonment or war and who are already psychologically suffering." 

 "To make matters worse, this group of vulnerable people who have already endured an enormous physical  and psychological toll are then subjected to a process in Australia which ignores their substantial need for  high quality mental health care."

 Senator Allison said numerous submissions to the mental health inquiry, including that of the Rau family,  have condemned the lack of mental health services in detention centres and explored how the environment  exacerbates depression, psychosis and psychological distress.

 In its submission, the Rau family characterises Cornelias treatment in Baxter as punitive, prejudicial to her  physical and mental health and brutal given she spent three out of four months as the only female in an  isolation compound.

 "We have known for years about the mental heath impact on detainees," Senator Allison said. "Research  shows that detention contributes to high levels of anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, self-harm and suicidal behaviour." 

 "The only way to address the mental health problems caused or exacerbated by detention is to remove  people from that environment," Senator Allison concluded.

 

