---
title: "Minister message to Baxter protestors."
date: "2005-03-23"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Baxter (SA)"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Demonstrations and protest movements"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211277113
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3YKF6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Minister Message to Baxter Protestors

 VPS 047/2005

 Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, today urged protestors attending Baxter over weekend to commit to peaceful protest.

 ‘While I support the right of all Australians to protest, I urge those attending Baxter this weekend to ensure their protest is peaceful and does not  overly disrupt operations at Baxter or the community of Port Augusta,’ the Minister said.

 ‘There is a lot of misinformation in the community about the detention population. Some of this is fuelled by advocacy groups to serve their own  purposes.

 ‘The simple fact that all too often seems to be ignored is that there are no refugees in Baxter or other detention centres. Where someone seeks  protection, regardless of how they arrived in Australia, their claim is assessed and if protection is required, a visa is granted immediately.

 ‘It is in no-one’s interest for detainees to be given any false sense that these actions will somehow change their circumstances. Nothing could be  further from the truth. I call on those attending protests to look beyond their own motives and consider the situation of those in the centre.

 ‘If the protests result in trouble inside the centre, will the protestors feel vindicated? I certainly hope not.

 ‘While centre staff do not want to place restrictions on visits and other normal centre activities, they will be forced to if protest action disrupts the  normal operations of the centre. This is hardly in the interests of detainees, for whom visits with friends, relatives and supporters are extremely  important.

 ‘I understand there have been suggestions among some groups attending of undertaking such actions as blocking the Port Augusta bridge and  attempting to break detainees out of Baxter. I alert those more reasonable people thinking of attending to question whether they are prepared to be  associated with the actions of these people which may threaten the safety of the local community, officials and detainees.’

 23 March 2005

 See:

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media_releases/media05/v05047.htm 

