---
title: "Minister launches SA refugee week."
date: "2005-09-24"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283749
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1NHH6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Minister Launches SA Refugee Week

 VPS 115/2005

 Immigration Minister, Senator Amanda Vanstone today launches SA Refugee Week in Adelaide. 

 ‘This terrific event is a celebration of the courage of refugees,’ the Minister said.

 ‘I have been lucky enough to meet many of the brave people who are welcomed here under Australia’s Refugee and Humanitarian Program.

 ‘Many come from appalling conditions in camps after fleeing violence and persecution in their home countries.

 ‘It takes great courage to endure such conditions and to make a fresh start in a new and unfamiliar place.

 ‘This event is a great opportunity to again welcome refugees and recognise their contribution to our nation.’

 Since World War II, 645 000 refugees and people in need of protection have resettled in the Australian community.

 Senator Vanstone said South Australia had embraced more than 4000 humanitarian entrants in the past four years.

 Around 13 000 humanitarian entrants and refugees will resettle in Australia this financial year.

 ‘The tapestry of entertaining and colourful events held for SA Refugee Week would forge links between the mainstream community and new  arrivals,’ the Minister said.

 ‘Some 40 organisations are participating, which demonstrates the breadth and diversity of the South Australian response to refugees.

 ‘Refugee and community groups are staging a fantastic array of music, dance, food and exhibitions. I invite all South Australians to get out there  and relish this experience.’

 24 September 2005

 See: Index of Media Releases

