---
title: "Detention Centres and health services: Labour solution needed."
date: "2005-06-23"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Christmas Island"
  - "Mental health services"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211556530
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F6GG6%22
---

 LAURIE FERGUSON MP             SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION 

 FEDERAL MEMBER FOR REID  23 JUNE 2005   

 DETENTION CENTRES AND HEALTH SERVICES:  LABOR SOLUTION NEEDED     

 The revelation that a psychologist in the Christmas Island detention facility lacked  qualifications, adds to the mounting evidence of an inappropriate detention  system controlled by an incompetent Minister.  

 

 Many cases have highlighted the lack of adequate mental and psychiatric care  and treatment for detainees. The Government’s recent improvements in staffing  levels and frequency of visits are a late response to a mounting crisis.    

 The Member for Fremantle, Carmen Lawrence, last month exposed other  medical staff lacking qualifications.     

 Also, Justice Finn recently declared that the Government had breached its duty  of care and shown “culpable neglect” in its refusal to transfer two Iranian  detainees to a psychiatric hospital, despite recommendations.  He ruled that  “the Commonwealth’s own arrangement for outsourcing health  care services itself requires review. Its aptness is open to real question.”   

 The psychiatric consultant to the Palmer Inquiry into Cornelia Rau, and 200 other  possible cases has stated that the report makes “very serious findings.”    

 Minister Vanstone however fails to recognise that there is a serious crisis  regarding mental health issues in Immigration detention: “I am not prepared to  come to that conclusion” - that the detention system puts patients at serious risk  of mental illness” 

 

 Yet she goes and makes these following comments:  “Can I give an absolute guarantee that the detention of Cornelia Rau for 10  months did not in any way further damager her condition? Of course I cannot  give that guarantee”   

 Further proof that the Government’s Immigration system is a Shambles, and why  we need proper reform and a decent inquiry.   

 Labor has consistently called for an end to outsourcing detention centre services,  with control to be returned to the public sector. Since 2002, it has advocated for 

 independent medical access to these centres, and an Inspector-General of  detention to monitor conditions and resolve complaints.  Unfortunately, Petro  Georgiou and his allies yesterday defeated our substantive efforts to make the  current system more humane. 

 

 Laurie Ferguson: 02 6277 4920                                             23 June 2005 

 Aisha Amjad:        0413 511 666   

 

