---
title: "Consultations pave the way for refugees in Mildura."
date: "2005-08-24"
creators:
  - "Cobb, John"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211282355
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EH3H6%22
---

  Hon JOHN COBB MP  Minister-for C i t i z e n s h i p  a n d  M u l t i c u l t u r a l  A f f a i r s  

  Date: 24 August 2005 

  CONSULTATIONS PAVIE THE WAY FOR REFUGEES IN MILDURA 

  Refugees will hopefully settle in the IVlildura area following successful community  consultations today, the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb,  announced today. 

  Subject to continuing support from local agmcies, up to I O  African families may be settled in  Mildura early next year in a pilot scheme similar to one announced for the Shepparton area  by the former Minister, Peter McCauran. 

  Mr Cobb said he was delighted with the positive response DlMlA officers have received so  far in Mildura, particularly the strong and er-thusiastic contribution from John Forrest, the  Federal Member for Mallee. 

  "Mr Forrest has shown a great deal of leadership during the discussions and I look forward  to working closely with him in bringing African refugees to Mildura," Mr Cobb said. 

  Mr Forrest said that the Sunraysia has an s!xcellent record of settling migrants aver the last  60 odd years. 

  "I am confdent this will continue with the new generation of refugees who are looking  forward to building a new life for themselves and their families in the region, Mr Forrest said. 

  Today's discussions were held with key selvice agencies and employers in the Mildura area,  as welt as the Mildura Rural City Council, the Sunraysia Ethnic Communities' Council and  local Members. 

  "Although the discussions are still at an ea l y  stage, people in Mildura seem to have  recognised the benefits of bringing refugecs and humanitarian entrants to their community,  and how greater diversity will help the community grow. 

  T h e  settlement of African refugees in rural Australia is a success $tory, as illustrated by  their growing ties to communities across the nation," Mr Cobb said. 

  "Not only does Australia grow by helping those in desperate need, but by embracing them  and making them a part of our community, we also enrich our nation, socially, economically  and culturally. 

  "I feel very positive that communities like Mildura and Shepparton have an important role in  shaping the Mure of Australia," Mr Cobb said. 

  Ends: 

  Mcdia Enquiries Ron Kelly 02 6277 789'0 or Mob 0417 862 924 

