---
title: "Tampa anniversary still causing damage 4 years on."
date: "2005-08-26"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211282468
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ST3H6%22
---

   Links 

 AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS PRESS RELEASES Sub-menu: View Latest Releases | List By Date | List By Portfolio | List By Person 

 Senator Andrew Bartlett Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Queensland Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 26 August 2005 Press Release Number: 05-423

 Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Tampa Anniversary Still Causing Damage 4 Years On

 Democrats Deputy Leader, Andrew Bartlett, says the fourth anniversary of the rescue of 433 asylum seekers by the MV Tampa is a reminder  that major damage is still being caused as a result of the Governments response to the incident.

 Senator Bartlett, who was the first person to raise concerns in the Senate about the Tampa incident, said there is a direct link between the  brutal and irrational way the Howard Government reacted to the Tampa and the current enormous mess in the administration of our  Immigration Department.

 The legacy of the Tampa is far more than just unnecessary suffering caused to hundreds of refugees, many of whom are still waiting to be  reunited with their spouses and children.

 The Tampa incident led to actions that perverted the law, wasted billions of dollars, destroyed families and lives, corrupted our foreign policy  in the Pacific and entrenched the incompetent and uncaring culture in the Immigration Department which the Government is now pretending  to fix.

 The Tampa incident was used to manufacture the political grounds for gaining the Labor Partys support for forcing a package of six pieces of  legislation though the Senate which dramatically amended the entire Migration Act, giving immense power to bureaucrats, further restricted  judicial and independent oversight and in many cases enabled Commonwealth officers to act completely outside any legal constraints.

 Until the Migration Act is reformed and the Government adopts a policy based on reality rather than myth-making and lies, the operation and  administration of our countrys migration system will remain severely dysfunctional. You cannot change the culture of the Department whilst  the law and policy remains the same. An essential part of repairing the culture is to restore the checks and balances taken out of the law by  the Liberal and Labor parties in 2001.

 The Tampa incident also gave birth to the so-called Pacific Solution, which has been shown to be grotesquely unjust, financially extravagant  and continues to inflict mental torture on twenty-eight asylum seekers still imprisoned on Nauru. The current Minister continues to turn her  face away from the massive suffering she is responsible for, never even bothering to visit Nauru and continuing to maintain the fiction that it  has nothing to do with Australia.

 

 Join Donate 

 RSS News Feeds

 Authorised by: J. Wood,  711 South Road, Black  Forest, SA 5035.  Copyright © 2005 

 Australian Democrats 

   ACT   NSW   NT   QLD   SA   TAS   VIC   WA   ECODems   Carter GLBTI Network   VIDA Women    Don Chipp 

  Suggest page to friend  Print  Bookmark  Search  Legal   Support  

