---
title: "Landmines don't stop killing when the war's over."
date: "2005-09-20"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of O'CONNOR, BRENDAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211283560
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D9JI6%22
---

 

 

 

 Landmines don't stop killing when the war's over   MEDIA RELEASE  20 September 2005 

 

 

 Brendan O'Connor, the Federal Member for Gorton, condemned the appallingly destructive  impact of landmines both in wars and long after conflicts are over, at a public meeting in  Sydenham last night. 

 "Landmines, of course, do not stop killing when the war’s over; they go on killing and  maiming children, animals, farmers, and anyone with the bad luck to come upon them,"  Mr O'Connor said. 

 Mr O'Connor was speaking at the Town Well Uniting Church, to a public meeting convened  by the Uniting Church Justice and International Mission Unit to discuss the campaign to  extend current bans on landmines to prohibit the manufacture and export of anti-vehicle  mines, which are equally responsible for the deaths and injuries of tens of thousands of  people all over the world every year.  

 "I’m gratified that the opposition to the use of landmines is not confined to the Labor  Party, but is now broadly held across the political divide in Australia," he said. 

 "The principle disagreement between the parties at present is on this subject of anti-vehicle, as opposed to anti-personnel mines. Unlike anti-personnel mines, which are  subject to the international ban supported by Australia under the Ottawa convention, anti-vehicle mines are not banned." 

 "It is incumbent on all Australian Governments, whoever they may be in the future, to  lobby our powerful friends in the United States to accept the necessity and the  responsibility as the most powerful miltary state in the world, to end the manufacture and  distribution of these inhumane weapons of war." 

 Mr O'Connor was given a large number of petitions signed by members of the community  calling for the banning of anti-vehicle mines by Rev. David Webster, Outreach Ministry  worker at Town Well Uniting Church. He will shortly table the petitions during the next  parliamentary sitting, and move a motion for debate in the Parliament to address the  issue. 

 The International Campaign to Ban Landmines calls on governments to recognise a  worldwide ban on antipersonnel landmines, to recognise universal membership of the  1997 Mine Ban Treaty, to support of the needs and rights of survivors, and to support  efforts to demine and to promote risk education in affected areas. 

 Other speakers included Dr. Mark Zirnsak, of the International Campaign to Ban  Landmines Australian Network; and Elizabeth Doherty of the Jesuit Refugee Service, on  her experiences working with landmine survivers in Cambodia. 

 

