---
title: "Australia and Afghanistan sign new arrangements."
date: "2005-05-17"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "International cooperation"
  - "Repatriation"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211278748
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VU2G6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Australia and Afghanistan Sign New Arrangements 

 VPS 059/2005

 Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, said the signing of two separate arrangements between Australia and Afghanistan highlighted the  close and ongoing cooperative relationship between the two governments.

 A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) - signed in Kabul tonight by Australia’s Ambassador to Afghanistan, Ms Zorica McCarthy and Afghan  Deputy Minister for Refugees and Repatriation, Abdul Qader Ahadi, is aimed at providing solutions to the situation of those Afghans in Nauru and  in immigration detention in Australia who have been found not to be refugees.

 ‘The arrangement provides for the re-offer of a reintegration package to encourage the voluntary return of these people,’ Senator Vanstone said.

 ‘The package will include cash assistance of $2,000 per individual with a maximum of $10,000 per family, international and domestic travel, short  term accommodation in Afghanistan, and access to vocational training and referral services. ‘

 ‘The MOU allows for the return of those who have been found not to be owed protection and who do not take up this reintegration package.’

 The reintegration package will be offered to claimed Afghans on Nauru who have been found not to be refugees and to claimed Afghans in  immigration detention in Australia who have been found not to be refugees, if and when they become available for removal. 

 ‘Currently, on Nauru and in immigration detention in Australia, there are 19 people who have been accepted as Afghan nationals, by the Afghan  Government, and a further 37 people whose claims to Afghan nationality are being examined by the Afghan Government,’ Senator Vanstone said.

 A Record of Understanding was also signed today between Ambassador McCarthy and the Afghan Deputy Minister for Housing and Urban  Development, Dr Said Sharif Hussaini, under which the Australian Government will be providing US$4 million for a housing project.

 ‘The housing project recognises the special challenges that Afghanistan faces in meeting the accommodation needs of the many Afghans returning  to their country now that the situation is becoming more settled and will be used to accommodate people returning to Afghanistan,’ Senator  Vanstone said.

 Funding for the housing project is separate from the $110 million of development assistance provided by Australia since September 2001.

 Welcoming the initiatives, Deputy Ministers Ahadi and Hussaini thanked the Australian Government for its generous and continuing assistance to  reconstruction and capacity building in Afghanistan.

 ‘The signing of these two arrangements marks a further major step in the close cooperation between the two governments in addressing issues  regarding Afghan asylum seekers, refugees and displaced people,’ Deputy Minister Ahadi said.

 Australia’s commitment to Afghanistan on migration management issues has included the provision of more than $21 million to the UNHCR since  September 2001, to support Afghan refugees living in neighbouring countries and their return to Afghanistan and more than $6 million to the 

 International Organization for Migration to support the Afghan Government’s management of returnees and displaced people.

 In addition, the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs is working with the Afghan Government to assist in  strengthening its border management capacities, including the provision of new Afghan visa labels. The new Afghan visa label was officially  launched in Kabul yesterday by the Afghan Deputy Foreign Minister Mr Zalmai Aziz.

 17 May 2005

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media_releases/media05/v05059.htm  Last update: 18 May 2005 at 11:25 AEST 

 

