---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 5 April 2006: Australia-Indonesia relations; Cole Inquiry."
date: "2006-04-05"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY"
subjects:
  - "Australia-Indonesia relations"
  - "Cole Inquiry."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291863
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9I9J6%22
---

 

 TRANSCRIPT   

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Trade and  International Security   

 DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  - BRISBANE  -  5 APRIL 2006   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:  Australia-Indonesia relations; Cole Inquiry.   

 

 REPORTER:  The Immigration Department has confirmed that six people  from Papua have arrived off the coast of northern Australia. How do you think  that they should be handled? 

 

 RUDD:    Each of these cases has to be handled under Australian  immigration law which means that each case is looked at on its merits and a  decision made based on the merits. These decisions should be made free of any  political factors, just as decisions on the previous set of arrivals were made  independently as well.   

 There is a grave danger at a political level that the relationship with Indonesia,  the relationship between Jakarta and Canberra, could well start to spiral out of  control. I think that it is very important that we have a time of effective  diplomacy. No one has got an interest in this relationship spiralling out of  control. It is important that effective diplomacy now be applied.    

 My recommendation to Mr Downer is that if he hasn’t done so already, to pick  up the telephone and call his Indonesian counterpart. Let’s get this relationship  back on an even keel as soon as possible. 

 

 REPORTER:  Where do you think that they should be processed?   

 RUDD:  When it comes to the application of our migration law and  migration procedures, that should be done precisely in accordance with 

 departmental regulations as they now stand. What we believe is important is for  each of these decisions to be made on their merits. Each case is different and they  should be assessed properly, professionally and independently according to  Australian law.    

 REPORTER:  So do you think maybe Christmas Island or the mainland is  the best option?   

 RUDD:  When it comes to that level of detail, I would rather defer to  my colleague, the Shadow Minister for Immigration Tony Burke. When it comes  to the merits of each case, my argument is that each of these individuals should  be processed on their merits and a decision made on their individual merits  consistent with Australia’s international obligations under the Refugees  Convention.   

 REPORTER:  Tony Burke said this morning that they shouldn’t be  processed on Christmas Island, that it takes up too much money and resources.   

 RUDD:  Well, on that level of detail I would rather defer to my  colleague, Mr Burke. That lies entirely within his portfolio. When it comes to the  question of how they should be processed under International Refugee Law, that  of course is a portfolio responsibility which we share and I state again my belief  that these individuals should be assessed on their merits and decisions made on  the merits, free from any external political interference. That was the case with  the assessment of the previous set and this should be the case with these  individuals as well.   

 REPORTER:  You mentioned relations between Australia and Indonesia,  can you talk a little bit more about the implications of the new arrivals from  Papua?   

 RUDD:   On the specific implications of the new arrivals, it is too  early to comment. But I would say this: there is a grave danger that we begin to  see the Australia-Indonesia relationship spiral out of control. That is why the  time has now come for effective diplomacy. My call to Mr Downer is to pick up  the telephone to his Indonesian counterpart, for the Prime Minister to pick up the  phone to his Indonesian counterpart, and let’s get this relationship back on an  even keel.    

 In doing so, the Federal Government would have our complete bipartisan  support. This is a very important relationship for Australia; it is an important  relationship for Indonesia. Important because of our common interests with  counter-terrorism, our common interest when it comes to the effective control of 

 illegal people movements across the Archipelago as well as obviously a range of  other bilateral interests that we have in common. We need to make sure that this  relationship is put back on an even keel as soon as possible. 

 

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible.]   

 RUDD:  On the AWB wheat for weapons scandal, can I simply say  this. Mark Vaile and Alexander Downer are providing statements to the Cole  Inquiry. It is time for John Howard to do the same.   

 There are three Ministers involved in this scandal: the Prime Minister, the  Foreign Minister and the Trade Minister. Statements are being extracted from the  Foreign Minister and the Trade Minister. But we have had nothing forthcoming  from the Prime Minister.    

 If John Howard has nothing to hide, he would expand Commissioner Cole’s  powers right now and do the honourable thing and provide a statement to the  Commission himself. That statement should include precisely how John Howard  responded to each of the 27 warnings his Government received about this $300  million dollar wheat for weapons scandal which ran over five years, warnings  which the Prime Minister consistently ignored.    

 What we have instead is a strategy by the Prime Minister to lump blame at one  level and point the gun exclusively of the Cole Inquiry at the AWB; and when it  comes to the Government, to point the gun exclusively at Foreign Minister  Downer and Trade Minister Vaile. John Howard is the third Minister in this  equation. John Howard should do the right thing and volunteer his statement, a  comprehensive statement to the Inquiry now about what warnings he received,  what contact he had through his office with the AWB and specifically whether  his office provided the AWB with advice about how they should deal with the  Volcker Inquiry by the United Nations. These questions remain unanswered by  John Howard. If he has got some integrity on this, he will start answering those  questions straight away.   

 Ends   

 

 Media contact:  Alister Jordan 0417 605 823   

 

 

 

