---
title: "Minister admits government has done no planning for climate refugees."
date: "2006-10-30"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211300001
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C3BL6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales 

 

 

 Minister admits government has done no planning for  climate refugees 

 Senator Nettle, Monday, 30th October, 2006 

 Immigration Minister Amanda Vanstone admitted during today's Senate estimates  hearing that the government has done no planning into the possibility of climate  refugees seeking to come to Australia. 

 Greens Immigration spokesperson Senator Kerry Nettle asked the Minister if her  department or the government had any contingency plans to deal with climate  refugees - the answer was no. 

 "The government is asleep at the wheel regarding the immigration challenges posed  by climate change," Senator Nettle said. 

 "The very real prospect of large scale climate refugee migration poses the biggest  challenge for immigration authorities in our history, and yet the government has done  nothing to assess this challenge.  

 "Not only did the Minister unequivocally state that the government has done no work  in relation to the future arrival of climate refugees, but she also questioned the  existance of climate refugees. 

 "Last week at the Pacific Island Forum, the President of Kiribati raised the need for  Australia to get used to and prepare for climate refugees. New Zealand is resettling  3000 Tuvaluans following a request made in 2001 that Australian rejected. 

 "The Stern report into climate change released today in the UK indicates the  possibility of 200 million refugees being displaced by climate change yet the Howard  government has made no plans to deal with this possibility. 

 "The Greens call on the government to immediately undertake an analysis of the  implications for Australia of the possibility of large scale migration as a result of  climate change, and in particular make arrangements with our Pacific neighbours to  resettle populations displaced by rising sea levels." 

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

 

