---
title: "Bi-partisan fence building won't stop asylum seekers."
date: "2006-04-10"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292092
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OEBJ6%22
---

 

 DEMOCRATS 

 

 senator.bartlett@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 MEDIA                                      MONDAY 10 APRIL 2006

 SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS DEPUTY LEADER 

 BI-PARTISAN FENCE BUILDING WON’T STOP ASYLUM SEEKERS   Democrat immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, says Australia is now reaping the  consequences of John Howard’s dishonest and inhumane election message from 2001. 

 “Our nation knowingly and willingly turned back boats full of refugees fleeing the atrocities of  Saddam Hussein and the Taliban.  It should be no surprise that Indonesians are hugely offended  that we have now promptly - albeit rightly - accepted refugees fleeing persecution in West Papua,”  Senator Bartlett said. 

 “Mr Howard’s attempts at backsliding by suggesting ways of making it easier to reject future refugees  from West Papua will simply add to the problem.” 

 “How we can urge other countries in our region to improve their human rights record and their  respect for due process and the rule of law if we are signalling that such things are optional for  Australia, depending on political circumstances?” 

 “Labor Leader Kim Beazley and ‘Justice’ Minister Chris Ellison also seem to think the solution is just  to increase the barbed wire fence around Australia to prevent people from being able to flee  persecution, rather than exploring ways to help bring the human rights problems to an end.” 

 “Both the Government’s and the Opposition’s position on the asylum seeker question is political  posturing at its worst.  Ultimately, these are the lives of human beings we are dealing with and they  should not be subject to the whims of politicians.”   

  “I have been part of meetings with both President Yudhoyono and Foreign Minister Wirajuda.  Regardless of the reported assessment by Indonesian intelligence officials that I am an ‘enemy’ of  Indonesia, I believe both men are highly capable and honourable people making significant progress  in moving their nation towards higher standards of democracy and human rights.” 

  “It’s about time that the major parties realised the irony in the ‘fences make good neighbours’  argument.  Fences serve to isolate, distance and foster distrust between people.” 

 “Successfully addressing the issue of asylum seekers from Indonesia or anywhere else will not come  from making it harder to get here or taking the most politically expedient approach when people  arrive.  Real change will only come about by engaging in open and honest dialogue,” Senator Bartlett  said.   

 Media contact - Tracee McPate - 0417 607 655 

