---
title: "Senator and Mayor raise the morning star flag in Marrickville."
date: "2006-03-23"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Papua"
  - "Independence"
  - "New South Wales"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291192
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CN4J6%22
---

 Senator Bob Brown   Senator for Tasmania    

 Senator and Mayor raise the morning star flag in  Marrickville 

 

 Senator Brown, 23rd March 2006 

 Debt of honour to West Papuans highlighted 

 Senator Kerry Nettle and Mayor of Marrickville, Sam Byrne raised the West Papuan  flag today urging inner city citizens to support self-determination for the Papuans. 

 The flag raising ceremony took place in front of the war memorial at Marrickville  Town Hall highlighting the role of the West Papuans in supporting the Allies during  World War II. 

 "The situation in West Papua is terrible", Senator Nettle said. 

 "Like in East Timor, the actions of the Indonesian have led to thousands of deaths and  the human rights violations are getting worse." 

 "Australia needs to be doing more to support the West Papuans seeking to exercise  their right to self-determination. The Greens are supporting the 43 refugees who  recently had to flee their country." 

 "We have a debt of honour to the West Papuans.", Mayor Byrne said. 

 "They worked with the diggers in defending Australia from Japanese invasion. We  should now help them." 

 "Many Australians were based in West Papua during World War II. Gough Whitlam  was there while serving with the RAAF." 

 "The West Papuans are hurting. I hope the people of Marrickville can show their  solidarity by attending the support rally on April 2." 

 West Papua was invaded by the Indonesian military in 1961. In January 43 asylum  seekers in a traditional Melanesian long boat to Australia and are still detained on  Christmas Island. Under Indonesian law the raising the West Papuan flag has lead to  jail sentences of twenty years. 

 Rally in support of West Papua and the refugees. 12 Noon Sunday April 2 Hyde Park  North 

 Contact: Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 or Sam Byrne 0408 231 509  

 Created by Administration   Last modified 23-03-2006 01:33 PM    

