---
title: "Change in culture: [Address to] the Victorian Immigration and Settlement Conference: Northern Migrant Resource Centre, Melbourne: 19 July 2006."
date: "2006-07-19"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Grants"
  - "Immigration"
  - "Address to"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295771
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JUCK6%22
---

  Hon ANDREW ROBB AO MP  Member for Goldstein  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister  for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  Address on  “Change in culture” 

  Victorian Immigration and Settlement Conference  Northern Migrant Resource Centre 

  Stamford Plaza, Melbourne 19 July 2006 

  lntrod uction 

  [t’s a pleasure to be here today. After five months holding these 

  responsibilities, it is a most appropriate opportunity to talk about my 

  perspective on settlement, and the direction I see services taking in 

  the future. 

  Since taking up this position, I’ve had much to learn - in the process 

  I’ve been genuinely impressed by the work you and your colleagues 

  are doing to settle migrants into our community. 

  I feel honoured to be given responsibility for Mutticultural Affairs and  Settlement because I am very proud of our success as a nation 

  openly welcoming people from the four corners of the globe. 

  1 

  This morning I listened very closely to Stephanie Lagos’ speech, 

  about the justifiable concerns over the 36,000 people who have 

  come to Australia since 2001 and may not be yet in a job. 

  But when I was listening to Stephanie, I suppose I was perhaps 

  reminded a lrttle bit of the glass half-full, half-empty analogy. When I 

  look at the last five years migration experience, I do see those 

  challenges and 1 accept them wholeheartedly but I also think of the 

  more than half a million migrants and refugees who have joined our 

  community and I think of our success in absorbing and finding jobs 

  for just on 95 per cent of those people - hundreds of thousands of 

  peopie, in the space of five years, into our communities and into 

  jobs. 

  Sure, many of them haven’t started in their ideal job but I know their 

  frustrations from the experience of my children. One of my fellows 

  took several months to find a job. He had good qualifications but had 

  to apply for dozens of jobs before he found something and even 

  then it still wasn’t what he really wanted. But since he and my other 

  kids got their foot in the door, they have gone from strength to 

  strength and I am really proud of them. 

  When I look at the Australian migration experience, and I compare it 

  to other developed countries, I think what we have achieved is 

  extraordinary and something that you in particular should take great 

  2 

  pride in given the central role that most of you have in delivering that 

  result. 

  I very much agree with Stephanie that we shouldn’t be satisfied until 

  every one of the migrants and refugees are gainfully employed but I 

  think in approaching that task, the mindset we have got to adopt is 

  that we should take strength from our successes in life as 

  individuals, as communities, as organisations. 

  You recognise and look for your strengths and you build on and 

  make use of them. i think as a country, we are good and we have 

  been good at integrating people from so many countries and 

  cultures. Most of you are an integral part of that success and in 

  striving to do even better, I think we should draw confidence from 

  that success. 

  Compared to so many other developed countries around the world, I 

  think we owe our success to a number of factors. The first is the 

  clearly regulated immigration programme that we’ve had for 60 

  years - we have made decisions about who comes to Australia, 

  when they come, how they come and what skills they bring. 

  The second important factor is our effective border control. We 

  simply cannot have a regulated immigration programme, supported 

  by the broader Australian community, if we can’t control our borders. 

  3 

  And the third, and some would argue the most important, is our 

  ability to successfully settle and integrate new migrants. We’ve 

  settled over 6.5 million migrants to Australia from over 200 countries 

  in the last 60 years. 

  And as we’ve gone along, we’ve become better and better at 

  integrating people into our Australian family. It’s why our current 

  settlement policies are recognised as some of the best in the world, 

  if not the best. 

  i’m also extremeiy proud that we have one of the three largest 

  refugee resettlement programmes in the world, and an uninterrupted 

  refugee intake since World War i i .  

  in fact, on a per capita basis, Australia settles more refugees than 

  any other country, including the US and Canada. We also spend 

  more on the settlement needs of each new migrant than either of 

  those two countries. 

  But we can’t rest on our laurels. We’ve got to keep getting better as 

  we face fresh challenges. I know you have a keen sense of the 

  settlement challenges we are facing with the new communities that 

  have been arriving over the past few years. 

  4 

  You’re the ones we look to for advice on how best to meet these 

  new challenges. You’re the ones who take the policy we make and 

  turn it in to real services on the ground. Whatever changes and 

  improvements we make, we need to make them together. 

  I came to these responsibilities with a certain bias. Most of my 

  teenage years were spent in Reservoir in the Northern Suburbs of 

  Melbourne. My parents are still there. 

  During the time 1 was growing up, a lot of my mates were young 

  Italians and Greeks. So many of them have greatly enriched our 

  community. Since those years, many other groups have come 

  through Reservoir. 

  After the Southern Europeans, the Eastern Europeans established a 

  strong presence and then there was a strong Asian representation. 

  Now there’s a strong Muslim community. And I imagine in due time  there will be SI significant African presence. 

  Despite the challenges, and the inevitable edginess of the 

  community with each wave of new migration, it has been a great 

  migration story. 

  It gives me great heart to think that any settlement issues we’ve had 

  before, we’ve worked through; and I have every confidence that the 

  challenges we face with some of the newer communities, such as 

  the Muslim and African communities will also be worked through. 

  5 

  Especially with the help of organisations like the Northern Migrant 

  Resource Centre. I know you have a particularly tough job as the 

  areas you cover such as Hume, Moreland and Darebin are popular 

  settlement destinations. This part of the world has always had a 

  diverse population. 

  I would imagine, though, that working within this diversity, helping to 

  build these communities, provides some wonderful insights, and I 

  hope some important rewards. Certainly you have the thanks of the 

  Government for the great work you do. 

  implementation of programmes for effective integration 

  While diversity is something that Australians are used to, an 

  increasingly diverse population is a future reality. 

  The significant challenges Australia faces over the next few years 

  associated with the ageing of our population and the prospect of 

  skills shortages in key areas of the economy, will mean even more 

  people migrating from non-traditional source countries. 

  In the current global environment, it's not so much a matter of 

  whether migration will occur - it will. Or whether it's beneficial - it is. 

  It becomes a question of how we best manage and support this 

  migration. How do we best integrate people quickly and effectkelp 

  6 

  The shifting priorities of the UNHCR also mean that people will be 

  coming from places that have not been traditional humanitarian 

  regions for Australia. World events have a huge impact on our 

  refugee programme. 

  For example, the percentage of people resettled from Africa has 

  risen from 31% of the total offshore programme in 2001-02, to 

  40% in 2002-03, 62 % in 2003-04, to around 70% in 2004-05 and 

  05/06. 

  I’m sure ! don’t have to tell you that refugees arriving from Africa 

  generally have greater settlement needs than people from 

  previous source regions, reflecting their very different pre- 

  migration experiences and circumstances. Some of the 

  challenges they face in settling in Australia include higher levels 

  of poverty, larger families, lower levels of literacy and numeracy, 

  unfamiliar health issues, longer periods spent in refugee camps, 

  little experience of urban environments, and higher rates of 

  torture and trauma. And added to that, many of them are 

  separated from their families. 

  The Settlement task has become fast changing, increasingly 

  challenging. 

  The Settlement Services Review of 2003 shone a light on the 

  need for greater flexibility and better planning. 

  7 

  This need for flexibility and rapid response to changing needs 

  explained the removal of core funding and the move to straight 

  project funding, including an administrative component. It has 

  been disruptive for many of you, but necessary none the less. 

  Difficult choices have had to be made if the available money is to 

  meet the most pressing needs. 

  The legitimate needs of established communities have been 

  appropriately shifted more and more to the mainstream 

  departments of health, ageing, education and welfare, while 

  settlement monies have been focussed on the needs of those 

  who have arrived over the last five years. 

  With these new arrivals, you have been placing a heavy 

  emphasis on building self-reliance, developing critical English 

  skills and making sure they are capable of using and accessing 

  everyday services as quickly as possible, 

  In the face of this dynamic change your efforts have been most 

  impressive, and I congratulate you. 

  At the beginning of this new funding period I know our clients will 

  benefit from the enormous amount of work and review that has 

  gone into the new programme. 

  8 

  The new National Framework for Settlement Planning, launched 

  in March 2006, will provide further capacity for governments, 

  service providers, community organisations and other settlement 

  groups to do their job. 

  Under the Framework, a range of information products are being 

  developed to assist in the settlement of new entrants, including 

  Community Profiles of the new communities that are arriving. 

  As well, each year, Settlement Needs Reports will provide 

  demographic data including information on the settlement patterns 

  and the particular needs of new arrivals and the services available to 

  meet those needs. 

  These strategies to target settlement funding must be backed up 

  by a greater commitment across government to deliver more 

  responsive mainstream services to our diverse Australian 

  community, particularly around employment, education and 

  health, so that settlement funding is not called on to fill the void. 

  The Review showed us the importance of flexibility, in our 

  settlement programmes, and in our broader government services. 

  I’m confident that all our government programmes are now more 

  innovative and comprehensive, and our settlement programmes 

  9 

  in particular are targeted to deliver assistance to those in greatest 

  need. 

  This has been evidenced most recently by the formation, at a 

  Commonwealth agency level, of a very senior Interdepartmental 

  Committee formed to address the emerging needs of African 

  settlers. The encouraging thing was that getting all these 

  mainstream departments together was seen as the logical 

  approach. 

  Need for broad community support 

  One of the key reasons for our success over the years is that 

  Australia's migration, humanitarian and settlement programmes 

  have enjoyed the broad support of the Australian people. 

  This year and last year, Australia welcomed more than 130,000 

  migrants, over 13,000 of who were refugee and humanitarian 

  entrants. 

  I firmly believe the only way to continue the benefits of a diverse  migration intake are to make sure our programmes continue to 

  receive broad community support. 

  I see this support as founded in the continued willingness of 

  migrants to embrace and commit to some important core values that 

  Australians hold dear -the importance of taking responsibility for 

  our own lives, supporting the rule of law, accepting the freedom of 

  10 

  individuals to live their lives the way they choose, allowing people to 

  practice the religion of their choice, treating men and women 

  equally. 

  To this must be added the sense of a fair go, especially for those in 

  need. 

  You are uniquely placed to introduce our new arrivals to these 

  values on a practical level. For example, introducing a driver training 

  program to our new African settlers is a wonderfully practical way of 

  helping them understand the rule of law and get on with taking 

  responsibility for their own future. 

  In return, Australia offers migrants remarkable opportunities based 

  around participation in a stable democracy and a strong economy - 

  the opportunity to get on and make something of their lives. 

  One of the best ways we can support and encourage people to 

  achieve success is by making sure they are settled as quickly and 

  effectively as possible once they arrive. 

  Learning a workable level of English and finding stable employment 

  is essential to this process. 

  With jobs to support themselves and their family, and with the 

  capacity to communicate, people can become active participants in 

  our commu nity. 

  Need for flexibility in the delivery of settlement services 

  11 

  The recent grant round has demonstrated that the majority of 

  migrant resource centres are competitive under the new grant 

  arrangements. 

  I congratulate the successful grant recipients. 

  I am amazed at how far you make the money go to help people 

  settle into our community. 

  We live in a dynamic and global society, where what happens in a 

  country on the other side of the world can have an impact on us 

  almost immediately. 

  We must be ready when events overseas such as the civil war in 

  Somalia, see a contingent from a specific country being settled in 

  Australia in a relatively short time. 

  We have to be able to respond quickly and flexibly to these 

  developments. 

  This is one of the key reasons for the increased flexibility and new 

  direction set down through the Settlement Grants Programme. 

  For the next round of grants, my department has already started 

  working on taking us to the next step. I must report, sadly, that the 

  one constant is change. 

  The application form and application process will be simplified and 

  streamlined recognising the welter of information that longstanding 

  recipients of settlement grants have already provided. 

  12 

  I have also asked the department to consider including a range of 

  additional practical projects like homework clubs, driver education, 

  household budgeting, sporting activities and employment mentoring. 

  I am also considering alternative locations for settlement services to 

  be provided from. For example, after visiting a number of state 

  schools, I am interested in exploring opportunities for placement of 

  settlement outreach officers at schools with high numbers of refugee 

  and humanitarian pupils. 

  Some of you may have participated in a workshop yesterday which 

  looked at some of these ideas. 

  The department is also looking at giving greater weighting and 

  emphasis to projects which focus on the needs of the most recently 

  arrived entrants - say refugees who have arrived in the past two 

  years. 

  Already the settlement grants funding mechanisms recognise and 

  give weighting to the proportion of refugees in each state and 

  territory and funds are allocated accordingly -the more refugees in a 

  state, the more funding they will get. 

  Now I am looking at an additional weighting around those refugees 

  who have arrived recently. This would deliver more funding to states 

  and territories with larger numbers of refugees who have arrived in 

  the last two years. 

  13 

  What this recognises is the need to focus on early intervention - 

  getting refugees into good jobs, learning English and basically 

  settled as soon as possible after arrival. 

  This approach will flow through to the way the department assesses 

  applications - priority will be given to those projects that aim to 

  address the needs of the most recently arrived refugees. 

  Again, I emphasise our aim is to help the people of greatest need. 

  Conclusion 

  Settlement involves enormous personal change for people. 

  it takes huge courage to leave the country of your birth, to leave  family and friends, and strike out afresh in a new land and a new 

  society. 

  It is in everybody’s interests io make this transition as easy as 

  possible. 

  I want to congratulate and thank Stephanie and her staff for planning 

  and organising this Conference. 

  I was particularly impressed with the number and diversity of 

  sponsors for today’s event. As I’ve said, successful settlement 

  reJies on broader community support, and it seems to be here in 

  spades today. 

  14 

  Getting government, migrants and the community walking in step is 

  a complex and challenging business. 

  But we have been very good at it. Australia’s experience points less 

  to the challenge, and more to the reward: a vibrant, united society, 

  whose strength lies in its diversity. 

  15 

