---
title: "Speech at launch of Vital Signs, Vibrant Society: Gleebooks, Sydney: 22 March 2006"
date: "2006-03-22"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of EMERSON, CRAIG, MP"
subjects:
  - "Productivity"
  - "Economic growth"
  - "Educational achievement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291102
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DNSL6%22
---

 Craig Emerson   Member For Rankin 

 

 

 

 Vital Signs, Vibrant Society   

 Craig Emerson 

 Speech  Launch of Vital Signs, Vibrant Society, Gleebooks, Sydney - 22nd March  2006  I wish to pay my respects to the traditional owners of the land on which we meet today.  

 And I want to acknowledge just some of the distinguished guests: my mentor Bob Hawke and Blanche 

 D'Alpuget; our Party President Warren Mundine; my friend of old, John Singleton; my parliamentary 

 colleagues John Murphy who I call Dunedoo (since I come from Baradine and he comes from Dunedoo) and 

 Mrs Dunedoo; Chris Hayes, the very effective Member for Werriwa who won a big vote at his first election 

 and who is well plugged into the thinking of people in his electorate; David Cox; John Elliott, the head of 

 University of New South Wales Press - thank you for your confidence in me when you saw a rough draft and 

 said you'd go with it; Francis Sullivan; union colleagues Tony Woolgar and Barry Tubner and all good 

 friends. 

 Since 2002, I have been worrying about productivity growth. People ask me, why Craig? Haven't you got 

 better things to do? I have, but I do worry about it - because today's productivity growth is tomorrow's 

 prosperity. In a modern economy, we get productivity growth not by working ever harder, but by working 

 smarter. 

 As pre-eminent American economist Paul Krugman said: "Productivity growth isn't everything, but in the 

 long run it's almost everything". 

 Productivity growth isn't just about the mighty dollar. It gives us the prosperity that allows us to provide 

 opportunity for all, remedy social disadvantage and exclusion, and repair our fragile environment. 

 Australia has enjoyed a record-breaking decade of productivity growth, built on the reform program of Bob 

 Hawke here with us today and of Paul Keating. That productivity growth has given Australia its most 

 sustained period of prosperity ever. 

 But in 2002 the Treasury produced its Intergenerational Report, which assumes annual productivity growth 

 will slip back from more than 2 per cent during that record-breaking decade to around 1¾ per cent. If that 

 happened, then from the decade beginning in 2010 Australia would record its slowest rate of income growth 

 per person since the decade of the Great Depression! 

 But in 2004, productivity growth didn't just slip back to 1¾ per cent; it slipped into negative gear and has 

 been stuck there ever since. 

 The reason is that the Howard government has failed to embark upon a new reform program. Instead, it is 

 pursuing a single-item agenda of virtually complete labour market deregulation. And labour market 

 deregulation will not lift productivity growth - a point that was confirmed by the Governor of the Reserve 

 Bank when I questioned him a few weeks ago. 

 The Howard government has been squandering the proceeds of growth, failing to invest in the future. On top 

 of the proceeds from the Labor reform program, Australia has been getting a $46 billion annual gift from the 

 rest of the world from high commodity prices associated with the phenomenal expansion of China and also 

 India. But the government has been squandering that gift too. 

 Australia desperately needs a new reform program.  

 And we have a new challenge - the ageing of the population. By around 2040, Australia will have an 

 additional 4.3 million people over the age of 65 but only 0.5 million extra children. By then, only a little 

 more than two working-age Australians will be earning the incomes and paying the taxes to look after each 

 Australian who has retired, compared with more than four working-age people today. 

 So, having considered all these challenges facing Australia, I decided to join the book club! 

 The book sets out a nation-building plan that harnesses market forces for the public good. It is a reform 

 program that builds on the open, competitive economy created by the Hawke and Keating governments.  

 It is a reform program that confirms that Margaret Thatcher and John Howard are wrong - there is such a 

 thing as society. It is a reform program that helps build a prosperous, fair, tolerant and compassionate 

 society. That helps lift the human spirit - after ten long years of crushing it with fear of each other and fear of 

 foreigners. 

 It is a reform program that nurtures the talents of all children. That gives every child a flying start in life.That 

 liberates the disadvantaged from despair. That raises their horizons.  

 It is a reform program that affirms that all children - not just children of the privileged few - are capable of 

 wonderful achievements.  

 It is a reform program that tells all children that we want their talents to develop and flourish in a creative 

 Australia. 

 I wrote this book out of a conviction that there are always new ways of looking at old problems. Not the first 

 way, not the second way, not the third way, but a new way - a lesson I learned from Bob Hawke, who taught 

 me that Labor's philosophy, values and goals are immutable, but we should always be thinking of new ways 

 of achieving them. 

 This new way rises above the stifling public-versus-private debate and harnesses public and private 

 resources for the public good. 

 The centrepiece of the book is education. 

 Education brightens Labor's light on the hill. 

 Education is the key that opens two doors - one leading to prosperity and the other leading to a fair society. 

 In a damning indictment of Australia's education system, one in five adult Australians are functionally 

 illiterate and there has been no overall improvement in literacy among young people in the last quarter of a 

 century. 

 Deutsche Bank has done an important study. It forecasts that in terms of percentage improvements in years 

 of education, by 2020 Australia will rank last among the 33 countries examined. 

 We need a new funding model that abandons funding distinctions between government and private schools. 

 Surely it is the needs of the child that are important, not whether the child goes to a public or a private 

 school. A needs-based funding system would give extra funding to those schools with more needy children. 

 The book argues for a national preschool system for all four-year-olds. If you've seen the front page of The 

 Australian today, you'd have seen that Education Minister Julie Bishop has picked up this proposal. It'll be 

 interesting to see whether Peter Costello picks up my tax reform proposals. 

 The book then moves onto university education and makes new funding proposals. Australia is the fifth most 

 expensive place to study.All the countries that rank above Australia in terms of affordability of a university 

 education also rank above us on the productivity table. 

 Then the book deals with innovation. I firmly believe in a strong, growing Australian manufacturing sector. 

 We can't and shouldn't compete with China on the basis of wage costs. That's John Howard's race to the 

 bottom to low skills and low wages. Instead, we must take the high road to high skills and high wages - 

 embodying large doses of skills and innovation in higher-value manufactured products. 

 And then there is the next I - initiative. We need to reform the welfare and tax systems. I propose a universal 

 family payment for all mothers with children under the age of three. This would remove a big hurdle for 

 mothers wanting to return to work, giving them an extra 20 cents of extra dollars earned. That's equivalent to 

 a 20 per cent tax cut. 

 And in reforming the tax system we should look at wiping out the 42 cent rate that is already be faced by one 

 million taxpayers, with another 400,000 set to join them over the next three years. 

 The book is a plan for a big country with a population of 30 million by 2050. But that extra population 

 would not be crammed into the Sydney basin. It would be dispersed into our dynamic regions - into a band 

 of gold of extending from Cairns in the north down the Great Dividing Range to the cool climes of 

 Warrnambool in western Victoria. 

 And speaking of Warrnambool, here I would like to pay tribute to John Singleton. John has been financially 

 supporting the resettlement of refugees from the Sudan in Warrnambool. When city people say country 

 people won't welcome migrants, don't believe them. The people of Warrnambool and many other regional 

 centres are welcoming refugees to their towns and cities. It's only a matter of time before a 200 centimetre 

 ruckman from the Sudan is playing in the AFL. 

 Our dynamic regional centres - that band of gold - can be a new engine of Australian economic growth.But 

 they need excellent broadband rollout, excellent transport systems. I am a supporter of the inland rail 

 proposal and the PNG gas pipeline.And they need top-class schools, university campuses and health 

 facilities to attract management and creative people from the cities and from overseas. 

 We need a national infrastructure plan to supply this infrastructure. 

 So my book argues for investment in the five Is - intellect, ideas, initiative, infrastructure and immigration. 

 The book thinks big for a bigger, better country. 

 And this takes me to Kim Beazley. Kim is a big man with a big heart, with big ideas for a big country. He 

 has encouraged me and my colleagues to develop fresh ideas and I thank him for it. 

 We are engaged in the contest of ideas. When the people go to a polling booth they make their decision on 

 which party they think is best equipped to run the country and make their lives a bit better. 

 Kim, I don't expect you to embrace every idea in this book. I'd be astonished if you do. 

 But Labor is at its best when it is debating ideas.  

 We are the party of reform. The Australian people expect it of us. 

 I hope, in my own way, that I have been able to contribute to the noble task of reform - for a better country, 

 for a fairer country, for an equal opportunity in life for all Australians.  So Kim, I invite you to come forward and launch the book. 

