---
title: "Black Friday for asylum seekers: Andren."
date: "2006-04-13"
creators:
  - "Andren, Peter"
source: "Office of ANDREN, PETER, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TUCJ6%22
---

 Peter Andren MP - Independent Member for Calare   

 

 13 April 2006

 Black Friday for asylum seekers - Andren   

 The Howard Government has shamefully caved in to Indonesian pressure by  announcing radical new asylum laws that breach our international obligations,  according to Independent Member for Calare Peter Andren.   

 “To imply that asylum seekers from West Papua are exploiting our generosity, as  Foreign Minister Downer suggests, is a sad indictment of the government’s  commitment to human rights,” Mr Andren said.   

 “The Geneva Convention on Refugees defines as refugee as a person having a well-founded fear of persecution. This is exactly the situation with thousands of  indigenous West Papuans, and has been the case since the world abandoned West  Papua to Indonesian control in the sham ‘act of free choice’ in 1969.   

 “While many Australians might support an off-shore processing of asylum seekers  who have come via another country, I believe the vast majority of Australians will  reject the government’s plan to keep West Papuan refugees offshore until they can be  sent to another country.   

 “Does this mean we will be asking an economically-stretched Papua New Guinea to  accept these people?   

 “The government’s planned amendments to immigration laws will completely  contradict our responsibilities not only under the Geneva Convention, but the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention Against  Torture and Other Degrading and Inhuman Treatment.        

 “The only way Australia can reduce the inevitable flow of refugees from West Papua  is to engage the Indonesian Government in discussions about a settlement of the  almost 40-year struggle by West Papuans for a meaningful form of self-government  and share of the province’s resources.   

 “The Netherlands, as the former colonial master, should also have a role along with a  country like Finland which helped broker the Aceh settlement.   

 “Australia should never shape its refugee policies and adjust its human rights  obligations to satisfy anyone, especially a country that has refused to sign up to the  Geneva Convention,” Mr Andren said.   

 For further information:  Peter Andren - 02 6332 6229 or 0419 612 891/Tim Mahony - 0427 480 825.   

 

 

 M  e 

 d 

 i 

 a 

 

 R  e 

 l 

 e 

 a 

 s 

 e 

