---
title: "Government has shown leadership on values."
date: "2006-09-11"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298108
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/766L6%22
---

 Media Centre  Government Has Shown Leadership on Values 

 11 September 2006 

 The Howard Government has demonstrated a strong commitment to  values education for migrants entering Australia.  

 Mr Beazley's call to include a statement by applicants on their visa forms  that they will uphold Australian values and laws, and run “some sessions”  on Australian values ignores the comprehensive program already offered  by the Australian Government.  

 All successful applicants for permanent visas receive information about  Australian values, loyalty to Australia and the basic structures and  principles of Australian society, along with other settlement information,  with their visa grant letter.  

 As well, applicants are given information which refers them to the  Beginning a life in Australia booklet on the internet in English and 24  other languages. It includes a chapter on Australian customs and laws.  

 The Government also spends in the order of $1million annually on a pre-departure Australian cultural orientation program for refugee entrants  under its humanitarian programme.  

 Once here, there are comprehensive settlement and language programs,  valued at over $230 million annually, to assist migrants to integrate into  the Australian community and enable them to participate through work or  study as soon as possible.  

 This includes over $150 million this year in teaching migrants English.  The program includes the module “Lets Participate” which teaches them  about their rights and responsibilities in Australia.  

 In the 2006-07 Federal Budget, the Government allocated an additional  $0.6 million for a new communication campaign that will focus on  Australian democratic values and institutions and the rule of law, and  English as our national language. The campaign will complement a  broader information campaign promoting Australian citizenship.  

 The Australian Government, through the Department of Education,  Science and Training, has also committed funding of $29.7 million over  four years (2004-2008) to its Values Education programme to help make  values education a core part of Australian schooling. This initiative forms  part of the National Action Plan to promote national security and cohesion  within our community.  

 As well, the Government is looking at the merit of a formal citizenship test  for migrants seeking Australian citizenship.  

 Home

 Biographical details 

 Media Centre 

 Portfolio Links 

 Electorate site

 Contact Details 

 Andrew Robb AO MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  

  The Government's program is comprehensive, diverse and tailored to  meet the specific needs of the people it targets. 

  MEDIA CONTACT: Kathryn Hodges 0409 132 567 

  [Media Release index] 

  Home  Copyright & Disclaimer  Privacy  Site Map  Immigration Department   

