---
title: "[Planning Howard's end: how the Greens aim to rescue the Senate]: speech at the National Press Club, Canberra."
date: "2006-11-01"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Climate change (Anthropogenic)"
  - "Australian Greens policy"
  - "Energy efficiency"
  - "Opinion poll data"
  - "Solar energy"
  - "Natural resource management"
  - "Planning Howard's end: how the Greens aim to rescue the Senate"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211300142
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RVBL6%22
---

 Senator Bob Brown   Senator for Tasmania    

 

 

 BOB BROWN AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB    

 [Planning Howard’s end: how the Greens aim to  rescue the Senate]   

 

 1 NOVEMBER 2006    

 **Check against delivery**  

 Thank you for inviting me to the National Press Club again. Since  I last spoke here in 2004, the world as we know it has profoundly  changed. The all pervasive impacts of global warming, intensifying  over the past thirty years and now accelerating at an alarming rate,  are affecting everyone. The American National Academy of  Sciences said last month that the world is now the hottest it has  been in 5000 years.   From the melting of the Greenland ice shelf and the West Antarctic 

 ice sheet, to the thawing of the tundra, to rising sea levels in the  Pacific and worsening storms, drought and bushfires in Australia,  there is no escape for any species, human or otherwise from the  impacts of global warming.   We have only 10 years left to prevent catastrophic climate change. 

 It is very sobering. It is a huge human rights issue - in fact, it is a  challenge to human existence on the planet.  

 1  

 I have spent thirty years of my life working with communities and  thousands of activists around the world to save natural and cultural  heritage; from the Franklin River and Daintree rainforests to where  the chainsaws still wreak havoc in Tasmania and Borneo - and the  Japanese harpoons kill whales in Antarctica; and to places of  cultural genius like Western Australia’s Burrup Peninsula, with its  World Heritage value Aboriginal rock art, now threatened by  Woodside’s selfish wish to bulldoze an industrial gas liquification  plant which should be built further up the coast.   Much of my life has gone into making Australia a fairer, safer  place and also towards advocating freedom for Tibet, East Timor  and West Papua, and to helping people working, some time  dangerously, for democracy in China and Colombia and Burma.  But now what is shockingly clear is that all of our combined efforts  will have been in vain, if we do not tackle climate change, and  tackle it effectively.   What we do, or do not do about climate change in the next 10  years will determine the course of human history; it will determine  how many  

 2  

 species and ecosystems survive or are destroyed forever, and it will  determine the quality of life our children and grandchildren inherit  from us.   The Pentagon, in a suppressed report in 2004 warned that,   "Abrupt climate change could bring the planet to the edge of  anarchy… Disruption and conflict will be endemic features of life. 

 Once again warfare could define human life."   Former World Bank chief economist Sir Nicholas Stern said this  week that, "Climate change will affect the basic elements of life for  people around the world - access to water, food production, health  and the environment. Hundreds of millions of people could suffer  hunger, water shortages and coastal flooding as the world warms  up."   Stern added that, "Our actions now and over the coming decades  could create risks of major disruption to economic and social  activity on a scale similar to those associated with the great wars 

 and the economic depression of the first half of the 20 th  Century."  

 3  

 That is, if we do not deal with global warming, we may be dealing  with an economic ice age.   And the Vatican envoy to the United Nations, Archbishop  Migliore, echoing Greens philosophy, said yesterday that, “It is  becoming rapidly ever clearer that if these, the world’s life support  systems, are spoiled or destroyed irreparably, there will be no  viable economy for any of us…[t]he world needs an ecological  conversion…”   Such extraordinary times require extraordinary leadership. They  require new vision, intelligence and leaders who are prepared to  act urgently and resolutely, and to determine indeed whether the  world is to proceed at war or in peace.   Prime Minister Howard may have been the man for the  complacent, comfortable and self serving times, last century. But  he is not the person to steer the nation on a new course, this  century. He does not see the problem. And he does not see the  solutions. He still castigates those  

 4  

 seeking action on climate change as wanting to destroy the  economy. He does not see, as Sir Nicholas Stern, the Vatican and  the Greens see, that the economy’s health depends directly on the  environment; that the economy must be our servant, not our  master.   The Stern report throws the Howard government’s failures into  stark relief. Peter Costello did not even identify climate change as  a risk to the economy in his May budget. Amanda Vanstone  refuses to accept that people displaced by climate change are  refugees, and she will not consider the consequences of millions of  people displaced by climate change.   Mr Howard, asleep so long on climate change, has now  commissioned an inquiry into nuclear. But nuclear power will not  save the world. We cannot even save it with solar, wind and wave  power. The projected demand for energy as global population and  economic growth soars this century, with a potential tripling in just  the next four decades will overrun every reasonable plan unless  energy demand is constrained.  

 5  

 That said, nuclear power might supply 5 percent of the world’s  demand in some decades. Energy efficiency can supply 30 percent  now. Yet most commentators write about the 5 percent later, not  the 30 percent now.   Well, we will know our prime minister is waking up when he  commissions an inquiry into energy efficiency, when he stops  being mesmerised by uranium.   However, the Australian people are awake to climate change and  know that the Greens are best placed to handle it. I have with me  today a Morgan poll of more than 11,000 voters. It shows that,  when it comes to terrorism, 48.1 percent of people think the  Coalition is the best manager. Congratulations, John Howard.   But, listen to this. The Morgan poll also shows that the exact same  proportion, 48.1 percent of Australians, thinks the Greens are best-placed to handle climate change. Let me repeat that. 48.1 percent  of Australian voters think that the Greens are the best managers to  meet the threat of climate change.  

 6  

 That management will feature energy efficiency. Australia cannot  achieve real emissions reductions without establishing a national  energy efficiency target.   What is energy efficiency? Turning off the light. Putting sensors  into spasmodically used places to turn lights, heaters, and hot water  supplies off when people are not there. Delivering lower  temperature water for showers. Heating water where it is used, not  seven stories or 13 hotel units away. It is commonsense. The  Greens have been advocating it since the seventies - since the  Franklin Dam furore, at least.   On the supply side, we must price carbon through a national  emissions trading scheme, a carbon tax, a feed-in law and a  mandatory renewable energy target. The amount of money the  government has spent on renewables is tiny compared with what  the private sector would spend with the right market signal.  Germany has introduced a feed-in law that has triggered a solar  revolution. The European Union has an emissions trading system,  nine American states have done the same. There is a  

 7  

 carbon exchange in Chicago and in California Governor  Schwarzenegger is putting solar power on a million roofs. He has  also asked to join the Pan European Trading scheme.   The inconsistency in Australian government policy is mirrored in  Labor's response. On the one hand it will ratify the Kyoto Protocol  but on the other, it will not stop deforestation. Globally the  destruction of forests produces more emissions than urban  transport. But Labor backs the Howard government’s plans for  decades more destruction of Tasmania’s ancient forests, which are  also our largest carbon sinks, including Gunns destructive  proposed pulp mill. The Greens would end the destruction of  Australia’s old growth forest, and native woodland clearance.   Labor is going to have to address other policy incongruities on  climate change. Just look at Peter Beattie. He, as premier of the  biggest coal exporting state in this, the biggest coal exporting  country in the world, has rejected an emissions trading system. Mr  Beattie is pouring a fortune into enhancing coal sales while  simultaneously he has announced a string of bunkers from  Cooktown to Bundaberg to shelter people from the rapidly  

 8  

 growing risk of category 5 cyclones due to climate change. He says  he’s considering climate change, category 5 storm bunkers for  Brisbane! If the Sunshine state's Peter Beattie cannot see the sun  for the coal, will Kim Beazley?   The Greens will go to the 2007 elections with a costed action plan.  The Greens want Australia to have, and the world must have, an  80% or 90% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. This  nation should be the world leader in environmental technology,  environmental business, environmental exports and wealth and job  creation.   Back in 1997 I brought a bill into the Senate for a Sun Fund. This  Fund was to come from one billion dollars of the government’s $3  billion diesel fuel rebate scheme. The bill proposed equipping rural  Australia with renewable energy. Our Sun Fund would have  injected hundreds of millions of dollars into rural and regional  economies, and created 50,000 jobs in the bush. It was optional for  farmers and cost neutral for taxpayers. Mr Howard, along with  Labor, rejected it. He should adopt it now.  

 9  

 We will remove the GST from public transport. That would cut  ticket prices by 10 percent across the board. Nick Minchin hates  this idea, but let’s raise the 5 percent tax on imported petrol-guzzling 4 wheel drives to 10 percent, to parity with other  imported vehicles, and take the tax off petrol-sparing cars like  hybrids. How stupid is it to give General Motors subsidies to  import the Hummer and at the same time insist that the only  electric car in Australia, the Reva, be crushed or deported?   The Greens advocate that Australia take up the Dutch budget  model and inject one percent of spending on transport into  bikeways and walkways. The $1.1 billion fringe benefit tax given  to companies for car fleets each year would cover that good option  and leave plenty for more.   The Greens would also end the decades of starving funds from 

 trains, trams, buses and ferries. Our ideal is free public transport.  We would retro-fit our cities to bring fast, clean, on-time trains,  buses and trams to every populous precinct. If Tokyo and Toronto  can do it, so can Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.  

 10  

 Sir Nicholas Stern said this week that, “Climate change is the  greatest market failure the world has ever seen.” Our Prime  Minister shows why.   Before John Howard came to power, Australia produced as many  solar panels as Japan. Now Japan produces nearly half the world’s  solar panels and Australia produces less than one percent. That is  because the Japanese government has both financed research and  development, and priced carbon to drive investment in  commercialisation.   The constant government refrain that we need to develop new  technology is disingenuous. We already have the technology to  achieve deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions. What is  desperately needed is a market to provide the incentive to  commercialise existing technology.   The Greens would end the drought of government funds to  Australia’s cutting-edge scientists in the field of renewable energy.  

 11  

 A specific example of the Howard government’s retarding  influence is in sliver cell technology. Drs Andrew Blakers and  Klaus Weber at the Australian National University’s Centre of  Sustainable Energy Systems have stunned the industry with a  simple but brilliant breakthrough. They slice the silicon wafers  which convert sunshine into electricity and turn the slices side-on  to the sun. This reduces the amount of expensive silicon needed by 

 90 percent. The sliver cell technology is more efficient and it cuts  costs by 75 percent.   Yet this global breakthrough has been defunded by John Howard  and strangled by the lack of a feed in law and decent Mandatory 

 Renewable Energy target.   Dr Blakers told the Canberra Times’ Rosslyn Beeby last month  that, “Australia used to be the world leader - not a world leader  but the world leader - in solar technology,”   “Now we’ve lost that position of advantage because of the Federal  Government’s lack of interest in supporting a solar energy  industry,” he  

 12  

 said. “Germany is where the photovoltaic industry is centring  itself, and despite having the skills and the technology, Australia is  going to be relegated to the sidelines in the future.”   “We will become clients of our own technology, importing back  expertise we lost.”   Origin Energy which acquired the base patent for sliver cell  technology from the ANU and spent $30 million on a pilot  manufacturing plant in South Australia needs $100 million to  upscale to commercial manufacture.   While the Howard Government is well capable of spending that  amount on coal or on self-promoting public relations campaigns,  Origin may go overseas. So it looks like we’ll be buying our own  world’s best solar sliver cells from Beijing or Berlin. The Greens  would ensure funding of this great product, here in Australia.  

 13  

 At least four other world-class solar technologies have been lost  off-shore to clued-in overseas investors. Unlike Howard, they were  keenly aware of the commercial, if not their planet-saving  potential.   Sydney University’s evacuated collector for solar water heaters, an  energy collector consisting of rows of parallel transparent glass  tubes, has gone to China.   A photovoltaic technology to reduce heat loss and overheating of  office building with large glass areas, also invented at Sydney  University, is now being developed in Japan.   Crystalline silicon on glass, a process invented by the University of  New South Wales, uses laser technology and a thin layer of silicon  deposited on the textured surface of a glass sheet to trap light and  extract solar energy. It’s gone to Germany.   Buried contact solar cells, which are cheaper and more efficient 

 than screen-printed solar cells, went to Spain for commercial  development and  

 14  

 have since been licensed to most of the world’s largest commercial  solar-cell manufacturers.   After 28 years in the industry, Dr Blakers from ANU has a  stunningly cheap idea for politicians to take up.   “In Europe,” he says “most large renewable energy research  institutes have budgets of around $40 million.”   If Australia invested in creating three or four such institutes, each  with a budget of around $40 million, we would become a  renewable-energy superpower.   And that is where the Greens come in. We will catapult Australia  to a world-renewable energy superpower, by putting in place the  financial and regulatory mechanisms that will drive investment  into such ready-to-go proposals from people who know this  industry best, rather than government subsidies continuing to pour  into tollways, coal companies, pulp mills and tax cuts for  executives.  

 15  

 Beyond climate change and besides rising interest rates, there are  other issues stalking the Howard government’s future.   In 2003 I challenged President Bush here in our Parliament, to end  the incarceration, after torture but without trial, of Australian 

 David Hicks at Guantanamo Bay. Four unforgivable years later,  the Prime Minister should ring the President and have Hicks  returned to Australia’s justice system immediately.   Australia’s involvement in the Iraq war is entirely John Howard’s  mistake. He ignored hundreds of thousands of his fellow citizens  who turned out across the nation in early 2003 calling for  Australia, like Canada and New Zealand, to stay out of this  reckless and bloody Bush administration venture. He also ignored  the parliament of the land. Instead, he consulted George W. Bush  who dubbed Mr Howard his “sheriff”, and sent our defence  personal to Iraq. Now reliable estimates put the Iraqi death toll  above 600,000. It is heading for one million. More than 3,000  coalition soldiers are dead. The mood in this country has swung  strongly against this  

 16  

 horrible war. Most Australians want us out. Most Americans want  us out. Most Iraqis want us out. But George W. Bush and John  Howard, intolerant of commonsense, are not listening.   The Greens have led in the political arena, consistently, and  sometimes alone, calling for the return home from Iraq of our  Australian defence force personnel. I repeat that call today.   We have also taken a very strong stand in defence of the Australian  workers. We join Kim Beazley in committing to overturning the 

 unfair industrial relations act and returning a fair go in the  workplace for the men and women who work in and for Australia.   But voters need to know it will take more than a Labor government  to achieve fair wages and conditions. The Industrial Relations Act  will remain if Labor wins government but the Coalition retains its  Senate majority. It is essential the Greens win back the balance of  power in the Senate.  

 17  

 Australians have more material wealth now than ever before but  we are no happier because we live on the treadmill of the market  economy. We have no time. We work harder, longer hours over  seven days a week and it has been made worse by the Howard  government's industrial relations legislation. There is less and less  family time. Weekends have gone. Australians spend hours in  traffic, breathing fumes. 50 percent of us are overweight or obese.  We work harder to earn more to buy more things to keep up with  the latest trends but we don't have enough time to spend with our  children and our spouses or our friends. Our old people are too  often lonely and our children are too often at risk. There is not  enough time for recreation, school sport, visiting friends,  socialising, thinking, reading for pleasure, staying healthy, being  actively involved in the civic life of our communities. Or just  enjoying the day.   How can you describe a government that has put its people on a  treadmill and devised ways to keep families from spending time  with each other as having family values?  

 18  

 Reversing the impact of the government’s IR laws means more  than the better workplaces. It will be an important step towards  restoring the time together which is essential for happy families.   Even without balance of power, we Greens have won significant  gains for Australia through our Senate power base. These gains  include:  

  a) the roll-out of non-sniffable petrol to end the scourge of  petrol sniffing which has been killing or maiming hundreds  of young Aboriginal citizens in central Australia.    b) Christine Milne initiated the Senate inquiry into 

 Australia’s future oil supply which is due to hand down its  report soon.    c) Christine Milne and Rachel Siewert initiated the Senate  inquiry into our national water policy.    d) a core role in insisting that East Timor, the poorest nation 

 in Southeast Asia, got a fairer deal for its Timor Sea oil and  gas revenues.    

 19  

  e) Rachel Siewert’s questioning of the Wheat Export  Authority which helped trigger the Cole Inquiry into alleged  Wheat Board kickbacks for Saddam Hussein.    f) amending legislation, so far blocked by the government, to 

 ban junk food advertising aimed at kids, as obesity rates soar  in Australia.    g) Kerry Nettle’s work showing how the private health  insurance rebate overwhelmingly benefits wealthy people in 

 Liberal electorates.    h) the legal advice from Melbourne Senior Counsel Brain  Walters which forced the government to retreat from  privatising the Snowy Hydro Scheme.    

 The Greens were the only party to have the courage to oppose the  tax cuts for the rich this year. In the Senate, Christine Milne argued  that we need to use the profits from the good times to adapt to  climate change and oil depletion. But the Liberal and Labor parties  gave that $37 billion away.   The Greens would also do much more to help farmers adapt to a  new future rather than staring at cracked earth with no hope but a  bandaid drought relief and a Prime Minister in an Akubra praying  for rain. Climate  

 20  

 change presents opportunities for new endeavours in rural  Australia. Western Australia is showing one way by developing  alternative fuels for income and jobs by planting of deep rooted  perennials which addresses climate change, salinity, and  biodiversity loss.   We want to help grow more of our own food as a nation and as a  community, and become more self reliant. We especially back  organic food - healthy, drought-resistant, family-farm organic  food. Who does not want to support our own farmers and rural 

 communities? Yet, Free Trade Agreements, like the US Australia  Free Trade Agreement, end up exemplifying market failure.   And isn’t it time global air and sea transport paid properly for its  massive cost in terms of climate change?   It makes no sense to effectively subsidize imported orange juice  from Brazil while farmers in the Riverina feed their oranges to  cattle.  

 21  

 Speaking of biodiversity loss, ANZ wants to become carbon  neutral as a company, whilst preparing to finance logging of  Tasmania’s old growth forests, by financially backing Gunns pulp  mill. ANZ does not see the interconnectedness of its own practice  and what it finances. Besides destroying the forest carbon banks, 

 studies at Melbourne University show that such logging will  increase the chance of extinction of Tasmania’s giant wedge-tailed  eagle to 99 percent in the pulp mill logging zone. What about that,  ANZ?   The same with the Managed Investment schemes for plantations  touted to be a solution to climate change when conversion of  native forest to monocultures has dire consequences for carbon  emissions, water availability and biodiversity loss. The Greens 

 would stop this ecologically destructive market intervention  immediately.   Water is another example of market failure. Commonsense says  that cotton and rice irrigation are not a good idea on the world’s  driest continent. In August I visited the Macquarie Marshes north  of Dubbo. Here is one of the world’s great bird breeding wetlands.  Let me cite the case of one  

 22  

 particularly beautiful bird. For centuries the Marshes have hosted  tens of thousands of nesting white egrets each year. Not any more.  Due to the Macquarie River being sopped up by largely foreign-owned cotton farms upstream, not one white egret chick has  survived since the turn of the century. In 2002, a trickle of water  did get down to a bit of the marshes. The excited egrets laid eggs.  But by the time the chicks fledged, that is, got feathers, the trickle  had dried up. When the fledgling egrets launched out of their nests 

 on to the hard, barren earth, they died. You know, these birds live  eleven years. So, another five years and the last of the breeding  thousands of white egrets will be dead in the Macquarie Marshes.   Imagine that! Imagine too, the plight of the farmers in the  Macquarie Marshes. For them, no water means no income. Due to  the foreign cotton combines upstream, these good Australian  family farms have also landed on parched earth, their next  generation drained of hope.   Governments have made monumental miscalculations across the  whole of the Murray-Darling basin and tough decisions are needed  to unmake those mistakes. The current Howard-enhanced drought  across much of  

 23  

 Australian is now the colour of our future. Limiting the damage to  our productive farmlands requires, in a world fast approaching a  global food deficit, the degree of attention and commitment John  Howard has given terrorism. We are calling on him to set up a  national climate change centre. The Greens would also put three  and a half thousand gigalitres of water into the Murray Darling ($3  billion) and a good start would be to ensure Cubby Station gave  back its water.   Before this summer’s predicted holocaust, a start should be made  on upgrading the Bushfire Cooperative Research Centre in  Melbourne to an International Bushfire Institute.   This major bushfire study and control centre would co-ordinate  bushfire emergencies, drawing on all the state, territory, local and  international information and aid available. It would look at better  fire-proofing Australian and New Zealand farmlands and cities,  minimizing the impact of fires on biodiversity and - this is so  important - devising an action plan to minimize the deadly work of  arsonists. We have to detect and more readily apprehend arsonists  before they set neighbourhoods alight. That  

 24  

 prevention will involve a more vigilant public and a review of  laws, treatment and penalties.   Earlier this year I canoed down Queensland’s Mary River with  local residents. Farmlands and rare species are threatened by the  Labor government’s Traveston dam proposal. The dam is simply  bad policy when real water efficiency, diverting Brisbane's  downpipes into tanks, and recycling current supplies in South East  Queensland is a river-saving option.   One of the Mary River’s species is the Queensland lungfish, facing  extinction after millions of years on the planet. It has survived all  challenges - that is, until the present Labor Party arrived.  

 Professor Jean Joss, the world expert in lungfish at Macquarie  University says that this creature explains how vertebrates came  from the sea and colonised the continents. The lungfish is our  distant ancestor. It gave us our backbone. Maybe that is why so  many politicians don’t care - they haven’t inherited the feature.  

 25  

 Back in the Murray-Darling basin, the Greens want Parliament  House to show a national lead in energy and water efficiency. Yet  Capitol Hill’s presiding officers refuse to even install water-saving  dual-flush toilets. Unless the Prime Minister has secretly had one  fitted in his own suite, not even he has a dual-flush, water saving  loo.   Here’s a few other things I would advise John Howard might think  about:  

  a) Bring spending on Aboriginal health up to the same level  as the rest of us - after all, First Australians are dying 20  years to soon.    b) Give that great Nobel Peace Laureate and world-loved 

 man of compassion, the Dalai Lama of Tibet, a parliamentary  reception when he comes back to Australia next June.    c) Give every Australian a free tertiary education. Abolish  HECS. And, go on, tell the Elect Vessel of the Exclusive 

 Brethren sect, who lives in your electorate of Bennelong, to  let Brethren kids go to university too. You know him. Tell  him that you won’t tolerate repression of any Aussie family  to the point where their kids are banned from uni.    

 26  

  d) Visit the Burrup. See the rock art for yourself, and save it.    e) Call up Greenpeace. Get them to come back and re-erect  those free solar panels on your roof at Kirribilli - tell them  that this time you won’t rip them down. They won’t mind. 

 We all make mistakes.    

 Speaking of which, I was elected to this Parliament in 1996, the  same year as John Howard was elected Prime Minister. I gave my  maiden speech in the Senate at the exact same hour as Pauline 

 Hanson gave hers in the House of Representatives.   Ten years later, may I say, humbly, that it is a pity for Australia  that John Howard took her direction, not mine.   We four Greens Senators are a robust team working so well  together. We have just endorsed party room rules which will help  ensure good internal governance as our team increases in  Parliament in the coming years. These rules are set for the day we  have 40 members in our party room in Canberra, not just four.  

 27  

 Let me read from the epilogue of our rules, because you won’t find  this in the other parties’ standing orders. Here it is:   “Our electoral obligation is to the voters of our age,   but let us keep future generations  

 equally in mind,   for we are also the custodians   of their world.”  

 Our aim is to put a smile on the faces of our grandchildren. And  when, in our mind’s eye, we see those grandchildren smiling back,  we all start smiling too. That’s the Australia, we Greens are  working for.  

 28  

 Comparative Polling - by issue and party   Polling to accompany the National Press Club  address of Senator Bob Brown, leader of the  Australian Greens  

 November 1, 2006  

 Thinking about the next federal election. Which party, or parties, do you think would be  better for each of the following issues?   GLOBAL WARMING  AND CLIMATE 

 CHANGE  

 DEFENCE AND  NATIONAL SECURITY  

 Australian Labor  Party   17.00% 29.20% 

 Liberal Party  15.40% 48.10% 

 The Nationals  2.80% 4.20% 

 The Greens  48.10% 1.90% 

 Family First  1.10% 0.70% 

 Australian Democrats 3.60% 2.10% 

 One Nation  0.80% 1.90% 

 

 ROY MORGAN SINGLE SOURCE AUSTRALIA : JUL 2005 - JUN 2006   Sample Size: 11,146 RESPONDENTS  

 NPC Bob Brown 1-11-06.doc   

 

 This transcript is taken from a recording, and freedom from errors, omissions or  misunderstandings cannot be guaranteed.   

 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS  Wednesday, 1 November 2006 

 

 LAURIE WILSON:  Thank you, Senator Bob Brown. I perhaps should explain for  our viewers there was a lot of enthusiastic applause here today and Senator Brown has  a lot of supporters in the room, no doubt some of our working press perhaps do share  some of the values that Senator Brown’s espoused but they do tend not to, shall we  say, respond with such enthusiasm. Nonetheless, we do open our doors to all comers  at the Press Club particularly for speakers.    

 BOB BROWN:  We’re working on converting them.   

 LAURIE WILSON:  Indeed. So if I could perhaps introduce our first question today,  Andrew Fraser.    

 ANDREW  FRASER  (Canberra  Times):  The  Prime  Minister  this  morning   announced the first tranche at $60 million funding for the capture of emissions from  power  plants.  Under  the  AP6  banner,  he  said  that  he  was  taking  practical  measures   and taking them quickly, while other politicians were merely looking to sign pieces of  paper. How important are the practical measures and the approach the Prime Minister  takes? Isn’t there some importance to those measures?    

 BOB BROWN:  Well, it’s like your first sip of tea in the morning. That’s important,  but  if  you  don’t  have  anything  else  for  the  rest  of  the  day,  it  looks  pretty  pathetic.   Here  we’ve  got  a  Prime  Minister  who  is  suddenly  now  trying  to  take  off  the  rack   some of the things he’s turned down in the past. And note that this money, in bulk,  and  the  announcements  of  the  last  two  weeks  is  going  to  the  coal  industry.  A  bit   across to renewables, a bit here and there—tokenism—but it’s basically being handed  across to the coal industry. Do you know why that is? Our Prime Minister has got an  open door to the lobbyists of the big mining corporations, including in particular the  coal  industry.  The  renewables  people,  the  energy  efficiency  experts,  the  small   companies  that  are  out  there  struggling  to  get  dollars  to  put  the  world-saving   technology they have together, simply don’t make it.    

 Now, the coal industry is cash rich. It’s returning billions of dollars profit each year.  Let  it  research  putting  gas  underground  or  whatever  else  it  is  going  to  do.  Those   technologies, by the way, are not going to be around this decade. As I said earlier, the  solar  technology  I  was  talking  about—I  gave four examples only—where the Prime  Minister  has  defunded.  An  energy  efficiency  is  available  now  and  we  all  know  that  

 the  Prime  Minister  is  really  getting  his  head  into  gear  when  he  sets  up  a  proper   commission  about  how  Australia  can  go  to  the  forefront  with  renewable  energy   technology energy efficiency and demand ... looking at demand in this age where we  have got to take huge, previously unthought of, changes to the way our society works.  Australia  should  be  a  world  leader;  Prime  Minister  has  taken  us  to  the  back  of  the   pack.    

 Yesterday he was talking about a second Kyoto, a Kyoto mark II, whatever it was. I  just want to clear that if I may. John Howard, having signed Kyoto, took us out of the 

   Page  2  

 

 process  and  has  refused  to  ratify  it,  along  with  George  W.  Bush.  I  was  in  San   Francisco  last  week  talking  to  500  environmentalists.  They  know  Australia  for  one   really ... well, besides Steve Irwin. You see eulogies to Steve on back of cars driving  around in San Francisco, and it is lovely to see. But besides that, the thing that people  in America know us for is being the other country; the other country that’s refused to  ratify  the  Kyoto  protocol.  What  an  embarrassing  thing.  But  worse  still,  what  a  lost   opportunity.    

 Look, I predict the Prime Minister will bring down a record environmental spending  budget next May in the run to an election. He’ll try to buy kudos for being the biggest  spending—he said a few years ago he was going greenish. Well, that came to a quick  halt.  But  he  cannot  buy  back  a  wasted  decade.  It’s  been  culpable  of  our  Prime   Minister  that  he  wasn’t  in  there  funding  the  world’s  best  technology:  renewable   energy and energy efficiency that’s going to help us make the grade.    

 Now,  sure,  you  can  look  at  trying  to  make  coal  clean,  but  the  coal  corporations  are   hugely rich and we should be ensuring that they fund that and we should be ensuring  that  they  pay  their  way  for  the  damage  they’re  doing  to  our  grandchildren’s  

 environment.  That’s  where  we  need  a  coal-pricing  scheme.  When  we  see  that  from   John Howard, a carbon tax, an entry into an energy emissions trading scheme, we’ll  know we’re starting to get somewhere.    

 BEN PACKHAM (Herald Sun):  If I could ask you about the Victorian election.    

 BOB BROWN:  I thought you might.    

 BEN  PACKHAM:   The  campaign  seems  to  have  ramped  up  tensions  between   yourself and Family First. In the Herald Sun today on the front page, Steve Fielding  has  accused  the  Greens  of  promoting  homosexuality  to  young  people.  What  do  you   make  of  his  comments  and  do  you  see  them  as  a  personal  attack  on  your  own   sexuality?    

 BOB BROWN:  That suggestion was put to me by one of your colleagues yesterday.  Ask  Steve  Fielding  about  that,  would  you?  But  when  it  comes  to  promoting   homosexuality  or  heterosexuality,  I  think  kids  have  got  to  know  what  the  world  is   about and I think they need to be acquainted with the world as it is and the brilliance  of God’s own-made diversity in humanity on this planet.    

 Let me say that I think we should be way past the politics of hate, which tries to nail  people on the basis of their sexuality or their race or their religion, whatever it might  be, for different treatment. And so as I also said yesterday, I’m happy to debate this  with Steve Fielding in any forum he might like. I see he’s declined doing that. That  speaks for itself. I think Steve would be doing well if he attended a few more Senate  votes. He is so often missing from there, I think that it’s a big responsibility being in  Parliament and you’ve got to take it on, and you’ve got to take it on for the whole of  the people, not just for some extreme and limited vision from the periphery.    

 CHRIS  JOHNSON:  (West  Australian):   You’ve  spoken  today  about  the  need  to   rescue the Senate. Before the last election you nominated Mark Latham as the prime 

   Page  3  

 

 minister-in-waiting.  I’m  just  wondering  if  you’ve  asked  yourself  since  whether  that   endorsement actually helped to hand the government the Senate majority [inaudible].    

 BOB BROWN:  I think you were down there, Chris.    

 CHRIS JOHNSON:  I was.   

 BOB BROWN:  What I said was pure logic: that the leader of the Labor Party, Mark  Latham,  here,  is  the  prime  minister-in-waiting.  And  can  I  make  an  announcement   today: Kim Beazley is the prime minister-in-waiting. It was no more or less than that.  But  let  me  say  this,  because  we’ve  all  looked  at  Mark  over  the  last  12  months  and   frankly at times I’ve had some concern. But he came to the Tasmanian forests and he  forced John Howard to move to protect the Tarkine rainforest and to end a bit of the 

 awesome poisoning of wildlife in Tasmania’s public forests. He said he was going to  eliminate it. He hasn’t done that.    

 And so from where I stood on that day, we saw a politician with the guts to go and see  for himself part of this nation’s great heritage and Mark Latham—I don't know if you  are  watching  this—but  that  very  big  tree  under  which  we  stood,  huge,  ancient,   mammoth, one of the biggest living things on the planet, is saved because you went  there. I only wish John Howard had gone there before him.   

 STEPHANIE  PEATLING  (Sydney  Morning  Herald):  Last  week  the  Senate  was   told that Natasha Stott Despoja would not be running at the next election, so mine is a  two-pronged  question.  She  left  the  door  open  to  a  return  to  federal  politics  at  some   point in the future. I’m wondering if you think the Democrats will still be around for  her to return to them, and also what the demise of the Democrats says for the future of 

 the Greens given the rosy prediction you’ve given for your own growth?    

 BOB  BROWN:   Let  me  first  up  say  thank  you,  Natasha,  on  behalf  of  millions  of   Australians  for  a  brilliant  job  in  bringing  so  much  sense  and  lift  and  positivity  to   Australian politics. I hope she does return, and I don’t know what is going to happen  with  the  Democrats.  I’ve  always  said—and  this  includes  Family  First—let’s  have   more  parties,  let’s  have  bigger  choice  for  our  electorate  because  we  need  them,   particularly  when  the  two  big  parties  keep  looking  so  much  like  each  other  on  so   many fundamental issues.    

 I also thank the Democrats for the options they’ve given people over the last 30 years  and if they don’t survive ... I shouldn’t be saying this because you know we’ve got a  brilliant young woman, Sarah Hanson-Young who is going to lead the Senate ticket in  South  Australia  and  I’m  looking  forward  to  the  potential  of  her  joining  us  in  the   Senate next year. But I have to say this, because this is what I think: I hope if Natasha 

 does  think  about  coming  back  to  politics,  she  will  consider  doing  that  as  a  Green   because she’s a humanitarian, par excellence, she cares for the environment and she  thinks long term. And that’s how I see the Greens.    

 PATRICIA  KARVELAS:  (The  Australian):   Senator  Brown,  you  started  your   speech by referring to Morgan polling which shows voters trust the Greens more on  global  warming,  but  it  also  revealed  that  voters  don’t  trust  the  Greens  on  national  

   Page  4  

 

 security  issues.  Does  that  concern  you  at  all,  that  voters  are  so  unsure  about  the   Green’s  credentials  on  defence  and  national  security,  particularly  in  an  era  where   there’s increasing levels of terrorism?    

 And  also,  back  on  that  Mark  Latham-Kim  Beazley-type  theme,  you  called  Kim   Beazley the prime minister-in-waiting. Would you prefer him to win the next federal  election  over  John  Howard  and  do  you  trust  him  more  to  rescue  Australia  from  the   threat of climate change?    

 BOB BROWN:  Well, the answer to the second is yes. I’ve given a speech on why  we need to change prime ministers. Now, I think we need a Green Prime Minister, but  I'm a realist. But the planet, you know, is in dire straits. I would like to see Christine  Milne or Kerry Nettle or Rachel Siewert, not only in that position, but being able to  talk about the broad range of issues we have. We believe very strongly in the defence  of this country. We were the first people to ask the Prime Minister to send a force to  intervene in the bloodshed in East Timor. We don’t believe we should be, as I said,  involved in George Bush’s war in Iraq, but we do believe that the Defence Forces are  just enormously important and I’m very, very personally grateful to the security they  give our country.    

 When it comes back to the business of ‘what do we do about prime ministers?’ that’s  up  to  the  electorate.  But  climate  change  is  of  such  urgency,  we  should  be  thinking   about such things as a national unity cabinet. Why shouldn’t we have Christine Milne  as  the  minister  for  climate  change?  Why  shouldn’t we have the best in Labor being  brought  in  to  look  at  climate  change?  Let  us  not  underestimate  the  overarching   problem  that  this  huge  human-made  dilemma  causes  for  Australia  and  the  whole   planet. It’s going to require lateral thinking. We offer our services to any government 

 to help them catch up on where Australia should be going. We need to cross political  lines and barriers if we are going to get the best approach because Australia has got to  be  suddenly  taken  in  a  whole  new  direction.  Prime  Minister  Howard  has  shown  he   can’t do that. He’s even shown that in the few days since the Stern report.   

 The challenge is there for Kim Beazley, but the Greens are going to be leading both  those parties into the next election, which will be about climate change and, as I said  earlier, it is going to be essential that voters give us the power in the Senate to pursue  the  positive  alternatives  I’ve  been  talking  about  and  to  ensure  whoever  is  in   government lifts their game.    

 LAURIE WILSON:  We have four questions to go and I think our ABC viewers will  be leaving our coverage at some point during that process, but let’s move to our next  question.    

 MICHELLE  GRATTAN:  (The  Age):  Senator  Brown,  going  back  to  Victoria,  do   you  think  that  the  attacks  that  are  coming  on  you  from  Family  First  are  a  dress   rehearsal for the federal election campaign ...   

 BOB BROWN:  Yes, I do.   

   Page  5  

 

 MICHELLE GRATTAN:  ... when the Greens came under fire from other quarters  in a fairly ‘in-your-face’ way last time, and are you more fireproof to what you make  of all this?    

 Also, what is your prediction for the Greens’ chances in the upper house in Victoria?  And if the Greens had the balance of power there and there was a Labor government  back, what—as specifically as you can make your answer—would you be doing with  that balance of power?    

 MICHELLE  GRATTAN:   Firstly,  yes.  Machiavelli  said  300  or  400  years  ago,  if   you are going to change the world, get ready to be jumped on from a great height by  those  who  have  most  to  lose.  In  a  way  Family  First  represents—and  the  Exclusive   Brethren—and the people in the back room of the Liberal Party and elsewhere that are  involved  in  those  attacks,  they  know  what  they  are  doing  politically,  but  we  are   fireproof to that. I read the Suffragettes whenever I think we are having a hard trot and  I think, ‘Oh, crikey, this is pretty good.’    

 But I don’t know how many seats will be won. The pollsters are talking about two or  three. What I do know is that the Greens who are potentially up for election, and this  includes  the  incredibly  commonsense  Richard  DiNatale  who  is  very  close  to   potentially  picking  up  a  seat  in  the  lower  house  seat  of  Melbourne,  will  equip   themselves very well and will give the Victorian electorate very good service.    

 Just let me tell you, we have a lot of experience in balance of power. Christine was in  the balance of power team in Tasmania with the Greens with the Liberal Party. Before  that I was with the Labor Party in 1989. Now, we inherited a huge budget deficit from  the Gray Liberal government back in ’89. Very, very tough. Budgetary measures had 

 to be taken, including slashing health and education. We had to go and speak to the  protests  around  Tasmania,  but  we  stuck  to  our  word  and  we  made  those  terribly   difficult  decisions  of  the  1989-92  period  which  are  now  the  basis  of  Tasmania’s   prosperous economy. Yeah, we are responsible. We are committed to the community,  and the Greens in the upper house in Victoria will use their power, if the electors give  it to them, with great responsibility and I can just remind you that everybody is in the  balance of power. Labor and Liberal will be able to put through what they want. If the  Greens are there and then another combination might work. In a two-party system, if  three parties end up being in there, any two of the combinations...   

 [end] 

