---
title: "Conscience votes important to democracy."
date: "2006-06-11"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211293868
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/49YJ6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator  for Queensland

 Dated: 11 June 2006 

 Press Release Number: uzhqoyvi  Portfolio: Prime Minister & Cabinet  Related: Accountability 

 More from on Accountability   

 CONSCIENCE VOTES IMPORTANT TO DEMOCRACY

 Australian Democrat Deputy leader and Queensland Senator, Andrew Bartlett, says the potential  expulsion of Labor MP for Noosa, Cate Molloy, just for representing the views of her electorate on a  major issue in the Parliament is a subversion of democracy.   

 It is time for the major parties to help repair democracy by loosening the straightjacket they place on  their MPs and accept that conscience votes should occur on major issues, Senator Bartlett said.   

 The most important aspect of conscience votes isnt that politicians get a bit more freedom. It is that it  actually places some extra responsibility on politicians to be able to personally justify their stance and  take away the easy out of just being able to say 'the party made me do it'.   

 There are contentious votes coming up in the Senate in the next fortnight on exiling refugees in Nauru  and overturning the ACTs law on civil registration of same sex relationships.   

 There is a real risk that both of these issues will see Senators voting in a way that is directly opposed to  their strongly held beliefs.   

 It is simply wrong that parliamentarians have to repeatedly vote for legislation they strongly disagree with  or face major retribution for publicly saying what they believe.   

 We should remember that by far the most positive aspect of the Parliamentary debate and vote on the  RU486 issue earlier this year was not the result, but the fact that politicians had to examine the issue for  themselves rather than uncritically accept the propaganda of a Minister and then voted according to their  beliefs, rather than be forced to toe the party line.   

 Everybody understands that politicians have to work as part of a team and have to make compromises.  But if an elected representative cannot freely speak and vote according to their beliefs on major issues,  then the independence of Parliament is destroyed."    

 I have always strongly supported the need for all MPs to have the right of a conscience vote. The right of  a conscience vote is one thing that always distinguished the Democrats from other parties."   

 "As my own experience has shown, it does not mean people voting differently every day of the week. In  nearly 9 years as a Senator, I have only voted against a majority decision of my party room a couple of  times." 

