---
title: "Racism haunts ten years of Howard Government."
date: "2006-02-20"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Xenophobia"
  - "Muslim Australians"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211289686
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0KTI6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales   

 

 Racism haunts ten years of Howard Government 

 20th Feb 06 

 

 Australian Greens Senator Kerry Nettle today said the Prime Minister's comments in 'The 

 Howard Factor' regarding Muslim immigration, bookend a decade of government sullied by 

 xenophobia and racism.  

 

 "It is irresponsible for Mr Howard to single out one religion as undesirable for immigration to 

 Australia. There are good and bad individuals in every religion," said Senator Nettle. 

 

 "To slur a whole religion or race is not good leadership and only feeds xenophobia in the 

 Australian community. These comments echo his comments in 1988 on Asian immigration. 

 

 "It is a sad fact that Mr Howard has exploited racism and xenophobia for political gain 

 throughout his ten years as Prime Minister. 

 

 "First we had the scare tactics over native title. Then the failure to condemn Pauline Hanson and 

 One Nation's polices. In 2001 there was the blatant exploitation of xenophobia during the 

 Tampa incident and the lies about children overboard. 

 

 "Last week Mr Howard failed to clearly speak out against anti-Muslim comments by Coalition MP 

 Dana Vale. 

 

 "The abhorrent policy of mandatory detention of asylum seekers is also based on racism. The 

 overwhelming majority of asylum seekers detained have been from the Middle East and Central 

 Asia. 

 

 "The Greens call on Mr Howard to stop exploiting xenophobia and racism for political gain as he 

 enters his second decade in power." 

 

 Contact: Jon Edwards - 0428 213 146 

 

