---
title: "Remaining refugees on Nauru should be brought to Australia."
date: "2006-08-16"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211297110
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XLLK6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 16 August 2006  Press Release Number: jnwxbiwx  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Remaining Refugees on Nauru Should be Brought to Australia 

 Australian Democrats' Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett, today backed calls by the  Nauru Government for Mr Muhammad Faisal, one of the last remaining asylum seekers on Nauru, to be  evacuated to Australia for appropriate medical treatment.   

 "Both remaining asylum seekers should be brought to Australia immediately," Senator Bartlett said.   

 "Poor mental health outcomes are inevitable in a situation where there is enforced isolation, a loss of  familial and social support and a Government seemingly intent on causing these individuals as much  stress as is humanly possible."   

 "Despite numerous attempts to uncover the nature of adverse security assessments received by these  men, no information has been forthcoming. That these men have been left in a perpetual state of limbo  regarding their status is appalling and shows that the system is not working."   

 "Having been to Nauru three times and witnessing first hand the treatment received there, I am not at all  surprised that the stress has become too much."   

 "By imposing the Pacific Solution to appease community fears about possible terrorist threats that they  themselves had fostered, the Government abrogated its responsibility under international law and as a  result two men continue to suffer immeasurably."   

 "It is now nearly five years that these men have been kept on Nauru. They can't go back to Iraq and no  other country will take them."   

 "It shows precisely how people can get stuck in a legal limbo on Nauru and why no further asylum  seekers should be sent there."   

 "The Government needs to balance its domestic and international responsibilities, not give a false sense  of security to one group and persecute the other in order to appear like it is taking action," Senator  Bartlett said.   

 

