---
title: "Refugees finding hope and a future in Australia: Adelaide."
date: "2006-06-19"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294479
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/22AK6%22
---

 Media Centre 

 Refugees finding hope and a future in Australia - Adelaide 

 19 June 2006 

 ‘Australians can be very proud that it is one of the top three countries in the world to  provide hope to refugees and others in humanitarian need,’ Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs, Amanda Vanstone, said today. 

 ‘Hope’ is the theme of this year’s United Nations designated World Refugee Day, on Tuesday  20 June, and the Minister urged the Adelaide community to support activities to mark the  day, including the World Refugee Day Citizenship Ceremony for 26 humanitarian entrants,  on 20 June at 2pm at the TAFE SA Mall Campus Library, Level 4, 127 Rundle Mall, Adelaide.  

 On the eve of World Refugee Day, Senator Vanstone said the occasion was a chance to  recognise and praise the courage of refugees and humanitarian entrants in Australia, many  of whom have fled desperate circumstances to begin a new life in Australia. 

 ‘Tomorrow in Canberra, I will have the honour of conferring Australian citizenship on  refugees who have settled in the Australian Capital Territory,’ the Minister said. 

 ‘Every refugee and humanitarian entrant has a personal story to tell, and I would urge  people to mark World Refugee Day by listening to some of those stories. 

 ‘Events are being staged across the country to mark World Refugee Day, with the  Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs directly supporting a number of events  involving local community groups, including the World Refugee Day Citizenship Ceremony in  Adelaide, organized by my department and the Australian Refugee Association. 

 ‘The Australian community plays a vital role in supporting and assisting refugee and  humanitarian entrants settle into life in Australia and this event is a way to acknowledge  and thank people for this valuable work.’ 

 The Minister said Australia is one of the top three countries, along with the USA and  Canada, providing comprehensive resettlement programmes for refugees and others in  humanitarian need. 

 ‘Since the end of World War II, Australia has accepted over 660 000 refugees and people  needing humanitarian assistance into the Australian community,’ the Minister said. 

 ‘I am very proud of the fact that Australia currently gives 13 000 refugees and people in  humanitarian need every year, a reason to hope,’ the Minister said. 

 Media contact: 02 6264 2244 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Border Protection Migration Program Humanitarian Program Multicultural Affairs Home Minister's Profile Contact the Minister Media Centre 

  

