---
title: "Australia increases assistance to Sri Lanka to fight landmine menace."
date: "2006-05-25"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211293126
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q0RJ6%22
---

 

 

 

 Page 1 of 1 

 The Hon Teresa Gambaro MP  Federal Member for Petrie  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs

 

 

 

 

 AA 06 28                  25 May 2006                

 

 Australia increases assistance to Sri Lanka to fight landmine menace   

 The Australian Government will commit more than $1.6 million to aid communities in heavily mine-affected  provinces of northern and eastern Sri Lanka.   

 Australia’s Special Representative on Mine Action and Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Teresa  Gambaro, said that she was pleased to announce the mine action assistance for Sri Lanka during Landmine  Action Week.   

 The assistance is part of Australia’s new five-year Mine Action Strategy, which aims to reduce suffering and  the socio-economic impact of landmines. The Strategy is linked to a $75 million five-year pledge to mine  action made in July last year by Minister for Foreign Affairs, Alexander Downer, and builds on a $100  million commitment delivered over the past 10 years.   

 Australia is providing $1.4 million to the Swiss Foundation for Mine Action for its Future Operations Project,  which aims to build the ability of mine-affected communities to clear mines in the districts of Mannar and  Vavuniya.   

 ‘As part of the Future Operations Project, Australian funding is directly supporting three manual clearance  teams and a technical survey team to clear an estimated 110,000 square metres of mine contaminated land,  and destroy approximately 3,000 anti-personnel landmines and 1,500 unexploded ordnance,’ said Ms  Gambaro.   

 Ms Gambaro said the program would also enable the resettlement of families displaced by conflict.   

 ‘Australia is also providing $250,000 in funding to support a United Nations Mine Action project in Sri  Lanka, which aims to reduce the threat of landmines and other explosive remnants of war, and enable  reconstruction so that refugees and internally displaced people can return to their homes.    

 ‘This support will also enhance the peace process in Sri Lanka by improving local and national capabilities to  implement and manage mine action activities such as mine clearance, mine risk education, physical  rehabilitation support to landmine survivors and advocacy against the renewed use of landmines,’ Ms  Gambaro said.   

 May 20 to 26 is Landmine Action Week which aims to raise awareness of landmine issues and increase  support for the elimination of landmines.   

 The Australian Government’s Mine Action Strategy is available at www.ausaid.gov.au.   

 Media contacts: Damien Cocks (Parliamentary Secretary’s Office): 0438 171 330  AusAID (Public Affairs): 0417 680 590 

 Media Release 

