---
title: "Speech to the ALGA [Australian Local Government Association] Regional Co-operation and Development Forum: Canberra: 27 November 2006."
date: "2006-11-27"
creators:
  - "Vaile, Mark"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Area Consultative Committees (ACC)"
  - "Roads to Recovery Program"
  - "Australian Local Government Association"
  - "Regional Partnerships Program"
  - "Regional development"
  - "Connect Australia (Telecommunications)"
  - "Federal local government finances"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211301153
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6XQL6%22
---

  Home  Feedback | Search    

 Contact

 Biography

 Media Releases

 Speeches

 Interviews

 Previous Ministers

 The Nationals

 Liberal Party of Australia

 Subscription Service

  Minister for Transport and Regional Services   

 ALGA REGIONAL CO-OPERATION  AND DEVELOPMENT FORUM  VS09/2006  27 November 2006 

 ALGA REGIONAL CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT FORUM  CANBERRA, 27 NOVEMBER 2006 

 Acknowledgements 

  z Councillor Paul Bell AM, President of the Australian Local Government 

  Association;   z Councillor Basil Morrison, President of Local Government New Zealand;  

  z ALGA Board members; and  

  z Mr Eom Yi-Woong, Vice President of the Korean Local Government 

  Centre and the members of your delegation. 

  Introduction 

  For ten years, the Australian Government has been developing policies and  programmes to strengthen regional Australia and improve the lives of those  people living in our regions. 

  The Australian Government has invested heavily in the things that are important  to regional Australians, such as schools, roads, health care facilities and  telecommunications. 

  For example, we have established Connect Australia, which is a $1.1 billion  programme to improve regional access to telecommunications services. 

  Connect Australia will rollout improved broadband to people living in regional,  rural and remote areas, extend mobile phone coverage, build new regional  communications networks and set up vital telecommunications services to  remote Indigenous communities. 

  Supporting and developing Australia's regions is a key government priority, both  from an economic and social perspective. 

  Regional industries, such as agriculture, the resources sector, business services  and tourism play a fundamental role producing national wealth and supporting  our high standard of living. 

  Without a prosperous regional Australia, we could not have achieved the same  levels of economic growth Australia has enjoyed over previous years. The  strength of these industries will continue to be vital for Australia's growth 

  

  prospects over the years ahead. 

  Assistance to local government 

  I'd firstly like to turn to the Australian Government's relationship with local  government - the cornerstones of which are the $2 billion worth of financial  assistance grants and Roads to Recovery grants we provide councils. 

  The Australian Government is strongly committed to assisting councils fulfil their  responsibilities to improve the economic and social wellbeing of their  communities, whether they are in urban, rural, regional or remote parts of  Australia. 

  Financial Assistance Grants, which total more than $1.6 billion this financial  year, are untied, which means councils can spend the money on projects that are  important to them. 

  They often make up more than half the revenue of some small and remote  councils. For these councils, these grants are a lifeline. 

  Roads to Recovery 

  Complementing our Financial Assistance Grants to councils is the AusLink  Roads to Recovery Programme. 

  $1.2 billion is available to local government under the Roads to Recovery  Programme over four years to mid-2009. In addition, we have made available a  further $307.5 million supplementary payment in 2005-06. 

  This represents a further year's worth of funding for every council in Australia and  will enable local councils to accelerate works to maintain and improve local  roads. 

  It brings to $2 billion the Australian Government's commitment to local road  improvements in the five years to June 2009. 

  The total comprises $1.48 billion for AusLink Roads to Recovery, the $307.5  million supplementary payment and $220 million under the AusLink Strategic  Regional Programme, which I'll talk a bit more about shortly. 

  As most of you know, the Australian National Audit Office has reviewed the  former Roads to Recovery Programme and its report was tabled in March this  year. The audit focused on my Department's administration of the programme,  but it also involved an audit of 93 councils across the country. 

  The programme came through the audit reasonably well. Local councils are using  the programme to boost their road networks, but the report also implied that  some councils have been cost shifting. 

  If that's the case, they are working against themselves. If councils want the  programme to continue, the one thing that will undermine that objective is clear  evidence that they have been cost shifting. Most of the other issues were at the  margin. 

  In view of this, we have asked councils to provide information on their own  sources of road funding as part of their normal annual reporting. From this, we  will be able to gain a much better idea of the use of funds by councils for roads 

  and have much more definitive information as to whether cost shifting is in fact  occurring. 

  The current Roads to Recovery programme has now been operating for over a  year and I urge all councils to ensure that they are meeting the requirements of  the programme. 

  The Australian National Audit Office would like to look at the programme again in  a few years and their findings will need to have been addressed. 

  Strategic Regional Programme 

  At last year's National Assembly of Local Government, the Minister for Local  Government, Territories and Roads, Jim Lloyd, announced the Australian  Government's decision to provide an additional $100 million to the AusLink  Strategic Regional Programme. 

  This took total funding for this important AusLink component to $220 million. 

  The bulk of these funds will flow to local roads and AusLink continues to  demonstrate that it is delivering for local government and regional Australia. 

  These commitments to local infrastructure attest to the growing partnership  between the Australian Government and local government since the inception of  Roads to Recovery. 

  Following the 2005 National Assembly we called for project applications from  local councils, and I can say that the response has been remarkable. 

  The AusLink Strategic Regional Programme is indeed an exciting, innovative and  fresh approach to regional land transport funding, and it has paid off. 

  By the 1st of May my department had received 495 applications from 274 local  councils seeking more than $1 billion in funding, for projects worth in excess of  $2 billion. 

  The response to the programme has highlighted quality regional responses to  transport issues, and the willingness of local government to share in the cost of  these solutions with industry, the state government and the Australian  Government. 

  Earlier this month, the Government announced the first two successful projects in  the large project category. These are an upgrade to the Esperance Coast Road  in Tasmania's Huon Valley and the upgrade of Arundel and Annandale roads in  north-west Melbourne. I congratulate the Huon Valley Council and the Hume City  Council on their successful projects. 

  I can tell you that further announcements of successful projects in the large  category will follow in the near future. I can also confirm that projects submitted  under the small project category are still under active consideration. They will be  announced in the coming weeks. 

  I thank councils across Australia for participating and look forward to working with  you. 

  Sustainable Regions programme 

  Of course, the Australian Government's commitment to regional Australia isn't  limited to improving transport infrastructure. 

  I'd like to touch on two of the Government's most important regional development  programmes - Sustainable Regions and Regional Partnerships. 

  The Sustainable Regions programme has provided a planned, integrated  approach to regions facing economic, social and environmental change. 

  Up to $133 million has been made available for projects in 10 designated regions  around Australia. 

  The real success story though is that for each dollar invested by the Australian  Government the programme has attracted around two dollars in partner funding  from private business, community organisations and local governments. 

  The Sustainable Regions programme relies on a strong partnership between  government and regional communities, with government supporting local  innovation and ideas that will make regional areas stronger. 

  The Government is currently looking at how Sustainable Regions has worked  and is taking on board the lessons from the programme in planning for new  initiatives. 

  Regional Partnerships programme 

  The Australian Government is providing $270 million for the Regional  Partnerships programme over the next four years. 

  The programme helps foster the development of self-reliant communities, so that  people living in regional areas have more control over the destiny of their regions. 

  There have been over one thousand successful initiatives supported by Regional  Partnerships, across a diverse range of activities. 

  Some of these projects include: 

  z In New South Wales - the development of food and agro-tourism in the 

  Hunter Valley;   z In Victoria - a soft-fruit export hub in the north-east;  

  z In Queensland - the upgrade of the Cairns Aviation Skills Centre;  

  z In South Australia - creation of a wetlands precinct for conservation and 

  eco-tourism in the Barossa Riverland;   z In Western Australia - facility upgrades for the Smartaflow water 

  purification plant in Katanning;   z In Tasmania - child care services for migrants and refugees; and  

  z In the Northern Territory - a business hub for the Desert Knowledge 

  Cooperative Research Centre in Central Australia. 

  All of the projects demonstrate the real and tangible benefits that flow from the  funds we provide under Regional Partnerships. 

  ACCs and Seachange 

  To help the Government work with regional communities, we fund 56 local Area  Consultative Committees which are made up of volunteers. 

  These ACCs work at the grass roots level to identify opportunities, priorities and  development strategies for their regions. 

  These ACCs are also well placed to develop strategies to stem some of our  migration issues, which I'd like to spend a few moments talking about. 

  Over eighty five per cent of Australians live within fifty kilometres from the  coastline, and about twenty per cent of them now live in coastal cities and towns  other than capital cities. 

  Whilst this 'sea change' phenomenon has obvious benefits and opportunities for  local businesses, it does place pressure on local infrastructure and services,  such as roads, hospitals and the environment. 

  Coastal councils and the National Seachange Taskforce have raised seachange  issues with the Australian Government. 

  The Minister for Local Government, Jim Lloyd, put the sea change issue on the  agenda of the August 2005 meeting of the Local Government and Planning  Ministers Council for discussion. 

  The Council agreed that efforts to address sea change challenges should focus  on regional planning and urban management policies, such as greenfield land  development policies and development assessment processes. These  responsibilities are mainly local and state responsibilities. 

  The Australian Government will also continue to facilitate consultation,  cooperation and information sharing about Seachange through the Regional  Development Council, which I chair. 

  Water Management 

  Another critical issue for regional communities is water. I appreciate that local  government is currently engaged in a significant number of water conservation  initiatives including improving water efficiency, water pricing, recycling and reuse. 

  The key Australian Government funded programme which is particularly  important to local government to sustainably use and manage water is the $2  billion Australian Water Fund under the Australian National Water Initiative. 

  The Community Water Grants Programme under Water Fund is particularly  popular with local government as the main themes are core local government  business, including water savings and efficiency, water reuse and recycling and  surface and ground water health. 

  I urge local governments to take advantage of the funding offered under the  Australian Water Fund. 

  While on the topic of water, I'd like to say a few words about the drought. 

  The Australian Government is supporting Australia's farmers through the worst  drought in our history and will continue to stand by them. 

  On 7 November 2006, the Government announced the Small Business Drought  Assistance package valued at $210 million over two years, and increased  assistance from the Australian Government to farmers and communities during  this prolonged drought to more than $2.3 billion. 

  The extension of the eligibility criteria for Exceptional Circumstances assistance  will allow thousands of small businesses, such as shearing and fencing  contractors, feed and fertiliser suppliers and farm machinery retailers to access  assistance until 2008 and will give small businesses greater security and peace  of mind. 

  Conclusion 

  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you once again for the opportunity to speak with  you about how the Australian Government is helping to build stronger regional  communities. I wish you all the best for this forum. 

  Last Updated: 28 November, 2006

  

  Department of Transport and  Regional Services 

  

  

  

  

  © Copyright 2006 | Disclaimer | Privacy 

  

