---
title: "Petrol: Government blind spot on public transport."
date: "2006-08-09"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296664
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F2JK6%22
---

 Senator Christine Milne   

 Petrol: Government blind spot on public transport 

 Senator Milne, 9th August 2006   

 The Australian Greens today called for the government to remove its blind spot and  make a major national investment in public transport to help reduce transport costs as  petrol prices continue to rise.    

 "The Greens are calling for the Council of Australian Governments to begin working  on redesigning Australian cities with a view to investing in public transport to reduce  dependence on private cars," Australian Greens energy spokesperson Senator  Christine Milne said today.    

 "Rising petrol prices have prompted a spate of calls for subsidies for everything from  petrol excise to gas conversion for private cars but not the easiest, most obvious  response - investing in public transport.    

 "Sydney and Melbourne cannot be global cities with the public transport systems of  regional towns.    

 "The GST should be removed from public transport as a start. But the idea of  subsidising public transport is still anathema to state and federal governments. This is  despite evidence that high petrol prices have prompted more Australians to leave their  cars at home in recent months and opt for public transport.    

 "These petrol refugees face high fares, poor services or no services at all. A major  national investment in public transport is the simplest, most effective way that  governments can reduce commuting costs and oil-proof Australia.    

 "Improving public transport will have the added benefits of reducing greenhouse gas  emissions, as emissions from transport are growing substantially, and reducing air  pollution.    

 "The Greens support measures to promote conversion of vehicles to LPG or natural  gas but these sorts of subsidies are only interim measures because oil is a finite  resource and we need to reduce our dependence on it."    

 Contact: Katrina Willis 03 6234 4566 or 0437 587 562 

