---
title: "Minister welcomes High Court decision on Protection Visa applications."
date: "2006-11-15"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211300725
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WLIL6%22
---

  Media Release  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  264.06 Wednesday, 15 November 2006 

  Minister welcomes High Court decision on  Protection Visa applications 

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Amanda Vanstone has welcomed today’s  High Court decision in relation to applications for Protection Visas. 

  “The 4-1 majority decision confirms that a refugee under Australia’s temporary protection  will not be guaranteed continuing protection once conditions in their former country have  improved,” Senator Vanstone said today. 

  “Afghan asylum seekers QAAH and NBGM were both initially granted Temporary  Protection Visas (TPVs). 

  “However, my department and the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) refused their  applications for Protection Visas (PVs) on the basis that circumstances in Afghanistan had  imp roved . 

  “The Majority of the Court found that neither the Migration Act nor the Refugees  Convention offer any ‘promise or obligation to continue to afford protection or grant  residence, whether permanent or otherwise, in the event that circumstances change’. 

  “The High Court has confirmed the Australian Government’s intended position that, when  considering an application for a PV, the test is whether the applicant has a well-founded  fear of persecution at the time of decidinq the application. 

  “The High Court found that there is no presumption that once a person has been granted a  TPV they continue to be a refugee until the Government proves otherwise. 

  “TPVs are a key plank of our border protection measures, and help ensure more of  Australia’s refugee places are taken by those assessed by the UN High Commissioner for  Refugees as being in most desperate need of resettlement.” 

  Senator Vanstone said today’s High Court’s decision would have an impact upon those  cases that have similar issues currently undecided before a delegate, the RRT or the  Courts. 

  Minister’s media contact: Anthony Rogers 0417 445 886 

