---
title: "Tampa 5 years on time to undo the damage."
date: "2006-08-25"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211297460
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/86QK6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 25 August 2006  Press Release Number: vozttuyz  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 TAMPA 5 YEARS ON TIME TO UNDO THE DAMAGE

 On the eve of the 5th anniversary of the Tampa incident, Democrats Immigration Spokesperson, Andrew  Bartlett renewed his calls for the reversal of the disgraceful and destructive legislation which was forced  through Senate in its wake.   

 "It's good that the Senate recently rejected Government legislation to further entrench the Pacific  Solution, but we should use the Tampa anniversary as a reminder that the destructive laws which  followed it are still in place."   

 "I have been introducing a range of private Senator's Bill aimed at reversing these perverse laws, and I  call all Liberal and Labor MPs to recognise that passing these laws was a mistake, and reverse it before  more harm is done to innocent human beings and the underlying fabric of our legal system."   

 "In 2001, 433 asylum seekers were turned away from Australia by the Government in violation of  international law, inflicting massive trauma and harm to people whose only 'crime' was to try to flee  persecution."   

 "The incident marked a dramatic increase in the Government's policy of public vilification and the  knowing inflicting of harm on asylum seekers.   "Tampa led the Government to pervert and break the law, waste billions in taxpayers' money, destroy  families and entrenched the uncaring culture in the Department of Immigration that is still not fixed."   

 "The Pacific solution was also born of this disgrace and it is still inflicting untold pain on the sole  remaining refugee in Nauru and on other asylum seekers on Christmas Island."   

 "The Democrats have always maintained that asylum seekers should have their claims processed fairly  and promptly within Australia, where they have access to legal representation, their families and support  networks. They should not be left to languish in inefficient and expensive off-shore processing centres,"  Senator Bartlett said.  

