---
title: "Bartlett condemns Pacific Solution for Burmese asylum seekers."
date: "2006-09-18"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298368
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3NWK6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 18 September 2006  Press Release Number: pcaacnui  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 BARTLETT CONDEMNS PACIFIC SOLUTION FOR BURMESE ASYLUM  SEEKERS

 Democrat Immigration spokesperson Senator Andrew Bartlett today condemned the Government's  decision to send seven Burmese asylum seekers to Nauru.   

 "The Pacific Solution has already been show to be an expensive failure," Senator Bartlett said.   

 "The only possible reason why these people have been transferred to such a remote location is that it is  the deliberate intention of the Government to deny these people proper processing of their claims, and to  prevent them from accessing adequate legal and other support. It is also assists the Government to  keep the asylum seekers from media attention or public scrutiny."   

 "It is a disgrace that until recently Australia had left two Iraqi asylum refugees on Nauru in a state of  limbo regarding their status. Everyone, including the media had forgotten about their existence."   

 "I have met with the refugee who was recently brought to Australia at the insistence of Nauru's  Government for essential medical treatment. He still remains in limbo, his status has not changed and it  is extremely distressing that this lack of a decision is the source of his health problem."   

 "The Pacific Solution is no solution when dealing with the processing of asylum seekers."   

 "It is expensive, inhumane and burdensome. I strongly urge the community to maintain the same  pressure that led to the Senate rejecting recent legislation attempting to extend the Pacific Solution, to  get the whole thing scrapped once and for all," Senator Bartlett said.  

 

