---
title: "New English language options for young arrivals."
date: "2006-10-05"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298963
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/C83L6%22
---

  THE HON ANDREW ROBB A 0  MP 

  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affaiis 

  072/06 5 Odober 2006 

  NEW ENGLISH LANGUAGE OPTIONS FOR YOUNG ARRIVALS 

  The Australian Government is looking at a range of options that will help new arrivals get  jobs and not become dependent on the welfare system. 

  The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and h4ulticultural Affairs,  Andrew Robb, said among the options being considered was a new English language  programmc for 15 to 24 ycar old rcfugcc and humanitarian cntrants. 

  In 2005-06 a total of 14,144 visas were granted under Australia’s refugee and humanitarian  programme. In the same period 41 per cent of people who settled in Australia under the  programme were aged 14 years or under, and a further 24 per cent were aged 15 to 24 years. 

  “Young people need courses designed with them in mind,” Mr Robb said. “What is needed  for this group is basic literacy and numeracy delivered at a greater level of intensity than that  suitable to older adult learners; a course for young people about to start work or in work.” 

  Mr Robb was opening the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) National Conference in  Perth. He said that in 2006-07 the Australian Government is committed to spending  $285 million on English language training. 

  Mr Robb told the conference that new arrivals would benefit from having it explained, from  the outset, what the community expects of them - to get a job and not rely on the welfare  system. 

  “The communication and implementation of all programmes, including English tuition,  should persistently spell out the key milestones to having a successful life in Australia - ajob,  a workable level of English language skills, high retention rates in school, quick and regular  interaction with other groups in the community through activities such as sport,” he said. 

  “Such an approach engenders a sense of mutual obligation, it provides clear direction and  helps them establish positive priorities from the outset.” 

  Mr Robb said people currently studying under AMEP art- eligible for a 13 week exvmption  from requirements under Job Network which requires them to be actively seeking work. He 

  . ./2 

  Parliament House Office  Parliament House  CANBERRA ACT 2600 

  Bentleigh Electorate Office  368 Centre Koad  BENTLEIGH VIC 3204 

  said up to 80 per cent of people asked for a further 13 week extension and in some cases, three  or four extensions are requested. 

  “In such cases a year or more can go by and then the wrong priorities may have taken hold,  and unemployment and a welfare mentality has &en become entrenched,” he said. 

  “Getting a job quickly may at first be very confronting, but we all know from our life  experience that getting on with life heals wounds, builds confidence and initiative, and in this  case a job can be a great aid to mastering the English language. 

  “Without question, many new arrivals have suffered enormous difficulties, but I’ve observed  in most of them very special qualities which are a direct result of their experiences -qualities  wliicll make them very marketable in the workplace soon after their amival. 

  “Consequently we want to examine whether employers can be better supported to enable  English language training to continue if they offer jobs to recent migrants. Options such as  traineeships would have the advantage of allowing people to work, but still have dedicated  period3 of time set aside for them to learn English.” 

  Mr Robb said despite current high migration, the ageing population and ten years of high  economic growth means that in five years time there could be 200,000 more jobs in Australia  than workers to fill them. 

  He said this meant the Australian Government had to keep improving our ability to integrate  new migrants, including English language training. so that new arrivals were job ready as  soon as possible. 

  Media contact: Stewart Foster 0401 141 420 

