---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 6 April 2006: Developments in the Cole Inquiry; asylum seekers."
date: "2006-04-06"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY"
subjects:
  - "Iraq"
  - "AWB Ltd"
  - "UN Oil for Food Programme"
  - "Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil for Food Programme"
  - "Corruption"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Developments in the Cole Inquiry"
  - "asylum seekers."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291937
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J3AJ6%22
---

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Trade and  International Security   

 

 DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  - SYDNEY   -   6 APRIL 2006   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:  Developments in the Cole Inquiry; asylum seekers.   

 

 RUDD:   There have been further developments in the Cole Inquiry  today, particularly in terms of the AWB’s relationship with the Howard  Government.  As late as September of 2005, we have a very important record of  conversation between the AWB and Mr Downer’s Department.    

 In that record of conversation, Mr Downer’s Department appeared to be telling  the AWB to make sure that whatever the AWB told the Volcker Inquiry was  consistent with what the Government had told the Volcker Inquiry. Now the  Volcker Inquiry of course was the Inquiry launched by United Nations back in  early 2004 to get to the truth of what happened with this massive wheat for  weapons scandal. 

 

 So just on the eve of the Volcker Inquiry concluding its deliberations, we have  this meeting between the AWB and officers of Mr Downer’s Department where  extraordinarily Mr Downer’s Department were telling the AWB to make sure of  one thing and one thing alone: that is, make sure that your story is the same as  the Government’s story, as told to the Volcker Inquiry.   

 I mean for goodness sakes, is the Government interested in the truth or not? Or  are they interested simply in coaching the AWB to tell the Government’s version  of events? This I have got to say smacks further of a cover up, for the  Government was right into this cover up to its very neck. 

 

 What I want to know is this whether Mr Downer’s officials who were providing  this advice to the AWB acting on the Government’s direction? Were they free  wheeling? What actually happened here? It is completely unacceptable for the  Government to be telling the AWB what the AWB should be telling a UN  Inquiry. The core question here is the truth. Instead, we have a Government once  again caught red-handed in the middle of a cover up. 

 

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 RUDD:    My understanding from the developments in the Cole  Inquiry today is that this depends on a record of conversation that has been  produced. That record of conversation has not been made public. What I have  just referred to has been made public. The key challenge for Mr Downer is to  confirm what exactly the truth was.  What exactly did his officials say to the  AWB in September last year? Remember that this comes some five or six years  after the $300 million dollar wheat for weapons scandal began. It is unacceptable.    

 Up until the Iraq war, we had a Government that was at least guilty of gross  negligence when it comes to this $300 million dollar wheat for weapons scandal.  But after the Iraq war, after we got control of the country of Iraq itself, the  Government’s behaviour changed. The Australian Government became  increasingly involved in a cover up with the AWB. I have got to say that today’s  evidence indicates that cover up and attempted cover up continued right  through almost to the bitter end of the Volcker Inquiry itself.   

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 RUDD:  More and more we have seen evidence of Mr Downer not  acting as Foreign Minister of Australia, but Mr Downer acting as the AWB’s man  in the Government. I would have thought that those two jobs were quite  different. You can’t be Foreign Minister of Australia, responsible for enforcing  UN sanctions against Saddam Hussein on the one hand and on the other hand  acting as the AWB’s unpaid representative, coach and principal advocate on the  other. These two jobs don’t fit together. Mr Downer at a minimum wasn’t doing  his job before the Iraq war. Subsequent to the Iraq war, increasingly we find  evidence of him acting as the AWB’s man in the government. That should not  have been the case. Mr Downer has a case to answer.   

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 RUDD:   I am not across the detail of that particular development, so I  would rather not comment on it. I think it is critical for the AWB to cooperate 

 fully with the Cole Inquiry. Despite the fact that Mr Cole has limited terms of  reference, despite the fact that Prime Minister Howard has rorted Mr Cole’s  terms of reference, it is important that the AWB cooperate fully with the Cole  Inquiry. 

 

 And I state again what I have said on many previous occasions. If John Howard  has nothing to hide, then why on earth won’t he give Commissioner Cole the  powers to make a determination about whether his Ministers have done their job  or not. John Howard has set up an Inquiry designed to do one thing: hang the  AWB from the nearest lamp-post. Instead, what Mr Howard should have done 

 was create an Inquiry which got to the truth of what the AWB did and also what  his own Government failed to do.    

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 RUDD:  Statements from these two questions won’t answer the  questions which should be asked - that is, what these Ministers did to fulfil their  obligations under Australian law. John Howard’s terms of reference have one  huge gap in them and that gap is that Commissioner Cole has no powers  whatsoever to make a determination about whether Minister Downer, Minister  Vaile or the Prime Minister actually did their job under Australian law. Why  won’t John Howard give him that power? Because he is frightened to hell as to  what the answer might be. The record so far is pretty grim.    

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 RUDD:  I haven’t seen the full text of the Prime Minister’s remarks  on this. What I would say is that Australia has fundamental obligations under  international law and under the convention for the protection of refugees when it  comes to assisting any person who falls within the categories defined by the  Convention. In terms of any further statements made by the Prime Minister  today, I would rather see those first before commenting any further.    

 Can I add one other thing though in terms of people movements across the sea  between West Papua and other destinations and it is this: we need to be very  mindful, very mindful indeed, of the absolute tragedy of SIEV X. That is, when  we saw a vessel loaded with asylum seekers which was lost at sea, literally  hundreds of men, women and children killed. It is very important in these  difficult circumstances at present that we ensure that no such tragedy ever occurs  again. 

 Ends. 6 April 2006.   

 

 Media contact:  Alister Jordan 0417 605 823   

 

 

 

