---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Darwin: 6 June 2006: The political, security and humanitarian situation in East Timor."
date: "2006-06-06"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY"
subjects:
  - "The political"
  - "security and humanitarian situation in East Timor."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211293631
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4VVJ6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Trade and  International Security   

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - DARWIN   

 6 JUNE 2006   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:   The political, security and humanitarian situation in East Timor   

 

 RUDD:    I have just come back from Dili in East Timor and the  security situation is very tight and difficult. There is still a lot of work to be done.  The Australian Defence Force has done a terrific job so far given the resources  available to them and given the breadth of the challenge. They have done a good  job when it comes to handling the situation with the East Timorese Defence Force  and the East Timorese Police Force. Both of those units have split effectively into  two and we have armed elements who have gone out into the community. The  Australian Defence Force has effectively brought them into barracks and  effectively disarmed most of them. There is still some work to do on that score.   

 There is still some work to be done on law and order in Dili itself - and many  people have seen that on their television screens. The Australian Defence Force  needs help and they need police help. They need police help not just from 

 Australia, but from a coalition of countries around the world. That is what needs  to be done. You can’t expect the Australian Defence Force to go out there with a 

 hardline military task to perform and at the same time act as the London  Metropolitan Police. It just doesn’t work that way.   

 One or two other things as well. When it comes to the problem of East Timorese  politics, it is very important that Australia not be seen to take sides in the internal  domestic struggle. That is why it is very important for Australia through its  Foreign Minister and its Prime Minister to make clear that we are not taking one  side or another in East Timorese politics. It is very good that the Foreign Minister  went over there the other day to make that claim to Prime Minister Alkatiri. I did  the same in my discussions with Jose Ramos-Horta and also with Prime Minister  Alkatiri and other Ministers of the Government. 

 

 I think that there are some in East Timor who had feared that some in Australia  had taken sides or may be taking sides when it comes to the politics of this  country.   

 Now I have assured the East Timorese that this is not the case and I know that  Mr Downer has done the same. But because some people have their concerns, I  believe that it is now very important for Prime Minister Howard travel to East  Timor to make that plain to the East Timorese himself and to all branches of the  East Timorese Government. Also, Prime Minister Howard by travelling to East  Timor would be in a good position then to become the anchorman for pulling  together this coalition of police that we now need on the streets of Dili.    

 On law and order itself and the impact of refugees or those who have been  displaced from their homes. Until the law and order situation has been fixed, we  are still going to have people who don’t feel secure enough to stay at home. I  visited a camp not far from Dili Airport - and in one camp alone there were  13,000 people with 3,000 children under the age of five. That is one of 32 camps  which has sprung up around the city and the Minister for Labour told me  yesterday that there is something in the order of 50,000 people in camps.  There  are still basic needs when it comes to water, when it comes to food other than  rice, when it comes to sanitation and shelter, with tarpaulins that can be used so  that children can be taught their lessons from school.    

 No-one feels confident enough to return home yet. I spoke to mothers yesterday  with young children who said that they were not game enough to even think  about going home until they had confidence that security had been restored on  the ground.  Therefore, there are going to be camps for some weeks and maybe  even months. So the humanitarian challenge for Australia is great - and it would  be good if our Prime Minister could look first hand at that on the ground as well.   

 The last thing is this: people have seen what has happened with all of this  violence from urban youths on the streets of Dili. The big challenge is that with  60 per cent unemployment in Dili and particularly unemployment amongst  young males, something has to be done to give these people a job. 

 

 I see a crying need for a very large community employment program focused on  public works in Dili to give these young men a job, to give them an income and  therefore help them get off the streets. Right now this is a powder keg and it’s  waiting to explode.   

 One other thing that we can do is have a public works program to clean up Dili  which has been so affected by this recent violence. Employ urban youths to do it  through a community employment program. I think that is an area which  Australia can put its shoulder to the wheel.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   I am not going to comment on whether the Australian  Government has handled its political relationships with the Government in East  Timor correctly or incorrectly. All that I am saying is that I fear that some in East  Timor may think that the Australian Government may have taken a side. I am  confident that Mr Downer has done his best to assure the East Timorese that this  is not the case but I think that it is very important for our Prime Minister to do  the same. We can’t allow the Australian Defence Force to become the meat in the  sandwich for someone else’s political dispute.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:  Look, overall given the challenges over the past few weeks,  the Australian Defence Force has performed a first class function. I spoke with  Brigadier Slater yesterday - he is doing a good job under difficult circumstances.  I saw many members, many individual members of the ADF and our men and  women in uniform are doing a great job for their country. The problem is that the  Australian Defence Force needs help. The Australian Defence Force needs police  help and they need that police help now.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   I think that it would be very good for the Prime Minister to  visit Dili as early as possible to assure the East Timorese that the Australian  Government is completely neutral when it comes to the political dispute within  East Timor. I think that it is also important that the Prime Minister use that visit  to leverage other countries in South East Asia and Europe into helping us find 

 the police necessary to restore law and order on the ground. And lastly, to put  our hand in the pocket through the aid budget to create jobs through a  community employment program on the ground - not just us, use the United  Nations as well. That has got to happen.    

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   Well I have just picked it up around various circles in East  Timorese politics. I don’t know how serious it is or how marginal it is.  But there  are 12 months to go between now and the next East Timor election. It is very  important, given that we don’t know how the politics of East Timor is going to  turn out, for Australia to be working with all sides of East Timorese politics and  to assure the East Timorese that that’s our attitude. The Foreign Minister has  done well on that score in his visit on Saturday. I have sought to reinforce what  he said. I think it would help a lot if the Prime Minister did the same by visiting  the country himself.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   I think various people working within East Timorese politics  within the parties have expressed those sorts of views.  I just don’t want that sort  of perception to grow and the best way to nip it in the bud is for both our  Foreign Minister and our Prime Minister, backed up by ourselves in the  Opposition, to say that we as Australians are working with all sides of East  Timorese politics. We respect the democratic and constitutional processes in East  Timor. East Timor’s political problems can be resolved internally using those  processes. Our job is to assist in restoring security given the challenges which  have arisen with the East Timorese Defence Force and Police Force.   

 REPORTER:  Do you think the East Timorese who have faced violence  should be given special treatment for asylum?   

 RUDD:  When it comes to individual decisions on asylum, I think it  is very important that any matter like that is dealt with on its individual merits.    

 You can’t make a blanket judgement - whether it’s about East Timor or any other  country. Our obligations under the Refugee Convention are very plain. An  application by any person should be dealt with on its merits.    

 That’s what we have done recently in the case of West Papua and that should be  done with people from any other country in which people apply from.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible 

 

 RUDD:  I think the Australian Defence Force has done a good job  under difficult circumstances in bringing the temperature down.    

 But there are still many opportunities for flashpoints to emerge, whether it’s  demonstrations in the city which may unfold over the days and weeks ahead or  whether it’s other political events which may trigger violence.    

 I’m concerned about that and that’s why I think it’s very important that we get  police on the ground as quickly as possible to take over the day to day policing  functions of the city.    

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   I think East Timor is in a bad state right now but none of us  should lose hope. We’ve got to put our shoulder to the wheel in building this  country back to where it was and to help provide this country with a future.    

 You see for Australia, we now face on our northern shores an arc of instability -  the Solomon Islands, PNG and now East Timor. Let’s make sure that we do  something concrete now for the long haul.  

 

 This is not a sprint, it’s a marathon. It’s our neighbourhood and we’ve got to  have our first priority here to ensure that stability and security is returned to our  immediate neighbours and friends.    

 

 

 Ends.   

 Contact:  Alister Jordan 0417 605 823   

 

 

 

