---
title: "When do I stop being a refugee: the journey of citizenship and community inclusiveness: a vision of multiculturalism and an inclusive Australian society."
date: "2006-10-18"
creators:
  - "Calma, Tom"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Multiculturalism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211299518
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BH0M6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 “When do I stop being a refugee?” 

 The Journey of Citizenship and Community Inclusiveness A Vision of Multiculturalism and an inclusive Australian  society 

 Speech by Tom Calma, Acting Race Discrimination  Commissioner and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  Social Justice Commissioner  

 Refugee Week 2006 - Adelaide  18 October 2006  

 

 I wish to acknowledge the traditional owners of Adelaide, the Kaurna people. I also wish  to commend the organisers of this timely conference and acknowledge our distinguished  guests.   

 Ladies and gentlemen    

 In the last few weeks we’ve been asked as members of the public, as community  workers and human rights advocates to reconsider some aspects of our formal  citizenship requirements by the federal government.   

 The release of the discussion paper on the matter of Australian citizenship has  generated nation wide debate. Today against this background, I wish to take up the  opportunity to address issues concerning citizenship, community and belonging in  Australia. My intention here is not to focus on the discussion paper itself but rather to try  to delineate some broader issues regarding the inclusive capacity of our society, the  potentials that the makeup of our society generates and the tasks ahead of us as a  nation in order to realize and actualize a fair and just Australia.    

 War, colonisation and lately globalisation have left us with many legacies, one of them  the legacy of refugees. As the late prominent writer Edward Saeed says; our age is the  ‘age of the refugee, the displaced person and mass immigration’.  

 

 Here in Australia we are still dealing with the effects of those legacies. In my position as  the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner and national Race  Discrimination Commissioner I endeavour to address the concerns, the rights and the  needs of two categories of people who have been affected most by the ruthlessness of  colonisation, the cruelty of wars and the incursion of globalisation. In my position I have  the privilege to work with those who are displaced and dispossessed in their land and  those who were displaced and dispossessed of their lands.   

 The Indigenous population of this land through the legacy of colonisation are not just  displaced of their land but also torn from their very way of being. Children taken away  from families, whole tribes deprived from speaking their tongue, and living their culture.  In someway, colonisation has turned our Indigenous peoples into refugees in their own  land. This is definitely one of the most excruciating fates; one that cannot be simply  expressed in language or codified in legislation.    

 p 

  

  

  This land also seems to be the destination of many people who are fleeing the  unbearable realities of wars and deprivations around the world. For over fifty years now,  Australia has become the place of refuge for many displaced peoples, who most often  left a whole world behind and move to a new world populated with languages, traditions, 

  skills and new ways of living that are foreign to their own.   

  Before proceeding further, I want to clarify two things. First by referring to Indigenous  peoples’ experiences and refugees’ experiences I have no doubt that we are talking  about two separate domains which cannot be reduced or collapsed into each other.  Secondly, nevertheless, rethinking human experiences in relation to each other widens 

  the horizon and the scope of our debate.    

  It is not an overstatement to say that our very progress as a nation, with a distinct and  assured sense of itself, hinges on our ability to address both Indigenous’ reconciliation  and the integration of refugees and migrants into our society. But it seems to me that so  far, in the current climate, we have not got it right. The process of reconciliation is  incomplete and we are not doing enough to progress it. And our treatment of refugees  and migrants is returning to simplistic strategies to assimilate newcomers who have, by  and large, been successfully integrating into the community through the versatility of  multiculturalism.    

  As Petro Georgiou suggests ‘by any standard, we are an exemplar of unity and respect  for our multicultural diversity. We have brought together peoples of diverse nations,  religions and cultures. Migrants have worked hard and committed themselves to this  country. Through their efforts and initiative they have profoundly enriched the nation.’  Well said Petro. 

  Until a few weeks ago, this was an article of faith on the part of every politician. Now we  are  told  we  need  to  make  significant  policy  changes  to  address  weaknesses  in  our   citizenship laws. 

  The final say on citizenship laws is not out yet but I wonder if the suggested law reform  will  reshape  our  exemplary  united,  yet  diverse,  society  into  a  less  hospitable  and  less   generous one.    

  Let  us  talk  about  hospitality  as  a  starting  point  for  thinking  about  these  issues.  For   instance,  the  type  of  hospitality  that  underlies  the  historical  and  ongoing  process  of   acknowledging Indigenous rights; or the hospitality involved in coming to a new land. In  these processes we can discern two types of hospitality; an affirming hospitality and a  domineering, bordering on hostile, hospitality.    

  This  latter  hospitality,  by  demanding  unprovable  loyalty,  more  skills  and  additional   abilities  from  certain  groups  of  the  community,  undermines  the  possibility  of  enjoying   equality  and  having  a  fair  go.  This  hospitality,  which  espouses  a  permanent  state  of   testing, betrays the act of hospitality itself, rendering Australia an inhospitable place.   

  But this is just one strand of hospitality and not necessarily the prevailing one. Think of  the  “welcome  to  country”  Indigenous  traditional  owners  extend  to  all  visitors  to  their   lands.  This  welcome  does  not  demand  anything  for  itself  except  as  an  ethical  and   respectful  practice.  This  hospitality  is  affirmative,  not  intrusive.  Before  demanding   acknowledgement  it  bestows  forgiveness.  This  hospitality  simply  extends  the  reach  of   human generosity.    

  Also, across the boundaries of language, in our urban centres and increasingly in rural  areas a new form of hospitality has been developing. Refugees and migrants might need  some  language  assistance  to  access  services  but  they  definitely  don’t  need  an   overriding  language  to  express  and  demonstrate  their  affiliation  with  their  neighbours,  

  local community and society. A whole new everyday way of communication, expression  and exchange has developed in our neighbourhoods through gestures which simply ask  for human affiliation based on reciprocity and respect.   

  Indeed, wars, colonisation and globalisation have left us with legacies. But in the act of  overcoming  those  legacies  our  society  develops  generous,  welcoming  and  reciprocal   sensibilities which we need to nurture and enhance.   

  In  this  situation  reciprocity  creates  the  conditions  to  understand  the  journey  of  the   refugee,  the  quest  of  Indigenous  Australians  and  the  need  of  some  communities  for   reassurance. In entering into reciprocal relations, we all must abandon our comfort zone  and step outside of our homes, to care, understand and engage with others. In doing so  we  follow  the  steps  of  Theodor  Adorno,  the  German  Jewish  philosopher  who,  in  his   reflection on the great suffering in Europe says; “it is part of morality not to be at home in  one’s home. So it is part of morality to put ourselves in the place of refugees so as to  understand with compassion.”    

  So,  how  can  we  build  on  our  successful  multiculturalism  and  make  Australia  an  even   more hospitable place?    

  Let me give you an account of my understanding of multiculturalism.    

  In my view multiculturalism simply reflects upon and responds hospitably to the culturally  diverse world we live in today. It is not a revolution but it has a revolutionary impact. It  has the ability to continuously re-generate society by opening it up to the enrichment of  new cultures introduced by layer upon layer of migrants and refugees contributing to our  national story and how we see ourselves.    

  Multiculturalism,  as  opposed  to  a  co-existence  of  mono-cultures,  is  the  source  of  our   society’s cohesion. It increasingly shelters us from the traps of ‘us & them’ because the  ‘us’  in  a  multicultural  society  is  an  expansive,  versatile,  diverse  group  of  peoples,   languages and cultures that embrace the affiliations which many of us might have.    

  In this context, a policy of permanent testing, through an English test, a values test and  an ‘Australian way of life’ test, as proposed, might have the negative and opposite effect  of  allowing  the  formal  process  of  granting  citizenship  to  take  precedent  over  the   substantial process of becoming Australian.    

  I  think  we  need  to  closely  consider  the  difference  between  becoming  a  citizen  and   becoming  Australian.  One  is  formal  and  requires  procedural  fairness  while  the  other,   substantive,  requiring  attentiveness,  openness,  foresight  and  an  embrace  of  life  or   things to come. One involves clearly delineated legal rights and responsibilities and the  other,  reciprocity  and  leadership.  One  is  about  reforming  the  system  to  meet  the   changing  realities  of  our  society,  the  other  about  the  ongoing  identity  formation  of  this   country.   

  Today, the question that seems to preoccupy many is how the experiences of refugees  add  to  our  multicultural  realities.  Referring  again  to  Saeed  in  his  description  of  the   refugees’ experience, he says  

  “exile  is  strangely  compelling  to think  about  but  terrible  to  experience.  It  is  the   unhealable rift between a human being and a native place, between the self and  its  true  home:  its  essential  sadness  can  never  be  surmounted.  And  while  it  is   true  that  literature  and  history  contains  heroic,  romantic,  glorious,  even   triumphant  episodes  in  an  exile’s  life,  these  are no more  than  efforts  meant  to   overcome the crippling sorrow of estrangement. The achievements of exile are  permanently undermined by the loss of something left behind forever’. 

  

  So refugees who arrive in this country may come with a sense of loss, dislocation and  sadness  but  this  experience  seems  not  to  hinder,  but  to  strengthen  their  resolve  to   ‘overcome the crippling sorrow of estrangement’.    

  On  arrival,  the  refugee  begins  the  ongoing  attempt  to  rebuild  a  shattered  life  and   establish roots through new affiliations and hard work.  

  

  My  staff,  in  their  work  with  different  communities,  bears  witness  to  this  process  of   overcoming.  For  example,  throughout  the  Isma  project,  the  commission  heard  that  a   significant  number  of  Arab  and  Muslim  Australians  were  feeling  fearful,  isolated  and   vulnerable. These experiences ranged from offensive remarks about race or religion, to  physical violence. They felt singled out on the street, in shopping centres, in the media,  in schools, in the workplace, by police - in short, everywhere. Muslim women had their  hijab  pulled  off.  But  these  painful  experiences  did  not  stop  Iraqi  and  afghan  refugees   from re-establishing their shattered lives in Shepparton in rural Victoria. Parents working  hard to overcome all obstacles to give their sons and daughters a new dignified life while  at the same time contributing immensely to the economy of that region. 

  But  isolation  and  indifference  in  many  cases  hinders  the  refugee’s  effort  to  integrate.   Take  the  example  of  a  family  of  African  refugees  who  flew  to  Australia  with  their   chronically ill son with a detailed medical file about the son condition. They were met by  a  contract  caseworker  at  Sydney  airport.  They  handed  the  file  over  to  the  officer  who   transferred them to a dingy flat in Fairfield, left them on their own and told them to dial  000 in case of emergency.  

  Eighteen hours later, the little boy was in convulsions. The father picked up the phone  and the only thing he could hear was the steady beeping on the other end. He had never  used a phone before. The son died. The father ran into the street crying for help in his  native tongue. Many people rushed to help but it was too late. 

  In this situation, isolation and indifference shattered a shattered life once more, before it  even began. This incident is a clear and stark example of failing to create a preliminary  condition  of  hospitality  and  belonging  by  providing  proper  access  to  resettlement   services.  To  resettle,  refugees  need  to  have  access  to  the  means  of  participating  and   sharing the benefits of the broader society including English classes, knowledge of laws  and support services.     

  So what should be done to create the enabling conditions of belonging?    

  First we need to decide how to extend hospitality by establishing a human rights based  approach  to  receiving  and  integrating  refugees  into  our  society.  This  approach  will   continuously remind us that we are committed to fundamental absolute human rights not  just simply limited or qualified rights    

  Second, procedural fairness and justice should be the bedrock of all the strategies that  determine a refugee’s status and that aim to integrate refugees into the community.   

  Third,  in  line  with  the  commitment  to  fundamental  human  rights,  effective  anti-discrimination  legislation  and  procedures  should  be  developed  to  combat  new  and   emerging forms of discrimination and racism.    

  Fourth,  NGOs,  state,  local  and  federal  governments  have  a  duty  of  care  for  the  most   disadvantaged  and  vulnerable  in  the  community  through  services  and  affirmative   actions.   

  Fifth  as  a  community,  in  our  interaction  with  and  reaction  to  refugees,  we  need  to   develop an ethos based on compassion, respect, dignity and a fair go, and finally;   

  Laws,  procedures  and  polices  are  not  in  themselves  effective  without  strong  affirming   leadership.  We  need  leadership,  in  different  walks  of  life,  that  champion  human  rights   principles, standards and treaties.   

  Our  collective  legal  and  moral  commitment  cannot  really  be  materialized  without   reciprocity. As the United Nations Secretary General, Kofi Anann unequivocally declares  '....States need carefully thought-out policies for integrating immigrants who are allowed  in. Since both migrants and host societies stand to benefit from successful integration,  both  must  play  their  part  in  making  it  happen.  It  is  reasonable  for  societies  to  expect  

  

  those who would become citizens to share certain basic values, to respect the law of the  land, and to develop fluency in the local language, with assistance if they need it.'   

  Our openness to the resettlement of refugees in our midst is a sign of our commitment to  a future which emphasises our achievements and transcends our shortcomings.   

  Let’s make refugee resettlement a homecoming experience while we keep in mind their  unlimited potential to contribute to our society.    

  Welcome, welcome, welcome.    

  Welcome to our home, welcome to your home.  

  

  

  © Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. Last updated November 22, 2006  

  Your comments and feedback are welcome. Email us at: webfeedback@humanrights.gov.au 

