---
title: "Australia should take the lead in drawing together an international police force for East Timor."
date: "2006-06-07"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211293715
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MJWJ6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Trade and  International Security 

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 AUSTRALIA SHOULD TAKE THE LEAD IN DRAWING TOGETHER AN  INTERNATIONAL POLICE FORCE FOR EAST TIMOR    

 Prime Minister Howard should now take the lead in drawing together an  international policing contingent for East Timor to assist the Australian Defence  Force and other international military commitments.    

 The bulk of the policing work in East Timor is currently being conducted by the  Australian Defence Force. The ADF is doing this dangerous work, in addition to the  job it was sent to do in East Timor - disarming and returning to barracks the  fractured elements of East Timor’s own Defence Force and Police Force. 

 

 Labor welcomes the fact that Australia’s State Governments today have rallied to the  cause by offering police elements for service in Dili.   

 However the numbers needed are much greater than those made available by the  States and the Federal Government needs to be doing more on this score.   

 John Howard’s number one priority on East Timor at the moment must be to jump  on the telephone to South East Asian and European heads of government to try and  draw together a sizeable police force to deal with the law and order problems on the  streets of Dili.   

 Until law and order is restored, the 50,000-plus people still seeking protection in  refugee camps will not be returning home because of their fears for their personal  safety. As a result, the humanitarian needs of these people in camps (food, fresh  water, shelter and sanitation) will get greater and greater.   

 

 

 

 Ends. 7 June 2006. 

 

 Contact:  Alister Jordan 0417 605 823   

 

