---
title: "Values and politics: public lecture: University of Adelaide: 26 October, 2006"
date: "2006-10-26"
creators:
  - "Wong, Penny"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKFORCE PARTICIPATION"
subjects:
  - "National identity"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Cultural values"
  - "Australian ethnic groups"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211299876
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AR9L6%22
---

 Check against delivery 

 

 Senator Penny Wong 

 

 Public Lecture, Adelaide University 

 

 Thursday 26 October 2006 

 

 “Values and Politics” 

 

 Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today on the topic “Values and 

 Politics”. 

 

 Some of the more cynical amongst you may suggest that the title of this lecture is an 

 oxymoron. That the hurly burly of politics is some distance from debate and 

 discussion based on values. 

 

 I would argue that values have a central place in Australian politics. Unfortunately, it 

 is not always the central place most Australians would like. 

 

 Most Australians would probably expect that their politicians’ views, policies and 

 arguments were predicated on their values.  

 

 Often they are. However, the notion of “values” can also used in a less principled way 

 by politicians, as a device to steer the direction of political debate for their own, 

 subjective, political ends. 

 

 Our current Prime Minister has been particularly adept at appropriating the notion of 

 “Australian values”, and the linked concept of “Australian identity” for his own 

 political purposes. 

 

 The discussion of values by members of the Howard Government has often been 

 driven by political strategy, whereby a reference to these Australian values, or 

 Australian identity has been utilised for clear political purpose. 

  1

 

 So we have a Prime Minister who states “I don’t like hyphenated Australians”, a 

 Treasurer who rails against “mushy multiculturalism”, and the (then) Education 

 Minister who calls for people who can’t embrace Australian values to “clear off”.  

 

 More recently, the discussion of values and identity has been central to the Howard 

 Government’s political response to incidents of serious community conflict, such as 

 the Cronulla riots. It has also been a key vehicle enabling the Government to link 

 national security fears to multiculturalism. This in turn has driven a new agenda 

 around citizenship and integration, exemplified in the proposition of a more stringent 

 English language test for new citizens. I will return to the relationship between 

 national security and the values debate later in this discussion. 

 

 I must, however, emphasise that aspects of the Government's strategy around the 

 values debate are so extreme that even members of Howard’s own party have opposed 

 them. Witness Petro Georgiou in this same lecture theatre earlier this month when he 

 criticised the approach taken in Andrew Robb's Discussion Paper on Citizenship, 

 particularly the proposed English test. 

 

 As Ghassan Hage, Chairman of Anthropology at University of Sydney pointed out: 

 "Sometimes it seems as if conservatives prefer people to hate Australia using good 

 English than to love it in broken English." 

 

 However, I want to focus initially on two important characteristics of the Howard 

 government’s utilisation of Australian values and Australian identity, which are 

 fundamental to the political effectiveness of these notions.  

 These concepts are used, but not often defined. They can be used in opposition to 

 other principles or ideas, or even self-referentially.  

 Last year saw a very dark period in our recent history, with the riots in Cronulla. 

 Anyone and everyone who participated in those riots, or incited others to violence, 

 should be condemned for their decision. 

  2

 After the riots, John Howard’s said, “I don’t like hyphenated Australians, I just like 

 Australians”. 

 In this, the Prime Minister sets one type of Australian against another. 

 A hyphenated Australian, presumably being someone who might describe themselves 

 as a Greek-Australian or a Chinese-Australian, or in this context presumably a 

 Lebanese- or Muslim-Australian, is cast in contrast to an “Australian”. Just what a 

 non-hyphenated Australian is, is not articulated. But it doesn’t need to be in order for 

 this statement to serve its political purpose. The assumption that most of us would 

 immediately make, and the context of the racial conflict that drove the Cronulla riots, 

 is that the non-hyphenated Australian is the white Australian. And that this is the type 

 of Australian that the Prime Minister likes. 

 This demonstrates the political effectiveness of appealing to certain powerful 

 stereotypes, and the way in which this can immediately capture an edifice of 

 assumptions about values and identity. Howard doesn’t need to explain what a non-hyphenated Australian is, because the listener fills in the gaps. Immediately, the 

 debate is framed around certain notions of Australian identity which are so pervasive 

 and powerful they do not require further delineation.  

 It is certainly politically effective. But it is not political leadership. As occurred 

 during the Hanson times, this tactic by the PM has its own collateral damage being 

 those Australians for whom he does not stand up for, and for those Australians on 

 whose “Australianness” he casts doubt. 

 Those who argue against this view are automatically cast into the position of 

 defending the hyphenated Australian. Whilst this can be a noble objective, it is not 

 necessarily the most effective response as it ultimately accepts the framing of the 

 issue that Howard seeks to impose. 

 To avoid being hamstrung in this way we must seek to reframe the debate. This is not 

 a new concept in politics, but it remains one that those of us on the progressive side of 

 these discussions infrequently succeed in executing.   

  3

 We need to insert a little more clarity into this debate. We should demonstrate the 

 absurdity of such a statement, which only has real meaning if we allow the spaces to 

 be filled by a range of cultural stereotypes and prejudices. 

 Just who is the non-hyphenated Australian? We are all both hyphenated and non-hyphenated Australians. Probably every Australian could describe themself, if they 

 chose to, by reference to their ethnic heritage, be that Anglo-Celtic, Indigenous, 

 Chinese, Italian and so forth.  

 All of us can also describe ourselves as Australian. So is it just those people who have 

 the temerity to describe themselves as Italian-Australian who are amongst the group 

 our Prime Minister doesn’t like, while those who are Italian Australian but choose not 

 to refer to themselves in that way are liked? 

 Or is it only certain types of hyphenated Australians - in this case the Lebanese 

 Australians who were the subject of media commentary during these riots? 

 Equally, the Australian (non-hyphenated) whom the PM lauds - the ones he likes - 

 just who are they? Are they the Australians who are white, of Anglo-Celtic heritage 

 for example, but who do not self-describe as such? 

 Let's consider for a moment just who this non-hyphenated Australian is.  

 John Howard's pronouncements over the years on Australian identity leave us in little 

 doubt as to just who he speaks of, with statements such as "our cultural identity is 

 very heavily Anglo-Saxon"; and "the Anglo-Celtic influence is still dominant". 

 In his address to the National Press Club in January this year, Howard stated “Most 

 nations experience some level of cultural diversity while also having a dominant 

 cultural pattern running through them. In Australia’s case, that dominant pattern 

 comprises Judeo-Christian ethics, the progressive spirit of the Enlightenment and the 

 institutions and values of British political culture. Its democratic and egalitarian 

 temper also bears the imprint of distinct Irish and non-conformist traditions.” 

 These statements go beyond acknowledgement of the historical links between this 

 nation and Britain, or the formative act of British settlement. They demonstrate a 

  4

 mindset predicated on the continued privileging of white, Anglo-Celtic identity as 

 being the heart and soul of what it means to be Australian. 

 I shall leave aside the argument as to the historical edits this privileging requires, of 

 the ethnic diversity that has always been a part of our history. I shall leave aside the 

 fact that so many Australians fall outside the Anglo-Celtic identity, with millions of 

 our countrymen and women having migrated or descended from countries other than 

 the United Kingdom.  

 I do want to emphasise that the effect of this version of Australian identity is to 

 exclude so many Australians. Those who fall outside this Anglo-Celtic tradition are 

 rendered lesser Australians, second-class Australians, not quite Australian enough. 

 Perhaps these are the hyphenated Australians, the ones that aren't really part of 

 Howard's understanding of what it means to be Australian.  

 So the call to Australian values that Howard espouses is not a call to values deriving 

 from and agreed by an Australia that has been built and shaped by a range of cultural 

 influences. It can be more easily understood as a call for adherence to a narrowly 

 defined, culturally (and historically) specific set of values. And it is against these 

 values that difference is set. It is against these that migrants and Australians outside 

 these ethnic and cultural traditions are measured. 

 Those of us who believe that our national identity goes beyond these narrow strictures 

 often set about arguing, as we should, for a more inclusive understanding of what it 

 means to be Australian.  

 However, I want to focus briefly on the other side of the discussion, and consider 

 which aspects of this white Australian identity Howard ignores.  

 Many Australians of Anglo-Celtic heritage signed the Sorry Books, many walked in 

 support of reconciliation, many have campaigned for years for decent treatment of 

 asylum seekers, and many demonstrated against the war in Iraq. Theirs are not the 

 values to which Howard refers. The values of many who would meet the non-hyphenated Australian test are probably closer to those articulated by the Whitlam, 

 Fraser, Hawke and Keating governments than Howard's.  

  5

 The British political culture to which Howard refers has a strong tradition of 

 liberalism and of pluralism. Religious tolerance has been a central liberal value. 

 As Petro Georgiou emphasised "the liberal tradition has facilitated the success of one 

 of the most successful migration processes in modern history". The question is where 

 is that liberal tradition today? It appears that it resides only in the hands of a few 

 moderates whose political influence is minimal, and certainly not at Kirribilli.  

 I want to return to the discussion of values in the context of the national security. SBS 

 chief political correspondent, Karen Middleton described it in this way: "This whole 

 values debate is actually about harnessing the power of national security as an 

 electoral vote-winner. The boats aren't coming now, not like they were so the 

 Government needs a new way to ignite and capture the same emotion it raised on 

 national security. Identity is it. And Labor needs to not let it get away". 

 I will deal with her exhortation to action in a moment. 

 Middleton's analysis of the Government's tactics is right on the money. But those of 

 us on the progressive side of politics need to do more than criticise these political 

 tactics. Sensible reasoned exposure of the inaccuracies in conservatives' position, or 

 seeking to expose their "real" agenda will not be an effective response on its own. We 

 need to take this debate head on. And we should start by recognising what drives it. 

 We must clearly understand what it is that Howard is responding to. We must 

 recognise that many in the Australian community seek a stronger sense of shared 

 values. This aspiration is driven by many factors, and is being harnessed for many 

 reasons. But dissecting the political strategy is not where the game is at.  

 

 In the contemporary context, the desire for these shared values has been fuelled in 

 part by a deepening sense of insecurity, emphasised by heightened national security 

 concerns. We are more connected to the world, and we feel more exposed. We seek a 

 sense of belonging and of security, and values are one of the ways in which we 

 believe we can find this. 

 

  6

 Paul Kelly recently wrote (partly quoting Prospect magazine's editor David 

 Goodhart): 

 

 "As the debate about national security and identity intensifies, successful nations will 

 demand a unifying idea that transcends the "ahistorical notion of human rights" or a 

 notion of cultural pluralism based on individualism." 

 

 The description of the phenomenon is largely accurate, but the prescribed solution 

 highly contestable. 

 The Government's "unifying idea" is primarily one of mutual obligation. Howard 

 stated last year that “ if somebody has come from another country and has failed to 

 properly embrace the values of this society, …then the idea of taking away their 

 citizenship is one that ought to be looked at. I mean, I think that when somebody 

 comes to this country you enter into a mutual obligation understanding. You receive 

 the benefits of living in Australia an in return you have an obligation to embrace and 

 imbibe the values and attitudes, unconditionally embrace and imbibe, the attitudes of 

 this society." 

 Similar views have been put by the Treasurer and Brendan Nelson. 

 Most would read these comments as applying to recently arrived migrants. Does 

 anyone believe the Government apply the same standard to Australian-born white 

 Australians, who espouse views that are inimical to the values this Government 

 supposedly adheres to?  

 One of the principles the Government describes as being amongst our common value 

 is the equality of men and women. Yet under his Prime Ministership the gender wage 

 gap has increased to $308 per week. I doubt that we shall see the Prime Minister 

 deporting those responsible for continuing this inequality.  

 I doubt that he will argue for the removal of citizenship of perpetrators of violence 

 against women?  And I doubt that the misogynistic comments reportedly made in the 

 tragic case involving Dianne Brimble will result in the removal of citizenship of the 

 men involved. 

  7

 Under John Howard, citizenship as mutual obligation only goes so far. 

 Those of us on the progressive side of politics have to inject greater clarity into this 

 debate. We cannot allow Howard to continue to appropriate Australian values for his 

 own political purposes. Perhaps even more importantly, we cannot allow him to 

 construct Australian values in ways which benefit his narrow political agenda. 

 

 Progressives must express the desire for shared values: a way of articulating unity that 

 does not depend on exclusion, that does not rely on the delegitimisation of rights, and 

 that does not require the singling out of the "other", of those groups of hyphenated 

 Australians.  

 

 Traditionally we have focused on the collective good. We need to draw on this and 

 find ways of making our collective, the Australian community, stronger, and more 

 inclusive. We need to focus on belonging, not excluding. 

 

 The Howard government, through its actions and words, instils a sense of 

 unbelonging, of exclusion for certain ethnic or religious groups. We must do the 

 opposite. 

 

 Unity doesn't come from sameness. Nor does it come from strong-arming, by forcing 

 people to adhere to the appearance of sameness. Unity comes from a sense of 

 belonging - of being a part of a greater whole. Unity comes from having a stake and 

 from having a fair share. And unity can encompass difference. 

 

 Multiculturalism can be understood as one of our greatest defences against discord 

 and conflict. It can be understood as a way of widening the circle of belonging.  

 

 But we also have to be clear that diversity must exist within an agreed framework. 

 And we should argue both for what we say that framework should be as well as what 

 it should not be.  

 

  8

 The remarks that are reported to have been made by Muslim cleric Sheik Taj Din al-Hilali go beyond that framework. He has trespassed the boundaries of what is 

 acceptable in a diverse community.  

 

 Sheik Hilali is reported to have said that women were “weapons” used by “Satan” to 

 control men, and that women dressed provocatively - without a hijab - were like meat 

 left uncovered outdoors. If the meat falls prey to hungry local animals, he said, then it 

 is the meat’s fault.  

 

 His comments go to the heart of the debate about what we understand to be 

 Australian. We do not accept violence against women, we do not hold women 

 responsible for violence perpetrated against them, and we do not justify rape, full 

 stop.  

 

 In Australia, we believe that men and women are equal and we do not believe that one 

 gender is inherently more virtuous than the other.  

 

 In Australia, we believe that people have to take responsibility for their behaviour: 

 you cannot blame the victim. 

 

 Diversity in Australia does not mean we tolerate anything and everything. These 

 comments cannot and should not be defended on the basis of multiculturalism or 

 religious tolerance. 

 

 We should recognise that Sheik Hilali’s comments have been condemned across the 

 board, starting with other Muslim leaders. The Islamic leaders who have condemned 

 Sheik Hilali have demonstrated that there is no single Islamic view of women, and 

 that there are dinosaurs within the Islamic clergy who do not represent their flock. 

 

 The Muslims who have condemned Sheik Hilali are in fact defending Australian 

 values. 

 

 Sheik Hilali must take responsibility for hurting the interests of Muslims in Australia.  

 

  9

 Some people need to understand that being tolerant does not mean having no 

 standards at all. We need to take responsibility for defining the framework which 

 bounds diversity. Our support for diversity should not lead us to justify views that are 

 inimical to commonly held values nor does it justify incitement to violence or 

 criminal behaviour. Our tolerance of cultural difference will always have its limits. 

 The question is what these are and how are they defined. They should not be defined 

 opportunistically, and they must be defined with the interests of our body politic 

 paramount. Leaders have the responsibility not to single out particular groups and fan 

 the flames of prejudice. 

 

 Likewise, some people need to understand that defending one standard doesn’t mean 

 abandoning other standards. They too need to take responsibility for defining the 

 framework which bounds diversity. Let me read a text message, reported recently, 

 promoting the Cronulla riots: 

 

 “Just a reminder that Cronulla’s first wog bashing is still on this Sunday. 

 Chinks bashing day is on the 27th and the Jews are booked in for early 

 January.” 

 

 This call to arms is not about defending the Australian way of life, it is a violent and 

 racist attack on the Australian community. Sheik Hilali ought to be condemned, so 

 should all those who issued a war cry on Australian beaches.  

 

 We all need to be able to discuss and debate what is acceptable in Australia without 

 resorting to violence. The resort to violence and intimidation in a civilised society 

 reduces combatants to moral equivalence.  

 

 As importantly, we should consider what governments can do to foster these values, 

 and to bring people into the circle. If we are serious about a fair go for all, this must 

 be reflected in our workplaces, in our social security system, in our health system; in 

 all the myriad of ways in which governments can affect the fabric of our society. 

 

 Instead of focusing on an English test as a barrier to entry, we should ensure that 

 migrants have the resources to learn English. As my colleague Annette Hurley has 

  10

 emphasised, the Government continues to under-resource English language teaching 

 for migrants, with funding simply not keeping pace with the higher refugee intake. 

 

 Finally, we should hold the Government to account for the disjunct between what it 

 says and what it does. The values it espouses are so often not the values it 

 implements. Yet, in our own lives we know we learn of another's values far more 

 from how they behave than what they say. 

 

 Howard speaks of the spirit of a fair go, while putting in place industrial relations 

 laws that strip away rights, and remove conditions. He speaks of compassion for those 

 in need while cutting the incomes of some of most vulnerable Australians families by 

 pushing many people with a disability and sole parents onto the dole. He speaks of 

 tolerance, then attacks hyphenated Australians. 

 

 His hypocrisy is breathtaking. 

 

 In 1995 John Howard stated: 

 

  “The Australian identity is the possession of all Australians. It ought not be the 

 political plaything of one or other side of politics.” 

 

 Yet this is the Prime Minister, and this is the government, that has consistently sought 

 to appropriate the Australian identity and Australian values for its political ends. 

 These are more than his playthings, they have become his political instruments.  

 

 Australian values are not the possession of any politician. They are not held under 

 lock and key in the Prime Minister’s office. They are the heart of our nation. They are 

 the unwritten rules that ordinary Australians live by. They speak to the New World’s 

 passion for democracy and justice; they acknowledge the lessons of our past. When a 

 politician talks to you about values, ask them not to express their values in words, but 

 in their actions. Better still, ask them to express your values in the decisions they 

 make every day in your name.  

 

 

  11

