---
title: "UNHCR concerned about possible implications of new legislation to strengthen border control measures."
date: "2006-04-19"
creators:
  - "United Nations"
source: "UNITED NATIONS REFUGEE AGENCY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292317
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9IEJ6%22
---

  19 April 2006 

  UNHCR concerned about possible implications of new  legislation to strengthen border control measures. 

  Echoing the statement made by UNHCR Headquarters in Geneva on 18  April, UNHCR’s Regional Office in Canberra today expressed concern at  the possible implications of proposed new ‘border control measures’  announced by the Immigration Minister late last week, which would involve 

  the transfer of all future ‘unauthorised boat arrivals’ to offshore processing  centres, in order to have their asylum claims processed. 

  UNHCR welcomes the Australian Government’s assurance that any new  legislation would reflect its commitment to international protection  obligations. However, it remains worried about the prospect that the  proposed changes might deflect elsewhere Australia’s responsibility to  ensure protection is available to bona fide refugees. Depending on the  details of the proposed changes, they could also amount to penalising 

  people who have directly fled persecution and exercised their right to seek  asylum in Australia. 

  UNHCR Regional Representative Mr Neil1 Wright said UNHCR is aware of  the difficulties governments face dealing with irregular arrivals in their  territories, including unauthorised boat arrivals. Nevertheless, a particular  concern with the new proposals is their stated aim that even persons who 

  land on the Australian mainland will be taken offshore for an assessment  of their claim. 

  “The Refugee Convention explicitly calls upon States not to penalise  refugees directly fleeing persecution and seeking asylum, ‘provided they  present themselves without delay to the authorities and show good cause  for their illegal entry or presence.”’ [Article 31, 1951 Convention Relating to the 

  Status of Refugees]“ 

  The widely adhered to practice of State signatories to the 1951 Refugee  Convention, like Australia, for asylum seekers is that they receive: 

  Acczss to a fair and efcient refagee stati;s deter.;iinatiorl  process to determine protection needs, implemented by the  competent state authority with the real possibility of timely and  appropriate solutions for those found to be refugees; 

  UNHCR Regional Office  15 Hunter St  Yarralumla,  ACT 2600  Australia 

  Tel: (+6l) 2 61201 104  Mob: (+61) 409501355  Fax: (+61) 62736822  www.unhcr.org.au 

  0 The exclusion of any possibility of refoulement - that is the 

  forced return of a person to a country where they face  persecution; and 

  0 That the asylum-seekers should be able to live in humane, 

  decent conditions which respect family unity while waiting for  their claims to be processed and a solution found. 

  Mr Wright urged the Government, in drafting any new legislation to ensure  appropriate safeguards are in place to ensure the rights of asylum-seekers  are respected. “It would be important that any new off-shore processing  arrangements meet the same standards Australia has previously set for its 

  own mainland processes, otherwise the alternative system could be  tantamount to a penalty for ‘illegal entry’,” said Mr Wright. 

  The new proposals also beg the question as to whether or not Australia  will in future undertake to provide protection to those asylum-seekers  processed in off-shore centres who are found to be refugees. It would  obviously be regrettable if one result of the changes would be refugees left 

  in limbo with no prospect of an appropriate solution within a reasonable  time frame. 

  “At a time when the number of asylum claims is in decline around the  world, and particularly in the absence of anything approximating a mass  influx, UNHCR is concerned about any precedent set by states with fully  functioning and credible asylum systems, which would have the effect of 

  deflecting elsewhere the responsibility to handle claims actually made on  their territories, as well as to find solutions,” said Mr Wright. 

  UNHCR has not been formally asked to play any specific role in the new  arrangements, but in keeping with its role under the 1951 Convention,  would welcome being approached to provide its comments on the  proposed changes to the Migration Act, and their refugee protection 

  implications. 

  Australia remains a valuable resettlement and global protection partner for  UNHCR. 

  Contact:  UNHCR: Ariane Rummery. 02 6?20 1104. 0409 501 355 

  UNHCR Concerned about possible implications of new legislation to strengthen border control  measures, I 9  April 2006, Page 2 2  

