---
title: "Time to change current refugee law, not just stop the new one."
date: "2006-06-15"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294052
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZB0K6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 15 June 2006 

 Press Release Number: wlihywxm  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 TIME TO CHANGE CURRENT REFUGEE LAW, NOT JUST STOP THE NEW ONE 

 Democrats Deputy Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett has introduced two Private Senator's Bills aimed at  reversing the existing law allowing the Federal Government to send asylum seekers to places such as  Nauru.   

 "There is widespread condemnation of the Government's current attempt to force all asylum seekers  who arrive by boat to Nauru, but there seems little realisation that the existing law already allows this to  occur for anyone who does not make it to the Australian mainland," Senator Bartlett said.   

 "The Labor Party is rightly saying that the Government's new law will harm people, but seems to be  ignoring the fact that the existing law which Labor supported has already harmed hundreds of people."   

 "All of the flaws that Government Senators identified in the proposed new law also apply to the existing  law. We must not only stop the new anti-refugee legislation from passing, we must start moving to repeal  the many flaws that already exist."    

 "My Bills will repeal the power to excise islands from Australia's Migration Zone, and remove the  Government's ability to remove asylum seekers to a 'designated third country' for processing outside the  reach of Australia's law.   

 "It is time to start laying out the specific legislative pathways to unwind the many destructive and  dangerous changes that have been to the Migration Act by both major parties over the last two decades.   

 "While there were positive signs last year of some momentum from the Government to reform the  Migration Act, this was clearly a brief respite in the Government's ongoing actions to destroy due  process and undermine basic rights and the rule of law."   

 "The aim of these bills are to provide a path for what needs to be done to reverse the numerous  provisions that have been introduced into the Migration Act over the last few decades which has  basically undermined the rule of law, restricted and removed the rights of refugees, asylum seekers and  migrants," said Senator Bartlett.   

 "This is what the Government should be doing - building on the momentum of true cultural change in  attitudes to asylum seekers and refugees instead of kowtowing to a foreign nation and letting foreign  policy take centre stage ahead of the protection of basic fundamental human rights.   

 "My bills are a challenge to other parties to support each of our bills in overturning the injustice that has  been met on refugees and asylum seekers. There has been enough talk, lets see some action," 

 concluded Senator Bartlett. 

