---
title: "The foreign policies of Robert Gordon Menzies and John Winston Howard: a comparison. [Paper presented at] Australian Historical Association Conference, Canberra, 3-7 July 2006"
date: "2006-07-03"
creators:
  - "Broinowski, Richard"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Foreign policy"
  - "MENZIES, Robert"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "Comparisons"
  - "Paper presented at"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295220
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VPDK6%22
---

  1

 Australian Historical Association Annual Conference   

 Canberra 3-7 July 2006   

 

 The Foreign Policies of Robert Gordon Menzies and John Winston Howard   

 A Comparison   

 By Richard Broinowski   

 

 

 

 Robert Menzies and John Howard operated as Australian Prime Ministers in two very  different eras. Menzies saw the country through the beginnings of a titanic struggle  between fascism and democracy, and then led it in the bipolar world of the Cold War 

 and post-war Asian de-colonisation. Howard shaped his foreign policies in the  unipolar post-Berlin Wall world of US hegemony with Australia engaged among  equal states in the Asian region. Yet the foreign policies of both leaders had  remarkably similar characteristics.   

 Defence Policies   

 In his first incumbency from 1939 to 1941, Menzies’ main preoccupation was to help  defend Britain from the Axis powers. He did this by becoming, as much as Churchill  allowed him to be, a de facto member of the British War Cabinet, and by sending a  large part of Australia’s Imperial Force to the Middle East to fight under British  command against Mussolini and Hitler. Menzies was out of office four months before  Japan attacked Pearl Harbour. Thus he did not have to manage the desperate  repatriation of Australian forces to the Pacific, which was the consequences of his  unfocused military profligacy.     

 During his second incumbency, Menzies saw his main foreign policy objective as  being to fight global Communism as far from Australia’s shores as possible. Beneath  his sentimental attachment to Britain, he was a realist, sceptical of the abstract,  looking for interest rather than principle as the motive for action. The best way to do  this was to support Australia’s two Great and Powerful friends (he coined the phrase),  Britain and the United States, especially in regional engagements. The hope and  expectation was that in return the friends would come to Australia’s assistance under  one or other of three defence treaties Menzies negotiated early in his second  incumbency - ANZAM, the Australia New Zealand and Malayan agreement in 1949,  ANZUS, the Australia, New Zealand and the United States Security Agreement in  1951, and SEATO, the South East Asia Security Treaty in 1954.    

 In pursuit of his ‘forward defence’ policy, Menzies sent Australian military forces to  two wars and two regional ‘police’ actions - to Korea during the war on that  peninsula between 1950 and 1953, to Malaya during the Emergency against local  Communist insurgents and Indonesian forces during Sukarno’s Konfrontasi between  1956 and the mid-1960s, and to the Vietnam War between 1965 and 1972. He also 

  2

 strongly supported an incursion by French and British forces into the Suez Canal zone  after President Nasser nationalised the Suez Canal Company in 1956, but wisely  refrained on that occasion from sending actual military forces.   

 Howard followed a similar pattern of military engagements. He sent Australian forces  to East Timor in 1999 to stop killings by Indonesian-backed militia after the Timorese  had supported independence from Indonesia, to Afghanistan in November 2001 as  part of a UN-supported intervention by the United States and various allies to defeat  the Taliban, and to Iraq in March 2003 as part of an illegal invasion by the United  States and its Coalition of the Willing to remove weapons of mass destruction  allegedly held by President Saddam Hussein.   

 In my view, Menzies and Howard engaged in their military activities with common  beliefs, expectations and strategies.    

 One belief was that Australia was incapable of defending itself against an attack from  a major power. Hence the need for a protector to whom insurance premiums must be  paid.    

 This led to a tendency to read into our security treaties a greater sense of obligation -  both by the protected and the protector - than is actually spelt out in the treaties.  ANZUS for example, did not, as Howard asserts, oblige Australia to join the United  States in its war on terror, any more than it requires the United States to provide  military assistance if Australia is attacked.       

 A strategy of both leaders has been to create fear among electors to convince them to  vote for conservative Liberal governments by exaggerating external threats to  Australia. Menzies was a master at exaggerating the Communist threat. He used it to  justify sending Australian forces to Korea, Vietnam, and into the Malayan Peninsula.  And Howard has exaggerated the threat of Islamic terrorism to justify sending forces  to Afghanistan and Iraq.   

 Coupled with this strategy has been a tendency by both leaders to send to their wars  only minimum forces, which any close analysis would show are not commensurate  with the threat Australia is supposed to be coping with. Thus, Menzies restricted  Australian forces to Vietnam to a maximum of three battalions plus Air Force and  naval units. And the ground forces were assigned to a comparatively peaceful  province, Phuoc Tuy, with ready access to a port in case evacuation became  necessary. And as the Fairfax correspondent Paul McGeogh has put it, Howard has  ensured that Australian forces in Iraq have been ordered to spend their time ducking  and weaving well away from the front line, while MPs at home huff and puff and  make po-faced speeches about ‘wartime leadership,’ ‘being at war’, and wining khaki  elections.   

 The result has been minimal Australian military casualties, and thus little or no  reaction from a disgruntled electorate. In Vietnam, for example, Australia sustained   500 military casualties, their American colleagues 58,000. In Iraq, we have so far  suffered no battle casualties, while the Americans have suffered over 2,500 and  counting, since what was supposed to have been a successful invasion.    

  3

 

 

 Other Common Characteristics    

 Asians are not like us   

 Menzies was attracted to what he characterised as a Circle of Light, white leaders led  by the British. He did not get on with India’s Prime Minister Nehru. He supported the  apartheid regime in South Africa under which Ghandi had suffered. He avoided  visiting Asian countries except when en route to somewhere else. He loved the  Commonwealth when the white Dominions dominated it. But when India became a  Republic and stayed within the Commonwealth, he strongly disapproved. He  disapproved again when Kwame Nkrumah , the President of Ghana, went to London  and became a Privy Councillor and then came home to declare Ghana a Republic.    

 On coming to power in 1996, Howard was keen to emphasise Australia’s traditional  links with Europe in general and Britain and the US in particular. He was anxious to  challenge the Labor view that Asia was Australia’s ‘true place’, or that Australia had  an Asia-Pacific future. He shed no tears when Indonesia unilaterally abrogated  Keating’s security treaty.    

 During his incumbency, Howard could not ignore, as could Menzies, the prime  importance of Asian nations to Australia, but he and his Foreign Minister, Alexander  Downer, could differentiate between their cultural, political and economic relevance.  In Beijing in April 2000, Downer sought, no doubt with Howard’s approval, to  distinguish ‘cultural regionalism’ from ‘practical realism’. To Howard, economic and  security concerns were all that relations with Asia were about, while political and  cultural closeness put relations with the US and UK on a different plane.        

 The fear of illegal immigrants   

 Menzies favoured the White Dominions. He favoured the White Australia policy  because he didn’t want to import racial conflict. He opposed the rise of black Africa  and non-white interference in South Africa. He had no time for what he characterised  as the noisy debate in Australia on these issues.   

 Since Menzies retired, Australia changed for the better. The nation became a rich and  successful mixture of racial and cultural influences, and Howard could not practise  racial exclusion policies even if he wanted to. But he fomented racial prejudices and  negativities about inter-racial issues. He kicked Pauline Hanson out of the Liberal  Party, but borrowed her views. When he was elected he abolished the Office of  Multicultural Affairs. He castigated ‘political correctness’. And during his first  overseas trip as Prime Minister, to Jakarta and Tokyo, Howard said no less than 16  times that Australia was not an Asian country. He has locked up illegal immigrants,  and in the Tampa affair, used the fear of the inundation of Australia by foreigners to  win successive elections.   

 

 Contempt for international organizations   

  4

 

 Menzies’ attitude to the United Nations is clear from observations he made in  Afternoon Light  about the Suez crisis. ‘It is, I suppose, unwise to be too positive  about that strange melange of disunited nations known as the UN. But clearly, so far  as the Suez Canal was concerned, no favourable action by the Security Council, with  the Soviet Union Nasser’s most vocal backer, possessing the veto, could be expected,  while the General Assembly, though notoriously disposed to arrogate to itself a sort of  executive authority since the ‘Uniting for Peace’ resolutions, has not been noted for  giving support to any old colonial power. In fact when the time came, it early relished  the opportunity of coming down in favour of Nasser.’    

 In some other respects, Menzies allowed Australia to be a fairly responsible and  useful member of the organization, but Howard’s record is altogether more sombre.  He participated in the illegal invasion of Iraq in defiance of the Security Council, and  has adopted the doctrine, illegal in international law, of pre-emptive strikes. He  refused to ratify the Kyoto Protocol, or protocols on the Rights of the Child, to end all  forms of discrimination against women, on torture. He rejected the Human Rights  Committee’s reports on Australia’s treatment of indigenous people and refugees. He  sanctioned  Australia’s non-attendance at the UN Racism Conference in Durban, and  did not attend the Millenium Summit. He has apparently connived in the AWB’s  defiance of UN Oil for Food sanctions.    

 From being a good international citizen, (Gareth Evan’s characterisation of  Australia’s international record), Australia’s reputation under Howard has been  degraded to that of a nation determined to flout the rules of international cooperation.  Australia has not been elected to a non-permanent seat on the Security Council since  the 1970s.   

 Conclusion   

 Menzies and Howard both conned the electorate - Menzies about Communism,  Howard about revolutionary Islam.    

 

 

 

