---
title: "New arrivals highlight the need for tough border security."
date: "2006-08-14"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296884
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1CLK6%22
---

  Media Release  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  181.06 Monday 14 August 2006 

  New Arrivals Highlight the Need for Tough Border Security  Eight unlawful entrants were intercepted late yesterday at Ashmore Reef after appearing  to have been dumped by people smugglers, Minister for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs, Amanda Vanstone, said. 

  The eight unlawful entrants have been taken aboard HMAS Albany for processing, where  they’ll commence health and identity checks. 

  The group was spotted by Coastwatch and the HMAS Albany picked them up. The group  is being transferred to the HMAS Darwin for transportation to Christmas Island. From  there they will be flown to Nauru. 

  “They are being taken to Christmas Island for final health checks and, as the group arrived  unlawfully at an excised place, they will be taken to Nauru for processing,” Senator  Vanstone said. 

  “If, as expected, this group was dumped by people smugglers, this is an example of why  our tough border security stance is a necessity. 

  “People smugglers exploit the vulnerable for cash and abandon them. People smugglers  are motivated by profit, not humanity. 

  “This Government has been highly successful in stemming the tide of unlawful arrivals by  boat, allowing us to welcome more refugees most in need from camps throughout the  world. But this arrival is a timely reminder that the threat of people smuggling remains with  us and requires constant vigilance and determination. 

  “Despite Labor’s decision not to support a further strengthening of Australia’s border  protection arrangements, the Government remains committed to a vigorous enforcement  of our territorial sovereignty and our successful system of offshore processing. 

  “We are getting on with the job of ensuring that there are appropriate and effective  capabilities in place to manage our borders and preserve Australia’s sovereignty. 

  “Under existing law, if these people had landed on the Australian mainland and were found  not to be genuine refugees, they would be able to stay in Australia for many years  challenging that determination through the courts. 

  “The Government’s proposed Designated Unauthorised Arrivals legislation would have  meant all unauthorised boat arrivals would have been treated the same. 

  “In contrast Labor’s approach to off-shore processing is piece-meal and inconsistent -  offering an incentive for people smugglers to continue attempting to breach our borders.” 

  Minister’s media contact: 0417 445 886 

