---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: House of Representatives, Canberra: 11 May 2006: Migration Amendment (Designated Unauthorised Arrivals) Bill 2006."
date: "2006-05-11"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Migration Amendment (Designated Unauthorised Arrivals) Bill 2006."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292489
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KZLJ6%22
---

 

 Tony Burke, MP   Shadow Minister for Immigration   

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW :  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,  CANBERRA   THURSDAY 11 MAY 2006, 10.30am   

 SUBJECT:  Migration Amendment (Designated Unauthorised Arrivals)            Bill 2006 

 

 E&OE-PROOF ONLY   

 TONY BURKE:  The Government has now introduced their migration  amendment.  This is what the appeasement of Indonesia looks like in black and  white.  There is no way of amending this bill to improve it.  There is no way of  amending this bill to make it anything other than the callous attempt to appease  Indonesia.     

 This bill makes clear that the Liberal moderates have not been given the  concessions they asked for and a bill has been presented where you cannot  move amendments which will fix this problem because the asylum seekers will  find themselves in another country.  And once you are in another country you can  lock up children, you can hold people indefinitely.  There is no way of delivering  case managed mental health care.  There is no way of having the oversight of 

 the Commonwealth Ombudsman.     

 The reforms that were introduced last year die with the passage of this bill.   

 There is one way and one way only to prevent the impact of this bill and this is to  oppose it.     

 Labor will not be moving any amendments to this bill.  Labor will be voting  against this bill at every stage in whatever form it appears by the end of the  debate.  But there is nothing you can do with this bill to save it.  This is bad  legislation, where the principle of it is wrong and the motivation for it is  unforgivable.     

 Journalist:  How dark a day is this in Australia’s history do you think?   

 TONY BURKE:  Never before in Australia’s history has a Government wanted to  pretend that we have no borders.  That’s what’s happening now.  We are not  excising an island here or there.  The Government’s approach to border  protection now is to pretend that Australia has no borders at all.  No Government 

 in Australia’s history has tried to contemplate something as illogical and appalling  as that.   

 Journalist:  What will mean for Australia’s future relations with Indonesia  (inaudible)?   

 TONY BURKE:  In the end this won’t do the job of fixing relationships with  Indonesia because what will happen at the end with Indonesia is every time we  try appeasement, the claims go one step further.  There wasn’t a demand for an  apology from Indonesia when the visas were first issued.  There wasn’t a  demand for the visas to be cancelled.  The extra demands from Indonesia came 

 the moment this Government went down a path of appeasement.  What we  should have done is Australia should have treated Indonesia the way Indonesia  treats Australia.  When we haven’t liked the operation of their criminal law, 

 Indonesia has said to us:  well they might be your citizens, but this is our legal  system.  When Indonesia didn’t like our immigration law, we offered to change it.   

 Journalist:  Is there any inconsistency with Labor agreeing to excise certain  islands and then objecting to wide-scale excision?   

 TONY BURKE:  No because the islands we supported were Cocos (Keeling),  Christmas Island and Ashmore Reef.  Boats that were heading towards those  islands were heading away from the rest of Australia.  There were people  smuggling operations which would not have taken place were it not for those  being within the migration zone.  But they were the only three parts of Australian  territory in that category.     

 Journalist:  What should happen to the three Papuans who were intercepted last  week?   

 TONY BURKE:  They should be processed in Australia and processed under  Australian law.  That is what should happen.  It should be at arms length.  I don’t  pre-judge whether or not they have refugee claims, politicians shouldn’t make  that decision.  That decision should be made at arms-length on the merits of the  case.   

 Journalist:  Andrew Robb says it’s incongruous that people arriving on one island  could be processed off-shore, but if they make it another thirty metres, they have  to be processed on the mainland and that is what this bill does, it clears up that  incongruity.  What do you say to that?   

 TONY BURKE:  It is an incongruity created by the Government.  They decided  the moment they had control of the Senate to excise islands that were thirty  metres off-shore.  That inconsistency is an invention of the Government.  They  can’t then use one bad policy to justify going further with a disastrous policy.   

 END    

 

