---
title: "Queenslanders focus on harmony."
date: "2006-03-02"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Harmony Day"
  - "Queensland"
  - "Grants"
  - "Multiculturalism"
  - "Community development"
  - "Day, year and decade programs"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211290289
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WHXI6%22
---

 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

 

 Media Centre 

 Queenslanders Focus on Harmony  Prominent businessperson and member of the Australian  Government ’s Council for Multicultural Australia, Sarina Russo, will  today host a forum designed to raise awareness of initiatives to  promote community harmony in Queensland.  

 This forum will focus on the Department of Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs ’ Living in Harmony program which seeks to  address issues of racism at the local level. It also marks the start of  activities throughout Queensland in the lead-up to Harmony Day on  21 March. 

 The Living in Harmony program started in 1999 and in 2006 six  Queensland community organisations received $187 271 in grant  funding. 

 Grant holders will discuss their plans and achievements at today ’s  forum. The 2006 Queensland grants include:  

 ? The Bayside Adolescent Boarding has a grant for its  Welcoming the Strangers program. This provides  information and cross cultural training for real estate  agents dealing with African refugee families settling in  Brisbane.  

 ? Brisbane City Council ’s It ’s Not All Black and White project  is responding to discrimination directed at African refugees  settling in the City.  

 ? Harmony Hockey Art - We Are All Playing on the Same  Team is Hockey Queensland ’s initiative to use  relationships, workshops and art to find solutions to issues  of prejudice on hockey fields throughout the State.  

 ? Engaging Multicultural Australia - Communities in  Conversation is an initiative of the Synod of the Dioceses of  Brisbane. It focuses on cross-cultural understanding  between recently arrived African communities and  residents in south-west Brisbane.  

 ? The grant awarded to the Women ’s Multicultural Choir in 

 Toowoomba will showcase the musical diversity of 

 Indigenous, Sudanese, Anglo Celtic and other migrant  women living in Toowoomba.  

 ? The Townsville Multicultural Support Group in partnership  with Queensland Women ’s Health Network is working to  increase mutual understanding between new migrants from  Africa, Afghanistan, Iraq and the Pacific Islands and the  broader Townsville community.  

 Already over 500 Queensland Harmony Day events are registered  on the website. 

 For details of these events visit the What ’s On section of  www.harmony.gov.au 

 Harmony Day on 21 March is the Australian Government initiative  bringing Australians together and encouraging people to say ‘no ‘ to  discrimination and racism.  

 2 March 2006 

 

