---
title: "Forrest makes stand on principle."
date: "2006-08-11"
creators:
  - "Forrest, John, (1949-)"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of FORREST, JOHN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296813
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0OJK6%22
---

 

 Media Contact Sally Turvey  (03) 5032 4510  -ends- 

 

 Friday, 11 August 2006 

 FORREST MAKES STAND ON PRINCIPLE  John Forrest, The Nationals Federal Member for Mallee today stands behind his decision to  abstain from voting yesterday in Parliament House in Canberra on the Migration  Amendment Bill. 

 “I have thought long and hard for an extended period of time, particularly over the winter  break, on what I would do.  This legislation is something that I believe is wrong for our  country; morally, spiritually and ethically.  We cannot continue to put these people out of  sight and mind - they are people just like you and I,” said Mr Forrest. 

 “Over many years I have developed a consideration and respect for the refugees who  choose to live and work in North West Victoria.  They have experienced atrocities that most  Australians, thankfully could never fathom.  They are decent people and my Australia is  egalitarian and based on a fair go for everybody, I just don’t think sticking them overseas,  offshore somewhere is a fair go.” 

 “Yes, I want to see strong border control.  Much has been done and the boats have  stopped.  There is no urgency for this Bill.” 

 “As a result of my personal convictions on this legislation, and my gesture in abstaining from  the ballot yesterday, I offered my resignation before the vote, as Chief Whip of The  Nationals.  As keeper of the discipline which is the traditional Westminster role of the Whip,  if you can’t keep the discipline yourself, then it makes a mockery of the office; as such Mark  Vaile, Leader of The Nationals has had no alternative but to accept that resignation.” 

 Mr Forrest said that he continues to remain committed to his electorate of Mallee.  “I will  continue to represent the people of North West Victoria with determination.  There is still  much to work on and as always I remain steadfast in my resolve to help the community to  work through the tough issues such as aged care, our regional road network, the Toxic  Waste Dump at Nowingi, the horticultural industry crisis in Sunraysia, the completion of the  Wimmera Mallee Pipeline and the ongoing impact of drought throughout the Wimmera  Mallee, as well as many many other issues.”   

 “I also remain 100% committed to the Howard Vaile Government which has delivered strong  administration for the Nation’s benefit.” 

 “We’ve just had a difference of opinion on something I feel very strongly about,” Mr Forrest  concluded. 

 

 John Forrest MP The Nationals Member for Mallee     

 

 Phone (03) 5032 4510         Fax (03) 5032 9407 

 

