---
title: "West Papuan asylum seekers must receive fair hearing."
date: "2006-05-09"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211555716
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7KLJ6%22
---

 

 

 senator.bartlett@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA                      TUESDAY 9 MAY 2006 

 SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT    SENATOR NATASHA STOTT DESPOJA  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS DEPUTY LEADER   DEMOCRATS FOREIGN AFFAIRS SPOKESPERSON 

 WEST PAPUAN ASYLUM SEEKERS MUST RECEIVE  FAIR HEARING  Democrats' Deputy Leader and spokesperson for Immigration, Senator Andrew Bartlett, has slammed  the Government's move to avoid responsibility for the latest group of 3 West Papuans asylum seekers. 

 "The Immigration Minister's stated desire to send them back to Papua New Guinea or else detain them  offshore undermines the Refugee Convention and runs a real risk of their asylum claims not being fairly  assessed," Senator Bartlett said.  

 "They must be brought onshore and processed under the Migration Act instead of being processed  elsewhere." 

 "It is hard to see how these West Papuans can get a fair hearing from the Immigration Department when  just a week ago the Minister said 'It is the Government’s strong preference that protection is not offered in  Australia to Papuan separatists'." 

 "The Minister also made the inflammatory and ignorant statement that West Papuans supporting self-determination were racists." 

 "The Minister has displayed undeniable and unreasonable bias towards West Papuan asylum seekers,  putting her Departmental officers in an impossible position when they assess claims that they know will  not be able to be appealed to any independent body." 

 "It is highly offensive and inappropriate for the Minister to undermine the Migration Act she is meant to be  overseeing, and engaging in political point scoring games to appease Indonesia, while using refugees as  pawns to be demonised and denied due legal process," Senator Bartlett said. 

 Democrats' Foreign Affairs Spokesperson Senator Natasha Stott Despoja said Australia must act to  address the human rights abuses in West Papua, which were contributing to the growing number of West  Papuans seeking asylum in countries including Australia. 

 Media contact - Senator Andrew Bartlett - 0418 743 789 

 Media contact for Senator Stott Despoja - Raina Hunter - 0417 085 260 

