---
title: "Refugees welcomed to Hobart."
date: "2006-02-17"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Burundi"
  - "Tasmania"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Congo (Democratic Republic)"
  - "Refugee camps"
  - "Tanzania"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211289643
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/84TI6%22
---

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Media Centre

 Refugees Welcomed to Hobart

 Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Amanda Vanstone, today sent her welcome to18 newly arrived African refugees - including  three families - who touched down in Hobart to start a new life.

 ‘I am sure all Tasmanians would join me in welcoming these refugees and wishing them well for their new lives in Australia,’ the Minister said.

 ‘Some of these people have endured appalling conditions in refugee camps in Tanzania for many years. For many of the children, Hobart will be  home after only knowing life in a refugee camp.

 ‘All Australians can be very proud that we are able to provide the opportunity for a new life for some of the most vulnerable people in the world.  The Australian Government is committed to providing protection to those that need it most.’

 The refugees are among almost 700 who are arriving in Australia this month - the highest number of any month this financial year.

 The 700 arriving this month are some of the 6000 refugees arriving this year under the Refugee and Humanitarian Program. The program provides  6000 refugee and 7000 humanitarian places each year, putting Australia in the top three countries (along with US and Canada) for providing  permanent humanitarian resettlement.

 The refugees being welcomed to Hobart today fled to refugee camps in Tanzania from Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo. They were  referred to Australia for resettlement by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who we work with closely to determine which  refugees are in greatest need of Australia’s protection.

 ‘They have been receiving intensive settlement support both from the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Services provider Centacare since  arriving in Hobart this week, including help setting up a home, cultural orientation assistance and links to essential services such as Medicare,’ the  Minister said.

 ‘They are being formally welcomed today - 72 hours after arrival - after having been given a chance to recover from their journey and ‘catch their  breath,’ she added.

 Members of this group will initially be settling in Hobart’s northern suburbs. 

 In total, about 40 refugees are scheduled to arrive in Tasmania this month, including a group of 11 Liberian refugees to be resettled in Launceston.

 Since July 2005, about 190 humanitarian entrants have arrived in Tasmania.

 17 February 2006

 See:

