---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra; 10 August 2006: Migration Amendment Designated Unauthorised Arrivals Bill."
date: "2006-08-10"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Migration Amendment (Designated Unauthorised Arrivals) Bill 2006"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Bills"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296782
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EMIK6%22
---

 TRANSCRIPT 

 TONY BURKE MP   

 Member for Watson 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  THURSDAY 10 AUGUST 2006 1PM  Subject:  Migration Amendment Designated Unauthorised Arrivals Bill.   

 E&OE-PROOF ONLY   

 Tony Burke:  The migration amendments as you know have now passed the House of  Representatives.  This was always going to be a two-round fight.  Round one has gone to  the appeasement of Indonesia.  Round one has gone to turning a blind eye to whether or  not children are locked up, to whether or not people are indefinitely detained, to whether  or not Australian sovereignty is more important than Indonesian sovereignty.   

 But it was always going to be a two-round fight.  The second round is in the Senate.  It  will go there forthwith and once in the Senate, I hope that we see what we should have  seen this time and that is for every Member of the Australian Parliament to show the  same principles they believed in 12 months ago.     

 Twelve months ago they believed that legislation like this was unthinkable.  In 2002 the  Prime Minister described exactly legislation like this as being ludicrous.  Right now it’s  in the process of becoming Australian law and the Senate is all that stands between  Australian standards of decency and the outright appeasement of Indonesia.   

 Journalist:  We saw three people cross the floor just then.  Do you expect the Liberal  Senators or Coalition Senators to cross the floor in the Senate?   

 Tony Burke:  I expect every Member of Parliament to show the same principles they  showed last year.  Unfortunately we only had three Members of the Coalition in the  House of Representatives who were willing to do that.  But I don’t understand how  anyone can hold a view that it’s wrong to lock up children in Australia, but it really  doesn’t matter if they do it in Nauru.     

 Journalist:  Given you say it is appeasing Indonesia, how strongly do you think is the  pressure from Indonesia lobbying the Government on this?   

 Tony Burke:  Well they did their lobbying right at the beginning.  Right at the beginning  they withdrew their Ambassador.  Right at the beginning Indonesia made their point very  clear as to what they expected and instead of the Australian Government standing up for  the Australian legal system, John Howard said “Ok, if you don’t like our laws we will 

 change them”.  Indonesia never would treat Australia that way.  They expect us to respect  their legal system.  We should demand no less.   

 Journalist:  You have been in discussions with Senator Fielding about what his plans of  attack are.  Are you going to move on and target some other Liberal Senators like Judith  Troeth?   

 Tony Burke:  I don’t know that it is helpful for Labor’s Shadow Immigration Minister to  be lobbying individual Coalition Members.  And so my focus was on meeting with  Senator Fielding- that conversation went very well.  But every Member of the Coalition  has in front of them a unanimous Senate report.  A unanimous Senate report chaired by a  Coalition Member which has recommendation number one: the bill should not be  proceeded with.  I think there is nothing I can say which will be more influential than  that.   

 Journalist:  There seems to be some suggestion that the Bill will be tried to pass through  the Senate today.  Is that your understanding?   

 Tony Burke:  I haven’t been told that.  I don’t know that.  The Government clearly wants  to shutdown this debate.  They clearly haven’t liked the way it has been running through  the Australian public and the Australian media.  That’s why they’ve gagged 20 Labor  speakers today.  Twenty Labor Members of Parliament were silenced today and were not  given the opportunity to put their objections to the Bill on the record.  The Government  wants to silence us and they want to do that in a context where they are willing to listen  endlessly to Indonesia and the development of the Bill.   

 Journalist:  Given the level of feeling we saw outside Parliament today how much hope  do you have that Judith Troeth or any other Senators are willing to cross the floor?   

 Tony Burke:  As I say, I still can’t comprehend that we are dealing with a situation of it  being crossing the floor.  All I am asking is for every Member of the Coalition to vote  consistently with principles that they all claimed to be proud of a year ago.   

 END   

 Media Contact:  Maria Iannotti 0408 274 696   

 

 

