---
title: "Proposed new migration laws would have seen 43rd West Papuan refugee sent to persecution."
date: "2006-08-01"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296284
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8YIK6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales   

 

 Proposed new migration laws would have seen 43rd West  Papuan refugee sent to persecution 

 Senator Nettle, 1st August 2006   

 Greens Immigration spokesperson Senator Kerry Nettle today welcome the Refugee  Review Tribunal's decision to accept David Wainggai's claim for asylum and warned  that had the new migration laws due to come before the Senate been passed earlier  then Mr Wainggai would have been returned to face persecution in West Papua.    

 "Mr Wainggai should never have spent half a year in detention. Senator Vanstone  should apologise for her department's flawed and cruel approach to his case which the  Refugee Review Tribunal has found to have no legal basis." Senator Nettle said.    

 "This decision should act as a warning to all Senators that the proposed new migration  laws would result in miscarriages of justice and human tragedies because refugees  like Mr Wainggai would not have access to the Refugee Review Tribunal to review  their claims.    

 "The Department of Immigration should now move as quickly as possible to grant Mr  Wainggai a protection visa and bring him to the mainland to be reunited with his  friends, family and supporters.    

 "David Wainggai always had one of the strongest cases for protection and so for the  government to attempt to reject his case on a flimsy technicality leaves the impression  of political interference in refugee processing.    

 "I have just returned from visiting West Papuan refugees in Papua New Guinea where  many suffer in difficult conditions in remote refugee camps. For Australia to attempt  to reject West Papuan asylum seekers and send then home or into these camps is  simply cruel.    

 "The Greens will be opposing the new migration legislation and urge all Senators to  join us in defeating what is a legally, morally and politically flawed piece of  legislation."    

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

