---
title: "DIMA plan charts course for coming year."
date: "2006-07-19"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295761
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BPCK6%22
---

 Media Centre 

 DIMA Plan Charts Course For Coming Year 

 19 July 2006 

 The Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (DIMA) today launched the DIMA  Plan for 2006/07, exactly one year after the appointment of its new Secretary, Andrew  Metcalfe and following the recruitment of more than 30 new senior executives.  

 The Plan , which outlines strategic priorities for the coming year - implementing the $495  million IT programme Systems for People , the Client Service Improvement Programme and  the Palmer Plus package - is designed not only to lead and guide the 6000-strong  department but also to further build community and stakeholder confidence.  

 "Trust in the department; trust in its leadership, values and cultures; and trust in its  organisational capability are critical to DIMA's success," Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs, Amanda Vanstone, said today.  

 "The department's longer term planning has been informed by the findings of the Palmer  Report on Cornelia Rau and the Comrie Report on Vivian Alvarez, as well as other reports by  the Ombudsman and Australian National Audit Office. It has also taken into account  comprehensive staff and client surveys over the past 12 months."  

 Senator Vanstone said DIMA is implementing a comprehensive reform and improvement  programme to successfully deliver the Government's migration, refugee, humanitarian,  citizenship, border security, multicultural affairs and settlement programmes.  

 "The Government has provided substantial resources to implement positive change in DIMA  - nearly $780 million in additional and redirected funding over five years," the Minister said.  

 "There has already been extensive change within DIMA. I am confident the department is  on track but there is still much to be done.  

 "For instance, Systems for People has a strategic partner (IBM) on board and work is now  well underway on this major IT applications and infrastructure project.  

 "The first students commenced with the College of Immigration on 3 July. Services and  infrastructure for immigration detainees have greatly improved. The department recently  launched its Client Service Improvement Programme and Client Service Charter and many  other initiatives are in place or are being developed.  

 "They provide a sound basis for the work DIMA needs to do in 2006-07 and beyond.  

 "The onshore compliance plan is providing a nationally-managed emphasis on visa  compliance and visa decisions relating to character issues.  

 "The launch of the DIMA Plan for the coming year is a very strong signal to me and to the 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Border Protection Migration Program Humanitarian Program Multicultural Affairs Home Minister's Profile Contact the Minister Media Centre 

  

  wider Australian community that DIMA has a clear strategy to progressively improve its  performance and a strong commitment to service excellence."  

  Minister’s media contact: 0417 445 886 

  See:  Index of Media Releases 

  | Home | Search | Links | Copyright & Disclaimer | Privacy | Site Map | Immigration  Department | 

  URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media_releases/media06/v06169.htm   Last update: 19 July 2006 at 12:34 AEST  

  

  

