---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: House of Representatives, Canberra: 30 March 2006: Commonwealth Ombudsman’s Report; Mr X; Amanda Vanstone."
date: "2006-03-30"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Mental disorders"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Dept of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs"
  - "Commonwealth Ombudsman’s Report"
  - "Mr X"
  - "Amanda Vanstone."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291575
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TL7J6%22
---

 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 

 TONY BURKE MP 

 

 Member for Watson   Shadow Minister for Immigration   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP:  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,  CANBERRA  THURSDAY 30 MARCH 2006 

 

 Subject:  Commonwealth Ombudsman’s Report, Mr X, Amanda Vanstone.   

 E& OE PROOF ONLY   

 Tony  Burke:  The Government has tabled yet another Ombudsman’s report of the  continued turnstile of incompetence of how people have been treated by the Australian  Immigration Department.     

 The worst of those cases is the first one.  A 33-year-old man, who is mentally and  physically ill, his health is worse because of the six years he spent in detention - he is  Australia’s longest serving detainee.   

 The Department was seriously contemplating deporting him to Bangladesh.  Even though  Bangladesh has said they don’t recognise him, even though there was medical advice that  because he is a chronic diabetic and insulin dependent, he would be dead within two to  three weeks of arriving in Bangladesh.   

 It should have been unthinkable for it to even be on the table that this man would be  deported to Bangladesh.  To deport a man who is mentally and physically ill in the  certain knowledge that he would be stateless on arrival and dead within two to three  weeks is something that no government department should ever put on the table.   

 Amanda Vanstone has a few different options in front of her in terms of visas or how she  handles this.  But deporting him to Bangladesh should be ruled out and ruled out  immediately.    

 Journalist:  What should happen?  Should he be granted a permanent visa?  That is what  the Ombudsman has recommended.   

 Tony Burke:  The Ombudsman’s recommendations make sense.  And so based on the  information that’s been provided publicly, that is what should be done.  But the most  important thing is that the pathway should be to treatment.  He is not a well man and I 

 don’t want to see Immigration do what they did with the case of Mr T that was reported  last week, where they decided to give him permanency- or in that case they realised he  was a citizen- they just give him some money and push him straight out the front door of 

 the detention centre.  There is a responsibility from Immigration to be part of the  treatment process.  They can’t keep treating people with mental illness the way they have  been.   

 Journalist:  The Minister says that a lot has been done within the Department now to  address the problems  (inaudible) … Do you think enough has been done?   

 

 Tony Burke:  I think it is important I acknowledge it’s better than it was.  It’s better than  where we were at 12 months ago.  I still find there is a constant theme with every one of  these cases and that is the Department seems incapable of treating people with mental  illness with decency.  That common thread I am yet to see evidence that it has really  improved. 

 

 Journalist:  But isn’t it the detention that is causing mental illness?   

 Tony Burke:  It’s in both cases.  Vivian Solon never saw the inside of a detention centre.   There are still problems with the way they deal with people who are mentally ill in the  first place and the second problem is they then aggravate it through the detention process.   It’s actually both.  The inability of the Department under Amanda Vanstone’s leadership  to deal with people with mental illness with any decency is an ongoing problem and that  part of it I haven’t seen improved.   

 END   

 

 Media Contact: Maria Iannotti 0408 274 696 or (02) 9554 3808   

 

 

