---
title: "Greens welcome damning report into new migration law."
date: "2006-06-13"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211293919
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8C0K6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales   

 

 Greens welcome damning report into new migration law 

 Senator Nettle, 13th June 2006 

 The Australian Greens welcomed the committee report into the new migration laws  (designated unauthorised arrivals) saying the report damned both the policy of  appeasement and the unaccountability and cruelty of offshore processing. 

 "This report sends a clear message to the government and the backbench that this law  represents an unacceptable deviation from the rule of law we expect in Australia and a  rejection of the policy of appeasement towards Indonesia," said Immigration  spokesperson for the Australian Greens, Senator Nettle. 

 "All the submissions and witnesses, except the Department of Immigration,  recommended that the bill not proceed and warned of serious breaches of the refugee  convention and human rights if it did proceed. 

 "All parties involved in this inquiry recommended that the bill not proceed. We  commend the chair and the courage of the government members who signed onto the  report. 

 "The 74% opposition to the laws in a recent Newspoll shows the public clearly concur  with the experts that provided evidence to the committee that these laws are draconian  and that appeasement of Indonesia over West Papua is a bad strategy." 

 "The Senate must listen to the public's overwhelming opposition and heed this  committee report and reject this bad law and the appeasers in Cabinet. 

 The Australian Greens recommend: 

 1. that the Bill should be opposed in its entirety on the basis that offshore  processing of asylum seekers is fundamentally flawed, the policy contravenes  the letter and spirit of the Refugee Convention and amounts to cruel and  unusual punishment of innocent people, and is based on an appalling foreign  policy decision designed to appease the Indonesia government;  

 2. that the government ends the policy of the Australian Navy intercepting and  returning boats of asylum seekers on the open sea because of the high danger  of refoulement (in the case of West Papuans direct refoulement) of refugees;   3. that the government acknowledge that Papua New Guinea does not have the 

 capacity to process large numbers of asylum seekers nor offer all refugees a  durable protection solution. Therefore Australia should not return asylum  seekers arriving in Australia via Papua New Guinea until they have undergone  a full protection visa determination process on the Australian mainland.   4. that the Australian Government immediately bring the two remaining refugees 

 on Nauru to Australia and permanently close the offshore processing camps on  both Nauru and Manus Island.  

 Contact Jon Edwards 0428 213 146  

