---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 8 August 2006: Processing of refugee claims: allegations of people being killed in Afghanistan; Migration Amendment Designated Unauthorised Arrivals Bill."
date: "2006-08-08"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Migration Amendment (Designated Unauthorised Arrivals) Bill 2006"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Processing of refugee claims: allegations of people being killed in Afghanistan"
  - "Migration Amendment Designated Unauthorised Arrivals Bill."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296602
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MLHK6%22
---

 TRANSCRIPT 

 TONY BURKE MP   

 Member for Watson 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY 8 AUGUST 2006  Subject:  Processing of Refugee claims- allegations of people being killed in  Afghanistan, Migration Amendment Designated Unauthorised Arrivals Bill.   

 E&OE-PROOF ONLY   

 

 Tony Burke:  The allegations on Lateline last night are as serious as it gets.  You realise  when you hear claims of people being returned and being killed just what the stakes are  in any refugee claim.     

 If you get it wrong, then people do return to persecution.  If you get it wrong, people do  lose their lives.  There is more detail to come out on this but the most important thing is  as Amanda Vanstone conducts her investigations she mustn’t be defensive on this one.   Amanda Vanstone should not approach this one trying to make sure that the Government  covers its record.     

 This information could not be more serious, the outcomes could not be more frightening.     

 What we want out of this is something that goes way beyond any defence of current  policy.  What we want out of this is a guarantee that this, if it has happened the way it has  been reported, never happens again.   

 And if you want to make sure that this doesn’t happen again, the first thing you do is you  say ‘We will not send people to be processed in Nauru.  We will not put people beyond  the reach of Australian law.’  Every check and balance matters and when you get rid of  checks and balances, you radically increase the likelihood that people will be returned  and they will be returned to danger.   

 Journalist:  On the Minister’s position though, they are unsourced and unnamed people  that have apparently been killed, how difficult is her position seeing as she has had  similar claims before which she has had trouble investigating?   

 Tony Burke:  And that’s why I don’t think she should be defensive about it.  What she  should do is take the claims seriously.  My understanding is that the Edmund Rice  Centre, which has undergone the investigations, is wanting to share all the information  that it is able to.  My understanding is a lot of that information has already been shared.   What Amanda Vanstone shouldn’t do is say ‘Oh what more can I do these are difficult 

 claims to follow.’  Yes they are difficult, but the stakes of getting it wrong are just  unthinkable.  And so I appreciate the Minister’s in a difficult position but she mustn’t be  defensive.  What we don’t want is an outcome that ends with the deaths of people.     

 Journalist:  Russell Broadbent walked through earlier and maintained that he and his  colleagues, the moderates, haven’t changed their position.  What would your message be  to them?   

 Tony Burke:  Good on them and I can’t understand why the Prime Minister ever changed  his position.  I don’t understand why John Howard decided that it was wrong to lock  children up in Australia but 12 months later said it didn’t really matter that much if he did  it in Nauru.  And if John Howard wants another argument as to why these changes  shouldn’t go through, it’s the argument that has come out in the last 24 hours.  You want  to make sure you’ve got your checks and balances; you want to make sure you don’t  return people to danger.     

 Sending people to Nauru throws a whole lot of checks and balances out- takes them  beyond the reach of Australian law.  So, there is an extra argument there that you didn’t  have before.  What Russell Broadbent and the Liberal moderates are doing to their credit  is saying ‘Everything we believed in 12 months ago we believe in now.’  If nobody does  a back-flip, the law can’t pass.     

 END.   

 Media Contact:  Maria Iannotti 0408 274 696   

 

 

