---
title: "The liberal tradition: Address to the Murray Hill Society of the University of Adelaide: 4 October 2006"
date: "2006-10-04"
creators:
  - "Georgiou, Petro"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "HILL, Murray, (MLC, SA)"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
  - "Liberalism"
  - "HILL, Robert"
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Former Members families"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298914
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WM5L6%22
---

 The Liberal Tradition   

 

 Address by Petro Georgiou given to the Murray Hill Society of the University of  Adelaide on Wednesday October 4, 2006.   

 

 Ladies and gentlemen,    

 It is a privilege to be invited here this afternoon to deliver the inaugural Murray Hill  lecture.    

 I would like to take this opportunity to canvass some thoughts about Liberal Party  tradition, not least because Murray Hill exemplified one of its vital streams.    

 Hill was a strong believer in tolerance and personal liberty and in his political career  acted to further those commitments.    

 In 1972, whilst Hill was a member of the Liberal and Country League, he introduced  a private Member’s bill in the South Australian parliament to decriminalise  homosexuality in South Australia.    

 Speaking from personal experience, private Members’ bills can be difficult creatures.    

 An amended version of Murray Hill’s bill passed the South Australian parliament in  1972 providing for the first time in Australia that homosexual acts in private were  made “if not exactly legal no longer entirely illegal.” 

 

 It was a significant achievement for Murray Hill.    

 The pursuit of convictions, a strong commitment to tolerance and individual liberty  places Hill firmly in the mould of the liberal tradition.   

  Hill was also a bearer of that tradition in the fundamental sense - he transmitted it by  personal example in his public life and also to his offspring and through them to  others.    

 After a quarter of a century as a Senator, Murray Hill’s son, Senator Robert Hill, said  in his valedictory speech that he had always leant to the liberal side of the Party:   

 “Maybe because my parents, while personally conservative were always tolerant of  the choices of others.”    

 Robert Hill’s tentativeness about the sources of his commitment is characteristic of  the frequent uncertainty surrounding the origins of traditions. But he does underscore  tradition’s importance to political parties. 

 

 Politicians and political parties are moulded by the inheritance of the past.    

 Traditions influence behaviour even if their force is not always recognised.  

  1 

 

 The images projected by history influence why people join one party rather than  another. Political parties draw strength and direction from their past. Traditions  influence how they behave and evaluate actions and their outcomes, what appropriate  values are, how to judge achievements, failures and lost opportunities.   

 For those who doubt the power of tradition in a rationalist age consider briefly the  Liberal party room at its simplest and most passionate.    

 New members uninformed about the rules of the tribe receive a rude lesson in the  power of tradition if they sit in a seat that is “owned” by someone else.    

 There are no written rules for the conduct of the federal Liberal parliamentary party  room.    

 Are there votes in the party room?    

 Does the party room have to agree to the introduction of private Members’ bills?    

 Must the party room be advised if someone is going to cross the floor?   

 What do you do to have a leadership spill?    

 The answer to these and other basic questions is not always clear. Fundamentally,  however, in the party room we do things the way we do them because we have always  done them that way. 

 

 Traditions are powerful but they are not immutable.    

 Some of them are immensely beneficial. Others are not - Winston Churchill’s  dismissal of the traditions of the royal navy as “rum sodomy and the lash” springs to  mind.   

 Yet I believe we need to try to understand our traditions in all their strengths and  weaknesses.    

 We need to expound and defend the best of them. And we need to appreciate that  what a tradition is can be highly contestable, and whether a tradition is good or bad  can divide judgements.   

 In orienting ourselves we need to recognise the fate of some of the things that once  appeared to be part of our political inheritance.   

 The white Australia handed down from Deakin through to Menzies - a legacy shared  with the Labor Party - has been demolished by the hand of the Liberal Party.    

 The great public enterprises of which Menzies was so proud, have essentially been  sold off. First of all by the Labor Party, and then by the coalition.    

  2 

 The social justice constantly proclaimed by Menzies as one of the Party’s  cornerstones has been forgotten by many members of the Liberal Party, and has been  reviled by others.    

 Our traditions of civil liberty have been curtailed, and in some cases overturned, in  pursuit of a war on terrorism.    

 In the recent past we lauded the liberal tradition as responsible for one of the world’s  most generous and compassionate responses to Vietnamese refugees arriving on our  shores.  

 

 Today some still demand the utilization of every artifice to deny refugees arriving on  the Australian mainland the protection of Australian law.   

 Traditions are not immutable. They are sometimes good and sometimes bad. The bad  traditions do not necessarily submerge or sink under their own weight, and the good  traditions do not defend themselves. 

 

 In the first decade of the twenty-first century the Liberal Party has to address its  traditions, justify and defend them or dismiss them. What we should not do however,  is to slide by them. 

 

 Today I would like to talk about a trinity of traditions which lie at the heart of our  Party and I consider worth defending.    

 The first is the tradition of members of the federal parliamentary Liberal Party  exercising their conscience on matters of principle.   

 The second is the Liberal Party’s tradition of respecting its heritage of liberal  philosophy.   

 And the third is the tradition of recognising social complexity and respecting  institutions that work. My particular focus here is to examine the current discussion  paper on citizenship. 

 

 I 

 

 

 The Liberal Party’s traditions may have changed over the decades.   

 But enduring has been the right of members of the Liberal parliamentary party to  differ from the majority of their colleagues on matters of principle and conscience.  This of course extends to the expression of a different view on the floor of the  parliament. 

 

 Indeed, the right to individual judgement was a primary rationale in the emergence of  the Party.    

 When the Deakinites fused with the free trade conservatives to form the first  precursor of the modern Liberal Party, a motivation was the rejection of Labor’s 

  3 

 demand that parliamentarians subordinate their individual judgement to the dictates of  the caucus majority.    

 As Alfred Deakin put it   

 In Labor there is not a natural and real, but a narrow mechanical  compulsory uniformity enforced by constant knee drill in caucus. They  all stand alike and apart. The Liberal Party stands in broad unity, but 

 individualities remain. In this government and in this Party no man has  parted with his individual judgement or his responsibility to his  constituents. We enjoy a proud sense of free union as free men in a free  party.   

 This is not just a matter of a distant past. It has always been intrinsic to the Liberal  Party’s commitment to the responsible individual.   

 The individuals that comprise the Liberal Party today value unity, but they do not  believe that parliamentarians should be clones.   

 The liberal commitment to the centrality of the individual’s reason and responsibility  distinguishes us from Labor’s collectivism.   

 Labor still demands that  its parliamentary members sign and adhere of to a pledge,  “to vote as a majority of the parliamentary party may decide at a duly constituted  caucus meeting”    

 Unlike Labor we recognise and respect that members of parliament can responsibly  deviate from their party on the floor of the parliament.   

 The liberal tradition of respecting the principles of the individual has endured from  Deakin through to Menzies, and to the present day.   

 The late Don Chipp described Menzies’ embrace of the tradition.   

 In 1961 Don Chipp’s principles prevented him from supporting a government bill that  included provisions for capital punishment.   

 Chipp recalled that with the government only holding a majority of one seat, he went  to see Menzies to explain that his conscience would prevent him from voting with the  government. 

 

 “I couldn’t possibly vote for the clause on capital punishment”,  said Chipp. “I was in a hell of a dilemma. I went to Menzies…in  absolute terror I told him I could not vote for the bill expecting him  to tear me to shreds, because his reputation as a sort of tyrant had  preceded him.    

 On the contrary, he put his hand on my shoulder and said, “My  boy, thank God we’ve got people with courage like you in the  Party …you vote as you please.” 

  4 

 

 Menzies apparent equanimity was very impressive. But then Menzies was in many  ways unique as the founder of the modern Liberal Party in his appreciation of the  need to continually defend the traditions which in turn defined the Liberal Party. 

 

 The tradition has endured long after Menzies’ departure. Even in the midst of a  tortured reappraisal following the 1983 loss of government, the Liberal Party  reaffirmed that:   

 The Party’s belief in the importance of individual conscience means  that it accepts that there are occasions when a Liberal member of  parliament may vote against his colleagues without incurring  sanctions from the Party (or expulsion as in the Labor Party).    

 

 Expressing traditions in documents is important. But their vitality is reaffirmed in the  party members’ actions. The voting recorded in Hansard demonstrates that the  tradition remains alive.   

 During the Menzies government, Members and Senators crossed the floor on 5% of  divisions.    

 Under Holt it was 11%;    

 Under Gorton it was 7%, and    

 under Fraser 6%.   

 In the 41st Parliament, which has so far run from 16 November 2004 to 14 September  2006, government Members or Senators crossed the floor in 2.2 % of divisions.   

 16 Members of the coalition still in parliament at the beginning of this year had  crossed the floor between 1 and ten times. A majority of those who crossed the floor  became ministers, and 5 of them cabinet ministers.  

 

 Robert Hill was one of the most frequent floor-crossers with 10 occasions to his  name.   

 As Robert was leaving the Senate, he reaffirmed the tradition, saying   

  For the Liberal Party, with its emphasis on an individual’s freedoms  rather than collective responsibility, the right to be guided by  conscience remains vital. I [Hill] am proof that you can take a  different view on certain issues and still succeed - although I would  not encourage it too often.   

 Hill thinks ten times is not too often. In the future no doubt some political scientists  will use regression analysis to test this.    

 Of course they will have to consider the parliamentary record of Senator Reg Wright.  

  5 

 

 Senator Wright was a delegate to the 1944 Canberra conference called by Menzies to  form the Liberal Party. He sat in the parliament from 1949 to 1978, became a minister  in the Gorton and McMahon governments, and he crossed the floor 150 times. 

 

 Wright was called a rebel by some. His response was illustrative of the very tradition  that we are exploring.   

 To call me a rebel shows a pur-blind lack of understanding of what  the parliament stands for…it demand[s] of each man that he  exercises individual judgement…anybody worth his salt as a 

 Liberal would never surrender his vote.    

 Only a few days ago, Wright’s legacy was brought home to both me and my  colleagues, Judi Moylan and Russell Broadbent.   

 Having recently crossed the floor on a matter of principle, we received an email from  Janet Upcher, the daughter of the late Senator Wright.   

 The email in part read:    

 My late father Reg Wright crossed the floor numerous times on  matters of principle, and as a young girl, I saw the struggle he  underwent to maintain his conscience - for that he has my eternal  admiration.   

 Whether it has been Robert Hill, Reg Wright, or any of the numerous members of the  parliamentary Liberal Party, crossing the floor is a step that is taken with a great deal  of gravity. And it also remains one of the strongest and most enduring traditions of the  Party.  

 

 Recently a number of Liberal Members and Senators either declared their intention to  cross the floor, or voted against the government on a bill to excise the Australian  mainland and Tasmania from the Migration Act.   

 In accordance with tradition the MPs concerned advised both the Prime Minister and  the party room of their intentions and the reason for their actions.   

 However, their actions were met with public attacks from some parliamentary  colleagues.    

 The liberal tradition of voting according to principle was denounced by Liberal  parliamentary party members as the acts of “heretics and anarchists”.    

 “Unprincipled”, “ridiculous” and “indefensible” railed one Liberal. “Flying in the face  of democracy,” declared another. Another Member had presaged this by calling the  pursuit of a private Member’s bill “political terrorism”.    

 I do not believe these responses reflect the view of the entire Liberal parliamentary  party, or the Party at large.  

  6 

 

 The essence of the tradition was best reflected intellectually by Peter Costello who,  whilst not agreeing with those crossing the floor, said:   

 We are a party that believes in a strong nation. We are also the party of  conscience. Where members of our party have deeply held positions,  genuinely held and argued and defended, we respect their right to  differ from our party. This is, after all, the Liberal Party.   

 It was similarly exemplified affectionately by Warren Entsch, who after the vote  hugged Judi Moylan. Warren said: “I had different views of the issue but I’m proud of  what she did…as a Liberal, I think that it is important to stick to our principles.”   

 The danger that we need to appreciate, of course, is that even the most embedded of  our traditions can be eroded. And that the challenge to those values and traditions can  come from within our party as surely as it can from without. 

 

 Attacking and denigrating parliamentarians who differ from their party on principle is  antithetical to the values of the Liberal Party.    

 The ethos of the Party is that those who cross the floor on a matter of principle are  entitled and free to do so. They are entitled not only to freedom from sanction, but  also to respect for their principles and beliefs.   

 I believe that this tradition of respect for individual principle is functional for good  government.    

 The resolution of issues in the party room is fundamental to our system. Everyone  sacrifices to achieve a consensus. On the overwhelming majority of issues, people do  give way on the whole or part of their perspective in the interests of achieving  common ground.    

 But where there are deep and genuine differences of principle that cannot be  reconciled, responsible government, accountability and parliamentary democracy  dictate that individual Members have the freedom to take the final step to manifest  their position.   

 I also believe that this is a tradition Australians want to see upheld.   

 Australians expect discipline of their parliamentarians.   

 They do not particularly care for infighting or personal aggrandisement.    

 But equally, they want those whom they elect to stand up when they believe it is right  to do so.   

 

 

 II 

 

  7 

 This brings me to the second great tradition of the Liberal Party which is worth  defending - the respect for both the liberal and conservative strands of the Liberal  Party.   

 Let us look briefly at the character of Menzies' liberalism. Consider the naming of the  Liberal Party.    

 Menzies stated that “we took the name ‘Liberal’ because we were determined to be a  progressive party, willing to make experiments, in no way reactionary, but believing  in the individual, his rights and his enterprise.”  

 

 Paul Hasluck, an acute observer of men and affairs, believed that:    

 …although a traditionalist, Menzies was not a conservative in  any doctrinal sense.    

 I do not know what part he had in choosing the name “Liberal”  for the new party he formed but the name would certainly fit  his political creed. His political thinking was in accord with the  liberalism of Alfred Deakin…    

 Menzies’ brand of liberalism was a particularly Australian one. It was not an import  from conservative parties abroad, but rather a far more progressive and tolerant brand  of liberalism reflecting the values of the Australian community.   

 I have outlined elsewhere my belief that Menzies’ legacy has been distorted by some  who have attacked the concept of social justice he constantly advanced.    

 The strength and pride of his commitment and his sense of achievement is reflected in  this declaration, towards the end of his prime ministership:   

 We have greatly aided social justice, we have shown that industrial  progress is not to be based on the poverty or despair of those who  cannot compete. After fourteen consecutive years …we can point to  …achievements in industrial justice and peace, in social services, in  a growingly successful attack upon poverty in widely distributed  rising standards of housing and living generally that can be matched  by very few counties in the world.   

 Menzies’ philosophical legacy was that Australian liberalism is a broad church.  Within that church are two fundamental arches. Under one arch reside the market,  free enterprise, opportunity and incentive. 

 

 Under the other arch shelter stability, security, social justice and equity. The  cornerstone of the arches is the state. The state supports a free market society at the  same time as it upholds its obligation to the weak, the sick and the unfortunate.   

 From another vantage point, I think John Howard is right that Menzies’ legacy  embraced the respect for the dualism of the liberal tradition. As he put it in his 1996  Menzies lecture “Menzies knew the importance for Australian liberalism to draw on 

  8 

 the classical liberal as well as the conservative political tradition… that encompassed  both Edmund Burke and John Stuart Mill.”   

 The philosophical strength of the Liberal Party lies in the coming together of both of  those streams. A respect for the duality of streams is entrenched in the Party’s ethos. 

 Indeed, as Peter Costello has said, “The Liberal Party is at its strongest when these  two strands intertwine. Each complements the other and gives it greater strength.”  

 To retain a philosophical balance in modern political parties takes constant reflection  and appraisal. Indeed, there are inevitable tensions in all political organisations.  

 In the modern Liberal Party, conservative and liberal streams can and often do coexist  in the same individual.  

 Indeed it is common for people to take the conservative side of one issue and the  liberal side of another.  

 Equally however, there are those who are more consistently on one side or the other. 

 In this sense, I believe it is true to say that currently the liberals or moderates are not  the overwhelming majority. Indeed Laurie Oakes, in an image that resonates, likens  the liberals in the Party to an endangered species, the orange-bellied parrot. 

 Ultimately traditions are carried and conveyed by individuals, and if too many liberals  flew into the political turbines it would weaken the continuation of the liberal  tradition. 

 I believe that we need to be sensitive to this and to such manifestations as attacks on  those who represent the liberal persuasion in the Party. I have already outlined public  attacks on those who crossed the floor on the immigration bill. 

 And we have observed renewed efforts to unseat Members of parliament because they  represent the liberal stream of thought.  

 We have seen such intrusions into seats such as Pearce directed against Judi Moylan.  

 In NSW, some seem determined that the broad church would be better off if there  were no liberals in the pews. Marise Payne bears the brunt of such targeting because  of her positions on refugees, abortion and civil liberties.  

 It would be a tragedy for the Liberal Party and the parliament if a classic Millsian  liberal who makes the enormous contribution that Senator Payne does is driven from  our Party. 

 Ladies and gentleman, there is no broad church in the abstract.  

 There is only a broad church in the rich tapestry and duality of those that form our  parliamentary party.  

 Their diversity of thought and the dual philosophical streams are what embody the  notion of a broad church. 

  9 

 No one individual, and no one tendency, represent the diversity of the Party as a  whole. 

 I believe that the Liberal Party as a whole is committed to its tradition of respect for  its philosophical duality. The reality is that, if a minority succeeds in attacking those  who represent the liberal strand, the loser will be the Party that we have inherited. 

 

 

 III 

 

 

 I now turn to a third aspect of the liberal tradition, the balance between change and  continuity. Sir Robert Menzies saw the Liberal Party as a progressive party, not  averse to experiment; as a party that believes in state action to secure economic and  social advancement and that embraces sensible parts of the Burkean understanding of  society. One of these insights is that when you are dealing with social arrangements  that have proved that they work, governments need to proceed with great care. There 

 is a substantial burden of proof required to establish whether something needs to be  changed, and that the changes proposed will achieve the desired outcome.   

 It is through this Burkean prism of the need to respect the complexity of social  patterns, particularly successful ones, that I would like to contribute to the current  debate about citizenship. In crude terms, what is broke and what needs fixing. 

 

 Let us look at our record. Since 1945, Australians have accepted 6 million migrants,  an average of 1 million a decade. We have overcome our concerns about migrants  coming from places other than the British Isles. We then overturned the white  Australia policy which was for so long considered by both major political parties as  essential to social harmony and cohesion. Today 28.2 per cent of our population was  born overseas. Since 1949, 3.5 million Australians have become citizens by  naturalisation.    

 By any standard, we are an exemplar of unity and respect for our multicultural  diversity. We have, with remarkable success, brought together peoples of diverse  nations, religions and cultures. Migrants to Australia have worked hard and  committed themselves to this country. Through their efforts and initiative, and that of  their children, and increasingly their grandchildren, they have profoundly enriched the  Australian nation, of which they are an intrinsic part economically, socially, culturally  and linguistically.   

 Until a few weeks ago, this was an article of faith on the part of every politician. Now  we are told we need to make significant policy changes to address weaknesses in our  citizenship laws.   

 What are the societal malfunctions that justify these changes?   

  10 

 I have looked closely at the federal government’s discussion paper, Australian  Citizenship: much more than just a ceremony, and, in what has been said and written  in connection with the proposed tests, I can find no detailed, robust analysis of a  problem, and no evidence of how the new measures would resolve a problem that has 

 not been demonstrated.   

 There is no equivalent of the Galbally report, which thirty years ago provided a  rigorous philosophical and evidential basis for the Fraser government’s adoption of  the policy of multiculturalism. 

 

 I have no doubt that more can and should be done to encourage immigrants to  integrate effectively into the Australian community. But in order to do so sensibly, I  would like to know pretty precisely what is the scale and nature of the issue. For  example, how do we define integration and assess whether it is occurring? Who is not  integrating and why is that so - are there attitudinal or language barriers or do they  suffer from discriminatory barriers?  

 

 I am all in favour of encouraging non-English speaking immigrants to learn English -  acceptance of English as the national language and promoting its acquisition have  always been central tenets of multiculturalism. Where is the evidence showing who  does not learn adequate English and the reasons for that? Do immigrants not want to  learn or are they stymied by the lack of availability of classes or are they fully  occupied in meeting other demands, such as employment and family responsibilities?    

 Instead, we are told that changes to the Citizenship Act are needed because the  present system showers citizenship around like confetti - throwing citizenship at  people who do not value it, in part, because it is so easy to get. 

 

 Such assertions are nowhere supported.    

 The discussion paper tells us that testing will “assist social cohesion and successful  integration into the community”. The implication is that this is not happening now.  Yet there is no evidence provided for this - no research to support it.    

 We are told that people take out citizenship because it is easy. It is easy we are told  because there is no “formal test” of English or suitability or commitment to our  country. A hearsay anecdote is related about people leaving a citizenship ceremony  before the singing of the national anthem. This, we are told, “suggests that there are  many people who are taking out citizenship who may see it as no more than a  passport.”    

 The discussion paper proposes “formal”, more difficult and more protracted tests  before people become citizens. These will, the paper asserts, provide a strong  incentive for people to learn English. 

 

 A number of underlying premises in the discussion paper are problematic. I will  address three.   

 The first of these is that people take up citizenship without commitment because the  requirements for English proficiency are so low. Yet it is those people most proficient 

  11 

 in English who are the ones least likely to take out citizenship. The reality is that  take-up rates of citizenship are lowest amongst those who are English speakers -  immigrants from the UK the USA and New Zealand.   

 The second underlying premise is that there are no existing tests, and no signatures of  commitment. I have seen a recent poll that a significant proportion of Australians are  in favour of the introduction of a formal citizenship test. The fact is that tests have  long been in place. 

 

 I am not going to play a semantic game about when a test is formal or informal. What  I can say is that following the requirements of the Australian Citizenship Act 1948,  people are currently assessed on the following: basic English language knowledge;  understanding the nature of the application and its meaning; and an adequate  knowledge of the responsibilities and privileges of Australian citizenship.  

 

 This assessment is made during a compulsory, formal interview. Additionally, those  seeking Australian citizenship are required to formally commit to citizenship by  signing a declaration as part of the application. At the citizenship ceremony  candidates are required to affirm their commitment to Australia in the words of the  Australian citizenship pledge, and I quote:   

 From this time forward, [under God,] I pledge my loyalty to Australia  and its people whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and  liberties I respect, and whose laws I will uphold and obey.   

 

 The third premise is that somehow we have fallen behind other countries in the  stringency of our requirements. The countries that we are falling behind are cited as  the US, the UK, Canada and the Netherlands. Look at their record of harmony.  Australia’s record is second to none in multicultural harmony and integration. We are  uniquely successful. Why should we emulate countries with a less distinguished  record?   

 The discussion paper has had one unintended, and I believe beneficial effect. It has  made many Australians reflect on the challenges that faced their parents and  grandparents. For my part, my mother and father were among the many people who  became Australians despite only limited fluency in English. My father was desperate  to speak English properly - and thought he did - but he really didn’t, because he  worked two jobs for most of his life.    

 A recent letter published in The Age reflects the experience and the sentiment of  hundreds of thousands of migrants to this country. Speaking of the Greek community,  the author writes: 

 

  …older migrants were not subjected to an English-language test and,  in many instances, they never did master the language of their new  country. Finding work, establishing a home and family and ensuring a  secure future for their children took all their energy and resolve. They  did not underestimate the importance of developing knowledge of  English and there was a sense of regret and sometimes despair that they 

  12 

 needed to rely on others to ease their way in an English-speaking  environment….   

 Reflecting on her personal experience she continues:    

 …My Greek migrant parents, relatives and friends who made it  possible for me to develop into a tertiary-educated bilingual  Australian, who nurtured me in my youth, set an example, and gave  me a sense of responsibility towards others, were in many cases  illiterate in English. They were, however, model Australian citizens  and their loyalty to this country was rock-solid. Their own Greek-

 speaking community helped them adjust to their new country. [Nina  Mills, Blairgowrie.]   

 Throughout our history, very many people have become citizens despite having little  fluency in English.    

 But that did not prevent them from making substantial contributions to our society -  people who worked hard in jobs that many English-speakers were loathe to take;  people who obeyed the law, were good parents and fine neighbours.   

 Aren’t such personal qualities the essence of good citizenship?   

 How can it be in the national interest to impose new barriers to citizenship, barriers  which would have prevented its acquisition by so many who have demonstrably  proven to be model citizens?    

 Ladies and gentlemen, the liberal tradition has facilitated the success of one of the  most successful migration processes in modern history. That has been made possible  because the Liberal Party was progressive and committed to nation-building. There  are no doubt many reasons why it has been a success. I believe it has something to do  with the Australian character that is fundamentally tolerant and accepting of people  trying to make a go of it, especially when they come to know them as individuals. I  believe it is partly because of the openness of Australian society. I believe it is partly  because of the policy of multiculturalism that embraces diversity as a value within a  commitment to Australia. And I believe that it is due to the fact that we have sought to  accept as Australian citizens those who made a real commitment to Australia, even if  they spoke only basic English and probably couldn’t answer many multiple choice  questions about Australia.   

 But beyond this, as a liberal I am enough of a Burkean to know that recipes for social  cohesion and commitment are complex and if the mix has succeeded, we need to have  imperative, overriding reasons to change it. In my view, the discussion paper in no  way demonstrates the need to change our longstanding processes, and the proposed 

 new approach potentially undermines our unquestionable success. 

  13 

