---
title: "Vanstone confirms killed Afghanis were on Nauru: shifts blame onto UNHCR and IOM."
date: "2006-08-09"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296640
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/13JK6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Vanstone confirms killed Afghanis were on Nauru:  shifts blame onto UNHCR and IOM 

 

 Senator Nettle, 9th August 2006 

 In response to Senator Kerry Nettle in question time today Immigration Minister  Senator Vanstone confirmed that two Afghanis who were reported as killed upon their  return from Nauru in a report by the Edmund Rice Centre this week were in fact on  Nauru.  

 Senator Vanstone attempted to deflect criticism of the implementation of government  policies which led to their return and subsequent deaths by querying whether the  UNHCR or IOM may be to blame. 

 "Its simply not good enough for Senator Vanstone to claim that because some asylum  seekers were dealt with by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees then  their return to Afghanistan is not the responsibility of the government. The Australian 

 government took them to Nauru and persuaded them to return to Afghanistan. 

 "The fact remains that many people were coerced and bribed by the government to go  home 'voluntarily'. Those who did not bend to coercion and return were eventually  found to be refugees and brought to Australia. Some of those who did return are now 

 dead. 

 "I spoke with two former Nauru detainees today who confirmed that they had been  told by officials on Nauru that; "you have to go back", "you are rejected", "you cant  stay here", " Australian govt says you must go back to your country", "Your cases are  closed" 

 SENATOR VANSTONE in Question Time today: 

 On whether killed Afghani asylum seekers were on Nauru, "...we did in fact have a  look at the two names provided by the Edmund Rice Centre as being people that  Australia has returned and in fact I have been advised by my department that one of  them was a part of the Australian case load on Nauru but the other was a part of the 

 UNHCR caseload." 

 On whether UNHCR are to blame:  

 "I will raise that matter with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees in  Geneva and see what they have to say about the implied criticism..." 

 On whether IOM may be to blame:  

 "as to the question of voluntary return I just make the point that we work with the  International Organisation for Migration....one of the conditions of working with the  IOM on Nauru is that there are no involuntary returns - so I will take the matter up  with the IOM as well actually." 

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146  

 

