---
title: "Howard adopts appeasement strategy."
date: "2006-05-02"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211555339
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8SKJ6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 02 May 2006 

 Press Release Number: 130406KL  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Howard Adopts Appeasement Strategy 

 Deputy Leader of the Democrats, Senator Andrew Bartlett has slammed Government measures to  deport West Papuan asylum seekers to offshore camps to be processed under radical new proposals to  be announced today.    

 "It is obvious that the Government has learnt absolutely nothing from the Palmer and Comrie reports and  has instead engaged in an exercise to appease Indonesian sensitivities instead of giving priority to the  protection of fundamental human rights.    

 "It appears that Mr Howard also wants immigration officials to take the 'AWB approach' to investigating  asylum claims - ask the accused country if the refugee's claim of persecution is correct."    

 "This move will encourage Indonesia and other countries in our region to tolerate human rights abuses,  as Australia is clearly saying human rights are an optional extra to be watered down whenever the going  gets difficult."    

 "It will give great comfort not just to those military and extremist forces in West Papua perpetrating  atrocities, but also to other major human rights abusers such as China."    

 "Mr Howard's action is particularly offensive given the actions of Papuans in helping Australian soldiers  in World War II. When we were fleeing aggressive forces, they helped us escape. When they flee  aggression, we try to force them back."    

 "Yet again we see the exercise of shunting refugees out to places that cannot be easily accessed by  advocates or the media, the reason being to keep them out of sight and out of mind, like the remaining  two refugees who are left on Nauru.    

 "We are extremely concerned about these proposals and what this might mean to the proper processing  of asylum claims and refute the PM's assertions that these changes do not breach Australia's  commitments under international refugee treaties.    

 "Now is the time for Liberal backbenchers like Petro Georgiou to stand up and voice their opposition to  these appalling changes. We cannot stand by and let the Government throw due process and the rule of  law out the window and neither should they, concluded Senator Bartlett.   

 

