---
title: "Diplomatic appointment: Ambassador to the United Nations Geneva."
date: "2006-03-21"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291032
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HR3J6%22
---

 

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER

 

 FA028                                         21 March 2006 

 

 DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENT:  AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED NATIONS GENEVA   

 I have today announced the appointment of Ms Caroline Millar as Ambassador for Disarmament and  Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations at Geneva.  Ms Millar  will succeed Mr Michael Smith who has been Ambassador since April 2002.  Ms Millar is currently  Charge d’Affaires, Australian Permanent Mission to the United Nations in New York.  She is  expected to take up her appointment in May 2006.   

 Ms Millar will be responsible for a range of UN issues in Geneva, including advancing Australia’s  interests in the field of human rights, in part through the pursuit of the Government’s diplomatic  initiative to reform the UN Treaty Bodies.  She will work actively to ensure that the proposed  successor to the Commission on Human Rights, the Human Rights Council, more effectively  advances Australia’s interests in protecting and promoting human rights and good governance  internationally. Ms Millar will also have responsibility for pursuing Australia’s interests on refugee  issues.    

 One of the main threats to Australia’s security is the spread of weapons of mass destruction (WMD),  including the danger that terrorists might one day acquire WMD.  A key Government goal is  strengthening of global regimes to prevent WMD proliferation, in which Ms Millar in her capacity as  Ambassador for Disarmament, will play an important role.  She will work to ensure that the Nuclear  Non-Proliferation Treaty remains a central pillar of the global non-proliferation and arms control  framework, to continue international efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the Biological Weapons  Convention and to realise the commencement of negotiations towards a Fissile Material Cut-Off  Treaty.  Ms Millar will be Australia’s Permanent Representative to the Conference on Disarmament  and will contribute actively across the UN arms control agenda.   

 As President of the Seventh Meeting of States to the Ottawa Convention, Ms Millar will lead  the  international community’s efforts to address the continuing humanitarian problem of anti-personnel  landmines.  This support will include encouraging countries which have yet to do so to join the  Convention, and assisting mine-affected countries to meet their mine clearance deadlines.   

 Ms Millar was most recently First Assistant Secretary, International Organisations and Legal  Division, a position she held since November 2002.  She has held a number of positions in the  department in Canberra including Assistant Secretary, Executive, Planning and Evaluation Branch  (2001-02), Assistant Secretary, Trade Policy Issues and Industrials Branch (2000), Director, Non-Proliferation Policy Section (1992-95) and Executive Officer, Indochina Section (1987-88).  Ms  Millar was seconded to the Office of National Assessments as Senior Americas Analyst from 1991-1992.   

 Overseas, Ms Millar has served as Counsellor, Australian Mission to the United Nations in New York  (1995-98), First Secretary, Australian Embassy, Washington (1989-91) and Second Secretary,  Australian Embassy, Hanoi (1985-87).     

 Ms Millar was born in 1958 in Melbourne.  She holds a Bachelor of Arts (Hons) degree from the  University of Cambridge.  She is married and has one child.   

 Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/ 

 

 

 

 Media contact: Chris Kenny (Ministerial) 0419 206 890 or  Chelsey Martin (DFAT) 02 6261 1555 

