---
title: "Refugees finding hope and a future in Australia: Brisbane."
date: "2006-06-19"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294497
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/D1AK6%22
---

 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone   MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

 

 Media Release 

 

 Refugees finding hope and a future in  Australia - Brisbane  19 June 2006 

 ‘Australians can be very proud that it is one of the top three countries in  the world to provide hope to refugees and others in humanitarian need,’  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Amanda Vanstone, said  today. 

 ‘Hope’ is the theme of this year’s United Nations designated World  Refugee Day, on Tuesday 20 June and the Minister urged the Brisbane  community to support activities to mark the day, including the World  Refugee Day Citizenship Ceremony for 41 former refugees and  humanitarian entrants, 2pm, Tuesday 20 June, at ‘Yungaba’, Brisbane  Multicultural Arts Centre, 120 Main Street, Kangaroo Point. 

 On the eve of World Refugee Day Senator Vanstone said the occasion was  a chance to recognise and praise the courage of refugees and  humanitarian entrants in Australia, many of whom have fled desperate  circumstances to begin a new life in Australia. 

 ‘Tomorrow in Canberra, I will have the honour of conferring Australian  citizenship on refugees who have settled in the Australian Capital  Territory,’ the Minister said. 

 ‘Every refugee and humanitarian entrant has a personal story to tell, and  I would urge people to mark World Refugee Day by listening to some of  those stories. 

 ‘Events are being staged across the country to mark World Refugee Day,  with the Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs directly  supporting a number of events involving local community groups,  including the Citizenship Ceremony at Brisbane Multicultural Arts Centre. 

 ‘The Australian community plays a vital role in supporting and assisting  refugee and humanitarian entrants settle into life in Australia and this  event is a way to acknowledge and thank people for this valuable work.’ 

 The Minister said Australia is one of the top three countries, along with  the USA and Canada, providing comprehensive resettlement programmes  for refugees and others in humanitarian need. 

 ‘Since the end of World War II, Australia has accepted over 660 000  refugees and people needing humanitarian assistance into the Australian  community,’ the Minister said. 

 ‘I am very proud of the fact that Australia currently gives 13 000 refugees  and people in humanitarian need every year, a reason to hope,’ the  Minister said. 

 Media Note: Ms Yanka Evonne Doe-Nunneh, from Liberia, will become a  citizen tomorrow and will be available for interview by media. Mobile: 040  5057414 

 

 

