---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 4 September 2006: security situation in East Timor; US Pentagon report on Iraq; North Queensland banana industry."
date: "2006-09-04"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY"
subjects:
  - "East Timor"
  - "Political stability"
  - "Bananas"
  - "Exports"
  - "security situation in East Timor"
  - "US Pentagon report on Iraq"
  - "North Queensland banana industry."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211297750
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IHRK6%22
---

 KEVIN RUDD M.P.   Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Trade and  International Security    

 

 DOORSTOP - PARLIAMENT HOUSE   

 4 SEPTEMBER 2006   

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:   Security  situation  in  East  Timor;  US  Pentagon  report  on  Iraq;   North Queensland banana industry.   

 

 RUDD:    Mr Howard has boasted that East Timor is his Government’s  greatest achievement. I notice that Mr Downer this morning seems to be  distancing himself from that. Mr Downer is saying that East Timor’s security and  their own affairs are up to the East Timorese themselves. You can’t have this  both ways. The Government says that East Timor is this Government’s proudest  achievement and then tries to walk away from any responsibility.    

 The bottom line is this: security on the ground in East Timor now and for some  time to come is going to be delivered by international and Australian forces. Mr  Downer’s moral lectures from up high on this don’t solve the problem one bit.  What Mr Downer should be doing instead is conducting an immediate, practical 

 review of the failings in our training programs of the East Timorese police force  and armed forces prior to the collapse in security earlier this year.   

 Furthermore, Mr Downer should not repeat the mistakes that he has already  made on national security with East Timor when he cut and run before the end  of 2005. What Mr Downer should be doing is learning from those mistakes,  acknowledging that there is a security crisis on the ground and committing  Australian troops to remain in substantial numbers right through to the East  Timorese elections.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   We believe that Australian troops should remain in  substantial numbers. Mr Downer has got East Timor wrong - he said that the 

 security situation had already significantly improved -that is over the last couple  of months he has said that. And he has also said because the security situation  has improved that we can pull out large numbers of troops - wrong again Mr  Downer. You shouldn’t be repeating the same mistakes again. He did this in  previous years - he shouldn’t be doing it now. Australia should remain in 

 numbers in East Timor to provide a security confidence and guarantee up until  the East Timorese elections next year.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   We have got a responsibility as the alternative government  to express a view about how you provide confidence on the ground in East  Timor for the best guarantee of security. You see, it was two months ago I think  since Mr Downer started saying that the security situation radically improved. It  hadn’t. We in the Australian Opposition, we speak to people on the ground in  East Timor all the time. We disagree with that assessment. We disagreed with it  then and we disagree with it now. The bottom line is that if the Government is  serious about this, they have to stay engaged in numbers right through until the  elections next year.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   The best barometer as to why security is still a problem in  East Timor is that you have still got 72,000 people still living in refugee camps  across the island because they fear for their own security. Talk to the people of  East Timor about why they are not going back to their own homes - they don’t  believe that security has been restored. Add to that the jailbreak, add to that gun  fights in the street, add to that the fact that you have got former leaders of the  insurrection broadcasting messages on East Timorese television.   

 To me, it doesn’t look that flash and most observers would also say it is also not  that flash. Mr Downer’s solution is to deliver them a stern talking to and it will  all fix everything. Good grief. That is not the way in which you deliver foreign  policy.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   Any arrest or elimination of terrorists anywhere in the world  is a good development. What I also note in the case of Iraq is the most recent  release from the Pentagon of the quarterly report to the United States Congress.  The United States Pentagon has said that Iraq is on the verge of civil war. It is  time that Mr Howard and Mr Downer recognised that fact as well. They need to  accept the reality that civil war is a real and emerging threat in Iraq but instead 

 they simply play word games about the current state of security on the ground.  Remember that this is a $2 billion Australian taxpayer military engagement in  Iraq - a policy which so far has yielded no fruit whatsoever in terms of a durable  peace in Iraq and we have had a further report from the Pentagon saying that  there is a massive problem of civil war.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   When it comes to our own region, our own neighbourhood,  our own backyard - this is where our national security responsibilities are at  their sharpest. The bottom line is that East Timor is a neighbour of ours - Mr  Howard has boasted about delivering independence to East Timor, leaving aside  the role of the United Nations. If you are going to take the key role in events like  that, you also pick up responsibilities on the way through and you can’t just  solve these problems by delivering moral lectures.   

 Just one final thing on Queensland. I have just come from Queensland this  morning and people in Queensland are scratching their head about a Prime  Minister who has basically stabbed North Queensland in the back on Telstra and  has now stabbed them in the back again with the importation of bananas. I mean,  what is this Prime Minister on about? This is a cyclone devastated region of  North Queensland and he uses technical arguments to justify a decision to  import foreign bananas. This is just wrong. Mr Howard should have the guts to  recognise that it is wrong and to take action.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   I have seen the arguments put forward by Mr Howard and  by others. What I know is that if you travel through North Queensland and you  speak to Queenslanders on the ground, they legitimately feel betrayed by our  Prime Minister. Mr Howard goes up there on the government aircraft, wanders  around the devastated areas of North Queensland and says that he is going to  look after them. What do North Queenslanders then see later? The importation of  foreign bananas. I have just got to say that this is grossly insensitive on the part  of the Prime Minister, he knows that and he should have the guts to do  something about it.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   When it comes to trade policy and as the alternative Trade  Minister, you have got to do what is right in the national interest. And when it  comes to what is happening in North Queensland at the moment, you have got 

 to look after our banana farmers. I should also add to this that my father started  his life as a banana farmer - I know a little bit about bananas.   

 REPORTER:  Inaudible   

 RUDD:   Well when it comes to a whole range of products in  Australia, price considerations when it comes to textiles, clothing, footwear, auto  and a range of other products are dictated by a broader trade policy as well, not  just price on the ground. When it comes to North Queensland and the state of the  banana crop and the future of the banana industry, it is time that Mr Howard  stood up for the Queensland banana industry rather than simply stabbing them  in the back.   

 Ends 4 September 2006.   

 

 Contact:  Alister Jordan 0417 605 823   

 

