---
title: "New Job Network to Assist Migrants."
date: "2006-09-08"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211298071
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X56L6%22
---

 Media Centre  New Job Network to Assist Migrants 

 8 September 2006 

 The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs, Andrew Robb, today launched a new Job Network  provider, designed to get new migrants and refugees into jobs. 

 Opening the new Spectrum Job Network office at the Northern Migrant  Resource Centre at Broadmeadows in Melbourne, Mr Robb said that the  gap between the employment rates of Australian-born people and  migrants had been closing since 1992. 

 “The Australian economy has been creating over 180,000 jobs per year in  recent years and strong jobs growth is projected to continue over the next  five years,” he said. 

 “However, due to the ageing of the population, and the unemployment  rate for skilled people being already below two per cent, we face a  significant challenge finding people to fill these jobs. 

 “The Government is working hard to address the shortages, currently  being experienced in areas like nursing, construction and information  technology. 

 “One of many steps being taken must be to equip new migrants and  refugees to not only integrate into the broader community but also to get  themselves into a job.” 

 Mr Robb said Spectrum Job Network had experience in meeting the  challenges that face new arrivals challenges when looking for a job. 

 “Some refugees and humanitarian entrants face significant barriers to  employment - they don't speak English, their education is limited or has  been interrupted by war, famine or other human tragedies,” he said. 

 “But, the subsequent success of many refugees shows their extraordinary  strength of spirit, resilience and determination to acquire the necessary  skills. 

 “The quicker we can get people into employment and learning English,  the better for them, their families and the community they live in.” 

 Launch of the Spectrum Employment Services office, a new Job  Network provider  Date: 8 September, 2006  Time: 10-11am  Location: Level 1, 1100 Pascoe Vale Road, Broadmeadows 

 MEDIA CONTACT: Jonathan Granger 0417 460 338 

 Home

 Biographical details 

 Media Centre 

 Portfolio Links 

 Electorate site

 Contact Details 

 Andrew Robb AO MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  

