---
title: "Australian Government Monthly Financial Statements April 2006"
date: "2006-06-23"
creators:
  - "Minchin, Nick"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294773
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BC7K6%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Nick Minchin   

 Minister for Finance and Administration   Leader of the Government in the Senate  

 Media Release 

 41/2006  23 June 2006 

 Australian Government Monthly Financial Statements   April 2006  

 KEY POINTS 

  z The underlying cash balance for the 2005-06 year to 30 April 2006 was a surplus of $16,763 

  million.  

  z The fiscal balance for the 2005-06 year to 30 April 2006 was a surplus of $18,374 million.  

  z The operating result for the 2005-06 year to 30 April 2006 was a surplus of $15,656 million.  

  z The difference between the fiscal and underlying cash balances is largely attributable to 

  increases in taxation receivables (see note 4).  

  z As foreshadowed in the 2006-07 Budget forecast, a range of one off payments is scheduled in 

  May and June 2006 such as the Auslink program and grants to the Murray Darling Commission  together with June having three pension paydays and three public service paydays.  

  

  Care needs to be taken when comparing monthly or cumulative data across years and to full year  estimates. Revenues and expenses do vary from month-to-month. Factors such as The New Tax  System, and the accrual framework including the timing of payments and policy decisions, can have a  large impact on fiscal aggregates from one year to the next and on year-to-date outcomes. The April  2006 monthly financial statements were produced under the Australian Equivalents to International  Financial Reporting Standards (AEIFRS), with the exception that the Department of Defence is not yet  reporting AEIFRS compliant data for monthly reporting purposes and the Defence Materiel Organisation  has partially adopted AEIFRS. The move to AEIFRS brings a number of changes including a new  financial statement, the ‘Statement of Changes in Equity’. 

  Consistent with the market basis of valuation of assets adopted under AEIFRS, the basis of valuation of 

  the Government's investment in Telstra Corporation Limited and other Commonwealth entities has  changed from cost to fair value. The financial effect of this change is recognised in the Statement of  Changes in Equity.  Following advice from the Australian Bureau of Statistics on the recognition of education grants  expenses under Government Finance Statistics, fiscal balance records education grant expenses from  April 2006 when cash flows rather than when the Ministerial determination is signed. Refer to note 4 for  the impact of the different recognition basis between GFS and AEIFRS for education grants expense. 

  FISCAL OUTCOMES 

  Underlying Cash Balance 

  The main components of the underlying cash balance are cash from operations and cash movements in  the net investment in non-financial assets. 

  The underlying cash balance for the year to 30 April 2006 was a surplus of $16,763 million. This  underlying cash balance is $4,426 million higher than the April pro-rata (a surplus of $12,337 million) of  the Revised Budget estimate for 2005-06 of $14,805 million. The difference reflects a number of  individual variations including the following: 

  Movements in underlying cash receipts:  

  Lower receipts from: 

  z Taxation in line with the usual monthly fluctuations in taxation receipts.  

  Higher receipts from: 

  z Dividends due to: 

  { the receipt of the RBA dividend in August each year; and  

  Movements in underlying cash payments: 

  Lower payments for: 

  z Grants due to: 

  { Underspends across a range of programmes;  

  z Payments to suppliers due to: 

  { Underspends in a range of defence related programmes;  

  z Personal benefits due to: 

  { Seasonality and Timing of pension payments; and  

  { Lower than anticipated demand for Youth Allowance.  

  z Foreign aid, specifically, AusAID’s three country and regional programmes (PNG & Pacific; East 

  Asia; and South Asia, Africa and Other) as well as the Emergency, Humanitarian and Refugee  Aid and NGO, Volunteer and Community programmes. These payments are not incurred on a  pro rata basis, due to the timing of activities, requirements of partner Governments and  organisations, and the unpredictable nature of expenditure on emergencies.  

  Higher payments for: 

  z a number of education grants.  

  z Personal benefits as personal benefits claimed through the tax system  

  Fiscal Balance 

  The fiscal balance for the year to 30 April 2006 was a surplus of $18,374 million. The main components  of the fiscal balance are the GFS net operating balance, which was a surplus of $18,798 million, and a  net capital investment of $424 million for the year to 30 April 2006 (refer to the Reconciliation of the  Operating Result to Fiscal Balance on page 10 for further detail). 

  FINANCIAL OUTCOMES 

  Actual expenses are $1,476 million lower when compared with a pro-rata of the revised Budget  estimate. The main reasons for the higher fiscal result, provided by function, are due to: 

  z Education function - higher grant expenses as education grants are expensed in January.  

  Partially offset by: 

  z Social Security and Welfare function - lower personal benefits expenses which are typically 

  higher in the first half of the financial year as tax returns are lodged.  

  z Transport function - lower expenses mainly attributable to AusLink and other transport 

  programmes as the level of these expenses does not occur equally each month but when State  and/or Local Governments make claims for payment.  

  z Defence function - lower supplier expenses as traditionally a higher proportion of the suppliers 

  budget is used in the second six months of the financial year, reflecting lead times associated  with procurement. Some of the variance is due to slippages in contracting activity, invoicing and  payment processing, and some savings generated from the favorable currency exchange rate  difference, which will be returned to the government at the end of the year.  

  z Health function - lower grant expenses due to underspends in a range of health programmes.  

  Assets and Liabilities 

  The net asset balance within the General Government sector is a positive net asset position of   $2,193 million at 30 April 2006, including the impact of a change in accounting policy under AEIFRS to  recognise investments in Telstra and other Australian Government entities at fair value. 

  Contact: 

  Senator Minchin’s Office: Michael Brennan (02) 6277 7400   

  Department of Finance and Administration: Anne Hazell (02) 6215 3650  Chief Financial Officer  Australian Government Reporting 

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -   INCOME STATEMENT 

  Nick Minchin  Minister for Finance and Administration  23 June 2006

  I J Watt  Finance Secretary to the Department of and Administration   

  23 June 2006

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -   BALANCE SHEET 

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -  

  STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -   CASH FLOW STATEMENT 

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -   INCOME STATEMENT BY FUNCTION

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -   RECONCILIATION OF THE OPERATING RESULT TO FISCAL BALANCE 

  10/07/2006 http://www.financeminister.gov.au/media/2006/mr_412006.html

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR -   DERIVATION OF UNDERLYING AND HEADLINE BALANCE

  Page 9 of 12 Media Release 41/2006 - Australian Government Monthly Financial Statements

  

  NOTES: 

  The accounting policies in this part are generally consistent with the requirements of AEIFRS. While the  scope for financial reporting recommended by AEIFRS and AAS 31 is the whole of government (that is,  the Australian Government public sector), the Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997  requires monthly financial statements to be consistent with the budget estimates. Accordingly and  pursuant to the Charter of Budget Honesty Act 1998, this presentation covers the general government  sector only. This publication does not include full note disclosures. 

  With the introduction of Business Activity Statements and Instalment Activity Statements in 2000-2001,  taxpayers provide information on payments associated with several types of tax when lodging the  statement and paying the aggregate net tax amount. Thus, while total tax collections are known with  certainty at the end of each month, the distribution across the relevant heads of revenue cannot be  finalised until all statements are received and processed. The outcomes for some revenue items  provided in this statement are thus estimates, in accordance with the best judgement of the Taxation 

  Commissioner, and subject to revision. The taxation revenue items not affected are: Petroleum  Resource Rent Tax, Excise duty, Customs duty, Other Taxes and Individuals Refunds. 

  The sum of the revenue accrued in the month and the revisions to prior periods equals the revenue  reported in the Statement of Revenue and Expenses. 

  All taxation items in these notes are reported on an AEIFRS basis, unless otherwise indicated. 

  NOTE 1: INCOME TAX 

  

  NOTE 2: INDIRECT TAX 

  

  

  NOTE 3: GOODS AND SERVICES TAX 

  

  

  In regard to GST revenue, AAS would suggest the gross amount of GST be included in the Australian  Government’s Financial Statements. However, the clear policy intent of the Intergovernmental  Agreement on the Reform of Australian Government-State Financial Relations is that the GST is a State  tax collected by the Australian Government in an agency capacity. Therefore, accrued GST revenues  and associated payments to the States and Territories are not recognised in these statements. 

  NOTE 4: ADJUSTMENT FOR EDUCATION GRANT EXPENDITURE

  In regard to education grant expenditure, adherence to AAS results in fewer education expenses being  reported until the signing of the Ministerial determination, which normally occurs between December  and March each year. This produces a bunching of expenses such that the full year's expense is  recognised at that time and remains relatively constant until June. The table below provides details of  the cash paid by DEST and attributable to the Education function for the year to date. 

  

  NOTE: 

  Style Conventions 

  1. Figures in tables and generally in the text have been rounded. Discrepancies in tables between  totals and sums of components are due to rounding.  

  International Monetary Fund (IMF) Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) 

  2. In accordance with the IMF's SDDS, quarter ahead notice of the date of release of the data on  central government operations, which is contained in the Australian Government Financial  Statements, is given on the IMF's Data Dissemination Bulletin Board at http//dsbb.imf.org.  

  3. Monthly and quarterly data on debt guaranteed by the Australian Government (central)  government that meet the coverage and timeliness requirements of the SDDS are published on  the AOFM website at http://www.aofm.gov.au/content/borrowing/commonwealth.asp?NavID=32.  In accordance with the IMF SDDS, the approximate date of release of the data on debt  guaranteed by the Australian Government (central) government, is given on the IMF's Data  Dissemination Advance Release Calender http://dsbb.imf.org  

  

  Back to top 

  This page was last updated 23 June, 2006 

  Media Contact:   Matthew Doman 02 6277 7400 or 0439 467 806 

  Website:

  www.financeminister.gov.au

