---
title: "Labor wrong again on English training for migrants."
date: "2006-09-05"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211297826
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/T56L6%22
---

 Media Centre  Labor Wrong Again on English Training for Migrants 

 5 September 

 The Labor Party has once again got it wrong on the Australian  Government’s funding of English language tuition for new migrants, the  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs, Andrew Robb, said today. 

 Since taking office in 1996, the Government has ensured that no eligible  client is denied access to their legislative entitlement of 510 hours of  English tuition under the Adult Migrant English Programme (AMEP).  

 Mr Robb said the Government adjusted funding for the AMEP each year,  based on demand estimates. Last year’s spend was $139 million. This  year, the appropriation has gone up to $153.7 million based on estimates  of the amount of people requiring intensive programmes. 

 In fact, the Government has expanded the programme to provide an extra  400 hours of English tuition for young people under the age of 25 whose  education has been interrupted by war, famine or any other number of  human tragedies. 

 Mr Robb said, despite his best efforts to educate the Labor Party on the  facts regarding AMEP, they persisted with their own version of events. 

 “Labor’s Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs spokeswoman, Senator  Annette Hurley, today launched an attack on the funding surrounding  AMEP, claiming that there is a shortfall between the funding allocation  and eligible students for the programme,” he said. 

 “This is wrong. As I have already stated, whoever is eligible for English  tuition gets it.” 

 Mr Robb said Senator Hurley’s migration figures were also at odds with  those on the public record. There was an increase in the refugee and  humanitarian programme in the 2004/05 financial year, however the  increase was from 12,000 to 13,000 places - an increase of only 1,000  people as opposed to the 9,000 claimed by Senator Hurley. 

 “Senator Hurley was again wrong in suggesting that the AMEP course  had to be concluded within a year,” he said. 

 “In fact, there is no time limit on the completion.” 

 MEDIA CONTACT: Jonathan Granger 0417 460 338 

 [Media Release index] 

 Home

 Biographical details 

 Media Centre 

 Portfolio Links 

 Electorate site

 Contact Details 

 Andrew Robb AO MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  

  

