---
title: "Meeting the needs of the Australian community."
date: "2006-03-16"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Africa"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211290854
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5F4J6%22
---

 

 Andrew Robb AO MP

 Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Media Centre

 Meeting the Needs of the Australian Community 

 16 March 2006

 Meeting with African community leaders and members of the broader community in Blacktown today, Parliamentary  Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Mr Andrew Robb emphasised the importance of long  term settlement outcomes for refugees and humanitarian entrants.

 ‘The African community, in particular, face certain challenges in settling into life in Australia. A number of areas of  immediate concern have been identified, including the English language, employment opportunities and job readiness,  early integration of children into the school system and law and order issues,’ Mr Robb said.

 ‘Over the next four months, I will be visiting several communities around the country with large refugee populations to  make an on the ground assessment of the challenges faced by these refugees, as well as the broader community,’ Mr Robb  said.

 Mr Robb said he would be listening to local community views as well as meeting with the African communities.

 ‘The Government is currently spending over $50 million a year on refugee resettlement services around Australia through  the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy.’ Mr Robb said ‘This includes at least six months intensive assistance  with a range of essential services, such as the provision of suitable accommodation, counselling, and healthcare,’ Mr Robb  said.

 The Government spends a further $150 million a year on migrant settlement, including adult English language tuition,  interpreting and translating services, and a settlement grants program.

 This doesn’t take into account spending by other government agencies on programs and services to migrants, such as  Centrelink, Medicare, the Job Network and school age English language tuition.

 ‘We need to ensure that government spending on settlement provides the most successful outcomes for the settlers, and for  the entire community,’ Mr Robb said.

 ‘It’s important to take a comprehensive whole of government approach to these settlement issues, particularly around jobs  and education.’

 ‘The Member for Greenway, Louise Markus, has been keen for me to see first hand some of the issues being confronted by  refugees and the broader community,’ Mr Robb said. ‘We need to focus in particular on those services which aim to get  people into jobs, learn English quickly, and generally help them integrate into the local community.’

 MEDIA CONTACT: 0409 842 069

