---
title: "[Transcript of doorstop interview: Electorate Office, Adelaide: 26 February 2006: meet with the Indonesian Foreign Minister; Paul Volker; AWB shares; 10th anniversaries]]."
date: "2006-02-26"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Visits from Australia"
  - "ANDERSON, John, (former Member)"
  - "AWB Ltd"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Papua"
  - "Terrorist financing"
  - "THOMAS, Joseph"
  - "Corruption"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Insider trading"
  - "HOWARD, John, (former PM)"
  - "Illegal fishing"
  - "Bali Nine"
  - "Transcript of doorstop interview: Electorate Office"
  - "Adelaide: 26 February 2006: meet with the Indonesian Foreign Minister; Paul Volker; AWB shares; 10th anniversaries"
  - "Transcript of doorstop interview: Electorate Office, Adelaide: 26 February 2006: meet with the Indonesian Foreign Minister"
  - "Paul Volker"
  - "AWB shares"
  - "10th anniversaries"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211289948
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MJVI6%22
---

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   

 DATE:   26 February 2006    

 TITLE:  Doorstop, Electorate Office, Adelaide    

 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Look, I’m heading off to Jakarta this evening.  I’ll only be there  for  a  bit  over  24  hours,  -  partly  to  address  a  conference  on  terrorism;  but  also  it’ll  be  an   opportunity  for  me  to  meet  with  the  Indonesian  Foreign  Minister,  Hassan  Wirajuda,  my   counterpart; and I’ll be talking to him essentially about three things from Australia’s point of  view. 

 First of all, we do have a situation at the moment where 43 Indonesians from the province of  West  Papua  have  applied  for  protection  visas;  and  I’ll  be  explaining  to  the  Indonesian   Government that this is going through due process at the moment; their applications are being  considered  one  by  one  by  the  Immigration  Department,  and  they  will  make  an  assessment   consistent with the legal obligations that Australia has, including under domestic law, but also  the 1951 Refugee Convention. 

 Secondly,  in  the  case  of  the  Bali  Nine,  two  of  them  have  been  sentenced  to  death.   Those   sentences  are  subject  to  appeal  at  the  moment,  and  of  course  there  will  be  no  formal   application from them for clemency until such a point as their appeals have all failed, should  that point ever be reached. 

 Of course I’m not anticipating anything in relation to the appeals.  We just don’t know what  will happen.  But, I will flag with the Indonesian Government that whilst we share their view  that we must all be very tough on drugs and crack down on people who traffic drugs, it’s the  Australian  Government’s  view  that  if  Australians  are  sentenced  to  death,  we  would  always   appeal for clemency. 

 And, thirdly, we remain very concerned about the issue of illegal fishing in Australian waters,  and  we  have  had  some  discussions  with  the  Indonesians  about  ways  of  improving  the   monitoring of this problem, and I want to make sure that, with the Indonesian Government,  we’re  making  good  progress  towards  trying  to  find  a  solution  to  the  problem  of  illegal  

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 fishing.   Because  obviously  it  has  a,  a  very  negative  impact  on  the  Australian  fishing   industry; also there are laws to be upheld here, and we need to make sure that the Australian  territorial  waters  and  the  Australia’s,  Australia’s  exclusive  economic  zone  are,  are  properly   maintained, and that their integrity is upheld. 

 QUESTION:  Mr  Downer,  did  you  discuss  Paul  Volker’s  revelations  about  AWB  with   John… 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Oh, talk about Indonesia first.  If there’s any other questions on  Indonesia? 

 QUESTION:  It’s  a  legitimate question. 

 MINISTER DOWNER: I know, I’m going to answer your question; there’s no need to  be hostile, but I’ll - because I’m ready to deal with that; but are there any other questions first  on Indonesia? 

 Okay.   Mr  Volker  -  did  I  discuss  it  -  no.   And  can  I  just  say  about  this  -  the  Labor  Party   several  weeks  ago  claimed  that  the  government  had  behaved  corruptly  in  relation  to  AWB.   Then of course the, through the Cole Inquiry there’s been no evidence at all of any corruption  on the part of the government. 

 And the Labor Party have been trying to make the government held responsible for this, and  as it is increasingly clear that the government isn’t responsible for it - and that is more and  more clear as the Cole Inquiry continues - they have decided that their only hope is to sink  into the gutter and throw mud at people like John Anderson. 

 I  mean  this  suggestion  that  somehow  John  Anderson  -  who  is  I  think  one  of  the  most   honourable  people  I  have  ever  come  across  in  politics,  or  indeed  out  of  politics  -  would   behave  in  that  sort  of  a  way,  and  that  I  would  be  conniving  with  John  Anderson;  that’s   Beazley at his lowest and Beazley at his most desperate.   

 And today Mr Beazley is out there on the Sunday program, smearing public servants; naming  public  servants  who,  you  know,  he  chooses  to  attack  because  he  alleges  they’ve  been   involved  as  staffers  for  the  Coalition  over  the  years.  I  mean,  Mr  Beazley  is  becoming   increasingly desperate, because he began a campaign claiming the government was corrupt, 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 

 which is an enormously serious allegation to make,  and  subsequently  to  that  it’s  been,  he’s   been exposed to have been entirely wrong. 

 I’d say there’s, I think Mr Beazley should apologise to John Anderson for making this sort of  grubby,  or  allowing  these  sorts  of  grubby  allegations  to  be  made.  We  look  forward  to  an   apology from Mr Beazley for this disgraceful slur on the reputation of a decent man. 

 QUESTION: What about Mr Anderson apparently selling his AWB shares late last year?  Is  that a pure coincidence do you think? 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Well Mr Anderson’s explained all of that.  I don’t know about  Mr  Anderson’s  share  trading.   I  give  you,  I’ll  give  you  a  tip  off  there.   But  I  have  no  idea   what  shares  Mr  Anderson  holds.   I’ve,  I  suppose  they’re  on  a  government,  on  the   parliamentary register.  I’ve never looked at Mr Anderson’s shareholdings.  I know absolutely  nothing about them at all. 

 But  I  tell  you  what  I  think  is  just  disgusting  muck  raking  -  it  is  the  Beazley;  it’s  the  new   Beazley style, that you hurl mud and then force people to deny these absolutely unfounded  allegations  and  move  on  to  something  else.   Oh  well,  at  least  a  bit  of  mud  stuck  on  Mr   Anderson here.  

 It’s Beazley at his worst.  This is a man who used to pride himself on being, well, a nice and  decent  bloke,  and  he’s  become  a  nasty,  defamer  of  good  people.   That’s  all  Mr  Beazley  is   today. 

 QUESTION: Do you concede that it was inappropriate for John Anderson… 

 MINISTER DOWNER: To sell his shares? 

 QUESTION: …no, not to declare it on the pecuniary… 

 MINISTER DOWNER: I don’t know any about it.  It’s not - I’m a Foreign Minster, it’s  not - way, way beyond my responsibility who declares what… 

 QUESTION: He was a backbencher at the time. 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Well that’s right, and I’m not the leader of the party any more,  and I’m, I’m not even a member of the National Party; I know absolutely nothing about it.  I  know nothing about that.  It’s not my area of responsibility. 

 QUESTION: Well he should have put it on the register at the time. 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Well, that’s the ABC’s view.  They can run that story with him. 

 QUESTION: No, it’s not the ABC’s view. 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Well you can, you said he should have. 

 QUESTION:  Well…  

 MINISTER DOWNER: You said he should have.  That’s your view. 

 QUESTION:  John  Anderson…  

 MINISTER DOWNER: I mean, you’re entitled to your view. 

 QUESTION:  …John  Anderson  admitted  that  he  was  supposed  to  put  it  on  the  pecuniary   interest register. 

 MINISTER  DOWNER:  Take  it  up  with,  take  it  up  with  John  Anderson.   I  just  don’t   know about that. 

 QUESTION:  Just  moving  to  Jack  Thomas,  the  first  Australian  convicted  under  the  Terror   Funding laws.  What’s your reaction to that? 

 MINISTER DOWNER: It’s a matter for Attorney General.  I mean, these, this is a case  which has been heard in a court and followed due process; and I’ll just leave it at that. 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 

 QUESTION: On a positive note, you’ll soon be celebrating your 10th anniversary as Foreign  Minister in Australia.  Any thoughts there?  Any exciting moments to look back on? 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Well I think over that 10 years it’s been a, a dramatic period for  Australia.  I think, in terms of Australia’s standing in the world, we are a much stronger and a  much more self-confident country than we were 10 years ago. 

 We’re a country which is much better integrated into the Asia Pacific region than we were 10  years ago.  But, I think Australia has made a magnificent contribution over the last 10 years  to  bringing  peace  to  Bougainville;  bringing  peace  to  East  Timor,  and  really  facilitating  the   independence of East Timor. 

 We’ve supported countries in the region through the Asian economic crisis.  We’ve helped to  bring freedom to parts, other parts of the world - Afghanistan and Iraq - we’ve made a very  strong contribution to fighting terrorism, and we have of course a very strong economy which  enables us to do all these things. 

 I  think  over  the  last  10  years,  Australia  has  become  a  much  more  confident;  a  much  more   self-assured,  and  a  much  more  significant  country  in  the  international  community.   And  I,   I’ve played my part in that, but of course lots of others have as well.  So, I never over-claim  for myself.  I am but an Adelaide Hills boy who does my best at work, when I go to work. 

 QUESTION:  It’s  also  the  Prime  Minister’s  10th  anniversary.   What’s  the  secret  to  his   success? 

 MINISTER  DOWNER:  Well  I  think  the  secret  to  John  Howard’s  success  is,  is  an   enormous,  a  very  passionate  commitment  to  his  country,  coupled  with  a  capacity  to  work   extremely hard, extremely diligently, and a very very sharp mind, where he can understand  the central points in issues that challenge Australia, and work his way through those points. 

 I think John Howard has been now the greatest Prime Minister Australia has had since 1901.   I think he has been an extraordinarily good Prime Minister. And, it’s a tribute to him that his  critics,  critics’  criticisms  -  such  as  Mr  Beazley  -  has  become  more  and  more  hysterical  as   time goes on. Because the public, in the main, they just don’t resonate with them.  I mean,  people  under  John  Howard  have  seen  Australians  become  more  prosperous;  their  country   become more self-confident in the world. 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 

 Australia has become a really significant country during the Howard years, and John Howard  is the person above all who deserves credit for that. 

 QUESTION: Come the celebrations, any quiet chardonnay’s that will be happening on that  day - what will be planned? 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Oh no, what is the day - it’s, the 2nd is the anniversary of the  election,  and  I  reckon  the  11th  was  the  anniversary  of  when  the  Prime  Minister  and  the   Minsters were sworn in.  I hadn’t -I’m going to the dinner 1st, and on the 2nd I’m just flying  home and just spend the evening here at home, and I’m not sure about the 11th.  I’ll have to  check on that. 

 I’m not a great one for celebrating these things.  Look, you know, my view is it’s been a team  effort,  for  me  and  Peter  Costello,  as  well  as  John  Howard;  we’re  the  only  three  who  were   initially in the Cabinet, who have remained in the Cabinet throughout those 10 years. And it’s  been, for me, just an enormous honour to have served the country for so long as the Foreign  Minister, and I hope I’ve been able to deliver good things for Australia in that period of time. 

 QUESTION: Just moving back onto Thomas quickly - personally are you disappointed that  sort of the test of the new anti-terror laws, and he’s been acquitted of two of the charges? 

 MINISTER DOWNER: Well, look, it’s a matter for the courts.  I mean, I don’t think the  government has a view really, on the final decisions that the court takes.  I mean, it was a jury  trial, as I understand it, and the jury has made their decision.  The court’s handed down its  decision, and you know, that’s just the way our system works.  It’s just a question of making  sure due process is followed. 

 QUESTION: What about claims by Thomas’s lawyer that it’s a trophy trial for the AFP? 

 MINISTER  DOWNER:  Well,  I  suppose  his  lawyer  would  make  any  range  of  claims.    His lawyer’s job is to sort of put a bit of spin for Thomas.  But, I mean, look, in the end this  has been heard by the courts, and I really don’t have any comment on it. 

 QUESTION:  So  you  don’t  think  there’s  any  need  to  review  the  anti-terror  laws  or  have  a   look at them again? 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 6

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 7

 MINISTER  DOWNER:  Look,  I  haven’t  heard  the  details  of  the  court’s  decision,  so  I   don’t really, couldn’t really comment on that. Just as I, you know, I’m not John Anderson’s  farm  manager  or  whatever  you  think  I  might  be.   I  just  don’t  know  anything  about  his   shareholdings.  His accountant is the person to raise his shareholdings with I suppose, if not,  him himself.  Same for Thomas. 

 Okay.  Thank you. 

 ENDS 

 

