---
title: "Latest refugee and humanitarian arrivals to Australia."
date: "2006-11-23"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211301010
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2ZKL6%22
---

 Media Centre 

 Latest refugee and humanitarian arrivals to Australia 

 23 November 2006 

 Australia welcomes the arrival of 345 refugee and humanitarian entrants this week as part  of our country’s contribution to the resettlement of those most in need, Minister for  Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Amanda Vanstone said today. 

 ‘Of these arrivals, 180 are refugees, many of whom have been waiting patiently in camps  for years,’ Senator Vanstone said. 

 Refugees are people who are outside their country of nationality and are unable to return  because they fear persecution. Their status has usually been determined by the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which has assessed them to be in need  of resettlement. 

 The remaining 165 are Special Humanitarian Programme entrants. They have been forced  to leave their home country after being subjected to substantial discrimination, and also  have family or other links in Australia. 

 Included in the 345 arrivals are 242 people from Africa, 77 from the Middle East and South  West Asia, 20 from South East Asia, and six from Eastern Europe. 

 ‘These are all entrants under Australia's refugee and humanitarian programme, which  currently provides about 13 000 places each year,’ Senator Vanstone said. 

 ‘Australia is able to offer this level of protection, in part, because of our commitment to  maintaining tough border security. 

 ‘There are 94 family groups among this week's scheduled arrivals, including 33 refugees  arriving under a dedicated programme for women at risk. This includes women who have  lost male family members and are therefore considered particularly vulnerable.’ 

 The refugee and humanitarian entrants arriving this week are expected to settle across  Australia as follows:  

 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

 Border Protection Migration Program Humanitarian Program Multicultural Affairs Home Minister's Profile Contact the Minister Media Centre

 New South Wales 88 Western Australia  30 

 South Australia  79 Northern Territory 26 

 Victoria  73 Tasmania  11 

 Queensland  31 ACT  7  

  

