---
title: "Vanstone shuffles deck chairs on deck of mandatory detention policy."
date: "2006-03-01"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "Refugee policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211290170
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BXWI6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales 

 

 Vanstone shuffles deck chairs on deck of mandatory  detention policy. 

 Senator Nettle, 2nd March 2006   

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle today dismissed the Immigration Minister's announced  progress of changes to her department as 'peripheral' and called for more far reaching  policy change.    

 "Mandatory detention of asylum seekers is a dog of a policy. The government is  seeking to make it better groomed, but it's still a dog," Senator Nettle said    

 "The Minister's announcement today confirms that Australia will continue to run  multimillion dollar desert and remote island prison camps, privately run and managed,  which will continue to damage inmate's mental health in processes protected by  commercial in confidence considerations.    

 "It's indicative of the fundamental failings of the mandatory detention policy that so  much effort needs to be expended to meet basic human rights concerns raised by the  Palmer and Comrie reports.    

 "The cultural problems in the Immigration Department were created by the Howard  government and are inextricably linked to the policy of mandatory detention.    

 "The review of the detention centre contract should include the possibility of  government taking responsibility for detention centre management but it does not.    

 "The earliest any change in contractual arrangements for detention centre  management is late 2007 which would be almost three years after Cornelia Rau's  plight came to public attention.    

 "The key change missing from today's announcement is the release of all asylum  seekers into the community with appropriate support whilst their claims are assessed.  As now happens for women and children asylum seekers who are living in the  community without incident.    

 "If the government was really trying to improve the outcomes of the Immigration  Department then it should adopt the policy of releasing all asylum seekers into the  community whilst there claims are assessed."    

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146   Created by Administration   Last modified 02-03-2006 12:37 PM    

 [01/03/06]

