---
title: "What the public wants: speech [to the] Australian Public Service Commission, [Canberra]: 11 October 2006."
date: "2006-10-11"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Government performance"
  - "Public service accountability"
  - "Immigration policy"
  - "Media coverage"
  - "Attitudes"
  - "to the"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211299202
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KU4L6%22
---

  ‘What the public wants’ 

  Speech by 

  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs 

  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone 

  to 

  Australian Public Service Commission 

  Wednesday 11 th October 2006 at 12 noon 

  What the Public wants: 

  Most people would agree that what Australians want is for Australia to be in safe hands  with a bright future. Our short term personal interest will often be expressed but few if  any would claim their short term personal interest should over-ride the long term  national interest. Most, while wanting the best outcome for themselves from a 

  Government, accept that a Government has to make decisions in the overall long term  national interest. We all want Australia to be a better place not just for ourselves and our  kids but for everyone. 

  There’s an interesting bbq debate as to whether people would prefer tax cuts or more  Government spending. 

  Wherever Australians believe that debate ought to conclude, the fact is when  Governments spend money it’s taxpayers’ money. One of the things I believe all  Australians want most is value for their money. 

  They want to be confident that their taxes are being used wisely, and, in many cases, to  see their taxes at work. 

  There’s one other thing the public wants at all times. They want Ministers and public  servants to work in an effective partnership to spend taxpayers’ money. They know  each side will have their own agendas, confidences and even secrets. 

  But they expect Ministers to be told the brutal truth about mistakes. 

  A wilful withholding of critical information from a Minister is a fatal mistake. If the public  ever knew about it they’d expect consequences. When a Minister finds this has  happened the trust is impossible to rebuild. The relationship will never be the same. 

  Sadly, this does happen. 

  Equally sadly, Australians get to hear too little about what their taxes do. 

  At Budget time much fuss is made about who gets what. But this is largely focused on  new policy initiatives and that’s a very narrow focus. 

  For example this year total spending rose by about $14billion to $220b, but only $55b  of that actually relates to new expenditure measures. Put another way, in the last  Budget new policy measures accounted for 2.5% of total Government spending. But  what a tremendous fuss is made over those new policy measures. 

  Just within the increased expenditure $8.5b, or 61 YO of the increase, was soaked up by,  for example, increased wage and non-wage costs, increases in the number of pension  beneficiaries, or growth in per person take up of programs. 

  Why doesn’t the media let the public in on the 97.5% of Government outlays? $214.5b  worth of expenditure is somehow not considered to be newsworthy. 

  The media feed our basest instincts under the mantra of ‘gimme gimme’, winners and  losers, with an outline of who gets what. 

  2 

  For example, if there had been nothing new for pensioners and welfare recipients it  would be quite misleading and false for the media to say there was “nothing for  pensioners and welfare recipients”. The social security and welfare recipients’ share of  the current Budget is $92b. There might be nothing new but $92b is not nothing. 

  New spending proposals are the fuel to the political fire. There’s very little focus on the  means by which new or old policy decisions are delivered. They strain out the gnat and  swallow the camel. 

  Generally the media’s interest in routine policy delivsry is triggered only when mistakes  are made or there are policies they didn’t like. Our Lnauthorised boat arrivals policy  from 1999 onwards fuelled perceptions the media e,ther held or wanted to convey about  DIMA. The reporting of the Rau and Alvarez cases was done through that perception  and was exacerbated by it. 

  We have made mistakes. And bad ones. But I can assure the community that while the  media’s perception of us led to some very very poor reporting of those cases, for public  servants a constant diet of unjust or biased criticism can lead to a shutting out of all  criticism. Sadly that includes warranted and fair criticism. This point was made by Mr 

  Palmer in his report - but not reported on. 

  There’s no doubt we made mistakes. There’s also no doubt that we’ve been very busy  fixing the problems that allowed those mistakes to happen. There’s a tremendous  amount of money and a tremendous amount of effort that’s going into it. I don’t see any  interest in that story. 

  The media in Canberra like to focus on the political game. Some, in particular, focus on  their own particular political and policy views. Interesting and relevant as these may be,  they cast no light on that $214.5b. 

  It’s no accident they shed no extra light, because of course the press gallery is not  always in tune with what the public want to know, and for that matter with what the  public think. 

  Of course the public is interested in their slice of the cake, but they’re also interested in  the rest of the cake. If we did a vox pop in a shopping centre would most people know  that 40% of Government expenditure goes on welfare and social security and that that’s  a significantly higher percentage than Labor spent? think not. 

  I cannot accept that there are no interesting stories amongst $220b worth of policy and 

  administration. 

  Amongst $6b a day there must be innovators and plodders, heroes and villains, sad  stories and happy endings. There are stories there. “hey are there and they happen  every day. There are stories that would be of interes! not just to political junkies but to  normal people not mainlining that drug. 

  Of course there’ll be horses for courses. Not all stories will pass the pub test. But it isn’t  hard to find stories in every newspaper that don’t pass the pub test. There are always  stories for particular interest groups but you don’t see many that come out of this $214b. 

  3 

  If you don’t believe me, can you tell me why Border Security is Australia’s top rating TV  show. 

  Okay, okay. Some stories will make us mad, some sad, some glad. But we will at least  be alive to the enormous part of Australia’s life going on around us. 

  I’ve been Minister in four different substantive portfolios, covering nine different policy  areas (employment, education and training, youth affairs, justice, customs, family and  community services, women, immigration, indigenous affairs). The culture and modus  operandi of each department has been quite different. 

  A service delivery portfolio like FACS as it was with Centrelink in it, would have a  completely different structure and outlook to a policy and practical enforcement portfolio  like Justice and Customs. And they would be different again from a department like the  old DEETYA with a huge customer base of students and welfare recipients through the 

  old CES. 

  And all of those departments face different challenges from those faced by my current  department which has millions of clients all over the world and strong responsibilities to  Australia through visa grants and border control. 

  The Australian public service is one of Australia’s largest human resources. The salary  cost is nearly $14b, or 6% of total outlays. That’s more than double the expenditure on  new policy. 

  The Australian Government, not including GBEs, employs nearly a quarter of a million  people (234, 076). In fact over all three tiers of Government there are nearly 1.7 million  public servants around Australia. Imagine how many more have been through the public  service. 

  Yet we see forests of paper and gigabytes of air time scrutinising new policy and hardly  any on the structure, shape, opportunities and limitations of the public service. 

  Defence in its three configurations of military, reserves and civilians, employs 84,000  full-time equivalents, Centrelink 25,000, and the Tax-Office 20,000. Immigration, with  6,000 full time equivalents, is the next largest employer. 

  The Australian Government is more heavily involved in dollar transfers to individuals  and Governments whereas the State Governments are more involved in service  delivery. That is reflected in the fact that our salary cost in this financial year is 6% while  the NSW Government’s is 44%. 

  Within departments some policies are more expensive to deliver than others. For  example, within FACSIA the departmental cost for Indigenous services is 12.2%. But for  seniors, carers, youth and disability the departmental cost is 1.4%. We could go even  further, for example within Indigenous services, and see that different outputs have  vastly different departmental expenses. 

  These departmental expenses of course are an average. If we were to simply bump up  welfare payments by a billion or two the departmental expenses for the addition would  be minimal. However if we were to decide to deliver $1 b more in new services to  Indigenous Australians you can be sure that the percentage of departmental expenses 

  4 

  would be very significant. There would be the cost of policy development, managing and  monitoring results. 

  Across the public service all this money and all these people are doing something,  every day. 

  If I had a small business with a salary bill of less than a million I would be very  interested in my staff. I would want the most from those people and that would mean  bringing out the best in them. And I would want to know what they were spending my  money on. We are spending $14b of taxpayers’ money on salaries and I’m sure they  want the public service to be the best it can be, And they want the remaining $212b to 

  be spent well. 

  I think o w  public service is world class. I’ve had the opportunity and privilege of working  with some truly fantastic people. But the percentage of the public service I get to work  with is a very small one and I can’t say whether eveyone down the chain is getting the  chance to be as good as they can. 

  This is not an easy issue. In a department with significant State offices, such as  Immigration, we need to ensure that people in State and Territory offices don’t feel like  they’re in outposts, almost disconnected from the centre. And at the same time we need  people in Canberra to understand that it’s people in the State and Territory offices who  are in the front line and who have the best and freshest information as to what is 

  happening in our broader constituency. 

  If people are to have the opportunity to be as good ES they can, they need to have the  opportunity to have diversity of experience. 

  This is not going to be possible if most people spend most of their time in one  department, or worse, in just one part of one department. 

  In Canberra there seems to be at least some mobility between departments. In the  State and Territory offices, where so much of the frotit line work takes place, this does  not seem to be the case. 

  I think State and Territory offices would benefit from a policy of requiring people looking  for promotion to senior positions to have at least experience in other States in the same  department or other departments in the same State. 

  With so many people employed there has to be some under-performers. The public  service can’t be immune to that. But it’s fair to say the public service doesn’t deal with it  very well. I do think we need a better solution, one that protects the integrity of the  service and at the same time protects all the good people who shouldn’t have to be  weighed down and held back by under performers. 

  Of course when a Government is looking for big cost cuts one traditional method has  been to offer redundancies. It may be convenient, but I don’t think it’s effective. The  good take the dollars and run, they set up in the privste sector, and possibly even  contract themselves back as consultants. The not-so-good and the completely hopeless 

  (but not SO hopeless as not to know which side their head is buttered) stay put. 

  5 

  In any organisation getting the structure right and giving people the chance to develop  and recognising their skills is very important. Just think back to what the AFP was  before Mick Palmer changed its shape, its promotional structure, and its outlook. He  created an organisation with greater capability and greater responsiveness that enabled 

  it to grow to the organisation it is today. Without those reforms this growth would not  have been possible. 

  I hope I’ve made the case that the dollars and the number of people involved in simply  delivering existing policies is very substantial and that both the management of people  and the administration of the policies deserve close attention. 

  Let me give some examples of changes that don’t fit into the new spending proposal  category but are nonetheless part of the daily work of improving the way we service  Australians. 

  A few years ago the humanitarian intake was increased, as was the refugee component  of it. There was some coverage of this change. 

  As a matter of interest Australia is consistently in the top three countries for accepting  people in need of resettlement according to the UNHCR. We are at the moment the  second largest. 

  Not many Australians understand that. It’s a real shame. It is something we can all be  very proud of. 

  But when media and advocacy groups have a mindset against a Government policy, as  they did have to unauthorised boat arrival policy from 1999 onwards, every negative is  exaggerated and no positives are conceded. 

  Little interest is shown in our refugee and humanitarian program and I think I should be  forgiven for concluding that the reason for that is advocacy groups and some in the  media will never concede a positive point to the Government in this area. 

  Perhaps we are starting to turn the corner because we do see at least some positive  stories about our new refugees and how they’re settling in. 

  Obviously we have an obligation to ensure that our refugee and humanitarian entrants  get the best chance of maximising the opportunities Australia presents. 

  One of the things we need to do is revise the criteria for who can act as a sponsor to a  humanitarian entrant. We need to look, for example, for a demonstrated capacity to do  the job of being a sponsor: to be an anchor and support for the humanitarian entrant. I  think this is almost impossible to do if you don’t yourself have a steady job. 

  Everyone who comes here under that program deserves to get the right support. We  shouldn’t b e  letting people sponsor if they can’t provide that. I will be consulting in the  near future with relevant groups on how best to improve sponsor selection. 

  It’ll be interesting to see how this is written up in the media. No doubt some will say it’s  being harsh to our new entrants by restricting the opportunity to sponsor. I think it is  harsh to the newest entrants not to restrict that opportunity. 

  6 

  The negative mindset I have mentioned about immigration means that little, if any,  attention is paid by the media to very substantial improvements in the way the skilled  migration program has been managed by this Government for the long term benefit of  Australia. 

  Another example of the media’s tendency to focus only on the negatives is the currently  topical 457 (skilled temporary entry) visa. Media coverage relates primarily to misuses  of the visa by relatively few employers. At this stage we estimate that to be about 2%.  But the coverage of the negatives is almost, if not eitirely, 100% of the story the media  tell the public about that visa. 

  Not that you would know it from media coverage (with a few notable exceptions) but the  457 visa is an exceptionally functional visa that helps business to quickly grasp  opportunities, to grow, and thereby protect Australian jobs and build new ones. 

  Most people don’t realise that a simple timing issue can have drastic outcomes. It  needn’t involve new spending or major policy chance. Take, for example, the  I mm ig rat ion Mi n iste r’s intervention power . 

  One reformer of immigration, Sen Robert Ray, as I’m advised, believed the  comprehensive codification of the rules meant there was no need for an intervention  power. The system should just work according to law and the outcome would be fair  The then opposition believed it was appropriate to Pave a catch-all in the form of 

  Ministerial intervention so that the occasional unique and exceptional case that fell  outside the comprehensive categories of rules could be considered. 

  With hindsight, neither view has proved to be correct. I’m confident the Ministerial  intervention power is required. I’m equally sure that the intervention process is clogged  with cases that are depressingly familiar and anything but unique or exceptional. In case  after case, the facts that are alleged to make the case unique and exceptional have 

  clearly arisen after the final decision at the relevant tribunal. 

  Australians want strong and fair immigration policies. 

  Those who have no entitlement to stay should go. 

  If applicants had a very early indication of the likely success or otherwise of an  intervention request that would then focus their minds purely on the likely outcome of  legal challenges through the Courts. DIMA is a very successful litigant. With a clear  understanding of a likely ‘no’ response to an interwition the outlook for staying is not  good. 

  But if a ‘no’ simply means ‘no for now, but come back any time’, I believe it will  encourage people to litigate, simply as a means of cielaying their time here and in that  time building community support for another intervention request. 

  During this time both the wily and the lucky find what passes for and what is,  respectively, true love. Possibly, Australian citizen children are born. In any event,  children, born overseas or here, go to school, everybody makes friends and community  support is built. 

  7 

  Allowing people to seek an intervention at any point, and repeatedly, allows them to  build an emotional case to stay over and above their legal entitlement. 

  But if no means no and if things you did yourself in the delay period didn’t count then  the delay is no longer attractive. The self-initiated delay shouldn’t get a reward. It’s a  waste of Court time and also of taxpayers’ dollars. 

  It’s also unfair to those who do accept the rules and leave and it’s unfair to those  overseas who get a no and can’t access intervention. 

  Australians want strong and fair immigration policies. But we often find, when it comes  down to someone they’ve met and shared a meal with, that it’s hard not to offer  personal support. That’s entirely understandable. What we need to do is have the final  decision made more quickly. And it needs to be final. 

  It was, in my view, a simple administrative mistake to not require an early point at which  the first intervention is sought. 

  We should require all applicants to state their case straight after they get a negative  decision from the MRT or RRT. This would be sensible because at that point the  department is meant to consider each case against international conventions for the  purpose of deciding whether removal is possible. At the same time, we should consider  all the facts that an applicant can put forward. The applicant should know at that point  what the likely outcome would be. 

  I will be consulting in the near future with stakeholders on these matters, but I hope I  have conveyed that the simple timing of an event, not of itself a new policy, with no  particular cost, can have a dramatic and beneficial impact. 

  Certainly the failure to set a starting trigger for consideration of intervention has had a  dramatic impact. I hope the establishment of a reasonable starting trigger will have a  similar dramatic impact. 

  $220b affects our daily lives. It’s our money and we, the public, want to know what’s  happening with it. 

  The public service is in a sense our business and we do want to know about how it’s  managed and how it spends our investment. In so many ways, how that happens has  an equally important impact as new policy does. Australians have a right to hear about  it. 

  8 

