---
title: "Call for Auditor General to review refugee settlement contract."
date: "2006-07-05"
creators:
  - "Hurley, Annette"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295275
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1V5K6%22
---

 M E D I A  R E L E A S E 

 Senator Annette Hurley LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL  AFFAIRS 

 

 Wednesday, 5 July 2006  

 CALL FOR AUDITOR GENERAL TO REVIEW REFUGEE  SETTLEMENT CONTRACT   

 The Auditor General will be asked to review the refugee settlement contract of the  Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. The announcement today of a  Statement of Claim arising from the death of 2 year old refugee Richard Nioyonsaba in  Sydney in November 2005 highlights government incompetence in contract  management.   

 The Shadow Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Annette Hurley,  will write asking for the Auditor General to examine the Integrated Humanitarian  Settlement Strategy (IHSS) contract which came into effect in October 2005. Following  the commencement of the contract serious complaints were made about the provision of  adequate services to refugees arriving in Sydney and Newcastle, culminating with the  tragic death of Richard Niyonsaba.   

 “The Department of Immigration and the Howard Government’s record of contract  delivery and oversight is riddled with incompetence,” said Senator Hurley.   

 “The Auditor General report into the detention centre contracts pointed to mistakes  which appear to be repeated in the Settlement Services contracts. As a result, the  Immigration Department is again being sued over mismanagement,” she said.   

 Senator Hurley asked a series of questions about the contract at the Budget Estimates  in May this year dealing with complaint mechanisms and checks on performance.    

 Labor called for a Senate enquiry into the Niyonsaba case and other issues around the  Settlement Services contract earlier this year, but this was rejected by the government.   

 “The Government has resisted any attempts at an independent enquiry, now we have  the prospect of another protracted legal action,” she said.   

 “I call on the Department of Immigration to deal with this case expeditiously to save the  family of Richard Niyonsaba further anguish.”   

 

 Contact:   Andrew Plimer 0405 088 309   

   Or   Senator Annette Hurley 0417 826 632 

 

 - Ends -   

 

