---
title: "Youth poll: tackle climate change."
date: "2006-06-27"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294882
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1F3K6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Natasha Stott Despoja  Democrats Senator for South Australia  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Higher Education

 Dated: 27 June 2006 

 Press Release Number: vhganhwi  Portfolio: Environment & Animal Welfare  Related: Higher Education  Related: Children & Youth Affairs 

 Youth Poll: Tackle Climate Change

 The lack of action on climate change is a major source of anxiety for young people, Senator Natasha  Stott Despojas annual Youth Poll survey has revealed.   

 Releasing the results of Youth Poll 2006, Senator Stott Despoja said an overwhelming majority of 15-20  year-olds were concerned that too little was being done to combat global warming.   

 "More than 80% of the young people who responded thought the Government was not doing enough to  address climate change," Senator Stott Despoja said.   

 Other major issues for young people this year include: inadequate levels of student income support  (56% say student assistance is inadequate); full-fee paying students entering university courses with  lower grades (64% say they do not want full-fee paying students entering university with lower marks  than HECS students); and, asylum seekers being detained in detention centres (64% do not support  mandatory detention).   

 "The spectre of voluntary student unionism in universities, which starts from July, has more than half of  respondents spooked," Senator Stott Despoja said.   

 "Health issues remain a significant concern in young peoples lives, with a disturbing number of  respondents admitting to binge drinking and the number of young people who know someone who has  attempted or committed suicide remaining steady.   

 "Young people also want to see our human rights and civil liberties protected by a Bill of Rights.   

 "Youth Poll has been providing young people with an opportunity to express their views for more than a  decade. It also ensures their opinions are heard in Parliament." Senator Stott Despoja said.   

 State-specific findings for 2006 include: 84% of South Australian respondents do not believe the  Government is doing enough to restore River Murray water flows; 81% of New South Wales respondents  consider last years Sydney riots to be the result of racism; and, more than half of Western Australian  respondents are concerned about the water shortage in their State.   

 

 

 

