---
title: "23 take a run for Australia at Adelaide Oval."
date: "2006-01-26"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Australia Day"
  - "Adelaide"
  - "Citizenship"
  - "Cricket"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288959
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KPLI6%22
---

 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone   MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

 23 Take a Run for Australia at Adelaide  Oval  Twenty-three people will become Australian citizens before an  audience of around 30 000 people at the Adelaide Oval during a  break in the International one-day match between Australia and Sri  Lanka today.  

 Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs,  Amanda Vanstone, said the ceremony would be part of an historic  Australia Day where more than 14 000 people would become 

 citizens.  

 ‘Given that these conferees in Adelaide are from the great cricketing  nations of South Africa and the United Kingdom, it seems highly  appropriate that they become citizens during a one-day  international cricket match,’ the Minister said. 

 ‘These conferees join the 3.5 million people who have become  citizens since Australian citizenship was introduced more than 55  years ago.’ 

 As a memento of the occasion, the 23 new Australian citizens will  receive a small engraved bat commemorating the ceremony and  their part in this historic day.  

 ‘I invite the crowd to also celebrate their commitment to Australia  by participating in an affirmation ceremony where they can publicly  state their loyalty and commitment to Australia and its people. Our  citizenship is something we should actively celebrate on Australia 

 Day,’ the Minister said.  

 ‘To the many conferees around the nation who have come as  refugees and found sanctuary here, I offer a special welcome on the  day Australia celebrates its beginnings as a new nation. 

 ‘I thank all of those people becoming Australian citizens at  ceremonies today - there will be close to 14 000 across Australia -  for their commitment to the Australian community and I encourage  those who are eligible to take the step and become a citizen,’ the  Minister added. 

 26 January 2006 

 

