---
title: "The quest for the medical dream team."
date: "2006-03-02"
creators:
  - "Haikerwal, Mukesh"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Medical education"
  - "General practice"
  - "Skill shortages"
  - "Council of Australian Governments"
  - "Australian Medical Association"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211290252
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JIIJ6%22
---

 

 

 Home  Whats New  Site Map  Member Login Search 

 Australian Medical Association

 Speech

 Date released:   2 March 2006 

 Good morning Ministers, Shadow Ministers, Honourable  Members and Senators, AMA Federal Councillors, ladies  and gentlemen. 

 May I first say ‘Happy 10th Anniversary’ to Government  members here this morning.  I’m sure it will be a long and  joyful day for you celebrating a decade of Howard  Government. 

 For Opposition members it is perhaps a not-so-happy 10th  anniversary - more like a time to reflect and regroup for  the battles ahead. 

 And for the minor parties and independents, may you  continue to ‘keep the bastards honest’, whoever is in  power. 

 This morning I could talk to you about many aspects of  the Australian health system - the good and the not-so-good. 

 I could talk to you about the challenges of mental health  ahead of the major COAG announcements later in the  year.  There was a welcome sense of cooperation between  the Commonwealth and the States at their last meeting -  especially on health promotion and illness prevention.  

 I could talk about the continuing crisis in Indigenous  health, which I acknowledge is receiving a trickle of  positive attention as we await the torrent of commitment  that is truly needed. 

 I could talk about nutrition and obesity.  This Week’s ABS  National Health Survey shows that we still have big  problems with obesity, but also with smoking and alcohol  abuse. 

 Aged care remains a major issue worth talking about.   The elder abuse in nursing homes is horrific.  We need to  respect older Australians and provide greater assistance  to the people who care for them. 

 The Quest For The Medical Dream  Team

  About the AMA Policy and Issues Resources Media Events Meetings Publications Member Services 

 Page 1 of 9 AMA - Speech

 Environmental health and climate change remain major  concerns of the AMA and the community. 

 I could talk about child and youth health.  It is our duty to  help our kids get off to a healthy start in life.  The  Government has made some moves in this area, and  Labor recently released its bold blueprint on children’s  health.  It is an area getting deserved attention. 

 I could talk about health care for asylum seekers.  There  have been some big changes since this time last year.   We have seen the release of children from detention.  And  Victoria, my home State, was the first to give refugees  access to health care. 

 I would love to talk at length about the indexation of the  Medicare Benefits Schedule - one of my favourite topics.   Like you, I could go on and on forever about this…but I  won’t.  Not today, anyway. 

 I could talk about electronic health initiatives.  This is a  riddle.  We have some great technology tied up with  stacks of red tape.  The AMA has the knowledge and  capability to help the Government realise the benefits of  e-health.  We must get it right.  So please call us, Tony.   Call us, Joe.  We are here to help. 

 I could talk at length about the Pharmaceutical Benefits  Scheme.  We need to maintain access to quality  affordable drugs in this country.  AMA members prescribe  every day of their working lives.  We see first-hand the  struggles of working Australian families as they balance  the need for medicines with two safety nets and the  threat of higher and higher co-payments. 

 I could even talk about a flaw in the WorkChoices Bill that  could allow veterinarians to issue sick leave certificates.   Yes, that’s right.  If the Bill goes through as it currently is,  workers in the ACT, for example, could quite literally ring  work and say:  ‘Won’t be in today, boss - I’m sick as a  dog’.  But I won’t talk about that here this morning. 

 I know all these subjects are of interest to you.  All these  subjects affect the people in your electorates. 

 But this morning I will limit myself to one major topic -  the medical workforce. 

 Without a highly skilled medical workforce in the right  numbers, all the programs I have just run through cannot  be effective. 

 Page 2 of 9 AMA - Speech

 There is one simple fact about health: when people get  sick, they want to see a doctor - a medical doctor.   Despite what others are saying - a doctor is a doctor is a  doctor.  This still rings true for the great majority of  Australians.  It resounds across the country, and around  the globe. 

 The political and medical solutions to the medical  workforce shortage must ensure that access to doctors  and professional high quality scientifically-based care is  maintained. 

 We have to train doctors in the right numbers.  We have  to attract doctors to work where they are needed.  We  have to provide workforce support for doctors.  And we  must ensure that there is leadership in any health care  team.  And that leadership must be provided by the  comprehensively trained, most highly skilled members of  the team -  the doctors. 

 Leadership is not a new role for doctors.  The difficult life-and-death decisions and quality of life decisions - and the  final responsibility for care - have always been the lot of  the medical practitioner. 

 You will all be aware that some State Governments, and  now COAG, are keen to fill medical workforce gaps with  non-medical people.  The AMA is opposed to this. 

 Some have accused us of ‘turf protection’.  I can tell you  it is not ‘turf protection’, it is ‘patient protection’. 

 All Australians - no matter their means or where they live  - deserve to be able to get to see a doctor when they  need one.  They demand and need a medical diagnosis  from a registered medical practitioner. 

 There must be equal access to the best possible health  care, and the gateway to that care has to be the local  family doctor, the GP. 

 GPs are highly trained, they are skilled at diagnosis, and  they are skilled at managing simple, complex and chronic  health conditions.  They can detect what is abnormal in a  patient’s health and then help them negotiate the  healthcare maze. 

 If your health requires particular expertise, your GP will  help you see a health professional with the most  appropriate skills for your condition. 

 Australians make, on average, 11 visits to the doctor each 

 Page 3 of 9 AMA - Speech

 year.  The average GP consultation is about 15 minutes  face-to-face.  Non face-to-face time is about five minutes  per patient. 

 For that, you get excellent holistic care and continuing  management.  And all for less than $200 per person a  year, on average.  It’s more affordable than most other  services in Australia, let alone professional services.  It’s 

 great value for holistic care, continuity of care, and the  comfort and security of the doctor-patient relationship. 

 Now, the AMA is all for more clever ways to use the entire  health workforce to fill the gaps where there are no GPs,  too few GPs, or where the GP resources are stretched. 

 It is already happening.  The health system is evolving all  the time.  

 In the last couple of years, the Australian Medical Council  has been asked to approve new specialties in: 

  z Sports and Exercise Medicine  

  z Pain Medicine  

  z Palliative Care Medicine  

  z Addiction Medicine  

  z and Rural and Remote Medicine.   

  Nothing stands still in health.  Optometrists now do a lot  of refractions previously done by ophthalmologists.   Midwives are doing antenatal care and normal deliveries.   Practice nurses in general practice settings are now  routine - even in my practice.  

  And there are many new opportunities to further improve  care delivery.  Under the direction of the GP, general  practice nurses can become more involved in the delivery  of medical services to the aged, particularly in residential  aged care. 

  Psychiatrists are looking at ways of working with allied  health professionals in the delivery of mental health  services.  If we can get this right, we can extend the  reach of the psychiatric workforce whilst increasing their  numbers, which takes time.  They currently work in  teams, and will continue to do so.  But, again, the  psychiatrist has to be the key decision maker for mentally  ill patients. 

  All this is being achieved under existing Medicare Benefits  Schedule (MBS) arrangements. 

  Opening the MBS up to another 200,000 providers - as 

  Page 4 of 9 AMA - Speech

  advocated in some quarters - is not responsible or  sustainable.  

  It is barely able to cope with rebating services from  current providers. 

  The AMA team-based care model is both practical and  affordable. 

  The models being put forward by COAG, the Productivity  Commission, and the States are based on substitution -  somebody else taking the place of a doctor.  They want  somebody other than a doctor to perform what they term  ‘low risk’ or ‘normal’ tasks.  Where human life is  concerned, there is no such thing as ‘low risk’ or ‘normal’. 

  A doctor is trained to expect the unexpected and detect  the otherwise undetected.  These skills are a long time in  the making and the acquiring.  The question for patients  is:  who would you prefer to read and interpret your X-rays or analyse and explain your pathology results? 

  I think - I know - the answer is ‘my doctor’ and the  experts he or she can call on. 

  The AMA model is a collaborative model designed to  deliver the best medical care to patients.  It is all about  flexibility - a sharing of duties based on skills and  experience - but the ultimate responsibility of patient care  rests with the team leader, the doctor. 

  The thing about flexibility, though, is if you push it too far,  something will break - and that’s what will happen with  out-and-out role substitution. 

  I can hear some of you thinking ‘but there aren’t enough  doctors in my electorate to do the job’.  And that is the  challenge - that is our quest.  We have to set the game  plan for the ‘medical dream team’. 

  We have to find the way to overcome the tyrannies of  distance and isolation to ensure equity and fairness in  health care for all Australians.  And we have to be  realistic.  We can’t have every member of a medical  dream team in the same place at the same time. 

  That is just not possible in rural and remote areas.  It is  not even possible in some outer metropolitan areas. 

  But we can have systems whereby each member of the  team - the GP, the nurse, the specialists and the allied  health workers - can tap into the expertise of the other 

  Page 5 of 9 AMA - Speech

  team members to provide the best possible care for each  and every patient. 

  We will need to embrace new and emerging technologies  to make team-based care work in all settings - especially  in rural and remote areas. 

  And we would need to incorporate existing successful  outreach services like those operating in many Indigenous  communities today. 

  But the AMA’s plan for team-based care needs doctors if it  is to succeed.  So where are we on that front? 

  The Government has responded to medical workforce  shortages by announcing significant increases in the  number of medical schools and medical school places.   Private medical schools are a reality and universities will  be able enrol up to an additional 25 per cent of students  in full fee paying places. 

  By 2011, the combined effect of increased HECS-funded  and full-fee-paying places will see the total annual output  of medical schools increase to around 2400 graduates,  compared to 1270 in 2004. 

  Reforms to speed up the Australian Medical Council  overseas trained doctors assessment process mean that  around 320 overseas trained doctors will require intern  places each year, compared to 116 in 2005. 

  Around 133 overseas full fee paying students currently  require intern positions each year.  Taking this into  account, by 2011, Australia will need 2800 intern  positions to meet the demand for places. 

  To illustrate the challenge ahead, in 2005 there were  1553 intern places available, and 1780 specialist training  places. 

  The Government has in place plans to address medical  workforce shortages - but we have to concentrate on  quality, not just quantity. 

  Which part of an intern’s training would you be happy for  them to omit?  Or which part of the specialist’s knowledge  would you be comfortable with them not having? 

  Rather than going down the substitution path, the focus  should be on addressing shortages in nursing and allied  health professions as well.  What the substitution  advocates forget is that the medical workforce shortage is 

  Page 6 of 9 AMA - Speech

  also a health workforce shortage.   There are not enough  substitutes to fill the substitutes bench. 

  It is important to consider that if substitution does  somehow gain acceptance and momentum, the increased  medical graduate numbers in the system will hit a training  vacuum.  There may not be enough positions available to  train these new doctors, or they may struggle to get  access to a decent training experience. 

  Six years is a very short time frame to put in place steps  to ensure that the quality of training can be maintained  during undergraduate, post-graduate and specialist  training.  Infrastructure, resources and supervision will all  need to be increased significantly. 

  The use of alternative training settings - including private  hospitals and community settings - will need to be  considered. 

  The States mainly affected by these increases are  Western Australia, Queensland and New South  Wales.  Both Queensland and Western Australia have  formed committees to examine the implications, but little  progress is being made. 

  It is worrying that jurisdictions such as Queensland are  looking at how they can ‘cut’ training requirements - such  as accident and emergency terms - in order to provide  sufficient places - rather than build available resources. 

  Again, which core and essential bits of medical knowledge  can now be relegated to the ‘don’t need to  know’ basket?  COAG asked Senior Officials to examine a  range of workforce issues, including the organisation of  clinical education and training. 

  This reflects concerns expressed by the Productivity  Commission over the capacity of the system to account  for increased medical school student numbers.  The  Government needs to work through COAG to quantify the  medical workforce challenges ahead. 

  We need a better picture of what each State is doing, or is  planning to do, so we can get a national perspective. 

  The Australian Health Care Agreements must reflect the  new era of Commonwealth/State cooperation to properly  fund medical training.  And the States and the ACCC have  got to stop hammering the Colleges over workforce  shortages. 

  Page 7 of 9 AMA - Speech

  The Medical Colleges have an enviable reputation for  producing highly skilled medical practitioners and they  cost the taxpayer nothing. 

  I would remind you that the services of the Fellows of  Colleges who are training the next generation of their  colleagues and competitors do so willingly and pro bono.  

  Far from limiting numbers, the opposite is the case. 

  The 2005 Medical Training Review Panel Report shows  there has been an increase of 40.6 per cent in first year  specialist training positions since 1998. 

  There must be greater scrutiny of the role of State  Governments in specialist training. 

  Cutbacks to theatre time - and the closure of beds and  outpatient services - place increasing pressure on the  training environment. 

  The media grandstanding where the States refuse to  provide funding for additional training positions - and then  blame the Colleges for restricting the number of trainees -  must end. 

  It is not productive. 

  If you look at our health system, it may have a few design  faults - but it is delivering high quality services to patients  at a reasonable cost. 

  Through Medicare alone, in 2004-05, Australians received  assistance to access: 

  z over 120 million professional attendances  

  z nearly 80 million pathology services  

  z over 18 million diagnostic procedures, imaging and 

  other investigations   z and nearly 15 million therapeutic procedures.  

  Many additional services of all types were rendered in  hospitals to public patients. 

  This is evidence that Australia has a very hard-working  and productive medical workforce. 

  It is hardly a case to throw the doctors out of the system  - as some are proposing. 

  I urge all of you here today to push the case for team-based care as the way to solve medical workforce 

  Page 8 of 9 AMA - Speech

  shortages. 

  Substituting lesser-trained health workers for doctors is  not a symptom of a high quality health system. 

  I doubt that voters would be thrilled by promises of  lowering the quality of health services. 

  As I said earlier, the simple truth is that people want to  see a doctor when they are sick. 

  There is no substitute for the skills and experience of a  doctor - a doctor is a doctor is a doctor. 

  Thank you. 

  Date released: 02/03/2006 

   Top of Page

  © 1995-2003 Australian Medical Association Limited  All rights reserved | Privacy Statement

  Australian Medical Association ABN: 37008426793

  42 Macquarie Street, BARTON ACT 2600 PO Box 6090, KINGSTON ACT 2604 TEL +61 2 6270 5400 · FAX +61 2 6270 5499 EMAIL ama@ama.com.au

  Page 9 of 9 AMA - Speech

