---
title: "Get involved in Vietnam Veterans' Day, urges MP Irwin."
date: "2006-07-07"
creators:
  - "Irwin, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "Office of IRWIN, JULIA, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295366
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5NKK6%22
---

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 

 Get Involved In Vietnam Veterans' Day, Urges MP Irwin  Federal Member for Fowler, Julia Irwin, is encouraging Vietnam veterans to apply for federal  government grants to hold Vietnam Veterans’ Day activities. 

 “Up to $3,000 is available through the federal government to assist veterans’ organisations  with their plans to commemorate Vietnam Veterans’ Day on 18th August. 

 “The funds can be used for public events and ceremonies or for the making and installation of  plaques or other means of recognising the contribution by Australian and Vietnamese-Australian veterans.” 

 Mrs Irwin said grant applications were being assessed under the Saluting Their Service  program administered by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs. 

 “Vietnam Veterans’ Day on 18th August marks the 40th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan,  the first significant engagement by the 1st Australian Task Force in the war. 

 She said a dawn service was planned for the Australian War Memorial followed by other  activities culminating in a commemoration ceremony at Canberra’s Vietnam Forces National  Memorial. Similar local activities are also expected to be conducted across Australia on the  day. 

 “The 59,000 Australians who served in the war has swelled by large numbers of refugees  many of whom had fought alongside Australian forces during our involvement in the 13-year  conflict. 

 “Of those Australians who served, 520 lost their lives. 

 “The commemoration on 18th August is important to the memory of those who died, and to  those who served as Australians and those who served in the South Vietnamese forces and  who have made their homes in Australia,” Mrs Irwin said. 

 More details are available at www.dva.gov.au or from Mrs Irwin’s office on 9755 7911. 

 

 - 7th July 2006 

 

