---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Prime Minister’s Office, Honiara: 19 May 2006: [Solomon Islands]"
date: "2006-05-19"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Sogavare, Manasseh"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Solomon Islands"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292896
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IJPJ6%22
---

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   DATE:   19 May 2006   TITLE:  Joint Doorstop Interview, Prime Minister’s Office, Honiara.     MANASSEH SOGAVARE:  Thank you ladies and gentlemen.  We had a very cordial and frank discussion on issues that are of concern, and of course, interest to the three countries. The objective of the discussion of course is to continue to strengthen the good relationship that Solomon Islands and Australia/New Zealand have had over the last umpteen years and the discussions are aimed at consolidating that good relationship.   I am satisfied with the discussion that we had with the two Ministers.  We of course assured them of the continual commitment of Solomon Islands Government to good governance and of course the effort that RAMSI has been putting into this country to restore law and order and to bring back the country to full normalcy.  So, on behalf of the Solomon Islands Government and the people of Solomon Islands we would like to thank the two Ministers for coming to Solomon Islands at this time to visit us.  And as I said, we had cordial and fruitful discussions for which I am fully satisfied at the outcome.  ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well thanks Prime Minister and Foreign Minister and let me just say I appreciate your warmth, your welcome and your hospitality and I am delighted to have Winston Peters  - my New Zealand counterpart - to visit you with.   We congratulate your Government on its election and we look forward to working with you.   Clearly a very important part of our task here is the role we play in the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands or RAMSI and we appreciate very much that the Government wants RAMSI to continue.  And for our part - Australia’s part -  we’re happy to continue to work within RAMSI and to play the role we’ve been playing in RAMSI. Obviously the future of RAMSI ultimately is a matter for the Government and the Parliament of Solomon Islands but I am pleased to hear you are committed to it.    I would only say obviously that it’s very important that RAMSI is able to continue successfully to do its work and what it has done and has been doing.  We can continue to do good work in terms of helping with economic reform and economic restructuring.  RAMSI can help the Government with strengthening the Royal Solomon Islands Police, help the Government with improving the operation of the system of justice and help the Government in its campaign against corruption and weeding out corruption.    I think it’s important if RAMSI is going to stay, that it continues to do those things and it continues to have integrity as a Regional Assistance Mission. So I appreciate the frank 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 discussion we have been able to have about that and I think it has been well worthwhile  coming here and having a talk with you, both Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, and  thanks very much for your welcome. 

 

 WINSTON PETERS:  Thanks Prime Minister.  I just want to say there’s no greater deceit  than saying I am here from the Government to help you.  But I am here from the New Zealand  Government, to help with respect to the RAMSI program, Regional Assistance Mission.    

 I am here to make sure that our help does help, and it’s not misdirected and misused. And to  ensure that that assistance goes on as long as possible and is in the interests of our mutual  need for stability and good governance and democracy in our part of the world.  There’s a lot  at stake here and that’s why I will be here for four days which I know doesn’t sound long, but 

 it is more time in any country than I have ever spent, at any time in my portfolio or any  portfolio I might have had.  So that’s what I am looking forward to discussing with the Prime  Minister and my colleague the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Alexander Downer from the  Australian regional arrangement [inaudible] with respect to RAMSI. 

 

 LLOYD JONES (AAP): The appointment of the jailed ministers was an issue of  controversy, was that discussed?   

 SOGAVARE: Yes it is a matter that was discussed and we had a frank and very open  discussion about it.  We assured the two Ministers that the Government is taking positive  actions to addressing issues and concerns that were raised.  Not only by the Australian and 

 New Zealand Government but also the public at large in Solomon Islands.  We have taken a  step to addressing the situation by appointing two acting ministers to the portfolio and that  will be for an indefinite period. 

 

 DOWNER: Well for our part as the Prime Minister has said we had a lively discussion about  this and our views on this are well known.  And we welcome the first step that’s been taken to  appoint acting ministers for those portfolios and we of course retain the view that we have 

 held about this.  But the appointment of acting ministers is a step forward. I would just make  it clear that we obviously were disappointed with these appointments in the first place but we  hope that all this can be progressed. 

 

 PETERS: Do you want my view?   

 REPORTER: Sure   

 PETERS: Well, there are always a few sides to every story, I did ask the Prime Minister,  [inaudible] but I cannot deny that on the face of it, it came as a very significant surprise to my  Prime Minister and she said so.   

 GRANT DOBELL (ABC): You were obviously talking about the future of RAMSI.  The  Prime Minister has talked about some changes in the way RAMSI would operate.  Can you  tell us a bit about the changes you’d like to see and the response from Australia and New  Zealand and any idea on changes [inaudible]?   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 SOGAVARE: Thank you very much I think there are a lot of reports that have been made on  suggestions to improve the work of RAMSI here in this country and I think the one report that  came to mind is the report by the Eminent Persons Group.  It came out as a report.  We as a  Government, we will find out the progress that the formal regime has done in taking out the  recommendations that were made in that review.  And then probably taking it up from where  the previous Government has left off. There are also other reports that were made by Cabinet  from a Cabinet group of ministers that were put together to put out a report in response to the  position taken out by the Eminent Persons Group.  So there is a starting point to any review  that will be carried out. But of course, any review,  I made it clear to the two Ministers, will  be done within the confines of the legal framework that governs the presence of RAMSI in  Solomon Islands and at the end of the day, whatever review is taken out, will be in only the  best interests of the people of Solomon Islands.   

 REPORTER: How long would you like to see RAMSI stay?   

 SOGAVARE: We had these discussions with the two Ministers, we have no problem with  the presence of RAMSI here.  Now what we would like to see is an active process, an exit  strategy which is clear.  There is to be a process that is clear as to the transfer of technical  know-how and how to do things by the RAMSI officials that are holding in-line positions  -  which is not freely apparent.  Now if that is clear, and it takes how many years to have that  process completed? Let it be.  But as long as we are clear about an exit strategy, that is clear,  which in the end of the day we will see Solomon Islanders competently carrying out the tasks  and responsibilities that are held by RAMSI officials for in-line positions in Solomon Islands.   

 

 As far as law and order is concerned there are reports that will be presented to Cabinet   eventually which will brief the Cabinet as to that work in terms of capacity building and  improvement over the past year of the Solomon Islands police force to maintain law and  order. But generally I think there is a lot of good work that is done in the police force.  There  is a general feeling that it will take quite a while to see Solomon Islanders acting competently,  taking over the security aspect of this country.  So yes we can go on and talk about this matter  on how Government would undertake a review. But you know I would like to reiterate again,  whatever we do as a Government, we are a responsible Government, a Government that is  voted in by people and whatever we do at the end of the day, the outcomes must be for the  best interests of Solomon Islands and its people.   

 DOWNER:  Let me just make these points from my perspective [inaudible] about RAMSI.  The first is that of course we have had elections in Solomon Islands and a new Government is  now in place and the relevant legislation authorising  RAMSI comes up for renewal in July,  late July. So it would be reasonable then for a new Government to have a look at it and see  how it’s all working and review aspects of RAMSI. We are happy with that but we are 

 obviously for our part, Australia’s part, by far the heaviest investment in RAMSI of all the  participating countries.  We wouldn’t want in any way to see the integrity of RAMSI diluted  and I am satisfied with my conversations with the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister today  that they are not planning to dilute the integrity of RAMSI.    

 Certainly as far as how long RAMSI will remain, I mean, there are two points I’d make about  that.  The first is that it will not remain here for one day longer by grace of the Solomon 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 Islands Parliament and Government and that is very substantially a matter for them but  secondly for our part we are willing to contribute to RAMSI for such a time, as the Prime  Minister says, the Solomon Islands economy is back on its feet and is sustainable and public  administration is back on its feet and is up and running strongly. And also two other issues  need to be very substantially addressed.  One is the rebuilding of the Royal Solomon Islands  Police force that is actually from what I hear going well.  But there is still more work to be  done, there is still more training to be done but that is going ahead very well and has been  pretty successful.   

 So finally, last, but not  necessarily least, there is still this issue of corruption and the capacity  of the justice system here to deal with that and RAMSI of course is playing a big part in  trying to help the Solomon Islands Government and the people of Solomon Islands deal with  that problem. So the duration of RAMSI from our point of view is more task-based than time-based.  That is, of course it’s not going to last indefinitely. We wouldn’t want it to.  From our  perspective, when the task we feel is done and there’s no more we usefully can do, we would  talk with our RAMSI partners and go to the Solomon Islands Government and Parliament and  say there’s no more usefully we can do. So I think we are all reading - as the Americans say -   we are all reading from the same page on this point. 

 

 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATIONS: Any final questions?   

 REPORTER: [inaudible]   

 PETERS:  Well look let’s be clear, you can modify and change any vehicle. But at a certain  point you may not have the vehicle at all or have the capacity to do what it was originally  invented to do.  And in the case of RAMSI, of course we would be prepared to listen to any  other people’s views and particularly a sovereign nation, Solomon Island’s views of that  assistance mission.     

 But it cannot do its job if it is changed to the extent that it doesn’t have the institutions and  could not achieve the purpose for which it was established in the first place.  Now that’s the  critical part that needs to be understood here. How should I put it? If it was stripped of its  capacity, then frankly we could not justify it to continue to be here, and to be fair and honest  with ourselves and the people of the [inaudible]. It has a specific purpose.   We have a  purpose to achieve, and it won’t  be achieved if - some  minor modifications, no one could  argue about that -  but if it’s initial purpose were still maintained and it was respected for that. 

 

 GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATIONS: Ladies and gentlemen, thanks very much.   

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 DOWNER:  Well let me make two points about that.  First of all, Australia - like Indonesia  and a number of other countries in the region - signed the 1951 United Nations Convention on  Refugees, and I think you would appreciate that Indonesia is one of the founders of the non-aligned movement and has shown over the years enormous commitment to the United Nations  and the United Nations’ processes, and no-one in Indonesia would expect us to abrogate our  legal obligations as defined by the United Nations Convention on Refugees of 1951.  So 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 under that Convention we are required to assess the claims that are made by anybody who  comes to Australia and seeks asylum and that is a process that is going on at the moment.  I  have no idea what conclusions those who are doing the assessment will come to.  It is an  arms-length process and they will come to some conclusion and then those conclusions, 

 depending on what they are, can be subject to further court action because of the nature of our  legal system.     

 The second point I would make about this is that it is nevertheless important that people in  Indonesia understand one simple thing and that is that this has no bearing on the Australian  government’s policy, which is a policy of commitment to the territorial integrity of Indonesia.   We do not support secessionist movements in Indonesia.  We do not want to see provinces of  Indonesia - including Irian Jaya or West Papua - break away from Indonesia, and we certainly  support the policy as articulated by President Yudhoyono to provide an appropriate degree of  autonomy for West Papua but for it to continue to remain part of the Republic of Indonesia.   We certainly do not support the breaking up of the Republic of Indonesia and people  shouldn’t be concerned that this issue has any broader implications for our bilateral  relationship, which we value very much, and they shouldn’t be concerned that whatever the  outcome of these assessments, that has any implications for Australian policy in regards to the  province of Papua, which we believe is an integral part of the Republic of Indonesia.   

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible] a question to Mr Downer as well.  Mr Downer, the Indonesian  [inaudible] called this morning for western leaders to speak out against the publication of  cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed.  [Inaudible] Is Australia willing to [inaudible] condemn  the publication of those cartoons?   

 DOWNER:  Well I think we made our position pretty clear two or three weeks ago, it might  be two weeks ago when both the Prime Minister and I said in the media and also in the  Australian Parliament that obviously in the first place it is understood, and I think everybody  understands that in Australia we do have freedom of speech and freedom of expression, and  that secondly, when people exercise that freedom they must do so, conscious that they also  have responsibilities and they need to think through the consequences of what they do.  I  mean just because you are free to say something, just because you are free to abuse someone,  doesn’t mean that that is something, casting aspersions or abuse towards people, that’s  something that we would necessarily applaud.  It’s just that it is possible to do it in a free  society.  So when it comes to the publication of the cartoons, in the end when editors in free  societies make judgements about whether to publish those cartoons they need, as I’ve often  said, the wisdom of Solomon.  They need to think through the consequences of what they’re  doing.  The third thing I would say is that none of this excuses violence.  People are perfectly  free to and should be free to protest, to object, to denounce if they want, the publication of the  cartoons, but I don’t think people should be burning property and taking lives.  It’s very  important that everybody exercises appropriate restraint in dealing with these sorts of issues.   In free societies these issues will arise inevitably.  It is impossible to stop people expressing  their views freely.  It is very important that those who express their views are conscious of the  consequences and the hurt they may cause in doing that, but when others respond who feel  hurt, and they have a perfect right to respond, to express their hurt, to express their outrage.   They should do so in a way that doesn’t cause physical harm to people and lead to the  destruction of property. 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 

 REPORTER:  [Inaudible]   

 DOWNER:  Well, I’ve given this issue a fair bit of an airing in answers to your previous  question.  I don’t want to labour the point except to say that Australia has an immigration  policy.  We take around 130,000 migrants every year, people who appropriately apply to 

 migrate.  We take people from all over the world, regardless of their race or their religion or  their colour or their creed.  We’re very happy to take people who meet mainly trade  qualifications but there is a family reunion component also in our immigration program.   Secondly if people seek asylum in Australia, then we have certain obligations under the  United Nations Convention on Refugees, the 1951 Convention on Refugees, and we fulfil  those obligations, and look, from time to time people do seek asylum in Australia - we’ve had  people from other countries in South-East Asia, from Indonesia in the past, seeking asylum  from Australia from time to time and sometimes those applications have been granted and  sometimes they haven’t.  It depends on the circumstances of the individual.  There’s nothing  new about this.  This has been the case since 1951.  We’re now up to 2006, and it’s been  happening since 1951.  We’re not about to withdraw from the United Nations or the United  Nations Convention on Refugees or anything like that.   

 REPORTER: [Inaudible]   

 DOWNER:  Well, we have had since the early 1970s - if memory serves me well - since  1971, what’s called the Five Power Defence Arrangement between New Zealand, Australia,  Singapore, Malaysia and the United Kingdom. This arrangement still exists and there are  regular meetings under the auspices of the Five Power Defence Arrangement and certainly the  issue of terrorism has been discussed in those meetings, but we also have memoranda of  understanding on counter-terrorism with many countries in the region, obviously with  Indonesia, but we do also with Malaysia and we have very close cooperation with Singapore  on counter-terrorism.  A lot of the work that we do with Singapore and Malaysia is done  outside of the framework of the Five Power Defence Arrangement, because that’s really just  an arrangement between the militaries of our countries, whereas a lot of the work is at the 

 level of the police, our Police Commissioner Keelty is sitting on my right here.  It is done by  police and our intelligence agencies cooperating with each other and so on.  And so we have  done very good work with those countries, with Singapore and Malaysia.  We’ve been very  happy with the work we’ve done and also with the Philippines and Thailand and most  importantly with Indonesia itself.  But not much of that work is done under the auspices of the  Five Power Defence Arrangement, because the emphasis in that work is understandably been  more on police and intelligence cooperation, information sharing, and capacity building,  rather than on military interventions, which a lot of this fight against terrorism doesn’t lend  itself, some of it does, but a lot of it doesn’t lend itself to military intervention.   

 REPORTER:   [Inaudible] Mr Downer you talked about the battle of ideas as did President  Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono [inaudible] would you agree with the implication of his remarks  that the publication of the cartoons makes the fight against extremism and therefore by  extension the fight against terrorism that much more difficult?   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 

 DOWNER:  Well I’ve been asked a question already about the cartoons.  Look, I’m not  going to labour on this issue any longer.  The points have been made by the Australian  Government and I explained in answer to an earlier question what our position was in relation 

 to this.  I mean Australian newspapers - for what it’s worth - they, I mean - bearing in mind I  suppose where Australia is in the world and very ancient traditions of freedom that we have in  Australia - but I hope a sense of responsibility that all Australians have in exercising those  freedoms, Australian editors have on the whole made the judgement not to republish the  cartoons.  And they’re free to make that decision as well.  They’re free to make the decisions 

 they want.  I mean I don’t think we want particularly to prolong the controversy.  It is there.   We have seen both what has happened and what the reaction has been and I think everybody  understands everybody else’s position only too clearly.   

 ENDS 

