---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Woodside, Adelaide: 24 March 2006"
date: "2006-03-24"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Iraq"
  - "AWB Ltd"
  - "Dept of Foreign Affairs and Trade"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Papua"
  - "UN Oil for Food Programme"
  - "Diplomatic relations"
  - "Visas"
  - "Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in relation to the UN Oil for Food Programme"
  - "Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil for Food Programme"
  - "Corruption"
  - "Refugees"
  - "South Australia"
  - "Training"
  - "Australian Defence Force"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291276
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R35J6%22
---

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP 

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   

 DATE:       24 March 2006   

 TITLE:       Doorstop Interview - Woodside, Adelaide, SA. 

 

 

 ALEXANDER DOWNER - MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS: (Inaudible) in relation  to Woodside and this new air defence simulator - I think this is a wonderful step forward for  the training of the soldiers here at Woodside - it’s great for South Australia that we’ve got  this state of the art technology for training here and it re-enforces the point that the  Government has made on many occasions at the federal level - being responsible for the  Defence force - we can certainly bring an increasing focus on the Australian Defence Force  in South Australia, that’s great for South Australia - great for South Australia to have this  state of the art technology. It’s great for the Australian Defence Force and to have this state  of the art training because it means that in the field our soldiers will be much more proficient  than might otherwise be the case.    

 The second thing I want to say something about is Indonesia - I spoke yesterday with the  Indonesian Foreign Minister about the decision by the Department of Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs - who granted protection visas for 42 Papuans who landed in Australia 

 a few weeks ago. I explained to the Foreign Minister, as I have done on a previous occasion  in February, that this is something beyond the Government’s control. It’s a decision that’s  made in accordance with Australian law.    

 I don’t know what reaction there will be from Indonesia but the fact is we have no  alternative but to apply the laws of our land and to fulfil our international obligations under  the 1951 United Nations Refugee Convention. So, I hope that the Foreign Minister and the  Indonesians will be understanding, but you’ll obviously get at this time an expression of  various views from Indonesia and I think it’s a free and robust society - people will say  whatever they want and you will get different comments coming out of Jakarta about it. But  nevertheless, this is a decision that’s made in Australia and in accordance with our laws,  these are our laws, this is the way our laws work in this country and successful relations with  countries involve mutual understanding and respect. The agreements we have between  Indonesia and Australia are in both of our interests and I think the Indonesians recognise  that. So, they’re obviously disappointed and there will no doubt be some expressions of  disappointment from the Indonesians.   

 REPORTER:  … (inaudible) formal protest about this in retaliation (inaudible)?   

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 DOWNER:  Well look I think there will certainly be protests of one kind or another from  Indonesia. I would expect that. I’ve been anticipating that for quite a few weeks and so I  wouldn’t be surprised if there were different types of protests. But as far as cooperation with  Indonesia is concerned - look, it’s very close, it’s been very effective in recent years. Not  always, but certainly in recent years. The thing is that this cooperation is in both of our  interests, it’s in Australia’s interests and in Indonesia’s interests and so I think, you know,  they’ll be some protests and objections from various people no doubt to this decision, but I  think the close cooperation will continue.    

 REPORTER:  How do you think it will affect the relationship to Indonesia?    

 DOWNER:  Well look, I think they’ll be some protests from Indonesia but I think things will  settle down after a short period of time and I think - I don’t want to get into foreshadowing  what their protests might say but I would expect there to be a number of protests. We’ve  already had a member of the Indonesian Parliament who’s a fairly well known critic of  Australia making fairly unsurprising remarks and we accept that - it’s a free society.   

 REPORTER: (Inaudible) .. to Australia for the political conditions under the Australian  (inaudible)?   

 DOWNER:  Well, I can’t say that I’ve seen their applications or the decisions by the  Department of Immigration so that’s really a matter for the Department of Immigration. I’m  not sure if even the Minister has - she may have done. Not sure.    

 REPORTER:  Have you talked to your Indonesian counterpart about the …    

 DOWNER:  Well, he was very calm about it - I suspect he wasn’t altogether surprised -  bearing in mind that I was up in Jakarta last month and we had a long discussion about it  then. We had breakfast together and I went through this issue in a great deal of detail - I  explained to him how our law works, what the restrictions on the Government are - I think  it’s fair to say the Indonesian Government would rather we had just sent all 43 back to  Indonesia. And I explained that the Australian Government can’t just make a decision like  that. This is a matter that’s determined through delegated authority through the Department  of Immigration and I did point out to him that even if the Department of Immigration  rejected all the applications - and I had no idea then what the Department would do - then  they could appeal to the Refugee Review Tribunal, they could appeal to the Federal Court,  they could ultimately appeal to the High Court and this could take years. I explained to them  they could get temporary protection visas, they’re for a maximum of three years and after  two and a half years, I think, subject to a review. It could go one way or the other.   

 REPORTER:  I just want to talk about the Volcker Inquiry…   

 DOWNER:  … yes, Cole’s still underway….   

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 

 REPORTER:  Yes, still underway. The Australian Government have said that they’ve  cooperated fully all along - but it’s emerged that the UN wasn’t allowed to interview  Australian officials, so…    

 DOWNER: .. no, well, let me just make this clear - I think there is a tremendous amount of  misinformation being pushed out into the community from the Labor Party in relation to  what is being discussed in the Cole Inquiry. Now, first of all, Mr Beazley claimed that the  Government was corrupt in relation to the AWB kickbacks issue. Of course, he’s abandoned  that argument now. To claim that somebody is corrupt is a very serious allegation. Nothing  that has emerged from the Cole Inquiry suggests for a minute that officials of my  Department or of other Government Departments are remotely corrupt. The second thing is  that the Labor Party has argued for a long time - and was continuing to argue yesterday -  that the Government didn’t cooperate with the Volcker Inquiry. The Government fully  cooperated with the Volcker Inquiry. At no time did we ever reject requests from the  Volcker inquiry for information and when Mr Volcker wanted further cooperation from the  Australian Government, within a matter of hours we provided that further cooperation. Now,  the initial view of my Department at the end of 2004 was simply that we had to protect  classified material obviously from foreign citizens. The Volcker Inquiry wasn’t made up of  Australians, but foreign citizens. But of course we had no material which would have shown  government complicity with AWB - we know that - and kickbacks with AWB - we knew  that. When Volcker asked for more information and further cooperation, within hours we  provided that. So, there was never any attempt by the Government not to cooperate with  Volcker - we never refused a request made by the Volcker Inquiry and in the end I think  what we’ve been able to demonstrate in the last 24 hours is excellent cooperation by the  Government with Volcker.    

 REPORTER:  So you never gagged DFAT officials?   

 DOWNER:  I did not gag DFAT officials. Obviously, in November I think it was, on the 20th  of November 2004, when we were assessing - when the Department in particular and I were  assessing - how best we handle interactions with Volcker - there hadn’t been much  interaction up until that time - we had to take into consideration classified information and  classified material of course. When Volcker wanted more information and it became clear -  well I was very happy to do that, and when it became clear that we could sign a  Memorandum of Understanding - to protect our classified material, which we did - we were  happy to give them access to classified material. The ultimate evidence of this is in the  Volcker Report itself. There has been no suggestion in the Volcker Report, when the report  came out, of a lack of cooperation by the Australian Government and for the record - in  January of 2005 - a month or so before Mr Volcker’s conversation with Ambassador John  Dauth, Mr Volcker made it clear that he was very happy with the cooperation of the  Australian Government. May I say, since she’s been a bit of a campaigner against the  Government on this issue - that Caroline Overington from The Australian newspaper  reported this when she worked for The Sydney Morning Herald, in The Sydney Morning  Herald. I just thought I’d throw that in.    

 REPORTER:  (Inaudible).. that’s about an 11 month period. What did you do…. 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 

 DOWNER: … well they were just setting up the Volcker Inquiry during that period so it  wasn’t until - they had to set it up, they had thousands of documents to go through in Iraq  which was their main source of information. As you know from the Cole Inquiry, all of the  information we have has not been a lot of use in terms of establishing whether AWB were  paying kickbacks knowingly or unknowingly or whether they weren’t. That’s perfectly clear.  But, they came to focus on us at the end of 2004 and that’s when we had to take into  consideration the protection of classified material, but, when Mr Volcker spoke to John  Dauth, John Dauth sent the cable, that cable was shown to me, I immediately rang John  Dauth and said to him - you ring Mr Volcker and tell Mr Volcker that there will be full  cooperation by the Australian Government - we don’t want to leave any sense of lack of  cooperation. I remember this - I went and spoke to the Prime Minister subsequently - he  very strongly endorsed my view - as he has made clear. I rang John Dauth back to re-inforce  that the Prime Minister himself shared this view. So I was very focused on it at the time and  I think the fact is that the Volcker Committee, the Volcker team, sent people to Australia in  late February, early March 2005. Those people were able to go through our information,  there’s obviously sensitivity about classified material, but they were given access to that  material and Volcker produced his report and we set up the Cole Inquiry, so….   

 REPORTER: … (inaudible)…?   

 DOWNER: Well, I’ve just explained to you that they hadn’t set up the Volcker Committee -  the Volcker Committee wasn’t focussing on Australia in the early days, of course we knew  they would at a certain time and it wasn’t until November of that year that my Department  came to me about their recommendations about how we would handle information, with a  focus here on making sure that classified information could be protected. Let me make this  clear - I think it is crucially important that we do protect Australian classified information  and we shouldn’t be irresponsible in dealing with that classified information. So the  Department was right to be concerned about that - I nevertheless think I was right to ensure  that they negotiated an Memorandum of Understanding so that the classified material could  be used by Volcker and protected.   

 REPORTER: Would it have been DFAT’s job to vigorously investigate AWB and the claims  about kickbacks?    

 DOWNER: Well, ultimately - I think, if I may say so - all of these questions really will be  much better answered when the Cole Commission reports because what’s happening here is  that little bits of information are coming out and attempts are being made - particularly by  the Labor Party - and you can’t blame them - to use bits and pieces of information out of  context to attack the Government. But, just let me say this, I think in the end people will  need to read the Cole Commission’s report before being too judgemental about it. The Oil-For-Food Programme was not an Australian Government programme - it was a United  Nations programme, it was run by the United Nations. The Cole Commission knows this - it  may not have been in the media, but the United Nations didn’t only have people in New  York administering the programme - they had people on the ground in Iraq administering  the programme. We had no-one on the ground in Iraq during that period.   

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 

 REPORTER: Was it DFAT’s job to investigate AWB though?   

 DOWNER: Well, DFAT obviously, when there were allegations made against AWB - I  mean this has all been in the Commission for weeks - when there was allegations made they  looked into those allegations and they were satisfied…   

 REPORTER: (Inaudible).. DFAT to satisfy?   

 DOWNER: Well, that’s right.    

 REPORTER: But it was their job to investigate?   

 DOWNER: Well, they don’t have the powers of further investigation. I mean, if you’re  going to mount a - DFAT’s powers aren’t intrusive powers - the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade has no capacity to kick down the doors of companies or private  individuals and go into their personal financial affairs. But look, all this has been covered in  the Cole Commission.    

 REPORTER: But AWB wasn’t a private company though…   

 DOWNER: The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade - let me just try to explain - I  mean, I have spent an enormous amount of time and I have been tremendously patient in  explaining how all of this works, and can I just say - I’m very happy to do it. But, the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade doesn’t have the legislative power to raid a  company - it just doesn’t have that power. But let me make this point - what we know now,  we did not know of course, before Volcker. And I have made that point on many occasions.  Our view, as a Government, has been that we don’t want to cover anything up - we are all in  favour of transparency and openness - that is why we did fully cooperate with Volcker and  that is why we set up the Cole Commission. I mean, everything is out there in the Cole  Commission and I don’t know how many questions I’ve been asked on it - I don’t know  how interested the public are in the minutiae of the Cole Commission, but I think the public  will be interested when the Cole Commission produces its report, because it will be a good  deal more authoritive than the rantings of the opposition.    

 REPORTER: (Inaudible).. it hasn’t been transparent…   

 DOWNER: … the Cole Commission?   

 REPORTER: No, the AWB Inquiry.   

 DOWNER: Oh look, of course, I mean - that’s the Labor Party’s game. They have made  these claims, but I would have thought - for anybody who is interested in this issue - other  than making cheap shots and allegations and trying to prosecute the Government in this - by  the way - Government Ministers, the Prime Minister - we were not involved in corrupt  activity - lining our pockets or anything like that. Everyone knows that. Of course we  weren’t. The suggestion that somehow we were complicit with AWB and doing deals with 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 

 them, a wink and a nudge and saying ‘look, yeah, you go and pay the Iraqi Grains Board a  bit of extra money’ - clearly the Government didn’t do that. The officials who handled this  issue have been interviewed at enormous lengths over the last two weeks on this and I beg  people to read the transcript of what they said, not The Australian, not Caroline Overington,  and Wilkinson and Marr in The Sydney Morning Herald, who wrote a book condemning the  Government on a different issue and they are campaigners against the Government, which -  it’s a free world - you can do that.    

 REPORTER: Which Government should have investigated this - if not DFAT?   

 DOWNE: The United Nations was responsible for the Oil-For-Food Programme - I’ve made  that….   

 REPORTER: Which Government agency in Australia should have investigated AWB’s  corruption?   

 DOWNER: Well we didn’t know AWB was corrupt - you see what we know now, we didn’t  know. I’ll tell you who should investigate it: the Cole Commission. And when the Cole  Commission has investigated and finished investigating it, if they do have substantial  information that AWB at least prima facie behaved in a corrupt manner, then there should be  - the matter should be handed over to the police and to prosecutors. That is exactly the way  to go - it is entirely appropriate to do that.    

 REPORTER: (Inaudible)   

 DOWNER: Well, what you don’t know you can’t do anything about. I’d like - you know -  contemplate your own life - there are things that have happened that you didn’t know would  happen, but, I mean I think the best thing to do in this situation is - the best thing for us to do  is to have a full, open and transparent inquiry and to take up the recommendations made by  the Cole Commission. But, you know, the reason we’re having an inquiry isn’t so that there  can be trial of different people by the media, the reason we’re having an inquiry is so that the  Commissioner, Mr Cole, can have a look at all of the evidence presented and make  judgements about it, and we look forward to reading his report.    

 REPORTER: Given that you believe that the Government has been transparent - what do  you say to people who have suggested that perhaps you should step down or be sacked over  the issue?   

 DOWNER: Well, I think Mr Beazley of course makes this claim of every Minister in the  Government, almost every week. If Mr Beazley had had his way, then the Saddam Hussein  regime would still be in power and the corrupt Oil-For-Food Programme would still be in  place. That is the policy of Mr Beazley. Our policy was to get rid of Saddam Hussein. And  Mr Beazley made a speech yesterday or the day before - both yesterday and the day before -  saying that we were wrong to do that: we should have kept Saddam Hussein in place. We  should have kept the Oil-For-Food Programme in place - but then he’s attacking us over the  Oil-For-Food Programme. Look, the Oil-For-Food Programme was a genuine endeavour to 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 6

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 7

 try to provide humanitarian assistance to the people of Iraq. It was clearly rorted mercilessly  in all sorts of different ways - we know that. But it has come to an end, and it’s come to an  end because Saddam Hussein’s regime has come to an end. You know, that’s my response.  

 

 REPORTER: You said that there was a Department view to hold back on this information  initially. What was the purpose at the time?   

 DOWNER: Well, the Department - but you see, this is what we have to put up with - with  the greatest respect, not to be critical of you - but, this is what we’ve had to put up with for  weeks on end. It wasn’t the Department’s view to hold back on information; it was the  Departments view that we had to protect from foreign persons, classified material. Now, the  Department does have a responsibility to protect classified material - of course we do -  when Volcker wanted more information from us we found a way of providing it and he was  perfectly satisfied.   

 REPORTER: What was your view upon that?   

 DOWNER: Well, I think that in the end my take out is that those people who claim that the  government didn’t fully cooperate with Volcker, they’re wrong.   

 REPORTER: How can the Government prevent such a scandal from happening again?     

 DOWNER: Well, I think it’s not so much the Government is it, but it’s the UN will probably  not go down the Oil-For-Food Programme, or a similar type of regime. Though, look, to be  honest with you, there are a lot of sanctions regime’s in place still today, and who knows  how porous they are. I mean, my experience with sanctions is that sanctions regimes are  typically very porous. So, you know, it’s hard - it’s hard for the United Nations to ensure  that these regimes are perfect, but they can be quite effective. In the end, the Oil-For-Food  sanctions regime has been very thoroughly investigated … (inaudible).  

 

 ENDS 

