---
title: "Queensland projects to receive Living in Harmony funding."
date: "2006-12-04"
creators:
  - "Robb, Andrew"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211301536
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JETL6%22
---

 Media Centre  Queensland Projects to Receive Living in Harmony  Funding 

 4 December 2006 

 Projects for a community buddy mentoring programme and a sporting and  social programme for culturally isolated and disadvantaged 12 to 20 years  old from newly arrived and refugee communities are among six  Queensland projects to receive more than $265 000 in funding  announced today.  

 Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs, Andrew Robb said almost $1.5 million in funding is being awarded  today under the Australian Government’s Living in Harmony programme.  

 ‘The Queensland projects include a community buddy mentoring  programme, which will mentor newly arrived people in the local  community on local, social, cultural, economic and government systems,’  Mr Robb said.  

 ‘The Queensland Police-Citizen Youth Welfare Association’s, Inala  branch is running a sporting and social programme for culturally isolated  and disadvantaged 12 to 20 year olds from newly arrived and refugee  communities.’  

 ‘The programme will include sporting skills and coaching clinics, a mid  season gathering for participants and families and a tournament.  

 ‘Living in Harmony funding will help local organisations across the country  to develop grassroots programmes to promote Australian values such as  fairness, acceptance and fair go and help people realise the opportunities  offered by living in Australia,’ said Mr Robb.  

 The Australian Government is providing the funding to community groups,  schools and local governments to promote mutual respect and to provide  opportunities for people to participate in the Australian way of life.  

 This year 561 applications were received for the Living in Harmony  funded community projects. Priority went to projects promoting inter-faith,  new and emerging communities, schools and those involving Indigenous  Australians.  

 Successful applicants were drawn from all States and Territories with  each organisation to receive funding from $5 000 to $50 000 for each  project.  

 Visit the Living in Harmony website for the Queensland listing of the 2007  community funded projects.   See: www.harmony.gov.au  

 Home

 Biographical details 

 Media Centre 

 Portfolio Links 

 Electorate site

 Contact Details 

 Andrew Robb AO MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  

