---
title: "Papuans' privacy must be respected."
date: "2006-01-29"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Papua"
  - "Privacy"
  - "Refugees"
  - "NETTLE, Kerry, (former Senator)"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288987
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/O7NI6%22
---

 

 Senator Amanda Vanstone  

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 

 Media Centre 

 Papuans' Privacy Must be Respected  Senator Vanstone, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs today warned Greens Senator Kerry Nettle to respect the  rights of West Papuan detainees currently being processed by  immigration officials on Christmas Island.  

 The Minister said reports that Senator Nettle has travelled to  Christmas Island with an ABC journalist and sought to arrange  contact with the media were a cause for real concern. 

 ‘The Australian Government has made very clear that all of the  claimants will have their claims heard in accordance with Australia ’s  international treaty obligations, ’ Senator Vanstone said today.  

 ‘Senator Nettle wrote to me last week seeking my assistance in  arranging facilitation for her visit and I responded promptly that I  would do so. 

 ‘I also made clear to Senator Nettle that she would need to respect  the privacy of all of the individuals with whom she came into  contact, either at the Phosphate Hill facility, or those housed in  family duplexes within the community. ‘ 

 'I do not regard turning up on someone ’s doorstep with a journalist  as respecting one ’s right to privacy.  

 ‘All of the individuals should have been given the opportunity to  consider whether this is what they wanted and more importantly, to  have had the opportunity to take advice from their legal  representatives before making such a decision.  

 ‘The Government is committed to ensuring that all of the claimants  are afforded a proper process which fully protects their legal rights.  

 ‘My department ’s work processing these claims is progressing very  well, however it seems that Senator Nettle is more concerned with  gaining media exposure for herself than any consideration of the  rights of the individuals.  

 ‘I understand that Senator Nettle has now been advised of the legal  implications of this media stunt by independent lawyers on  Christmas Island.  

 ‘Apart from the legal issues, this is a matter of common courtesy, 

 something Senator Nettle clearly does not understand, ’ the Minister  added.  

 29 January 2006 

 

