---
title: "DIMA's 'new' culture: politics as usual."
date: "2006-04-11"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292140
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TXBJ6%22
---

 

 DEMOCRATS 

 

 senator.bartlett@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 MEDIA                                 TUESDAY 11 APRIL 2006

 SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS DEPUTY LEADER 

 

 DIMA'S ‘NEW’ CULTURE: POLITICS AS USUAL  Democrats’ Deputy Leader, Senator Andrew Bartlett, said any attempt by the Federal Government to  formally bring political considerations into the process for determining refugee claims would totally  destroy all the work done so far to improve the culture of the Immigration Department. 

 “We will be straight back to the days of incidents like the imprisonment and deportation of Australian  residents and citizens, and public servants and Ministers making politically motivated decisions  rather than following due process and the rule of law,” Senator Bartlett said. 

 “Mr Howard’s Liberal Party colleagues must not let him turn back the clock and start undermining our  refugee and immigration processes once again.”  

 “When the leader of the nation says we should be able to take the ‘national interest’ into account in  considering a refugee claim, he is talking first and foremost about the political interests of his  Government.” 

 “Mr Howard refuses to learn anything from the total debacle that occurred in the Immigration area  over the last few years.” 

 “It is not just a matter of morality or international law; it is a basic matter of good administrative  practice.” 

 “Once public servants or Ministerial staff start thinking ‘what would the Prime Minister want?’ before  making a decision, the whole fabric of democracy and the rule of law starts to unravel,” Senator  Bartlett concluded. 

 

 Media contact - Tracee McPate - 0417 607 655 

