---
title: "Religion in 21st Century Australian national politics."
date: "2006-05-05"
creators:
  - "Warhurst, John"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Religion in politics"
  - "Christianity"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211555576
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KNKJ6%22
---

  Religion in 2lSt Century Australian National  Politics 

  John War h urst  Australian National University 

  AUSTRALIAN SENATE OCCASIONAL LECTURE  SERIES 

  Theatre 

  Parliament House 

  5 May 2006 

  1 

  RELIGION IN 21" CENTURY AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL POLITlCS 

  Introduction 

  The religious factor generally means a number of things in politics. One is the political  activity of the organized face of religion, the churches and their agencies and lobby  groups, and the attitude of governments towards those churches. Another is the  relationship between religious affiliation and parliamentary representation. A third is the  relationship between individual religious belief' and the actions and voting behaviour o f  

  citizens. This lecture. largely about Christianity. discusses all these things and more. and  tries to convey the overall flavour of religion and politics early in the 21" centurlp. It  reveals the wide range of intersections between religion and politics. 

  Before going any further I should make clear that religion is often a slippery variable to  deal with. The religious affiliations of individual MPs, much less private citizens, are  often not at all clear. One certainly needs to distinguish between religious background,  such as family and schooling, religious and denominational affiliation, and religious  practice and values. 

  Religion and politics has a long and often controversial history in Australia, most o f  it  associated with Christianity (Hogan 1987: Thompson 1994). One resolution of the  relationship came with the incorporation into the Constitution of s. 1 16. That section  reads: 

  The Commonwealth shall not make any law for establishing any religion. or for  imposing any religious observance, or for prohibiting the free exercise of any  religion. and no religious test shall be required as a qualification for any office or  public trust under the Commonwealth 

  In discussions of the religious component of 20'" century Australian politics most  attention has been given not to constitutional issues but to the link betmeen  denominations and parties in voting and representation. Catholics M ith Labor and  Protestants with the Coalition. as \+ell as the denominational character o f  the Labor Party 

  Split of the 1950s that produced the Democratic Labor Party. Professor Judith Brett. for  instance, begins her survey of the literature as follows: 

  I t  has long been recognized that the foundation ofthe Australian party system had 

  a religious dimension. with an affinity between the main Australian nonlabour  parties and Protestantism and between the Labor Party and Roman Catholicism  (Brett 2002: 39) 

  This was the standard characterization of religion and politics that Ilr Marion Maddox  (2001 2-6) set out to move beyond in her 2001 parliamentary monograph. Since then she  has become the major analyst of religion and politics i n  contemporary Australia. 

  concentrating on the impact of religious faith per se on politics rather than merely  denominational affiliation (2005). It is also the view that Brett has set out to revise by  emphasizing the positive connections between Protestantism and the Coalition parties  rather than the connections between Catholics and Labor (2002 and 2003). Apart from  the Defence of Government Schools constitutional case, party politics took centre stage. 

  1,ittle attention was paid to personal religious belief outside these parameters, perhaps  because it was assumed, conscience voting apart, that party discipline was more  important than individual beliefs. Political leaders rarely chose to wear their religious  faith on their sleeves in an ostentatious way, reflecting not only the pitfalls of party  politics in a sectarian climate, but also Australia's political style and culture. 

  Voting and Religion in the Howard Era 

  Much has changed. After John Howard's first victory in 1996 one of the Liberal Party's  first claims was that the government's higher vote had reversed a number of its historic  electoral weaknesses, including a weakness among Catholics, by then Australia's largest  Christian denomination. This was a new development (Bean 1999). Andrew Robb, then 

  Liberal Party federal director but now an MHR, claimed that "a 9% deficit among  Catholics was turned into an 1 1 %  lead' (Robb 1997, p. 40). By the 2001 election the  Australian Election Survey reported that the Coalition still led Labor among Catholics by  three points (45% to 42%) (Bean and McAllister 2002). In 2004, while the political  scientists Dr Clive Bean and Professor tan McAllister point out that Catholics are more  still likely to vote Labor than other denominations like Anglicans and Uniting church  members, the Coalition led Labor among Catholics by nine points (50% to 41%) (Bean  ad McAllister 2005: 323-24). The old alliance between Catholics and Labor still has 

  some relative strength, but in absolute terms it has gone. 

  Throughout the Howard decade the Coalition has also en-joyed a striking electoral lead  among those who attend church regularly. Research into voting in previous decades  showed a similar, though not so clear pattern (Bean 1999). This phenomenon holds  across all denominations. By the 2004 election the Coalition lead Labor among regular  churchgoers (at least once a month) by 22 points (55% to 33%), nhile its lead among  those who never attended was .just seven points (46% to 39%) (Bean and McAllister  2005: 324). This combination of strong support among church-goers and better 

  pcrformance among Catholics has been an important element in Howard's dominance. 

  Changing Denominational Composition of the Political Parties 

  'The Howard governinent is the first federal Coalition government in which Catholics  have played a major role. While this fact has been commented on from time to time.  sometimes it is submerged under the exaggerated concentration on the religious  affiliation and pcrsonal religious background of just one of its senior ministers, Tony  Abbott. This concentration culminated in the reportage of the February 2006 debates  about the so-called 'abortion drug' RU486 (see below). The general trend is of greater  significance, however, than the role of any one individual. 

  3 

  Historically Catholic representation in the Coalition parties was minimal, almost non-  existent, and there was active antipathy towards Catholic MPs such as Sir John Cramer as  late as the 1950s (Australian Broadcasting Corporation I994).Professor Joan Rydon  ( 1  986: 39) notes “the almost negligible Catholic component of the non-Labor parties” in 

  her survey of the Commonwealth parliament from 1901 to 1980. Representation of  Catholics in the Fraser ministry ( 1  975-83) was still minimal, though it did include Philip  Lynch, Fraser’s deputy for a time. But it had jumped dramatically 13 years later in both  the Liberal and National parties. National Party Catholics have included two Deputy  Prime Ministers, Tim Fischer and Mark Vaile. Senior Liberal Party Catholics have  included Abbott. Brendan Nelson, Helen Coonan, Joe Hockey and Kevin Andreus to  name just some current senior ministers. Prominent Catholics earlier in the Howard era  included Communications minister. Richard Alston, Resources and Energy minister.  Warwick Parer, and Aboriginal Affairs minister, John Herron. By 2006. other Catholics 

  included new minister. Senator Santo Santoro. and up and coming parliamentary  secretaries such as Robb himself, Malcolm Turnbull and Christopher Pyne. One step  behind were senators George Brandis and Brett Mason. Prominent in another b a y  has  been Senator Bill Heffernan, the Prime Minister‘s outspoken N S W  party ally and one-  time parliamentary secretary. The overall change has been remarkable. 

  By contrast. the place of Catholics i n  their ‘traditional‘ party. Labor. seems much  diminished and less obvious. despite Kim Beazley‘s family connections with the church  and Kevin Rudd’s Catholic origins. Many of them appeared to be isolated i n  the Catholic  right faction. especially the N S W  Right. and the party‘s culture and history did not 

  encourage them to emphasise their religious belief, because it stirred internal party  divisions and conflict. Furthermore. anti-Catholic prejudice had become endemic in the  Victorian branch of the party following the Labor Party split (Strangio 2005: 242-243).  As a consequence there is hardlj, a tna-jor federal Labor figure Ishose Catholic identity 

  seems important. Most of the leading humanists in the Parliament are in the Labor Party  and several of them. led by Dr Carmen Labvrence, formed a cross-factional Humanist  Group in September 2000 to counter what they saw as the growing influence of religion  i n  parliamentary debates and decisions (Australian 16-1 7 September 2000) 

  There should be no uncritical assumption that the increasing presence of Catholics among  Coalition parliamentarians and grou ing Catholic voting support for the Houard  government automatically means growing “Catholic influence” whatever that might  mean. By way of comparison the evidence suggests that the Labor Part) did not favour  Catholic interests directly during the years of Catholic ascendancy in that party. I n  fact.  the Catholic campaign for state aid for its schools came to fruition not through the Labor 

  Party but with the assistance ofthe Liberal Party and the Democratic Labor Party. It \+as  the Catholic Social Studies Movement. led by B. A .  Santamaria, and the DLP not Labor  that were seen as evidence of church intrusion into Australian politics. However. it is  argued that the previous Catholic affinity to Labor has been a conservative influence in  general on Labor policies. especially through its opposition to socialism (Thompson 

  1994). 

  4 

  Catholic Liberals are inclined to downplay the possibility of a particular Catholic  influence on their party. The policy consequences of this shift has drawn attention mainly  in relation to moral issues such as euthanasia (Andrews) and abortion (Abbott). though it  has led to an uneasy relationship between these Liberal ministers and their church on the  employment and industrial relations issues for which they have been responsible. The  same was true of I-lerron's responsibility for Aboriginal affairs. The journalist and author 

  David Marr, in his celebrated attack on religious influence in contemporary politics, is  not primarily concerned with Catholic Liberals (Marr 1999). His targets are rather the  Catholic bishops, former chief justice Sir Gerard Brennan and Independent Senator from  'Tasmania, Brian Harradine. But Marr does allege: 

  Conservative Catholics have joined the Liberals and have made the Coalition side  of politics more conservative as a result (Marr 1999: 2 18). 

  Marr poses an interesting question. Catholic influence in the Liberal Party is probably  more about social conservatism than bricks and mortar. Nevertheless, the Howard  government has expanded Labor's support for private denominational schools. But one  might have expected some moderating Catholic influence on social welfare policies, of  the sort evident in Harradine's refusal to support the government's taxation reform  package in 1999 and perhaps in Senator Barnaby Joyce's (Catholic) concerns about the  2005 industrial relations reforms. Yet it is hard to see. 

  Greater attention has been given to the apparently greater policy influence M ithin the  party of evangelical Christians, also with a conservative moral agenda. Here attention has  been focused on the role within the party of the conservative faction, the Lyons Forum, a  faction in which Catholics have played a part but appear not to have been the driving  force (Maddox 2001 : 199-244). The Lyons Forum actively pursued family-friendly  policies and appears to have been at its height i n  the first and second Howard  c governments before some of its activists were either defeated (its chairman, Chris Miles. 

  Hraddon. Tasmania was defeated in 1998) or promoted into the ministry (Andrews in  200 1). 

  In the third Howard government attention was focused rather more on the religiosity of  leading government figures. including Treasurer Peter Costello (a Baptist) and Nationals'  leader John Anderson (an Anglican). This religiosity was demonstrated in part by the  apparent courting by Costello, in particular, of leading evangelical churches. such as 

  I-lillsong in Sydney (Maddox 2005: 163-164). By the time of the 2004 federal election it  \$as this relationship, and the rise of the Family First party (see below) that attracted most  attention (Maddox 2005a; Manning and Warhurst 2005). 

  Public Presentation of Religious Beliefs 

  The public presentation of personal religious belief's, now widespread in public life, is of  equal interest to the denominational changes that have taken place. More than any other  l'ederal government the senior members of the Howard government have been active, in  word and deed, in emphasizing (or at least being open about) its religious credentials and 

  5 

  beliefs and in emphasizing the positive contribution of Christian values to Australian  society. One has only to compare the publicly Christian approach of the Houard-  Anderson-Costello-Abbott team. for instance, to the privately Christian. even secular.  approach of the Fraser-Anthony-Lynch team in the 1970s to see that this is true (Mutch  2004: 15- 16). 

  The reason for this change might include a combination of the so-called international  clash between fundamentalist Islam and Western Christian nations together with the  particular personalities that just happen to have emerged in leadership positions i n  the  Coalition. IHoward himself, it should be noted. has not been the leading figure in this  development. despite the attention given t o  his personal Methodism-cum-Anglicanism. 

  Perhaps decreasing sectarianism has played a part. 

  Nevertheless, whatever its origins, this ha5 occurred to the extent that follo\bing the 2004  federal election it drew a response from Labor in the forin of Foreign Affairs shadow  minister, Kevin Rudd. who formed a party discussion group on religion. faith and values  to educate Labor colleagues and to warn them very publicly about the dangers of 

  allowing the Coalition to capture the growing religious vote (Compass 2005). Rudd and  other Labor figures, while revealing a typical Labor nzariness of the mix of religion and  politics. believed that ‘The Coalition is intent on exploiting religion for political  purposes’’ (Martin Ferguson in Weekend Australian 27-28 November 2004). At the 2004  election the contrast with Labor had been made somewhat clearer because Labor leader, 

  Mark Latham. was a declared agnostic (Compass 2004; Maddox 2005a: 47: see also  Latham 2005: 113-14). Latham was privately dismissive of religion and these views  became public on the publication of his diaries last year. This has led Anglican Bishop  Tom Frame to claim that in recent years “Labor leaders have exhibited an open disdain 

  for all things religious” (Frame 2006: 26). By 2005 the neu Labor leader. Kim Beazley, a  Christian himself. had overcome his traditional aversion to mixing religion and politics  by speaking about his own faith at an Australian Christian Lobby conference i n  Canberra. 

  The second aspect of the public presentation of religious beliefs is more debatable in my  viem. In her ma-ior work Marion Maddox (2005) argues that. just as in the USA, the  government has been speaking in code about matters such as values in education to  attract the support not only of religious believers but also others who uould not identify 

  with a church. It does this. argues Maddox, through “arnbiguouslq Christian rhetoric” and  “a carefully pitched Christian right ‘dog uhistie’ strategy“ (Maddox 2005a: 46-47). She  emphasizes Howard campaign strategies borrowed from the American religious right.  and supported by home-grown conservative religious activists and think tanks. to attract a  wider non-religious public. 

  G ov e r n men t Appointments 

  Religion and politics is also more prominent. though not widespread. in public  appointments. The most controversial Houard government appointment in this context  has been that of Archbishop Peter Holling\vorth as Governor-General in June 200 1 

  (Irving 2004:87-90). Hollingworth at the time of his appointment was Anglican 

  6 

  4rchbishop of Brisbane. Opinions vary markedly on the constitutional propriety and/or  political sense of Howard’s choice (Maddox 2005: 310-1 I ) .  but it certainly drew further  attention to church-state issues. Some argued that it was contrary to the spirit of s. 116,  though Maddox convincingly argued that it was absolutely in accord with the “no 

  religious test” segment of that section. Hollingworth was the first member of the clergy to  be appointed Governor-General, though such appointments had been made in other  countries and as Governor by Australian states. The Prime Minister defended the  appointment by reference to the diverse religious affiliation of previous Governors-  General, such as the well-known Catholicism of his predecessor. Sir William Deane, and  the Jewish faith of Sir Zelman Cowen. But he had taken a further step by his appointment  of Dr Hollingworth. 

  The Hollingworth appointment should be seen partly as an attempt to counter the  outspoken Sir William Deane, whose social comment on Indigenous rights had a clear  Catholic inspiration (Stephens 2002). Furthermore, it was a public counter-balance to the  criticism the Howard government was receiving from church leaders, including other  Anglicans. Later, in 2005, at a time of considerable church criticism of the government’s 

  industrial relations package, Howard appointed a prominent conservative Anglican  layman. Prof. Ian Harper, to head the Fair Pay Commission (Sydney Morning Herald 12  October 2005). Harper, publicly presented as an active Christian economist, soon rejected  criticism of the industrial relations reforms by the Anglican Archbishop of Sydney, Peter  Jensen (Sydney Morning Herald 14 October 2005). 

  Public Policy Debates and Conscience Votes in Parliament 

  The Christian churches have played a significant public role in numerous policy debates,  including taxation reform, the treatment of refugees and asylum seekers, and industrial  relations reform. These partisan issues are discussed in the sections that follow. 

  Before addressing these issues, attention should be drawn to the role of the churches in  issues that were resolved by the parliament in the traditional non-partisan way, by use of  the free or conscience vote. The first was the euthanasia issue in the first Howard term,  1996-97 (Maddox: 2005: 50-65), and the second was the issue of the so-called “abortion 

  pill”. RU-486, in the fourth Howard term, 2005-06 (there was a third conscience vote in  2002 on stem cell research). 

  fhere are similarities between the two cases beyond the use of the conscience vote and  the party divisions that inevitably followed. The first involved a successful private  members’ bill moved in the House of Representatives by Kevin Andrews to overturn  cuthanasia legislation introduced by the Northern Territory parliament. The second 

  involved a cross-party private members bill introduced into the Senate by four women,  L j  n Allison (Democrats), Claire Moore (Labor), Fiona Nash (Nationals) and Judith  Troeth (Liberal) to overturn the ministerial control over RU486 cxercised at the time by  ‘lony Abbott. the Minister for fklealth. The Prime Minister personally supported the first  and opposed the second (while the Opposition Leader on each occasion, Kim Beazleq. 

  7 

  supported both). The parliamentary debates each had strong religious-secular overtones.  though this was only part of the story and many other themes also featured. Notably each  c generated enormous religious (primarily but not solely Catholic) pressure group activity  closely associated with Catholic parliamentarians in both parties. Labor as well as 

  Liberal. and Catholic church leaders. In 1996 it was called the Euthanasia No! campaign  and i n  2005 it was Australians against RU-486. 

  There are also differences. The euthanasia issue contained an important states-rights  element. It also had less far-reaching connections to related issues. Mhile RU486 was  linked to attitudes to ‘life‘ issues such as stem cell research. access to IVF. and cloning.  The abortion issue. exemplified by the gender of the four movers of the bill. contained a 

  much more explicit gender dimension. In 2006 only three nomen senators out of 25  voted against the private members bill. 

  An analysis of parliamentary voting patterns on the RU486 legislation shows that  Catholic MPs voted overwhelmingly against the bill, though with some notable  exceptions, such as Coonan. Nelson, Hockey and Turnbull. Among the bill’s opponents  Catholic Labor MPs were almost totally isolated from their party colleagues, \\bile  Coalition Catholics could see that they were not. 

  At the time the issue of religion surfaced to an extent rarely seen i n  Parliament (Shanahan  2006; 2006a). Abbott accused his opponents of a “new sectarianism“ because they were  implying that a Catholic could not be Minister for Health: “The last time this kind of  sectarianism and alleged inability of a minister to carry out their duty i n  the national 

  interest was in 1916 at the time of the conscription debate. I thought n e  had mmed on  from there” (quoted in Shanahan 2006). Among those seeking change Senator Kerry  Nettle (Greens) was photographed wearing a YMCA T-shirt with the slogan “Mr Abbott.  Get your rosaries off m y  ovaries” (Herald Sun 10 February 2006). This ’1-shirt became a  particular focus for the debate about the intersection between religion and politics, 

  including numerous claims that it was offenshe to Catholics (Pearson 2006; Shanahan  2006a). 

  Faith-Based Delivery of Government Services 

  Another controversial element of religion and politics is the role of the churches i n  the  delivery of some government services. Privatization of the delivery of government  services has enabled some churches and charity groups, such as Mission Australia.  Wesley Mission, the Salvation Army and Anglicare. to successfully tender to participate 

  in the delivery of government programs in several fields. including relationship  counselling. As far as services to the unemployed were concerned this opportunity arose  with the privatization of the Comnionwealth Einployinent Service and its eventual  replacement by the .lob Network program. Various church agencies Mere involved such 

  as the Salvation Army’s “Employment Plus“ pro, (Tram. 

  8 

  Controversy followed in December 1999-January 2000 over allegations that both the staff  employment practices and the client practices of these Christian agencies might breach  the separation of church and state and infringe the non-discriminatory nature of the  delivery of secular government services. The critics included not only the Labor  Opposition and the Democrats but also Jewish community representatives (Sydney 

  Morning Herald 21 January 2000). Tony Abbott, Minister for Employment Services at  the time. jumped to the defence of the agencies and charged critics with religious  intolerance (Australian 8-9 January 2000). 

  The controversy extended to the churches themselves. some insiders doubting the  lvisdom of such a close association with government (Grace 1999; W.Brennan 2000).  Insiders were worried that the churches’ critique of the government might be  compromised. In the case of the Catholic Church for instance, its agency Catholic 

  Welfare Australia was responsible both for the management of Centacare‘s Job Network  contracts and for critique of government welfare policies. 

  Church Leaders’ Criticisms of the Howard Government 

  The next theme of this lecture is the interaction between church leaders and the Howard  L eovernment. The main Christian churches, Catholic. Anglican and Uniting. represented  by the statements of their leaders and leading agencies, have become a consistent element  of the opposition to the Howard government on some of the major issues of the decade. 

  ?his statement needs qualification as it does not apply to all church leaders, some of  \\ hom, such as the Salvation Army’s Major Brian Watters, have accepted government  appointments and some of whom have been most supportive pf particular public policies.  Catholic Cardinal George Pel1 of Sydney. for instance, offered timely support for the 

  government’s taxation and education policies respectively just before the 1998 and 2004  federal elections (Warhurst, Brown and Higgins 2000; Warhurst and Manning 2005). At  the time of the 2004 federal election he was .joined by the Catholic Archbishop of  Melbourne and the Anglican Archbishops of Sydney and Melbourne. It does not apply to 

  all policy areas either. In the traditional areas of personal morality the churches have  generally supported government attempts to maintain the status quo, or at least to resist  moves in alternative directions. This included not only opposition to euthanasia and  abortion (above), but also to same sex marriages. The federal parliament, led by the  government but with Labor support. made clear its opposition to same sex marriages just  before the 2004 election. 

  But overall the assessment is correct and it predates the Howard government. There has  been considerable church criticism of federal government economic policies from the  time of the major statement, Common Wealth for the Common Good, by the Catholic  bishops in 1992 (Australian Catholic Bishops Conference 1992). The churches have been 

  consistent critics of the attachment of both major parties to market-dominated economic  rationalism as an approach to policy-making, as well as to particular economic and  financial policies, such as taxation reform. While generally unsuccessful and often 

  9 

  unacknowledged, the churches have been one of the last of the traditional institutions to  resist the allure of the economic nostrums of the so-called New Right. There has been  considerable church criticism of social policies, such as mandatory detention of refiigees  and asylum seekers. and infringement of Aboriginal rights (F. Brennan I998 and 2003). 

  In foreign policies the churches have questioned Australian military commitments to the  Gulf and Iraq wars. 

  Some of this church criticism has been central to election debates and to the campaign  contest between the government and the Opposition. In the lead up to the Howard era the  churches were leading critics in 1992-93 of the then Opposition leader. John HeLison’s,  Fightback! policies, especially the introduction of a GST on food and essential s e n  ices.  The tenor of church opposition continued when Howard moved to introduce a GST in 

  1998. Only then-Archhishop Pel1 demurred from the unified Catholic opposition on that  occasion by arguing that there was no single Catholic position (Warhurst. Brou n and  Higgins 2000). 

  The most recent example occurred 1% ith industrial relations reform in 2005. The Catholic  bishops. .joined by many other Christian leaders such as the new Anglican Primate.  Archbishop Philip Aspinall of Brisbane, were united i n  their concerns. Bishop Kevin  Manning of Parramatta expressed the u ish that “in the new legislation, our cherished  tradition of solidarity, inateship and fairness would not be dealt a blou in the name of 

  productivity and profits”. Cardinal Pel1 Mas concerned that the refcmis would effectively  reduce minimum wages and urged much wider consultation before the legislation was  passed (Catholic Weekly I0 J u l y  2005). 

  The criticism was not solely of the Honard government, though this did little to mollify  Coalition members. Opposition to economic rationalism pre-dated the Howard decade  and applied also to the Labor Party. I n  2003 Australian Christian leaders, joined by  Jewish and Muslim leaders, called on all state and territory leaders (all of them Labor) as 

  well as the prime minister to develop a national strategy to reduce povert). In June 2004  an interfaith coalition of mainstream Christian churches also launched an anti-poverty  election campaign (Canberra Times 25 June 2004). 

  The Howard Government’s Criticisms of Church Leaders 

  Paradoxically, perhaps. given the general positive stance of Government leaders towards  personal religious belief and towards the place of Christianity in the formation of  Australian national identity. the relationship between the Howard government and most  ma-jor Christian leaders has often been very strained. According to the government they  have been speaking out of turn. 

  The Prime Minister has argued on principle of the churches that: “Their primarj role is  spiritual leadership, mhich I respect and support“. He added: I think church leaders  should speak out on moral issues. but there is a problem n i t h  that justification being  actively translated into sounding very partisan”. At the same time. February 2004, he  said: “It’s a difficult area. 1 don‘t deny the right of any church leader to talk about 

  I O  

  anlthing. But 1 think from the point of view of stresses and strains when the only time  they hear from their leaders is when they are talking about issues that are bound to divide  their congregations”. He implied that Coalition supporters would be particularly offended  by such criticism of the government: “Some of the church leaders have been particularly  critical of our side of politics [and] they end up offending a large number of their 

  patrons” (Herald Sun 16 February 2004). 

  Such reflections by Howard followed numerous flare ups i n  the relationship since 1996,  including suggestions by back benchers that, because of church support for Aboriginal  native title. rural churchgoers punish their churches by withdrawing financial support.  They also followed some attempts to mend the relationship by some closed-door 

  meetings between church leaders and their co-religionists in the ministry. But there is  little evidence in any major improvement in the relationship. 

  foreign Minister Alexander Downer’s Sir Thomas Playford Memorial Lecture,  ”Australian Politics and the Christian Church”, in 2003 is the most considered and  extensive elaboration of the Coalition government’s position and can thus be used as an  exemplar (Downer 2003: reprinted in Sullivan and Leppert 2004: 13-20). Downer’s 

  lecture, delivered with obvious feeling, brings together many criticisms, some by  prominent conservative journalists, of church social -justice statements over several  decades. ‘The lecture was very personal in its critique of church leaders who have spoken  out against the government’s Iraq military commitment. His targets included Archbishop 

  Peter Carnley of Perth. then Primate of the Anglican Church, Downer’s own  denomination. and the then president of the Uniting Church. Professor James Haire. 

  The Foreign Minister argued that the church leaders had misplaced priorities, caused  perhaps by their unhealthy attraction for personal publicity. He perceived “the tendency  of’ some church leaders to ignore their primary pastoral obligations in favour of hogging  the limelight on complex political issues”. It seemed to him that too ofien “the churches 

  seek popular political causes or cheap headlines. And this tends to cut across the central  role they have in providing spiritual comfort and moral guidance to the community”. And  again. .‘Apart from disdain for traditional pastoral duties and pontificating self-regard,  how best to explain the clerics who issue press releases at the drop of a hat on issues  where the mind of the church itself is unresolved or not yet engaged?” 

  The priorities of the church leaders were not to Downer’s liking: “Those clergy u h o  have  lost sight of the fundanientals have filled the vacuum with all manner of diversions. For  some. social work has become the be-all and the end-all. Environmental issues, feminist  and gay agendas and Indigenous rights provide constant grandstanding opportunities”. 

  The Foreign Minister regarded the tone of the criticism of church criticism as  intemperate. Here he was referring particularly to comments by James Haire. ” I  find the  accusation of political depravity-not just misguidedness in particular policies. mind you.  but depravity-profoundly personally offensive as well as foolish. That he was attacking  both the major parties is no comfort”. 

  1 1  

  He accused church leaders of having an anti-government agenda and of playing party  politics: “Most intoxicating of all, and most divisive for their congregations, is overtly  partisan politicking”. 

  Finally, Downer accused his church opponents of misplaced certainty and ignorance. He  complained that ”political and social judgements are delivered with magisterial certainty,  while utterances on fundamental Christian doctrines are characterized by skepticism and  doubt”. lle concluded: “The greatest challenge today for leaders of all religions is to 

  forego the opportunity to be amateur commentators on all manner of secular issues on  which they inevitably lack expertise. and instead to find the spark of inspiration to give  our lives greater moral and spiritual meaning”. 

  The Foreign Minister‘s statement remains representative. There has been no defence of  the church leaders or rebuttal of Downer’s position from within the government that I  know of. despite the number of Christians in its ranks. Government ministers have  attempted to bypass church leaders in favour of direct communications with church  members, a style which echoes the prime ministers own preference for talk-back media  arid the tabloid press. 

  Family First Party 

  The most recent development in religion and politics has been the emergence of the  Family First Party. The emergence of this new party at the 2004 federal election was just  one aspect of the larger relationship between the Howard government and evangelical  Christians. Despite the success of FFP it remains a less significant phenomenon than the  direct influence of evangelical Christians within the Coalition. Evangelical lobby groups, 

  like the emerging Australian Christian Lobby, are another notable element of this  evangelical story. 

  Leading ministers in the Howard government have clearly felt more at home i i i t h  the  individualist aspirations and traditional family values contained in the messages of the  newer evangelical churches than mith those of the more critical mainstream church  leaders. Moreover these churches have been grouing quickly. though from a small base.  and could offer visiting political speakers large. and often youthful. audiences. For these  reasons, the Treasurer agreed to speak in 2004 and 2005 at the annual Hillsong  conferences in Sydney. As the 2004 election approached. considerable attention \\as 

  focused by the media on the growing alignment betneen the newer Christian  denominations, generally referred to as Pentecostal Christians. and the H O M  ard  government. In particular, confirmation of the link was found in the suburban Sqdney  seat of Greenway, where the 1,iberal Party‘s candidate Louise Markus u a s  a Hillsong  staff member. Markus was to win the seat from the Labor Part). whose candidate  happened to be a secular Muslim. 

  Family First had no national profile until shortly before that federal election, but had held  a seat in the South Australian state parliament since its formation i n  2002 (Manning and  Warhurst 2005). It boasted a strong supporter base among Pentecostal Christians. 

  cspecially the Assemblies of God churches. During the election campaign the Coalition  agreed to exchange preferences with FFP and Howard personally encouraged the link.  FFP refused to give preferences to a lesbian Liberal candidate in Brisbane and to one or  t h o  sitting Liberal MPs who supported same sex marriages. The exchange of preferences  assisted the Coalition, while FFP won a Senate seat in Victoria on the basis of a 1.9%  primary vote and shrewd preference deals with Labor and the Democrats among others,  \vho were taken by surprise by the outcome. 

  l'he subsequent relationship between FFP Senator Fielding and the government has been  fraught. Fielding, while providing the decisive vote to overturn compulsory student  unionism. has become a critic of the government on a number of issues including family-  unfriendly industrial relations reforms. It remains to be seen whether FFP is a party with 

  growth potential or a flash-in-the-pan. But for the time being its growth and the  Democrats' decline alters the minor party balance between left and right parties in the  C oa I it i on ' s favour. 

  Islam and Politics 

  The politics of Islam i n  Australia cannot receive the attention in this lecture that it  deserves. It is a story in itself. The significance of the small and fragmented Islamic  community in Australian politics has largely followed September 1 1 2001. During the  last four or five years the emphasis in government pronouncements about the place of  Judaeo-Christianity as the centre-piece of Australian values and identity has served to 

  increase the isolation and alienation of that community from other Australians. At times,  c Fovernment leaders such as Peter Costel lo drew implicit negative comparisons between 

  lslam and Christianity (Mutch 2004: 16). 

  Apart from matters of security and terror the Muslim community has made few  interventions in public policy at the national level. Nevertheless, they share common  conservative social values with Christians. They also share common interests with low-  fee Christian schools and welcomed Labor's education funding plan in 2004. These  common interests and values may become more significant in the longer term. 

  Conclusion 

  Not for the first time religion has had a heightened profile in Australian politics during  the Howard era. Just as in the 1950s Labor Split the overall impact of religious  intervention appears to have benefited the Coalition parties. In fact, some elements of the  story. such as the growing presence of Catholics in the Liberal Party and the diminished  contribution of Catholics in the Labor Party, are actually a long-term consequence of the 

  Labor Split. The cultural receptivity of the parties towards religion has altered. 

  Nevertheless, although the ultimate impact of religion on the parties ma) not yet be  equivalent, the iast decade is a more interesting story. During the Howard decade the  inlluence of religion has been markedly more varied and has crossed denominational  boundaries from the mainstream to the newer evangelical churches. Furthermore. religion 

  and personal religious belief has been much more public. A wider cultural change has  occurred in 2lSt century Australian politics. 

  6433 words  28 April 2006 

  14 

  REFERENCES 

  Australian Broadcasting Commission. 1994, The Liberals, Episode 1. video 

  Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, 1992 . Commonwealth for the Common  Good. A Statement on the Distribution of Wealth in Australia, Collins Dove, Melbourne 

  Bean, C., 1999. “The Forgotten Cleavage? Religion and Politics in Australia“. Canadian  Journal of Political Science, 32, 2, June. 

  Bean, C.. and McAllister, I., 2002. “From Impossibility to Certainty: Explaining the  Coalition’s Victory in 2001”, in J. Warhurst and M. Simms (eds), 2001: The Centenary  Election, University of Queensland Press 

  Bean, C.. and McAIlister, I., 2005, “Voting Behaviour: Not an Election of Interest  (Rates)’‘, in M. Simms and J. Warhurst (eds), Mortgage Nation: The 2004 Australian  Election, API Network, Perth 

  Brennan, F., 1998, The Wik Debate: Its Impact on Aborigines, Pastoralists and Miners,  UNSW Press 

  Brennan, F., 2003, Tampering with Asylum, University of Queensland Press 

  Brennan, W., 2000, “Our quango which art in employment”, Sydney Morning Herald, 6  .I an uary 

  Brett, J., 2002. “Class, religion and the foundation of the Australian party system: a  revisionist interpretation”, Australian Journal of Political Science, 3 1. pp. 39-56 

  Brett. J., 2003, Australian Liberals and the Moral Middle Class. Cambridge  University Press, 

  Compass, 2004 “ What our leaders believe”, Australian Broadcasting Corporation.  Sldney. video 

  Compass, 2005, “Kevin Rudd and the God Factor”, Australian Broadcasting Corporation,  S l  dney 

  Costar, B., Love, P., and Strangio, P (eds)., 2005, The Great Labor Schism”: a  retrospective, Scribe, Melbourne 

  Downer, A.. 2003. Australian Politics and the Christian Church. ‘The Sir Thomas  Plaq ford Lecture, University of Adelaide Liberal Club, 27 August 

  15 

  Frame, T., 2006, “The Labor Party and Christianit] : A Reflection on the Latham  Diaries” ~ Quad rant. Jan- Fe b , 26-3 2 

  Grace. D.. 1999, “Preaching the gospel of thc Job Network“. Sydney Morning Herald,  30 December 

  Hogan, M., 1987, The Sectarian Strand: Religion in Australian History. Penguin,  1987 

  Irving, H.. 2004, Five Things to Know about the Australian Constitution. Cambridge  University Press 

  Latham, M.. 2005, The Latham Diaries. Melbourne University Press 

  Maddox, M., 2001, For God and Country: Religious Dynamics in Australian Federal  Politics, Department of the Parliamentary Library. Canberra 

  Maddox. M., 2005, God Under Howard: The Rise of the Religious Right in  Australian Politics, Allen and Unwin, Sydney 

  Maddox. M., 2005a, “Interlude: One Countr) under Howard”. in P. Browne and J.  Thomas (eds), A Win and a Prayer: Scenes from the 2004 Australian Election.  UNS W Press, Sydney 

  Manning, H.. and Warhurst. .I., 2005, “The Old and New Politics of Religion“, in M.  Siinms and J .  Warhurst (eds). Mortgage Nation: The 2004 Australian Election. API  Network, Perth, pp. 263-270 

  Marr, D., 1999, The High Price of Heaven. Allen and Unwin, Sydney 

  Mutch, S., 2004, “Religion in Australian politics: a surfacing debate”, AQ: Journal of  Contemporary Analysis. September-October. 15-20 

  Pearson, C., 2006, “Bigotry makes a rebirth”, Weekend Australian. 1 1 - 1  2 February 

  Robb. A.. 1997. “The Liberal Party Campaign“. in C. Bean et al (eds). The Politics of  Retribution. Allen and U n u i n .  Sydney. pp. 34-41 

  Rydon, J., 1986. A Federal Legislature: The Australian Commonwealth Parliament  1901-1980. Oxford University Press. Melbourne 

  Shanahan, D.. 2006, ‘*Abbott condemns ‘sectarian‘ critics’.. Australian, 9 February 

  Shanahan. D.. 2006a. “Morally issues can’t be ducked“. Australian, 10 February 

  Stephens, T., 2002. Sir William Deane: The Things that Matter, 1 {odder, Sydney 

  16 

  Strangio, P., 2005. “Closing the Split? Before and after federal intervention in the  Victorian ALP”, in Costar, Love and Strangio, eds, The Great Labor Scism: A  Retrospective, Scribe, 340-365 

  Sullivan, F.. and Leppert, S.. (eds). 2004, Church and Civil Society: A Theology of  Engagement, ATF Press, Adelaide 

  Thoinpson, R., 1994, Religion in Australia: A History, Oxford University Press 

  Warhurst, J., Brown, 1. and Higgins R., 2000, “Tax Groupings: The Group Politics of Tax  Reform:, in M. Simms and J. Warliurst (eds), Howard’s Agenda: The 1998 Australian  Election, University of Queensland Press, Brisbane 

  17 

