---
title: "Greedy grab for profits drives nuclear waste dump push: Greens."
date: "2006-07-12"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295563
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X4AK6%22
---

 Senator Christine Milne   

 Greedy grab for profits drives nuclear waste dump  push: Greens 

 Senator Milne, 12th July 2006   

 A greedy grab for cash is driving the push to turn Australia into the world's nuclear  waste dump, Australian Greens energy spokesperson Senator Christine Milne said  today.    

 "The latest advocate of this ill-conceived proposal, Reserve Bank board member and  former WMC chief executive Hugh Morgan, claims that Australia can improve its  international standing by taking the world's high-level nuclear waste," Senator Milne  said.    

 "This is nonsense. Hugh Morgan and the other cheerleaders for a nuclear waste  storage industry in Australia are trying to dress up a greedy grab for cash with the  respectable clothing of international reputation. In truth, they simply want to dump on  Australia.    

 "Far from improving Australia's international standing, a global nuclear waste dump  in Australia would simply show that the nation is prepared to condemn Indigenous  communities and future generations of Australians to exposure to waste so toxic that it  has to be managed for a quarter of a million years.    

 "Perhaps Hugh Morgan and fellow cheerleader former Prime Minister Bob Hawke  don't appreciate that Australia's global standing is already besmirched by its treatment  of refugees, failure to defend David Hicks'   legal rights, and its war on Iraq.    

 "Pulling the rug from under the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty through nuclear fuel  leasing and a high-level waste dump would just be the latest case in a long history of  the Australian government thumbing its nose at international law and standards.    

 "Mr Morgan's arrogance is evident in his reported comment that 'there's no better use  to which I can think you can put the country' in South Australia than a nuclear waste  dump.    

 "Nuclear waste is an unacceptable legacy to future generations. There are alternative  forms of energy that are safe and ecologically sustainable.    

 "The federal government must rule out the development of a uranium enrichment and  nuclear fuel leasing industry to ensure that Australia does not become a global nuclear  waste dump. Australia needs a smart industry development strategy; storing nuclear  waste doesn't measure up."    

 Contact: Katrina Willis 03 6234 4566 or 0437 587 562 

