---
title: "Vanstone blames Australians for West Papuan women's persecution."
date: "2006-05-03"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211555473
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WRKJ6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales 

 

 

 Vanstone blames Australians for West Papuan women's  persecution 

 Senator Nettle, 3rd May 2006   

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle responded to Senator Vanstone's comments today on  West Papua and imprisoning women and children.    

 "Senator Vanstone seeks to distract from her government's intention to lock up  asylum seekers including women and children on remote islands because she can not  defend her position," Senator Nettle said.    

 "Senator Vanstone also conveniently ignores the persecution that some women and  children face in West Papua at the hands of the Indonesian military. In fact she is  seeking to shift the responsibility for hardship West Papuans face from the Indonesian  military to Australians - 77% of whom support self-determination for West Papua.    

 "The government's new immigration legislation reneges on a promise the Prime  Minister gave to Liberal Party backbenchers last year that the Australian government  would not lock up women and children. The Greens hope that Coalition MPs will  hold the Prime Minister to his commitment by opposing the new legislation when it is  presented to them next week.    

 "Ferra Kambu, a mother amongst the 42 West Papuans, has spoken about witnessing  the rape, mutilation and murder of women by Indonesian soldiers in West Papua. Is  Senator Vanstone seriously proposing that women such as Ferra must choose between  such a life in West Papua or imprisonment by Australia on a remote island in the  Pacific?    

 "One imagines that the mother of lone West Papuan asylum seeker left on Christmas  Island wants more for her son that continued detention on a remote island off the coast  of Australia or the imprisonment she and his father faced at the hands of the  Indonesian military. But Senator Vanstone is proposing to imprison more families,  women and children in remote island detention centres in the Pacific."    

 The Greens welcome the Get Up TV commercial to be screened today that focuses on  the government's back flip regarding locking up families and children in detention.    

 Contact - Damien Lawson 0419 253 342   Created by Administration   Last modified 03-05-2006 02:39 PM    

