---
title: "West Papua: Australia must act."
date: "2006-01-26"
creators:
  - "Stott Despoja, Natasha"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of STOTT DESPOJA, SEN NATASHA"
subjects:
  - "Armed forces"
  - "Human rights violations"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Papua"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288935
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/33LI6%22
---

 

 

 senator.stottdespoja@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA                          THURSDAY 26 JANUARY 2006 

 SENATOR NATASHA STOTT DESPOJA  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS FOREIGN AFFAIRS SPOKESPERSON 

 

 WEST PAPUA: AUSTRALIA MUST ACT   

 While Australians reflect on our country's national Day, indigenous West Papuans can only dream  about national sovereignty, according to the Australian Democrats.    

 "The current breakdown of peace in West Papua highlights the need for the international community  to do more to prevent the bloodshed," Democrats' Foreign Affairs Spokesperson Senator Natasha  Stott Despoja said.    

 "West Papuans have suffered from decades of violence and oppression during Indonesia's  illegitimate reign.    

 "Australia can start by granting political asylum to the 43 West Papuan asylum seekers who arrived  in Australia last week, displaying a banner claiming genocide, intimidation and terrorism by  Indonesian forces. 

 

 "It is time the Indonesian Government returned the autonomy it has taken from indigenous leaders.    

 "The Indonesian military must be removed from the region - beginning with its elite forces, Kopassus,  which have been known for their brutality and violence. Australia certainly must not recommence  training or joint exercises Kopassus.    

 "Australia is a leader in our region. It is time for us to aid West Papua by vehemently advocating  adherence to fundamental human rights," Senator Stott Despoja said.   

 

 Media contact: Raina Hunter - 0417 085 260  

