---
title: "Howard's end?"
date: "2006-07-09"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211295409
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/698K6%22
---

 Senator Christine Milne   

 Howard's end? 

 Senator Milne, 9th July 2006   

 Australia's reputation can only be enhanced by the retirement of Prime Minister John  Howard, the Australian Greens said today.    

 "Prime Minister Howard has not kept promises on a whole range of matters, from  protecting Tasmania's old growth forests, the GST to Australian working conditions  and industrial relations, so why would we expect that he would keep his word on a  deal with Peter Costello made 12 years ago?" Greens Senator Christine Milne said in  Hobart.    

 "However, if he did put his own interests first, as per usual, and retire soon, the Prime  Minister's action would coincide for once with the best interests of the nation.  Australia's reputation as a good global citizen is increasingly besmirched under his  leadership.    

 "Following US President George Bush in turning his back on international law from  the Kyoto Protocol, to the Refugee Convention to the war in Iraq, the Geneva  Conventions and the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Prime Minister Howard  continues to thumb his nose at the global community to the detriment of Australia.    

 "Whether Peter Costello would have a higher regard for international law or for the  rights of Australian citizens, whether in Guantanamo Bay or in Australian workplaces,  than the Prime Minister remains to be seen.  

 Certainly he does not seem to have heard of climate change or energy security.    

 "The war in Iraq continues to go badly and the community is increasingly horrified by  revelations of the wheeling and dealing over the government's involvement in the  sanctions busting sale of wheat to Iraq and the extent to which wheat sales influenced  the decision to go to war.    

 "Prime Minister Howard has lost his authority in the party room and has struggled in  recent months to hold the coalition together, with internal struggles surfacing over his  policy positions on refugees, same sex civil unions, alternative fuels and nuclear  energy to name a few.    

 "He is even facing threats from backbench senators like Senator Ross Lightfoot that if  not preselected he would leave the party and sit as an independent, jeopardising the  Coalition's slender majority in the Senate.  

 

 "On top of this, there is now the prospect of the Prime Minister's electorate of  Bennelong becoming more marginal under a proposed redrawing of boundaries."    

 Contact: Katrina Willis 0437 587 562 

