---
title: "Government's false fear-mongering on asylum seekers show Labor's policy change is the right move."
date: "2006-10-17"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211299466
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UO6L6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 17 October 2006  Press Release Number: ljmocxcy  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Government's False Fear-Mongering on Asylum Seekers Show Labor's Policy  Change is The Right Move

 Democrats Deputy Leader, Andrew Bartlett, has praised the courage of Labor's shadow Immigration  Minister, Tony Burke, for supporting the abolition of the cruel and unnecessary Temporary Protection  Visa for refugees.   

 "The fact that the Immigration Minister has already come out with the same old tired lies accusing Labor  of encouraging people smugglers shows that Mr Burke has made the right decision," Senator Bartlett  said.   

 "The simple fact is that the number of asylum seekers arriving by boat increased after the introduction of  Temporary Protection Visas in 1999. It also led directly to far more women and children having to risk  their lives and engage people smugglers to have any hope of achieving safety and reuniting with their  husbands and fathers.   

 "TPVs have also made it harder for refugees to settle in and start contributing to Australia, and have  caused worse mental health for many refugees.   

 "Put simply, the evidence shows Temporary Protection Visas do not deter people from seeking asylum  and have directly caused serious and unnecessary suffering just as the Democrats predicted would  occur when we opposed their introduction in 1999.   

 "These are facts, and no amount of dishonest bluster by Coalition Ministers can disguise it.   

 "The public is much more aware of the government's dishonesty and deceit in this area. The Democrats  encourage Labor to stick to their guns and not get spooked by government Ministers or media shock  jocks trying to spread fear and hate.   

 "The suggested changes to Labor's policy on TPVs address some of the holes in our treatment of  humanitarian cases in Australia and would reduce inefficiency and political interference in the operation  of the Migration Act." Senator Bartlett said.    

 

 

