---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Honaria, Solomon Islands: 22 April 2006: [Solomon Islands; death of Australian soldier in Iraq]"
date: "2006-04-22"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Solomon Islands; death of Australian soldier in Iraq"
  - "Solomon Islands"
  - "death of Australian soldier in Iraq"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211555025
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8NFJ6%22
---

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP 

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   DATE:   22 April 2006  

 TITLE:   Doorstop - Honiara, Solomon Islands     

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well I just want to say that I’ve had a very useful look around this  morning at the damage that’s been done, particularly in the Chinatown area of Honiara - that  part of the town has been quite devastated and we’re deeply concerned about that.  I’ve had  the opportunity of talking with our police and our military and with Shane Castles, the Police  Commissioner of the Royal Solomon Islands Police.     

 I just want to make the point that I think, but for the intervention of the military during these  riots.  As the Australian Foreign Minister I want to pay a particular tribute to the courage of  the Australian Federal Police and actually Australian police from some of our state police  forces. They showed enormous courage in very difficult and very trying circumstances and  they deserve the admiration of the Australian people for what they’ve done.   

 

 I think we made the right decision to send in the military and I think the numbers that we’ve  got here are good.  They certainly look as though they’re doing the job and doing the job  pretty effectively and pretty efficiently.     

 I’ve had now the opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister, of course I’ve known him  before in his previous position and I’ve made it clear to him that we’re prepared to support the  democratic processes in Solomon Islands and, through what we’ve done, we’re also strongly  in support of economic reform. That economic reform is going to be central to the survival of  the country. That continuing with an economic reform program is a life and death issue for  Solomon Islands.    

 There needs to be a significant improvement.  I mean, the economy obviously has recovered  very substantially from the trough of 2003 but then there still needs to be improvement in  those areas and a lot of effort needs to be put into the health system and of course the 

 education of the population. The country only has a thirty per cent adult literacy rate, or a  figure in that vicinity, then that’s a problem. That’s a problem in this modern age.  So, we are  committed through RAMSI to do what we can to assist.     

 But in the end, the future of this country is in the hands of the people of the Solomon Islands  - the government and the people of Solomon Islands. They ultimately have to chart their own  destiny and be responsible for their own destiny, we can only help.  But I appreciate what our  police and our army have done.     

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 But let me also say, having been in a number of Pacific countries over the last few days, I  appreciate very much the role that a number of other countries have played in supporting  RAMSI.  RAMSI is not an Australian initiative it is a regional initiative. It is supported by the  Pacific Islands Forum.  It is supported by many Pacific countries and we appreciate, of course  we lead it, but we appreciate that very much.    

 I’m happy to answer any questions.   

 REPORTER:  Mr Downer, did you address the issue of corruption with Mr Rini and is there  anything Australia can do boost the attempts to crack down on corruption?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  We certainly did discuss the issue of corruption.  Obviously there is,  and has been, by the way, for many years, as you know only too well, a public perception of  corruption here in the Solomon Islands.  And the public perception of corruption has been  matched by reality.  There is no doubt that corruption has been a major problem in this  country over a long period of time and I had quite a long discussion with the Prime Minister  about that issue.     

 I’m not going into all the details of that discussion, but I had quite a long discussion with him  and I made the point that its very important that what you might call the ‘political class’ in the  Solomon Islands builds the confidence of the people of Solomon Islands that they themselves  are free of corruption. That corruption is a thing of the past and that there is a high level of  both accountability and transparency in order to ensure that, as best as one possibly can, that  corruption doesn’t continue.  We had quite a long talk about that.   

 REPORTER:  Do you have any concerns about any individual ministers named in the new  government, given that a lot were also members of the old government?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Look, I would only say in answer to that the choice of ministers in a  foreign government is a matter for them.  It’s not a matter for me.  Whatever I think doesn’t,  in that sense, matter.  I think the important thing is that we respect the democratic processes,  that the democratic processes should, of course, be free from corruption and that people who  are appointed ministers are appointed by the Prime Minister, the Governor-General of course,  but by the Prime Minister and the Governor-General. And they are members of parliament.   They’re democratically elected, so that’s a matter for Solomon Islands.   

 REPORTER:  But the Australian government has its own intelligence sources.  Did those  sources tell you that there was vote buying in relation (inaudible)   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  I would stick with the conventions of Australian governments over  the years and not comment on intelligence.   

 REPORTER:  Why did Australia take so long to bring in extra troops to…?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Like a day?     

 REPORTER:  …to quell the riots? 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Like a day?   

 REPORTER:  Yes.   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  I think a day is pretty fast.   

 REPORTER:  Mr Downer, will Australia take any refugees from the Chinese community in  Solomon Islands?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well, look, if any application for refugee status is made that would  be considered by the Department of Immigration in the normal way.   

 REPORTER:  You won’t rule it out?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well I would just say if an application is made, people make  applications, and the application would be considered consistent with our obligations under  the 1951 United Nations Refugee Convention and domestic, and consistent with our domestic  laws.  I don’t have a view whether there will be or not, I just don’t know.   

 REPORTER:  Australia has poured millions of dollars into Solomon Islands in the hope of  building a stable peaceful democracy and we see this huge upheaval this week.  Is it back to  square one?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  No, it’s not back to square one.  I think an enormous amount of  progress has been made.  There’s absolutely no doubt about that.  I mean, I remember coming  here back in the late 1990s and the early 2000s and I’ve seen, particularly in 2003 on a  number of occasions, and I know very much, very well what Solomon Islands was like then.  

 They have been enormous improvements. They shouldn’t be dismissed or downplayed.  There  have been substantial improvements.     

 This is obviously a significant setback, it would be an understatement to say anything else.   It’s a significant setback.   But I think we can keep pushing on.  And we need to keep pushing  on and, as I said to the Prime Minister, it’s a matter of life or death for Solomon Islands as a  country.  It needs to continue the process of economic reform, it needs to encourage  investment and it needs a higher degree of political stability.  So, I think people understand  that, obviously.  But it’s a question not just of understanding but of implementation.  But  there has been good, let’s not play down the good things that have been done.  There has been  a lot of progress over the last two and a half years, but there’s a way to go.   

 REPORTER:  Will there be more Australian money?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well, what we’re doing is enormous.  We are putting enormous  amounts of money in here - through projects.  I mean, Australians would be relieved to hear  that we’re not paying cheques to people here - we’re just running project aid here.  And we  have a lot of people on the ground.  We have Australians working in various government  ministries and helping to restructure those ministries and get them working better.  We have 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 all sorts of projects assisting in areas like health and education and so on.  So, we’ll just  continue doing that.  We don’t have any plans to spend more money than we’re currently  spending - we have a plan at the moment.     

 In relation to all of the damage that has been done and the costs of rebuilding and the  consequences for the people who own those businesses, well, there are assessments being  done about that and we’ll just have to have a look at those assessments when they’re done -  what the costs involved are and what the issues are.  It’s too early to comment on whether we  can help there or not, I just don’t know whether we will or not.   

 REPORTER:  You say there are no plans for extra money, what’s the point of doing  assessments if there’s no chance (inaudible)   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well, there’s no plan.  I mean, we’re doing an assessment, an  assessment is being done by the Solomon Islands people.  But there’s no plan.   

 REPORTER:  But what…?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  We’ll just have to wait and see.  I just don’t know at this stage, it’s  too early to say.   

 REPORTER:  And what are the options for getting money from international organisations  like the IMF?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well there’s a lot of support, by the way, coming in internationally.   Don’t underestimate the New Zealanders.  The New Zealanders, one or two of you may be  New Zealanders, they’re doing a tremendous job here. They’ve been great partners of ours.  I  reminded Winston Peters, the New Zealand Foreign Minister, of that just last night when I  was talking to him - he was in the Ukraine. But, look, a lot of other international  organisations and countries have been providing support for Solomon Islands - that’s been  pretty well coordinated.  The Asian Development Bank, other international financial  institutions, the European Union, and so on.   

 So, we’re happy with the, sort of, if you like, volume of support.  But I make the point again:  in the end, the destiny of this country rests with the people of this country.  Foreigners can  come in and help.  We can send in the army and the police to generate a high degree of  stability in the short term.  But in the end the destiny of the country is in the hands of the  people of the Solomon Islands.  They must take full responsibility for their own country.   They need to understand that and that’s a message we’ve delivered to them loud and clear.   

 REPORTER:  People on the street, opposition parties, commend RAMSI with regards to the  work its doing in rebuilding the police force.  But there is a suggestion, it seems to be a  common suggestion, that RAMSI needs to do more with regards to corruption allegations and  investigate.  Do you think…   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Mary Louise O’Callaghan question.   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 REPORTER:  Well, I follow in her footsteps.   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  That’s fine, it’s a good question.  It’s hard to...     

 REPORTER:  Do you think (inaudible)   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  I mean, I made the point to the Prime Minister, which I’ve described  already, about the issue of corruption.  I made it clear that that’s something, of course it’s not  something new, it’s something we’ve been concerned about for a long time.     

 It’s not for us, though, by the way, to choose the politicians of Solomon Islands.  It’s not for  RAMSI to choose the politicians of Solomon Islands.  It’s for the people of this country to do  that.   

 I think what we can do to help is encourage and assist with the development of stronger  institutions, such as the police which we have been investing very heavily in.  And I think, by  the way, the Royal Solomon Islands Police, from the reports I’ve had, have done a very good  job.  They are much stronger and much more effective and much less corrupt than they used  to be.   

 REPORTER:  But they’re stretched.   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  Well yes, it’s time consuming to build them up.  We are building  them up.  They are stretched - we wouldn’t have to have our police here if they weren’t.  But  we are building them up. I can tell you, I saw them three years ago and there is a world of  difference today compared to what they were like then.  But, having said all of that, there’s a  way to go.  And, on this issue of corruption, we can help with the development of institutions  such as the police but also to encourage them to, Solomon Islanders, to put in place greater 

 degrees of transparency and accountability and, you know, hopefully the voters themselves  will respond to that.  It’s a significant issue.   

 REPORTER:  Would you agree with the assessment of the police chief that Australia’s  commitment will be here for years and years and years?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  I think you’ve got to divide up the commitments into three  essentially.  Into the aid commitment.  That will be here, I suspect, for as long as any of us  here in this room are alive.  I mean, I think that will be here for years and years and years.   Secondly, I think, in terms of the police.  Look, they will be here for a good deal of time.  For  a long time.  In terms of military, that is more questionable how long they will be here for.  I  think the police will be here for a long time. I mean, you know, as I was saying in answer to  the previous question, there is a need to continue to build up the Royal Solomon Islands  Police.  There has been great progress, but there’s still a way to go there.   

 REPORTER:  (inaudible) the death of an Australian soldier in Iraq?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  I leave it to General Leahy to comment, in the main, on the death of  the Australian soldier in Iraq.  I would only say that I feel deeply sad about it and my 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 6

 condolences go out to the soldier’s family.  This is the first Australian, member of the  Australian Defence Force, who has been killed in Iraq.  An Australian was killed on a British  Hercules aircraft in January of last year. He was serving with the British Royal Air Force.  I  feel very sad about it.  I feel very sad about it.   

 REPORTER:  are you able to confirm any of the circumstances?   

 MINISTER DOWNER:  I’ll leave all of that to General Leahy.  Not only is that appropriate,  but that is the convention. 

 

 

