---
title: "Appointments strengthen Administrative Appeals Tribunal."
date: "2006-08-25"
creators:
  - "Ruddock, Philip"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211297456
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/16OK6%22
---

 ATTORNEY-GENERAL  THE HON PHILIP RUDDOCK MP 

 

 NEWS RELEASE 

 Parliament House, Canberra  ACT  2600  Telephone (02) 6277 7300  Fax (02) 6273 4102  www.law.gov.au/ag 

 25 August 2006 161/2006

 APPOINTMENTS STRENGTHEN ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS  TRIBUNAL   

 The Attorney-General, Philip Ruddock, has announced eight new appointments to  the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and renewed the appointments of four existing  members. 

 Mr Ruddock welcomed Mrs Naida Isenberg and Mr Peter Taylor SC to the Tribunal  as part-time senior members, and Dr Teresa Baker, Mr David Connolly AM, Air Vice  Marshal Franklin Cox (Retd), Mr Stephen Frost, Dr Saw Hooi Toh and Dr Peter  Wilkins MBE to the Tribunal as part-time members. 

 “These new appointees are well-respected members of their chosen professions, in  fields as diverse as law, medicine, taxation, superannuation and pharmaceutical  science,” Mr Ruddock said. 

 “I am delighted that people of such calibre are willing to make further valuable  contributions to the community by bringing their experience and expertise to the  Tribunal.” 

 Mr Taylor, Dr Baker, Mr Connolly, Mr Frost and Dr Toh will join the Tribunal in  New South Wales and Air Vice Marshal Cox and Dr Wilkins will be based in the  Australian Capital Territory.   Mrs Isenberg is a current full-time member of the  Tribunal in New South Wales and will continue to be attached to the New South  Wales registry in her new capacity as senior member.  

 The Attorney-General also congratulated Mr Mason Allen RFD on his re-appointment as a full-time senior member, and Rear Admiral Anthony Horton AO  RAN (Retd), Dr Michael Miller AO and Dr Maxwell Thorpe on their re-appointment  as part-time members of the Tribunal. 

 Mr Allen, Rear Admiral Horton and Dr Thorpe will continue to be based in New  South Wales and Dr Miller will continue to be attached to the Tribunal’s Australian  Capital Territory registry. 

 “These members represent a wealth of experience and knowledge and have  demonstrated a deep commitment to the importance of administrative review and to  the performance and good reputation of the Tribunal,” Mr Ruddock said. 

 The Administrative Appeals Tribunal provides independent review of a wide range  of administrative decisions made by the Australian Government. 

 APPOINTMENTS STRENGTHEN ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL

 All the new appointments, and the re-appointment of Mr Allen, commenced on  24 August. Rear Admiral Horton, Dr Miller and Dr Thorpe will start their new terms  on  1 October. 

 Mrs Naida Isenberg 

 Mrs Isenberg has been a member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal since 2001,  a senior member of the Veterans’ Review Board since 1998, and is a qualified  mediator. From 1996 to 1997 she worked for MMI Limited, first as Corporate  Solicitor and then as General Counsel and Company Secretary. Ms Isenberg served  with the Australian Government Solicitor’s Office between 1976 and 1994, including  as Deputy Director of its Sydney Office from 1987 to 1994.  During 1994-95, she was  the Director of the New South Wales Crown Solicitor’s Office. Ms Isenberg holds a  commission as a Lieutenant-Colonel in the Australian Army Reserve. 

 Mr Peter William Taylor SC 

 Mr Taylor is a barrister in private practice in New South Wales.  He graduated from  the University of Adelaide in 1974 with a Bachelor of Laws (Honours) and was made  Senior Counsel in NSW in 1993.  Mr Taylor practises in the areas of commercial,  building and construction, insurance, professional liability, equity and trusts and  public authority tort law.  He was the Chair of the NSW Bar Association Advocacy  Committee in 1996-2000, Convenor of the NSW Bar Association Bar Practice Course  Working Party in 2006 and has been a member of the Legal Practitioners Admission  Board of NSW since 1994.  

 Dr Teresa Maria Baker 

 Dr Baker is the Director of Pharmedica Consulting Pty Ltd, a company specialising in  providing advice on pharmaceutical regulation that she established in 2001.  Dr  Baker has a PhD in Chemistry from the University of Western Australia and thirteen  years’ experience in the pharmaceutical industry, including as a consultant to, and a  regulatory and medical affairs manager with, several large pharmaceutical  companies.  Dr Baker is in the final year of a postgraduate Diploma in Law. 

 Mr David Miles Connolly AM 

 Mr Connolly is a part-time member of the Refugee Review Tribunal and the  Migration Review Tribunal.  He is also a member of the Braidwood Rural Lands  Protection Board and the Chairman of Rice Walker Actuaries.  He has considerable  experience in superannuation matters and is a Director of ARIA (Commonwealth  superannuation schemes).  From 1998 until 2002 he was Australian High  Commissioner to South Africa.  From 1974 to 1996 he was a member of the House of  Representatives.  Before entering politics he was a member of the Australian  Diplomatic Service.  He has also been a member of the Army and Air Force Reserves. 

 Air Vice Marshal Franklin Cox AO (Retd) 

 Air Vice Marshal Cox is retired from the Royal Australian Air Force, is currently  working on a part-time basis as a contract consultant and has served for six years as a  member of the Defence Force Remuneration Tribunal.  Air Vice Marshal Cox has  long experience in flying, command and staff appointments in the Australian  Defence Forces in Australia and overseas, rising to the position of Assistant Chief of 

 APPOINTMENTS STRENGTHEN ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL

 the Defence Force - Personnel.  Air Vice Marshal Cox was on operational service in  Thailand 1966-68 and was later a flying instructor and flight commander at the  Central Flying School. 

 Mr Stephen Edward Frost  

 Mr Frost has been a tax partner with KPMG since 1995. He has had extensive  experience in taxation law including fifteen years working as a senior officer with the  ATO and a tax manager at KPMG.  Mr Frost graduated from the University of  Sydney in 1977 with a Bachelor of Arts, has qualifications in law and was admitted to  practice in the Supreme Court of NSW in 1989. 

 Dr Saw Hooi Toh  

 Dr Toh is a member of the Medical Tribunal of New South Wales. She is also a  member of the Professional Standards Committee, NSW Medical Board and a  member of the Impaired Registrants Panel, NSW Medical Board.  Dr Toh is a general  practitioner and is also a Senior Medical Educator, Institute of General Practice Inc, a  conjoint lecturer at the University of New South Wales and a Senior Examiner for the  Australian Medical Council. 

 Dr Peter Wilkins MBE  

 Dr Wilkins recently finished working full-time as a medical officer on the Royal  Australian Air Force Specialist Reserve, reaching the rank of Group Captain.   Dr Wilkins is a part-time medical member on the Social Security Appeals Tribunal.   Dr Wilkins has more than 30 years experience in all aspects of medical  administration working at senior levels in the RAAF, the Australian Medical  Association, New England Health and the Civil Aviation Safety Authority.  Dr  Wilkins has current fellowships in medical administration, occupational medicine  and public health medicine and is accredited as a specialist in occupational medicine. 

 Mr Mason David Allen RFD 

 Mr Allen has been a senior member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal since  1998.  Prior to this appointment he was a member of the Veterans’ Review Board,  worked with the Crown Solicitor’s Office in Tasmania and in private practice at the  Queensland Bar.  Mr Allen served as an Army Legal Officer in South Vietnam  (1968-69) and Papua New Guinea (1970).  He was admitted to practice as a lawyer in  Queensland in 1968.  

 Rear Admiral Anthony Horton AO RAN (Retd) 

 Rear Admiral Horton retired from the Royal Australian Navy in 1991 and since that  time he has held the positions of Consultant and Director, Business Development,  with the Southern Sydney Area Health Service with responsibility for strategic  planning and commercial development. During his service with the Navy, Rear  Admiral Horton held a number of senior appointments including the command of  various Australian navy ships and the Royal Australian Naval College at Jervis Bay.  Rear Admiral Horton has been a part-time member of the Tribunal since 1991 and  was re-appointed to the Tribunal in September 2003 for a term of 3 years. 

 Dr Michael Douglas Miller AO 

 APPOINTMENTS STRENGTHEN ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL

 Dr Miller is currently a part-time member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in  the armed services/medical areas.  Dr Miller has long experience as a medical  practitioner at hospitals, in private practice and as an officer in the Royal Australian  Air Force (RAAF).  Dr Miller directed medical services in the RAAF at various levels,  rising to the rank of Air Vice Marshal and the position of Surgeon General,  Australian Defence Force.  Dr Miller is a Vietnam veteran and has also served as  Chairman of the RSL National Advisory Committee on Veterans’ Health and on the  ACT Board of St John Ambulance Australia. 

 Dr Maxwell Elmore Cochrane Thorpe 

 Dr Thorpe is a Consultant Physician in private practice and an Honorary Consultant  Medical Officer to the Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney.  Dr Thorpe has been a  part-time member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal since 1985, last  re-appointed in October 2003.  From 1975 to 2000 Dr Thorpe was Warden of the  Clinical School at Prince of Wales Hospital, University of New South Wales (UNSW)  and is currently Chair of the Appeals Committee of the Australian Medical Council  for Overseas Doctors.  Dr Thorpe is a Guest Professor to Harbin Medical University,  China and Director of Post Graduate Clinical Training for the Harbin Exchange with  the Faculty of Medicine, UNSW.  Dr Thorpe has also worked as a WHO consultant in  Cambodia, advising on postgraduate medical training.  Dr Thorpe is currently Chief  Medical Officer to Swiss Re Life and Health, Australia.   

 

 Media Contact:    Michael Pelly    0419 278 715 or 02 6277 7300   

