---
title: "Australian Government Monthly Financial Statements - December 2005."
date: "2006-02-10"
creators:
  - "Minchin, Nick"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION"
subjects:
  - "Government performance"
  - "Financial statements"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211289384
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JFQI6%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Nick Minchin   

 Minister for Finance and Administration   Leader of the Government in the Senate  

 Media Release 

 09/2006  10 February 2006 

 AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MONTHLY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  DECEMBER 2005 

 KEY POINTS 

  z The underlying cash balance for the 2005-06 year to 31 December 2005 was a surplus of  

  $943 million.  

  z The fiscal balance for the 2005-06 year to 31 December 2005 was a surplus of $3,003 million.  

  z The operating result for the 2005-06 year to 31 December 2005 was a surplus of $3,086 million.  

  z The difference between the fiscal and underlying cash balances is largely attributable to increases in 

  taxation and other receivables and a reduction in education grants payable.  

  

  Care needs to be taken when comparing monthly or cumulative data across years and to full year  estimates. Revenues and expenses do vary from month-to-month. Factors such as The New Tax System,  and the accrual framework including the timing of payments and policy decisions, can have a large impact  on fiscal aggregates from one year to the next and on year-to-date outcomes. Further, the December 2005  monthly financial statements were produced under the Australian Equivalents to International Financial  Reporting Standards (AEIFRS), with the exception that the Department of Defence is not yet reporting  AEIFRS compliant data for monthly reporting purposes and the Defence Materiel Organisation has partially  adopted AEIFRS. The move to AEIFRS brings a number of changes including a new financial statement,  the ‘Statement of Changes in Equity’. 

  _

  FISCAL OUTCOMES   

  Underlying Cash Balance   

  The main components of the underlying cash balance are cash from operations and cash movements in the  net investment in non-financial assets.   

  The underlying cash balance for the year to 31 December 2005 was a surplus of $943 million. This  underlying cash balance is $4,783 million lower than the December pro-rata (a surplus of $5,726 million) of  the 2005-06 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) estimate of $11,452 million, but is consistent  with prior year December balances. The difference reflects a number of individual variations including the  following: 

  Movements in underlying cash receipts: 

  Lower receipts from:  

  z Taxation in line with the usual monthly fluctuations in taxation receipts.  

  Higher receipts from: 

  z Dividends due to the receipt of the RBA dividend in August each year.  

  Movements in underlying cash payments: 

  Lower payments for: 

  z Grants due to: 

  { The AusLink and Natural Disaster Relief Arrangements programmes. Pro-rata comparisons 

  are not necessarily a good indicator for these programmes as the level of expenses does not  occur equally each month but when the States and Local Governments make claims for  payment;  

  { Underspends in programmes including ATSI Health, Food and Regulatory Policy, Dementia, 

  Aged Care Workforce, eHealth Implementation, Rural Workforce and Medical Indemnity;  

  { The National Water Commission’s negotiations with funding recipients over the detailed 

  provisions of the funding agreements have not yet been finalised, although substantial  progress has been made; and  

  { Lower demand than previously anticipated and milestone slippages for the following 

  programmes: Commercial Ready, Assistance to Mitsubishi, Asia Pacific Space Centre,  Ethanol Production, R&D Start Premium and Biofuels;  

  z Personal Benefits due to: 

  { lower than anticipated demand for Youth Allowance; and  

  { lower than expected numbers of people receiving Disability Support Pension.  

  z Suppliers, as Defence traditionally spends a higher proportion of its suppliers in the second six 

  months of the financial year, reflecting lead times to implement projects, and administrative lead  times associated with procurement. Some of the variance is due to slippages in contracting activity,  invoicing and payment processing, and some savings generated from the favourable currency  exchange rate difference, which will be returned to the Government at the end of the year.  

  z Foreign aid, specifically, AusAID’s three country and regional programmes (PNG & Pacific; East 

  Asia; and South Asia, Africa and Other) as well as the Emergency, Humanitarian and Refugee Aid  and NGO, Volunteer and Community programmes. These payments are not incurred on a pro rata 

  _

  basis, due to the timing of activities, requirements of partner Governments and organisations, and  the unpredictable nature of expenditure on emergencies.  

  z Employees, due to lower Army numbers, an under spend in Reserve salaries and lower than 

  predicted allowance payments. Ongoing recruitment problems in a tighter employment market also  contribute to the variance.  

  Higher payments for:  

  z Grants, due to payments for education grants outstanding from 2004-05.  

  z Personal Benefits due to: 

  { Personal benefits claimed through the tax system are typically higher in the first half of the 

  year as tax returns are lodged; and  

  { the timing of pension pay days. There were three major pay days in December.  

  z Subsidies due to: 

  { the January subsidies payment for aged care homes being paid in advance to ensure there 

  was no disruption to services over Christmas.  

  Fiscal Balance 

  The fiscal balance for the year to 31 December 2005 was a surplus of $3,003 million. The main components  of the fiscal balance are the GFS net operating balance, which was a surplus of $3,311 million, and a net  capital investment of $308 million for the year to 31 December 2005 (refer to the Reconciliation of the  Operating Result to Fiscal Balance on page 10 for further detail).  

  FINANCIAL OUTCOMES 

  z Actual expenses are $2,014 million lower when compared with a pro-rata of the MYEFO estimate. 

  The main reasons for the lower result, provided by function, are due to:   

  Transport Function - lower expenses mainly attributable to AusLink and other transport programmes  as the level of these expenses does not occur equally each month but when State and/or Local  Governments make claims for payment.  

  z Defence Function - lower supplier expenses as traditionally a higher proportion of the suppliers 

  budget is used in the second six months of the financial year, reflecting lead times associated with  procurement.  

  z Health Function - lower grant expenses due to underspends in a range of health programmes 

  including ATSI Health, Food and Regulatory Policy, Dementia, Aged Care Workforce, eHealth  Implementation, Rural Workforce and Medical Indemnity.  

  Partially offset by: 

  z Social Security and Welfare Function - higher expenses as the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 

  Supplement is paid upon lodgement of a recipient’s tax return. Because tax returns are mostly  lodged in the period from July to October in each year, a higher proportion of expenses from the FTB  supplement falls in these months.  

  Assets and Liabilities 

  The net asset balance within the General Government sector is a negative net asset position of   $36,161 million at 31 December 2005. 

  13/02/2006 http://www.financeminister.gov.au/media/2006/mr_092006.html

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - INCOME STATEMENT 

  Nick Minchin  Minister for Finance and Administration  10 February 2006 

  Contact:   Senator Minchins Office: Michael Brennan (02)  62777400  Department of Finance and Administration:  Anne Hazell (02) 6215 3650  Chief Financial Officer   Australian Government Reporting.  

  IJ Watt  Secretary to the Department of Finance and  Administration  

  _

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - BALANCE SHEET 

  _

  _

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN  EQUITY 

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - CASH FLOW STATEMENT 

  13/02/2006 http://www.financeminister.gov.au/media/2006/mr_092006.html

  

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - INCOME STATEMENT BY  FUNCTION 

  Page 8 of 13 Media Release 09/2006 - AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MONTHLY FINANCIAL STA...

  _

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - RECONCILIATION OF THE  OPERATING RESULT TO FISCAL BALANCE 

  _

  

  AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR - DERIVATION OF UNDERLYING  AND HEADLINE BALANCE 

  _

  

  NOTES:   

  The accounting policies in this part are generally consistent with the requirements of AEIFRS. While the  scope for financial reporting recommended by AEIFRS and AAS 31 is the whole of government (that is, the  Australian Government public sector), the Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997 requires  monthly financial statements to be consistent with the budget estimates. Accordingly and pursuant to the  Charter of Budget Honesty Act 1998, this presentation covers the general government sector only. This  publication does not include full note disclosures. 

  With the introduction of Business Activity Statements and Instalment Activity Statements in 2000-2001,  taxpayers provide information on payments associated with several types of tax when lodging the statement  and paying the aggregate net tax amount. Thus, while total tax collections are known with certainty at the  end of each month, the distribution across the relevant heads of revenue cannot be finalised until all  statements are received and processed. The outcomes for some revenue items provided in this statement  are thus estimates, in accordance with the best judgement of the Taxation Commissioner, and subject to  revision. The taxation revenue items not affected are: Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, Excise duty, Customs  duty, Other Taxes and Individuals Refunds.   

  The sum of the revenue accrued in the month and the revisions to prior periods equals the revenue reported  in the Statement of Revenue and Expenses.   

  All taxation items in these notes are reported on an AEIFRS basis, unless otherwise indicated. 

  NOTE 1: INCOME TAX  

  

  NOTE 2: INDIRECT TAX  

  _

  

  

  NOTE 3: GOODS AND SERVICES TAX   

  In regard to GST revenue, AAS would suggest the gross amount of GST be included in the Australian  Government’s Financial Statements. However, the clear policy intent of the Intergovernmental Agreement  on the Reform of Australian Government-State Financial Relations is that the GST is a State tax collected  by the Australian Government in an agency capacity. Therefore, accrued GST revenues and associated  payments to the States and Territories are not recognised in these statements. 

  

  

  NOTE 4: ADJUSTMENT FOR EDUCATION GRANT EXPENDITURE   

  In regard to education grant expenditure, adherence to AAS results in fewer education expenses being  reported until the signing of the Ministerial determination, which normally occurs between December and  February each year. This produces a bunching of expenses such that the full year's expense is recognised  at that time and remains relatively constant until June. The table below provides details of the cash paid by  DEST and attributable to the Education function for the year to date. 

  

  NOTE:  Style Conventions 

  1. Figures in tables and generally in the text have been rounded. Discrepancies in tables between totals  and sums of components are due to rounding.  

  _

  International Monetary Fund (IMF) Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) 

  1. In accordance with the IMF's SDDS, quarter ahead notice of the date of release of the data on  central government operations, which is contained in the Australian Government Financial  Statements, is given on the IMF's Data Dissemination Bulletin Board at http//dsbb.imf.org.  

  2. Monthly and quarterly data on debt guaranteed by the Australian Government (central) government  that meet the coverage and timeliness requirements of the SDDS are published on the AOFM  website at http://www.aofm.gov.au/content/borrowing/commonwealth.asp?NavID=32. In accordance  with the IMF SDDS, the approximate date of release of the data on debt guaranteed by the  Australian Government (central) government, is given on the IMF's Data Dissemination Advance  Release Calender http://dsbb.imf.org.  

  Back to top 

  This page was last updated 10 February, 2006 

  Media Contact:   Matthew Doman 02 6277 7400 or 0439 467 806 

  Website:

  www.financeminister.gov.au

