---
title: "Sensible Liberals and Nationals should not be swayed by Howard Government bullying."
date: "2006-08-10"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211296773
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QGIK6%22
---

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP   

 SENSIBLE LIBERALS AND NATIONALS SHOULD NOT BE  SWAYED BY HOWARD GOVERNMENT BULLYING   

 I urge all sensible Liberal and National MPs and Senators to not be swayed by  bullying from extreme members of the Howard Government.   

 I sincerely hope they stand their ground and stand with Labor in opposing John  Howard’s weak asylum seeker laws.   

 The ugly face of this bullying was on display this morning. It has no place in the  Australian Parliament   

 I feel for those sensible Liberal and National MPs and Senators who are either  opposing these laws or considering opposing them.   

 Following Wilson Tuckey’s extreme behaviour this morning, I can only imagine  the sort of pressure those MPs and Senators would feel they are coming under.   

 Elected representatives should not be bullied by the Howard Government over  these weak laws.   

 I do not resile from my view that these weak laws do not improve border security  in Australia. In fact, in relinquishing sovereignty, these laws dilute our border  security.   

 John Howard should not change Australian laws to appease Indonesia or any  other country. That is a weak response to the issue and it sells out Australian  law.   

 Labor’s position is clear: If asylum seekers land in Australia they should be  assessed under Australian law. If they are found on the high seas escaping an  alleged place of persecution, they should be taken to Christmas Island for health,  security and identity checks.    

 Thursday, 10 August 2006   

 Contact: George Svigos: 0417 196 836   

 

 

