---
title: "Security treaty with Indonesia should not be signed."
date: "2006-06-08"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211293788
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L7YJ6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales 

 

 

 Security treaty with Indonesia should not be signed 

 

 Senator Nettle, 8th June 2006 

 Senator Nettle, today, called on the Federal Government to suspend plans for a new  security treaty with Indonesia in light of continuing revelations of abuses in West  Papua.    

 She also called for the two month military exchange 'Kartika Exchange 06' between  the ADF and Indonesian army beginning this month to be halted.    

 "Every day there is more reports of military abuses coming out of West Papua. Last  night SBS Dateline reported on increased Indonesian military operations on the border  with Papua New Guinea and in some cases incursions into PNG."    

 "I am concerned at reports that the treaty will include military cooperation,  intelligence sharing, joint naval and surveillance patrols, and expanded exchanges and  joint training exercises at a time when the Indonesian military are increasing  repression in West Papua."    

 "At the same time as the government's new migration laws are shutting the door on  West Papuan refugees they are seeking to finalise a treaty that will assist their  abusers."    

 "The reports we receive about military activities in West Papua follow a similar  pattern to what happened in East Timor prior to Independence.    

 "Australia should not be cooperating with the Indonesian military until personnel who  have been implicated in human rights abuses elsewhere in Indonesia and East Timor  have been tried and punished for these horrendous crimes.    

 The Greens will move a motion in the Senate next week calling on the government to  suspend treaty negotiations until allegations of human rights abuses have been  investigated and finalised.    

 Contact Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

