---
title: "Canberra refugees become citizens on World Refugee Day."
date: "2006-06-20"
creators:
  - "Vanstone, Amanda"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211294571
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MR0K6%22
---

  Media Release  Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone  Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

  155.06 Tuesday20June2006 

  Canberra refugees become citizens on World Refugee Day 

  With young daughter Atong in tow, Aja Kar fled her home city Khartoum, Sudan in 1998 in  search of a better life. For four years Kar struggled in Cairo, Egypt, desperately seeking  refugee visas for herself, Atong and newborn son Louis. 

  In August 2003 Kur and her two children arrived in Australia, where she has learnt English.  Now, on World Refugee Day, Kar and her family take the next step in their journey when  they become Australian citizens. 

  The three members will be among 23 refugees from Africa and the Middle East that now  live in Canberra to receive their Australian citizenship at Parliament House, Canberra  today. Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Amanda Vanstone, performed the  ceremony in Mural Hall, with Atong and Louis among the youngest new citizens on the  day. 

  “The theme of this year’s World Refugee Day is ‘Hope’, which is what Australia has given  to these 23 refugees and their families,” Senator Vanstone said. 

  “For these people, World Refugee Day carries two meanings - a reminder of their journey  to a new life in Australia and the day they embraced Australia as home by becoming  citizens of this proud nation.” 

  “ I  am personally very proud of the fact that every year, Australia gives 13,000 refugees 

  and people in humanitarian need, a reason to hope, by starting a new life in Australia.” 

  The Minister added the 23 refugees and their families being conferred with citizenship  today were among the 660,000 refugees and other people in need of humanitarian  assistance resettled by Australia since the end of World War Two. 

  “Australia is consistently amongst the top three countries - along with the USA and  Canada - in providing comprehensive resettlement programs for refugees and others in  humanitarian need,” Senator Vanstone said. 

  “I am particularly pleased that these families have now made the decision to go the next  step, and become fully-fledged citizens of Australia. 

  “I encourage all those who are eligible to take the same step and apply for Australian  citizenship so they can fully participate in this great nation of ours.” 

  Minister’s media contact: 0417 445 886 

