---
title: "Christmas Island detention facility farcical."
date: "2006-11-16"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211300772
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OBIL6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs

 Dated: 16 November 2006  Press Release Number: osotcjie  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Christmas Island Detention Facility Farcical 

 The Democrats say that reported maximum security measures for Australia's Christmas Island detention centre are  ludicrously excessive and a waste of taxpayers' money.   

 "The measures being taken to secure this site are just ridiculous," Senator Bartlett said.   

 "Existing security arrangements on the Island have clearly been adequate, with most asylum seekers being in a form of  community detention after arrival.   

 Senator Bartlett has visited Christmas Island twice, and has viewed the current detention facility, the location of the new  one and met with detainees.   

 "The excessive security arrangements incorporated into this new centre raise questions as to what the high-tech 'prison'  will be used for. It can't be for a small number of people who already mingle in the community or for the small number of  people who arrive annually.   

 "No wonder there are persistent rumours that the new centre is being built for other purposes.    

 "If the centre is to be used only to detain asylum seekers, the security measures are both extreme and unnecessary.    

 "The government would be using taxpayers' money more effectively if it brought all asylum seekers on-shore for  processing and allowed community release rather than locking them up in high-tech prison like facility," Senator Bartlett  concluded. 

 

