---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: The Domain, Sydney: 20 January 2006: West Papuan boat people; Amanda Vanstone.\n"
date: "2006-01-20"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "VANSTONE, Amanda"
  - "Papua"
  - "Refugees"
  - "West Papuan boat people"
  - "Amanda Vanstone.\n"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288729
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6BJI6%22
---

 TONY BURKE MP  Member for Watson  Shadow Minister for Immigration   

 

 

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW :  THE DOMAIN, SYDNEY :  FRIDAY  20 JANUARY 2006    

 Subject:   West Papuan boat people, Amanda Vanstone    

 E&OE - PROOF ONLY    

 Tony Burke:  I’d like to make clear that the Labor Party understands that while health,  security and identity checks are being carried out it can be necessary for people to be  placed in detention. We welcome the fact that the families [of the West Papuans] have  not been placed in detention, who, as I understand, have either formally sought asylum  now or will be doing so imminently. 

 

 However, there are no excuses for the government adopting, yet again, the most  expensive option. Sending these families and the few men who will be placed inside  detention all the way to Christmas Island is the most expensive option. It’s expensive in  terms of the reopening of that facility which never should have been reopened when the  Vietnamese arrived, while we had spare capacity in our detention centres on the  mainland. It’s the most expensive option for sending people there. Those expenses then  get relayed again every time they have to meet with their legal team.   

 Added to that, you have a further distance between them and access to their legal teams  and, worst of all, we are guaranteeing that it will be as difficult as possible for there to be  any scrutiny by the media during the time the West Papuans are having their claims  assessed.    

 Health, identity, security - they’re the reasons for detention to take place. Once those  checks are complete, there will be no reason for people to not be allowed back within the  Australian community while it’s being determined whether or not they are genuine  refugees.    

 Journalist: Do you think that they’re trying to keep them out of sight, out of mind?   

 Tony Burke: That’s exactly what they’re trying to do. And in doing so, to get the best  media spin - which for them is ‘out of sight, out of mind’ - they’re going to have an  immense cost to the taxpayers. Every taxpayer pays, and the lives of these people seeking  asylum will be placed in turmoil during that period.  

 

 Journalist: Inaudible   

 Tony Burke: Look, it’s important for those cases to be assessed at arms length and I don’t  think it’s appropriate for me to comment on the merits or otherwise of the cases. I want it  assessed at arms length, I want it assessed independently and I don’t want our  relationship with Indonesia to be brought into question in any way during that. They  should be completely assessed on their merits and if that creates a diplomatic problem,  then that can be dealt with by Foreign Affairs. It should have no bearing whatsoever on  the claims of these West Papuans.   

 Journalist: What would a Labor government do?   

 Tony Burke: A Labor government would only detain these individuals for health, security  and identity checks. The family groups themselves would not be placed in detention,  they’d be within the community. The few people who are being placed in detention  would only be detained while those security checks are being carried out and then they’d  be allowed to live within the community while the actual claims for asylum are being  assessed.    

 If I could also say, with the announcement we’ve had by Robert Hill now, it’s clear that  we have a likelihood of an essential re-shuffle and a likelihood that there’d be a major  reshuffle. This is a clear opportunity for the Prime Minister to move Amanda Vanstone as  far away from the immigration portfolio as possible.    

 Under Amanda Vanstone, this portfolio has been a turnstile of incompetence. There’s no  excuse for keeping her there. The Prime Minister now gets to decide: if he thinks that her  administration of this Department has been good, if he supports Australians being  deported and Australian residents being locked up, if he’s satisfied with a Minister who  oversaw a situation where a registered child sex offender was given a visa to go visit  Queensland only to then re-offend before he was deported. All of these problems have  happened and have been an absolute part of the way the worst minister in the  government, Amanda Vanstone, has administered her portfolio. This is the opportunity  for the Prime Minister to either say he’s happy with the way she’s being running the  portfolio or move her completely away from the Cabinet table  

 

 

 ENDS   

 

 Media Contact:    Katie Ford (02) 9554 3808    

 

