---
title: "Transcript of a doorstop interview: Innisfail, Queensland: 12 April 2006: visit to Innisfail; Cole Royal Commission; Indonesia.\n"
date: "2006-04-12"
creators:
  - "Beazley, Kim"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "visit to Innisfail"
  - "Cole Royal Commission"
  - "Indonesia.\n"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292186
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NXEJ6%22
---

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION   THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP    

 

 

 Visit to Innisfail; Cole Royal Commission; Indonesia  Doorstop Interview   

 INNISFAIL, QUEENSLAND - 12th April 2006   

 BEAZLEY:   I  want  to  come  to  Far  North  Queensland  regularly,  to  Innisfail  and   the  other  towns  that  have  been  affected.  This  is  a  great  national  problem  that   they're  dealing  with  here.  There  is  an  overwhelming  desire  on  the  part  of   Australians that we do this right, that we do the recovery from the damage of this  cyclone right.  So, it's very necessary for people like myself - not in a partisan way, I'm not here  to criticise the Federal Government or the State Government - but to understand  constructively how things are going and whether more things need to be done.  Thus  far,  I've  had  an  opportunity  to  talk  to  the  banana  growers  and  the  people   associated  with  the  sugar  industry.  There  are  some  issues.  I'll  be  writing  to  Mr   Howard  about  labour  problems,  about  the  job  subsidy  that's  in  place  now  and   due  to  cut  out  in  June.  The  banana  growers  want  it  for  36  weeks;  the  cane   farmers want it for closer to the conclusion of their season. That's reasonable. It's  a reasonable thing to ask for.  There's obviously two issues related to establishing a pool of labour and that's  something I'll be talking to General Cosgrove about a little later.  But the work issues here are very important. For the farmers, the progress that  they've been in a position to make is somewhat different from the progress that  has been made in the towns. There are difficult job choices now going on around  the plantations and farms around Innisfail and further a field. There's the issue of  where do you start. Do you start with the shed?  Do you start with your house?  Do you start with the fences? Do you start with the machinery as you go through  the repair issues? For farmers who need to start harvesting, in the case of sugar  farmers in June, those are very difficult choices. There is obviously going to be a  substantial need for additional assistance, particularly when farmers are sole  traders, to get them up and running in time to do this season properly, in the  case of sugar farmers.  In the case of the banana growers, there's going to be an issue, or course,  related to the pace at which they do things, in order that they don't experience  flux.  It's good for me to understand what is happening here. I now have materials to  write to the Prime Minister about it. The Prime Minister and the Government have  responded generously and appropriately and I wouldn't expect there to be 

 any difference in the way in which they'd handle additional suggestions made to  them.  So, I'm approaching this in a bipartisan spirit and with a view that I'm  dealing with a set of authorities at the State and Federal level who've said they've  got an open mind on what additional things they need to do and I will be writing in  that context. Over to you.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Beazley, how effective is writing a letter going to be?   

 BEAZLEY:  Judging by the way they've responded to requests of General  Cosgrove, they've responded to direct requests put to them by growers'  organisations, we're not actually banging our heads against a brick wall here.  There is a willingness to hear people on the ground and I suspect that the letter I  write will be in addition to other people who are already approaching the  Government on those same issues. So, volume counts.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Beazley, the Banana Growers Association at least is  receiving two to three calls a day from growers who say they're wanting to get out  of the industry and to take the exit package. What happens to our industry if they  actually do leave the industry?   

 BEAZLEY:  That's an issue, too, and it will also be included in my correspondence.  I do think the Government needs to respond generously to an exit package for  banana growers. Sugarcane farmers have had that in years past. It doesn't  seem to be so much an issue to them. It is a very big issue for banana growers. If  banana growers exit in a way that allows farmers to consolidate then that's a 

 process that needs to be managed sensitively but you can't say that it's a  process that would devastate the industry, it wouldn't. But the question is, is  a man to walk away with nothing? Are they to walk away from this, their lives  devastated or are they to walk away with a chance to set themselves up again?  That's the issue there. My view is they should away with a chance to set  themselves up again and we'll be approaching it on that basis.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, as far as the Cole Commission is concerned, what  sort of questions should be asked of John Howard to prove that the Inquiry's in  fact bona fide?   

 BEAZLEY:  Let me start. Downer and Vaile must resign. They must resign and if  they don't resign they should be sacked. This is now a national security issue.  We are dealing here with a problem that was at the heart of Australian national  security planning for a decade and at the very best, Downer and Vaile 

 were culpably negligent.  At the very worst, they turned a blind eye. It doesn't  matter either way. You cannot have Ministers with that level of irresponsibility  handling the national security issues of the nation. This is now, whatever else  happens in the Cole Commission - and the terms of reference are rorted as 

 you know - and he can't make findings about the extent to which they have  managed, or mismanaged, their portfolio responsibilities - but the evidence is  now out there for everybody to see. They've got to go. This is a national security  issue now. You cannot have the national security of our nation in the hands of  such incompetence.   

 JOURNALIST: The terms of reference aside, what questions should be asked of  John Howard?   

 BEAZLEY: Well, questions need to be asked of John Howard in the same way  they were asked of Downer and Vaile - you had all the information before you  Prime Minster, why didn't you act? Understand this. It's no good saying, "Well I  can't read every cable that comes before me". That's a reasonable excuse for a  cable dealing with the beef production of Outer Mongolia. It is a totally  reasonable excuse. It is not a reasonable excuse dealing with an issue affecting  an area where Australian troops are being deployed. Remember this.  Through the entirety of the period in which sanctions were imposed on Saddam  Hussein, Australian sailors were risking their lives at the head of the Persian Gulf  enforcing sanctions, through the entire period. The people who are the security  Ministers of the nation, are the fathers of the nation, when  they're dealing with Australian Defence Forces. So, for you to, on the one hand,  insist your children take great risks in order to uphold an important issue - the  position of sanctions - and then on the other hand to say that we don't care, we'll  see sanctions breached. No, not good enough. Cables that dealt with Iraqi  sanctions were cables that ought to have ended up on the desk of the Prime  Minister and I've got to tell you, I think they did.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do you think the issues of the Cole Inquiry are going to gain  traction, though, with the wider community.   

 BEAZLEY:  Yes.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do you think Australians really do care?   

 BEAZLEY:  I think this week will make a very big difference.This week the  Australian people have seen three seniorMinisters in the dock - the Prime  Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister. Quite frankly, the  Deputy Prime Minster and the Foreign Minister have made monkeys of  themselves and have showed themselves to be totally irresponsible in the course  of the last 48 hours. They're also potentially misleading. You know, when he was  in Parliament, Downer was telling me, in answer to my questions, that he had  looked at the cables. That is so he could show in Parliament, or suggest in  Parliament, that he was a man diligent in his duties. He comes to the Cole  Commission and he says he didn't see the cables. That is so that he can say to  Mr Cole, "Don't hold me culpable for any of this". Well, that's two different stories 

 told in two different places and they're not the same stories. That's just an  indication of what they're trying to scuttle away from.  But the same problems that confronted them, the same duties and obligations  that were on them, were also on the shoulders of the Prime Minister and as far  as I've seen, all the major warnings, all the bits of correspondence that came into 

 the Government, ended up in the Prime Minister's office as well.  He is in exactly the same position as Vaile and Downer and he certainly has a  moral obligation here to the service men and women of this country to do things  properly.  Australians love their serving personnel. Australians think the world of  their armed forces and when their service is taken so lightly and their sacrifices  taken so lightly, an Australian is slow to anger, but when they come to  understand that, they're capable of sustaining that anger for a very long time.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Beazley, do you think Australia should be repelling asylum  seekers at our northern border?   

 BEAZLEY:  I think Australians should be enforcing the law, and I mean the law  that now exists. We have tough laws in relation to asylum seekers but they are  laws that are internationally standard. Now, to suggest that we should break  those laws, walk away from those laws - and it seems that Minister Ellison is  suggesting that now - to suggest that we should do so, not at our own behest or  on our own judgement but at the behest of somebody else, not acceptable. That  is not acceptable. I say uphold Australian law.   

 JOURNALIST:  How would you rebuild Canberra's relationship with Jakarta?   

 BEAZLEY:  You have to do it on the basis of honesty. You know the problem  you've got now, is that the people in Jakarta, and look at it from their point of  view, there seems to be one standard from John Howard, when it came to  dealing with people who are refugees from the Middle East, and another  standard from John Howard now on refugees in relation to West Papua. Now,  there is an explanation for all of that, and that explanation has to be given.  The Indonesians are entitled to be treated with integrity and integrity starts with,  however unpleasant it is, explaining the logic behind the various positions the  Government has arrived at. You don't start by running away from the problem,  you've got to confront it.   

 Thanks.   

 

 Home | About the ALP | ALP people | Policy | News | ALP journal  Authorised by Tim Gartrell, 19 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600.   

 

 

 

 

 

