---
title: "Hapless Hardgrave backflips on African TAFEs."
date: "2006-09-06"
creators:
  - "Macklin, Jenny"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, TRAINING, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211297914
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UPSK6%22
---

 

 

 Media Release   

 Jenny Macklin MP  Deputy Leader of the Opposition   Shadow Minister for Education, Training, Science & Research    Federal Member for Jagajaga   

 HAPLESS HARDGRAVE BACKFLIPS ON   AFRICAN TAFES  6 September 2006  Gary Hardgrave has done a spectacular backflip on his hare-brained scheme to set up  TAFE colleges in Africa instead of training Australians first.   

 In today’s The Australian newspaper, Gary Hardgrave said:   

 These people are coming here anyway. Rather than have them start when they get  here, if we can get them skilled up in the rudiments of trade areas we will be  giving them a pathway.    

 The Australian went on to report:   

 Mr Hardgrave said he visited the Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya in 2003 and  found 93,000 Sudanese refugees waiting to be granted refugee status… Mr  Hardgrave said training at the camp would mean refugees would arrive with a  greater sense of dignity as well as the skills to earn a living.    

 But today in Question Time, the Training Minister tried to back away from his scheme:   

 The Australian government has absolutely no intention of establishing a TAFE  facility, or indeed anything resembling it, in Africa.   

 If Gary Hardgrave had no intention of building anything resembling a TAFE facility in  Africa, why did he tell The Australian newspaper that he did?   

 Given the Howard Government’s refusal to deal with the skills crisis by training  Australians, why should we believe the Minister now?   

 The Training Minister spends his time dreaming up hare-brained schemes at a time when  the Howard Government has turned 300,000 Australians away from TAFE.   

 Teenage unemployment is up to 40 per cent in some parts of this country. You don’t have  to look far to find a young person who wants an apprenticeship.   

 The Howard Government is just not interested in our young people.    

 Get it right, Gary - train Australians first.   

 More info: Nick Talbot 02 6277 4277 or  0408 473 278     

 

 6 September 2006   

 

 

 

 

