---
title: "Holocaust: whirligig of emotions. [Speech given at the] launch of Heirloom: the second anthology of the Melbourne child survivors of the Holocaust, Glen Eira Town Hall, Melbourne, 2 April 2006"
date: "2006-04-02"
creators:
  - "Kirby, Michael"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Melbourne"
  - "Genocide"
  - "Holocaust"
  - "Jews"
  - "World War 2"
  - "Books"
  - "Biography"
  - "Speech given at the"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211291700
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SBKJ6%22
---

 

 

 GLEN EIRA TOWN HALL MELBOURNE   

 SUNDAY 2 APRIL 2006   

 LAUNCH OF HEIRLOOM - THE SECOND ANTHOLOGY OF THE  MELBOURNE CHILD SURVIVORS OF THE HOLOCAUST   

 

 EDS:  MARIETTA ELLIOTT-KLEERKOPER, HELEN GERSHONI AND  FLORIS KALMAN   

 

 HOLOCAUST - WHIRLIGIG OF EMOTIONS   

 

 The Hon Justice Michael Kirby AC CMG* 

 

 

 THE HAUNTING MEMORY 

 

  There  will  always  be  memories  of  the  Holocaust.   Even  when  

 every  distorted  mind  that  conceived  and  executed  the  oppression  are  

 dead, there will be memories.  They are written into the consciousness 

 of  humanity  forever.   Human  beings  everywhere  will  continue  to  recall  

 the  pitch  black  moments  of  human  history  that  come  together  in  the  

 Holocaust.   

 

  There  was  genocide  before  the  Nazis  oppression.   There  have  

 been  fearful  acts  of  genocide  since.   But  never  was  genocide  so  

 

 *   Justice of the High Court of Australia. 

 2. 

 carefully and methodically planned.  Never was it executed by people of 

 such high civilisation.  Never was it performed by such fastidious human 

 beings,  who  returned  to  their  homes  and  children  at  night,  attended  

 meticulously to their hygiene and settled down to listen to recordings of 

 Schubert and Beethoven that made them cry.   

 

  Never  before  were  evil  acts  so  carefully  recorded  in  words,  

 sounds, songs and images.  For this reason, human beings will never be 

 entirely  free  of  the  records  of the  Holocaust.   The  memories  are  never 

 far  from  us.   Nor  should  they  be.   We  must  remember  them  and  learn  

 from them.  We should never let them go. 

 

  The  Nazi  Holocaust  was  a  terrible  oppression  for  many  hated  

 minorities who did not fit in to the oppressors' notion of an Aryan people.  

 Those  with  such  ideas  turned  their  hatred  on  gypsies,  socialists,  

 communists,  Jehovah's  Witnesses,  homosexuals,  the  disabled  and  

 others.  But overwhelmingly, the planned mass murder of the Holocaust 

 was  targeted  at  Jews.   They  were  hated  because  of  their  race  and  

 religion.   Millions  of  them  were  hounded,  cattle-trucked,  selected,  

 gassed and burnt.  This happened when I was a boy, living safe in far 

 away sunny Australia.  It happened in my lifetime.  It is impossible to be 

 free of the images.   

 

  I  am  grateful  that  I  have  been  asked  to  launch  Heirloom,  the  

 second anthology of the Melbourne Child Survivors of the Holocaust.  I 

 honour  those  who  initiated  and  edited  this  work.   I  pay  my  respects  to  

 3. 

 those who have contributed.  I greet those who have come to participate 

 in this launch.  And to remember. 

 

  There  have  been  many  books  that  describe  the  special  burdens  

 placed  on  children  of  the  Holocaust1.   One-and-a-half  million  Jewish  

 children  died.   Analysis,  statistics,  records,  maps,  medical  aspects,  

 social  research,  backgrounds,  nationalities.   All  of  these  historical  

 studies  are  important.   All  should  be  collected,  written  down  and  

 remembered.  But the precious quality of this book is that it tells the story 

 of  the  Holocaust  from  the  viewpoint  of  those  who  lived  through  it,  and  

 after it, as a child.  As their intelligence and understanding of the world 

 expanded,  they  came  to  know  what  it  has  meant  to  them  and  to  their  

 families.  They share their experiences with us.  They tell it as it felt to 

 them. 

 

  Before  I  read  this  book,  the  best  description  I  had  seen  of  the  

 experiences  of  a  child  in  the  Holocaust  was  written  by  another  

 Melbourne  child  survivor:   Abraham  Biderman.   In  his  autobiographical  

 work, he described living from day to day and hand to mouth in the Lodz 

 ghetto.  It was a story filled with fear.  But the most vivid image was his 

 

 1   For  example,  M  R  Baker,  The  Fiftieth  Gate  -  A  Journey  Through   Memory (Flamingo,  1997);  J  E  Young,  The  Texture  of  Memory   (Yale,  1993);  D  La  Capra,  History  and  Memory  After  Auschwitz  

 (Cornell,  1998);  O  Bartov,  Murder  in  Our  Midst  (Oxford,  1996);  B   Zelizer, Remembering  to  Forget  (Chicago,  1998);  I  Clendinnen,   Reading  the  Holocaust  (Cambridge,  1999);  D  E  Lipstadt,  Denying  the  Holocaust  (Free  Press,  1993);  T  Cole,  Selling  the  Holocaust   (Routledge, 1999). 

 4. 

 recollection of the SS guards in the death camp to which he was sent, 

 singing carols on Christmas Eve.  There he was, a boy, behind barbed 

 wire,  starved,  terrified,  lice-ridden  and  with  little  apparent  hope  of  

 survival.  And through the cold night came the haunting sound of men's 

 voices singing "Stille Nacht, heiliger Nacht".  He remembered their return 

 to  their  religion  and  to  its  songs.   A  powerful  image  from  another  

 powerful  book.   It  came  into  my  hands  a  few  years  back  when  I  was  

 asked  to  judge  the  best  Australian  biography  of  the  year.   I  chose  

 Abraham  Biderman's  book2  as  the  best.   I  did  so  for  the  power,  the  

 simplicity and the grace of his writing.   

 

  Every year since, he has sent me a Christmas card.  Not a New 

 Year's  card.   Not  a  Hanukah  card.   A  Christmas  card  sent  out  of  love  

 and, despite all, a feeling of respect for my spiritual tradition.  A signal of 

 forgiveness.  I cherish his card every time it arrives.   

 

  I  hope  that  people  of  every  religion,  race,  gender,  sexual  

 orientation  and  culture  will  come  to  exhibit  the  same  feelings  of  

 reconciliation.  If not in my lifetime, soon.  Especially amongst the people 

 of the Book - those of the shared Jewish, Christian and Islamic traditions 

 that are presently so divided. 

 

 

 2  A  Biderman,  The World of My Past (self-published), 1994.   

 5. 

 THE EMOTIONS OF THE BOOK 

 

  As I read Heirloom, I felt the whirligig of emotions that run through 

 the contributions.  What are the emotions to which the contributors give 

 voice? 

 

 * Determination:  A feeling of the need to be silent no more.  A need 

 to record the story.  To put on paper the memories of lost family 

 members,  fragments  from  mental  photographs  and  recollections.   

 This determination is voiced by the editors in their foreword3; 

 * Mutual respect:  The insistence that so many voices have still to  

 be  heard  and  that  many  will  come  to  their  descriptions  from  

 different  viewpoints,  demanding  space  for  different  opinions  and  

 attitudes to the subject of this history4; 

 * Minimisation:  To survive, many had to minimise and suppress the 

 terrible events that unfolded around them.  Floris Kalman declares 

 that  she  had  always  believed  that  nothing  had  happened  to  the  

 children5.   Only  now  is  she  willing,  in  older  age,  to  confront  the  

 numbing of feelings that was essential for survival; 

 

 3   M  Elliott-Kleerkoper,  H  Gershoni  and  F  Kalman  (eds),  Holocaust  -   Second  Anthology  of  the  Melbourne  Child  Survivors  of  the   Holocaust (Hybrid, Melbourne, 2006), v. 

 4   Id, vii. 

 5   Id, 1. 

 6. 

 * Fear:  Effort is still needed to quieten the fears that remain acute, 

 even sixty years later.  Anne Handelsmann-Braun describes6: 

 

 "What  images  …  keep  coming  back  as  flashbacks,   nightmares,  triggered  by  smells,  the  rattle  of  trains,  certain   foods,  hospitals,  large  crowds,  uniforms,  dogs.   Even  the   smile of a beautiful child can remind us of lost relatives". 

 

  Fear  is  woven  through  all  these  stories.   Including  the  fear  that  

 made  it  seem  "hazardous  to  love  again",  recounted  by  Paul  

 Valent7; 

 * Resilience:  The determination to live, to resist the evil-doers and 

 to  survive  against  all  the  odds.   It  was  this  emotion  that  led  

 Marietta  Elliott-Kleerkoper  and  her  family  to  migrate  from  

 Amsterdam,  where  thirteen  survivors  had  huddled  together  in  a  

 three  bedroom  flat.   It  was  resilience  that  brought  so  many  of  

 these contributors to Australia and to the hope of a better life8; 

 * Humour:   The  redeeming  bitter-sweet  feature  of  Jewish  culture.   

 The  story  by  Judy  Kolt  of  her  arrival  in  Melbourne  and  the  

 invitation to attend a party thrown by a neighbour in honour of her 

 family9: 

 

 

 6   Id, 4. 

 7   Id, 35. 

 8   Id, 9. 

 9   Id, 18. 

 7. 

 "'Bring a plate', says the neighbour.  'What a strange place,  where people invite you and do not have enough crockery to  serve you on', Mamma remarks, and decides to bring them  not one but two plates nicely gift wrapped, to alleviate their  shortage.   Our  hostess  smiles,  and  in  a  lady-like  manner,   thanks us". 

 

 * Empathy:  The  story  told  by  Dita  Gould  of  the  Australian  woman  

 who pulled her up on a bench to watch the Olympic torch pass by 

 in 2000, reminding her of the communitarian attitudes of Australia 

 at its best10; 

 * Silence:  The need for silence to reflect soulfully upon the abuses 

 of  the  past  and  the  difficulty  that  some  parents  had  to  help  their  

 children over the awful pain of their memories.  Even in safe and 

 sunny  Australia,  the  special  burdens  on  the  children  needed  

 attention,  although  to  adults  theirs  must  have  seemed  trivial  

 burdens by contrast to the enormities they had witnessed. 

 * Unruliness:   The  unruly  memories  that  keep  returning.   As  Floris  

 Kalman describes it11: 

 

 "I  cannot  reduce  my  unruly  memories  to  a  standard  set  of   facts  -  that  would  be  to  deaden  that  part  of  me  all  over   again". 

 

 * Gratitude:  The feeling of thanks for the survival.  Thanks even to 

 the unkind12; 

 

 10   Id, 24. 

 11   Id, 28. 

 12   Id, 28. 

 8. 

 * Puzzlement:   The  feeling  that  many  of  the  survivors,  including  

 children, felt13: 

 

 "About being Jewish:  we were secular, did not observe any  rituals  and  I  was  too  young  to  know  that  I  was  Jewish  or   what it meant.  I did grasp that a malevolent power wanted  to get rid of us" 

 

 * Trauma:   Paul  Valent's  description  of  the  trauma  which  is  "a  

 wound  that  threatens  survival  and  compromises  physical,  

 psychological, spiritual and social life"14; 

 * Recognition:  The recognition of the vital importance of recording 

 every little part of the story of suffering.  Through personal stories, 

 the full dimension may one day be understood; 

 * Generous  spiritness:   The  recognition  that  there  were  others,  

 beside Jews, who were afflicted.  For them the Holocaust was just 

 as terrible.  Their numbers were smaller but their suffering in such 

 company makes them brothers and sisters of the Jewish people.  I 

 thank Paul Valent for his insight into the suffering of gypsies and 

 homosexuals.   And  his  recognition  that,  unlike  the  affliction  of  

 these  and  other  minorities,  whose  suffering  was  less  well  

 documented, the Jewish people have "produced a vast collection 

 of testimonies, books and films".  Their suffering commands us all 

 

 13   Kalman, id, 28.  14   Id, 33. 

 9. 

 to reflect on the oppressions in Cambodia, Bosnia and Rwanda15.  

 We  must  embrace  erstwhile  enemies.   The  Ulsterman  must  

 embrace  the  Catholic  in  Northern  Ireland.   The  Bosnian  must  

 embrace  the  Serb  in  the  former  Yugoslavia.   The  Jew  must  

 embrace  the  Palestinian  in  the  Holy  Lands.   Our  times  and  their  

 weapons  are  too  dangerous  to  cling  to  hatreds.   All  of  us  must  

 extrapolate  from  the  wrongs  done  to  ourselves,  and  to  our  own  

 communities.  We must be champions of peace and justice for all.  

 As Paul Valent wisely observes16 

 

 "Past  traumas  need  to  be  fully  understood  and  lessons   learned  from  this  understanding,  fully  digested  and  applied   to new situations" 

 

 * Down to earth:  Henri Korn describes the down to earth characters 

 of the Royal Navy with whom he served as they captured "Captain 

 Schweinehund" and his crew from a sinking German U-boat.  The 

 fears  and  admirable  ordinariness  of  those  who  fought  for  the  

 Liberation still need remembrance17; 

 * Laconic  perceptions:   The  memories  of  first  perceptions  of  

 Australia,  including  Frankie  Paper's  memory  of  the  "dreary  

 Melbourne  docks"  that  welcomed  her,  "rain-sodden,  wind  

 

 15   Id, 35. 

 16   Id, 36. 

 17   Id, 43-44. 

 10. 

 swept"18.   I  never  thought  I  would  see  this  admission  in  a  

 Melbourne  publication.   Those  "dreary  docks"  are  now  near  the  

 fashionable  hub  of  a  vibrant  city,  thanks  in  large  part  to  the  

 contributions  of  the  refugees  and  others  who  came  to  this  land  

 following the Holocaust; 

 * Screaming  sadness:   Helen  Gershoni's  recollection  of  her  

 mother's grief and her mother's inability to deal with the reality and 

 all the pain19; 

 * Intuitive  insights:   The  same  author's  desperate  attempt  to  

 reconstruct her father arise from her insights and memories; 

 * Rebellion:  The need to give the child within the man and woman 

 a voice - if necessary to turn away from professions and wealth in 

 order to speak out and to protest against continuing wrongs20; 

 * Sharing:   Paul  Valent's  determination  to  beat  the  Holocaust,  

 including  by  writing  down  the  memories,  getting  them  out  of  the  

 dark recesses of the brain, sharing them with others.  Speaking to 

 future generations through words and pictures; 

 * Struggle with demons:  Wrestling with demons and remembering 

 the haunting moments, as Lucy Gould does in her vivid story21; 

 

 18   Id, 47. 

 19   Id, 57. 

 20   Id, 71. 

 21   Id, 72. 

 11. 

 * Regret  and  guilt:   The  feelings  of  guilt,  about  the  inability  to  fully  

 love  others,  even  an  aunt  who  for  a  time  pretended  to  be  a  

 mother.  Miriam Kanat writes22: 

 

 "Even  as  an  adult,  I  continue  to  have  feelings  of  

 abandonment,  bewilderment  and  fear:   the  legacy  of   deprivation during my childhood.  It has left me with a deep- seated  sadness  and  a  pervading  melancholy,  which  no   amount of good fortune can overcome. 

 I am now in my sixties.  It is time to confront the past and to  acknowledge my aunt's contribution and her rightful place in  our family history.  Her selfless devotion to her sister's child 

 should not go unrecognised.  I hope writing this story brings  some finality to our tragic journey". 

 

 * Solitariness:  Henry Borenstein's story on being on his own23; 

 * Gratitude:  For survival, for memories, for dignity, for friends24; 

 * Haunted recollections:  Like Eva Slonim's memory of the little boy 

 Schmuel,  nine  years  old,  who  knew  that  his  time  had  come  and  

 extracted  a  promise  from  her  to  say  Kaddish  after  him  and  to  

 remember the day, the date and his name25. 

 

  So  many  stories.   So  many  poems.   So  many  drawings  and  

 paintings - haunting images of what it was like - such as Hetty Lubliner's 

 

 22   Id, 77. 

 23   Id, 97. 

 24   Id, 120, 124.  25   Id, 127. 

 12. 

 picture of her father's last breath before his was gassed.  Puzzles, lost 

 dolls, cemeteries.  But also bright pictures, full of life and hope and the 

 redeeming human spirit. 

 

 ALL OF US 

 

  No-one in twenty-first century can escape the Holocaust.  In 1972, 

 my  brother  David,  now  a  Supreme  Court  judge  in  New  South  Wales,  

 married Marie-Line Hervic.  Her parents and grandparents were Jewish 

 victims  of  the  Holocaust.   Many  of  her  relatives  perished  in  the  death  

 camps.  Tragically, in 1986, this beautiful, intelligent, gifted woman died 

 young,  of  cancer.   Out  of  respect  for  his  beloved  first  wife,  my  brother  

 ensured  that  their  son,  Nicolas,  and  their  daughter,  Elisabeth,  grew  up  

 as Jewish children, attending Jewish religious instruction, proud of, and 

 honouring, their Jewish traditions.  There are many similarities between 

 the  Irish  and  the  Jews.   Guilt  trips  and  over-rich  food  are  two  of  them.   

 But family life, and respect for tradition, pride and spirituality are others.  

 They are precious.  In our family, we cherish the link. 

 

  An  essay  by  Danial  Kogan  gives  the  title  to  this  book.   He  

 describes  what  it  was  like  arriving  in  Australia  to  the  home  of  Marie-Line's parents.  He tells how, at the time of his arrival, her mother was 

 resting  with  her  pregnancy.   It  was  just  before  Marie-Line  was  born26.  

 

 26   Id, 129. 

 13. 

 This   memory  brought  me  directly  and  personally,  into  the  chapters  of  

 this book.  Unimaginable to most Australians are the sufferings that walk 

 around in our midst and the memories that Danial and others carry with 

 them, to which they have now given expression.  I honour Elisabeth and 

 Michel Hervic, as Danial Kogan also honours them.  And Aunt Rachel, 

 whose "palace" bungalow in suburban Sydney was Danial's first home in 

 Australia.   May  such  welcomes  always  be  there  in  our  country  for  

 refugees and people who have suffered and are suffering.  It is our duty 

 and our privilege to reach out to them with love. 

 

  In  every  corner  of  Australian  society  there  are  people  who  have  

 suffered from the Holocaust.  Recently I saw how Justice John Sulan of 

 the  Supreme  Court  of  South  Australia,  had  been  honoured  for  his  

 contributions to our multicultural society.  I wrote to congratulate him.  I 

 questioned  him  on  his  life.   He  told  me  how  his  mother,  from  

 Czechoslovakia,  spent  the  war  years  in  Terezenstadt.   She  lost  her  

 parents  and  her  two  sisters.   But  she  survived  the  murderous  Nazi  

 regime.   As  a  child  he  witnessed  her  frail  condition.   Yet  she  never  

 expressed hatred towards the German people.  She protected John, her 

 only child, against the burdens of her own suffering.  She and the Sulan 

 family  were  extremely  proud  of  their  Jewish  ancestry.   They  were   

 involved  in  Jewish  community  life  and  in  support  for  Israel.   Justice  

 Sulan told me that27 "the suffering of my family is part of my life, but the 

 

 27   Letter from Justice John Sulan to the author, 22 March 2006. 

 14. 

 positive  attitude  to  the  future  is  one  of  the  most  enduring  legacies  my  

 parents  left  me".   Everywhere  in  our  own  land  there  are  such  people.   

 They are blessings for the country that received them.  They rise above 

 their own suffering and learn from it for the suffering of others. 

 

  There  is,  of  course,  a  larger  moral  in  the  stories  collected  in  

 Heirloom.  It is explained in Victor Klemperer's diaries, since published, 

 describing  of  his  encounter  with  the  Holocaust28.   It  did  not  arrive  

 overnight.   First,  there  were  the  laws.   Then  the  yellow  stars.   Then  

 banishment to the back of the tram.  Then having to walk.  Then closure 

 of  the  businesses.   Then  consignment  to  the  ghetto.   Then  the  brutes  

 and  cries  "Juden  raus!".   Then  the  selective  deportations.   Then  the  

 "final  solution".   It  all  happened  gradually.   It  crept  up  insidiously.   If  it  

 could  happen  in  one  of  the  most  civilised  countries  on  earth,  it  could  

 happen anywhere.  Even in Australia.  We have been warned.  We must 

 heed the warning. 

 

  Every diminution of freedom takes us in a wrong direction when it 

 departs from fundamental human rights.  Every act of discrimination by 

 our  Parliaments  and  governments  dishonours  our  nation.   We  honour  

 the  memories  recorded  in  this  book  most  worthily  when  we  resolve  to  

 respect the freedoms and dignity of all people and to be vigilant for our 

 own. 

 

 28   V Klemperer, I  Will  Bear  Witness  -  War  Diaries  1933-41  (Random  House, 1999) (English translation). 

 15. 

 

  It is a privilege for me to launch Heirloom.  May its stories, poems 

 and pictures remain in our memories.  Always. 

 

