---
title: "Budget 2006: Overseas Aid Budget does not reflect the generosity of spirit in the Australian Community."
date: "2006-05-10"
creators:
  - "Sercombe, Bob"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR OVERSEAS AID AND PACIFIC ISLAND AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211292383
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KJLJ6%22
---

 Bob Sercombe MP 

 Shadow Minister for Overseas Aid and Pacific Island Affairs  Federal Member for Maribyrnong  10 May 2006.   

 PRESS RELEASE   

 Overseas Aid Budget does not reflect the generosity of  spirit in the Australian Community   

 Even after the increased levels of Overseas Aid reflected in the Budget, Australia  remains at one of the lowest levels of Aid expenditure (after adjusting for size of our  economy) amongst developed countries. We are 18th or 19th of the 22 OECD  countries.   

 Our relative position is also adversely affected by inappropriate use of the Aid budget.  Australians expect that Aid will be used to provide safe drinking water -not to pay  hundreds of thousands of dollars for Trevor Flugge to go to Iraq. Australians expect  Aid to stop children from dying from preventable diseases -not to pay for asylum  seekers on Nauru.   

 Too much of the Aid budget pays for political stunts by the Howard Government.    

 The Government's Aid budget still focuses too much on "top down" initiatives. It pays  lip service to achieving broad based economic growth in countries in our region. But  it fails to pick up important initiatives such as Labor’s proposal for a Pacific  Development Trust that will build livelihoods amongst families, and microenterprises  at the grass roots level.   

 The Government pays lip service to the importance of volunteer and community  programs. But the Government misses the opportunity to engage in a "whole of  community "approach. Labor believes we need mechanisms for promoting growth  and civil society from the grass roots up rather than just relying on "top-down"  government programs. That is why one of the important themes in my 2005 paper,  "Towards a Pacific Community", was the need to establish stronger people-to-people  links with our developing country neighbours. More focus is needed on mobilizing  and supporting the tremendous generosity and good will in the Australian community  by building effective partnerships, particularly with our Pacific neighbours.   

 

 Enquiries:     Bob Sercombe MP     PH: 0412 39 25 38   

 Electorate Office:   Shop 25, Milleara Mall, Milleara Road, East Keilor, Vic. 3033  Tel: (03) 9331 1922 Fax: (03) 9331 1925 Email: Bob.Sercombe.MP@aph.gov.au  Postal Address: P.O. Box 244, Avondale Heights, Vic. 3034 

