---
title: "Democrats welcome release of Naqib Noori but renew calls for change to laws."
date: "2006-01-11"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
  - "Visas"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211288506
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GTMI6%22
---

 

 

 senator.bartlett@aph.gov.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list. 

 DEMOCRATS  MEDIA                      WEDNESDAY 11 JANUARY 2006 

 SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT  AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS DEPUTY LEADER 

 DEMOCRATS WELCOME RELEASE OF NAQIB NOORI BUT RENEW CALLS  FOR CHANGE TO LAWS 

 Australian Democrats' Immigration spokesperson, Senator Andrew Bartlett has welcomed news that  Afghani refugee Mr Naqib Noori has finally been given a visa after six and a half years in detention,  but warned that the flaws in our law and system which led to his wrongful incarceration still exist. 

 “This man was locked up for over 6 years as a direct result of being denied the opportunity to  respond to anonymous, incorrect allegations about him.  The same injustice could occur to others,  including Australians, under the existing law. 

 Mr Noori is a former diplomat whose family arrived with him in 1999.  While his wife and children  were given visas at the time and have long ago become Australian citizens, this man has had to  endure being locked away while his three children grow up, due to mistaken identity and false  allegations.  

 "While I am very thankful to hear this good news, it is extremely regrettable that the Minister did not  heed the many calls by me, and others, for Mr Noori to be allowed into the community to be with his  family while clearances were being conducted over the last three and a half months. 

 "The decision by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) in October 2005 overturning previous  wrong decisions and finding that Mr Noori was not disqualified from refugee status should have been  the impetus for the Minister to show compassion and allow him to be with his family. 

 "It will take many years to undo the human, social, legal and administrative damage caused by the  Government's unjust and inhumane immigration policies. 

 "Nice sounding reassurance about ‘culture change’ within the Migration Department simply will not  be sufficient to overcome such deeply entrenched flaws. The Democrats repeat our calls for the  abolition of indefinite mandatory detention and for a proper revamp of the Migration Act," concluded  Senator Bartlett.   

 Media contact - Senator Andrew Bartlett - 0418 743 789   

