---
title: "Australia supports formation of emergency Palestinian Government."
date: "2007-06-27"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211306154
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NLHN6%22
---

 

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER  

 FA  076          27  June  2007  

 

 

 AUSTRALIA SUPPORTS FORMATION OF  EMERGENCY PALESTINIAN GOVERNMENT   

 

 

 Australia will provide $4 million to support the emergency Palestinian Government and a  further $3 million in humanitarian funding for refugees in Gaza and Lebanon.     

 Australia’s contribution to the emergency Palestinian Government will be delivered through  the Temporary International Mechanism and will assist in providing essential supplies for the  Palestinian Authority’s health and education institutions to keep hospitals open and children  in school.   

 Australia supports Palestinian Authority President Abbas’s decision to form an emergency  government with Mr Salam Fayyad as Prime Minister following the violent Hamas takeover  of Gaza.   

 The formation of the emergency government presents a valuable opportunity to revive the  peace process and ensure that the actions of violent extremists do not derail the legitimate  aspirations of the Palestinian people.     

 I welcome the comments of Israeli Prime Minister Olmert that the emergency government  would be regarded as a partner for peace.  I also welcome the re-engagement by the  international community, particularly the United States and the Quartet with the emergency  government. The efforts of the Arab League and key Arab states to promote dialogue are also  important in this regard.     

 Australia directs its engagement with the Palestinian Authority through our Representative  Office in Ramallah. Since January 2006 our engagement has been with the office of President  Abbas and more recently with Fateh and independent members of the former government. We  will continue to engage with the emergency Palestinian Government to promote the cause of  peace and provide humanitarian assistance.   

 Australia remains deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian  Territories, particularly Gaza, following the recent violence.     

 We will provide a further $2 million in immediate assistance for the Palestinians in Gaza.  This support will be provided through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency  (UNRWA) and will assist in providing emergency food assistance to an estimated 158,000  refugee families.   

 

 Media contact:   Mr Downer’s Office 02 6277 7500      DFAT Media  02 6261 1555 

 AusAID Public Affairs 0417 680 590 

 

 

 Australia will also provide a further $1 million to UNRWA to assist in meeting the  humanitarian needs of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. This funding will assist in providing  food, health services, shelter supplies, and water and sanitation services to about 27,000  displaced people.       

 These new commitments will take Australia’s total contribution to Palestinians affected by  the humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank, and in surrounding countries, to $23.2  million since July 2006.   

 Australian aid contributed to international efforts to provide emergency food assistance to  almost 1.4 million Palestinian refugees and access to education, health and social services for  over 4.3 million registered Palestinian refugees.   

 

