---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Canberra: 1 March 2007: Sri Lankan refugees; Rudd & Burke; East Timor; North Korea."
date: "2007-03-01"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Sri Lankan refugees"
  - "Rudd & Burke"
  - "East Timor"
  - "North Korea."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303734
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4IDM6%22
---

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE:   1 March 2007 

 TITLE:   Doorstop - Canberra  - Sri Lankan refugees, Rudd & Burke, East Timor, North  Korea. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Minister have you abandoned Australia’s plans to try and send the Sri  Lankan’s back to Indonesia? 

 MR DOWNER: What we’ve told the Indonesians at the outset was when they said that  they would be to have them back, we have our procedures that had to be followed. They could  of course go back to Indonesia - provided the United Nations High Commission for Refugees  was able then to assess them - and on the basis of those assessments, those that were found  not to be refugees could in turn be repatriated to Sri Lanka and those that were found to be  refugees would have to be relocated and that would of course have to be a matter of  negotiation with us and other possible re-settlement countries. We haven’t got a final response  yet from the Indonesians. We’re simply awaiting that and I don’t know what their response is  going to be. I saw a report in the newspaper today but I can’t confirm that  - we haven’t had a  response from the Indonesian Government. But if the Indonesian Government decides that 

 they won’t allow the UNHCR to do the processing, we’ll have to find an alternative. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you be disappointed with the Indonesians if they didn’t  (inaudible). 

 MR DOWNER: That’s a matter for them. We’ve got our own procedures that we have  to follow. I think the point is they have been a good partner of ours in helping to combat  people smuggling and dealing with people smuggling rackets. This is obviously one that’s got  through the net but you don’t hear about the ones that don’t. There has been a very effective  level of cooperation between us on this issue and I don’t want to say or do anything that  would undermine that. In the end, this is a decision for them, whether they want the UNHCR  to do the processing - we’d be quite happy of course to meet any costs of processing but I  guess their feeling is these people have come illegally to Indonesia. They don’t want to end up  with them permanently in Indonesia - that’s their perspective so we’ll have to wait and see  what their final decision is. 

 JOURNALIST: Australia’s still open to giving them back to Indonesia? 

 MR DOWNER: Well on that basis. I’ve seen the most amazing amount of commentary  about this - we’re going through those phases when everyone wants to have a crack at the 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 Government - it happens in phases I’ve noticed. This is one of those phases. The  Government’s always made its position clear on this, reiterating what we’ve said on many  occasions. 

 JOURNALIST: So when Indonesia says publicly that they… 

 MR DOWNER: Well you say when Indonesia says publicly - you are really just picking  up a quote from a spokesman for the Foreign Ministery. But we are waiting on advice from  the Foreign Minister and the Indonesian Government. 

 JOURNALIST: You don’t think he speaks for the Foreign Minister? 

 MR DOWNER: I haven’t had advice. This is what a spokesman said to some  newspaper. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you have an idea of when Indonesia might formally respond? 

 MR DOWNER: I assume in the next day or so. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Downer do you think Kevin Rudd has anything to explain in  relation to meetings he had - social or otherwise - with Brian Burke in 2005? 

 MR DOWNER: Well Mr Rudd seemed to be a bit interested in meetings people may or  may not have had during the course of this week - whether any of us had ever met Ron  Walker or my friend Robert Champion de Crispigney or whoever it may be - and I think I’m  afraid I think Mr Rudd has hoisted his own petard here. I think the Australian people have a  right to be told what Mr Rudd discussed at the dinner, and the lunch, and over coffee - in a  short period of time in 2005 - with Brian Burke. I think we have a right to be told. It seems to  me an extraordinary thing that he should have so many meetings with Mr Burke and over a 

 long period of time these meetings - I mean dinners and lunches, that takes time - he should  have substantial meetings with Mr Burke, what was discussed at those meetings. If he just  wanted to say ‘g’day’ to Mr Burke with his friend Mr Edwards - which is what of course Mr 

 Rudd’s spin is at the moment - then presumably that would be a matter that would be handled  very quickly. But no apparently he wanted to have dinner, and lunch, and coffee. So I think  we have a right to be told - did, for example, Mr Rudd discuss the Labor Party leadership at  those meetings? Did Mr Burke make any commitment to do what he could to assist getting  Labor members to support Mr Rudd’s push for the Labor leadership at those meetings? What  is the relationship between the views of - particularly Wesern Australian Labor members - on  the leadership of the Labor Party and Mr Burke? And I think we’re entitled to know the  answers to these questions from Mr Rudd. We can’t ask Mr Rudd questions in parliament.  But I think Mr Rudd - he’s had a good run now. He’s had a couple of months of fluff pieces  and that’s fair enough - I’m not complaining about it. It’s just as it should be. I remember  getting the same treatment myself. But I think we’re coming to the end of that period now and  I think we’re getting into the period where Mr Rudd is going to have to start answering some  questions. The first questions he can answer are questions about why he thought it so  necessary to have such prolonged and intense meetings with Mr Burke in 2005. 

 JOURNALIST: But what about if any Liberals met Mr Burke? 

 MR DOWNER: What’s the allegation? Who were they? When did it happen? Did Mr  Howard go and have lunch with Mr Burke? I think not. 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 JOURNALIST: Have you met Noel Crichton-Brown recently? 

 MR DOWNER:  What’s  recently?  

 JOURNALIST: Well in the last year. Have you met Noel Crichton-Brown in the last  year or so while he’s been working with Brian Burke? 

 MR DOWNER: Last time I reckon - and I mean you do a good job - I guess the Labor  Party got you to ask that question… 

 JOURNALIST: No. When did you last meet with Noel Crichton-Brown? 

 MR DOWNER: I gave you an answer to that question. 

 JOURNALIST:  Which  was?  

 MR DOWNER: 1995 or 6 - something like that. 

 JOURNALIST: Should Liberal members be (inaudible)… 

 MR DOWNER: Bad news for you old boy - I’m not a friend of Noel Crichton-Brown. 

 JOURNALIST: Should Liberal members therefore be banned from (inaudible) 

 MR DOWNER: But hang on… 

 JOURNALIST: …meeting with Noel Crichton-Brown? 

 MR DOWNER: Hang on - the issue here is - well we expelled Noel Crichton-Brown  from the Liberal Party. Excuse me if I just make that perfectly clear. But unlike the Labor  Party, we dealt with the Noel Crichton-Brown issue - I reckon it was in 1995 or 1996 - I  don’t remember the exact year. It was a long time ago because there were people in the 

 Liberal Party - from the now Prime Minister downwards - who had a lot of concerns about it.  But I’m talking about not the mid 1990s - or even talking about the time when you worked for  the Labor Party - I’m talking about now. I’m talking about 2007. Now we have Mr Rudd as 

 the new Leader of the Labor Party  - we know about the Crichton-Brown story back in the  1990s. But we have Mr Rudd as the Leader of the Labor Party and I think Australians have a  right to be told what happened - not just in a passing meeting - they didn’t just meet walking  by each other in the street and say ‘g’day’, or even have a quick coffee because Mr Edwards  thought it would be nice for Kevin Rudd, his friend, to meet Brian Burke, apparently his very  good friend - but they had dinner and lunch as well. In other words, they spent hours and  hours together and did they talk about the Labor Leadership and did Brian Burke support Mr  Rudd for the Labor Leadership and did he help Mr Rudd get the Labor Leadership? It seems  to me that is a centrally important question because if the answer to that question is ‘yes’, then  I think Mr Rudd has a very substantial case to face. 

 JOURNALIST: Is Mr Rudd’s stand too little too late? 

 MR DOWNER: This Commission of Enquiry in Western Australia - about which I  claim to have no particular expertise, being a South Australian - but it strikes me it has been  going on for quite some period of time. So the big surprise to me is why - when I think the  fourth or fifth minister is sacked by Mr Carpenter - why Mr Rudd suddenly thinks Brian 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 Burke is off-limits? But I’d like to know why he thought he was so on-limits and such a good  mate, back in 2005. Now, what was Mr Rudd in 2005? He was the opposition spokesman on  foreign affairs. Was Mr Rudd talking to Mr Burke about Mr Burke’s experiences as the 

 Australian Ambassador in Ireland? Was that what the meeting was about? I think not mon  ami. 

 JOURNALIST: Should the CCC be looking to widen their investigation to call before  them (inaudible)… 

 MR DOWNER: That’s for them - I’ll leave that to them. 

 JOURNALIST: Is Australia involved in any negotiations with the East Timorese  (inaudible). 

 MR DOWNER: The Australian Government isn’t. I had a discussion the night before  last with Jose Ramos-Horta - the East Timorese Prime Minister - about this issue and the  Government is giving some consideration to a range of issues in relation to Mr Reinado. It is  of concern to us that he is still on the loose and I think he appropriately should surrender  himself to the East Timorese authorities. Now he escaped from prison. The East Timor’s 

 Government’s position has been - and this is in East Timor, this isn’t in Australia - their  position has been that they’ve wanted to negotiate with Major Reinado and obviously that  process has come to an end, it would seem, with the raids by Major Reinado and some of his  people on police stations - East Timorese police stations - and them stealing weapons,  including rifles, from those police stations. So the East Timorese Government is now - I  mean this across the board in the East Timorese Government - the President, the Prime  Minister, the President of the Parliament, who’s himself a potential candidate - they have all  expressed to us real concern about the situation so we’re working through this issue. 

 JOURNALIST: So how do you think it should be handled? 

 MR DOWNER: Well I’ll have more to say about it in the next day or so. 

 JOURNALIST: Has there been a Presidential request for the army to arrest him? 

 MR DOWNER: We have had some discussions with them and we are having some  more internal discussions about how to respond to this and I’ll have more to say about it later.  That’s all I’m going to say. 

 JOURNALIST: So you know where he is? 

 MR DOWNER: The army seem to know where he is, yes. He’s in Same. 

 JOURNALIST:  Exactly  though?  

 MR DOWNER: Not exactly but I think so.  

 JOURNALIST: Have senior officers from our country spoken to him? 

 MR DOWNER:  They have in the past on a number of previous occasions, I don’t know  if they have in the last day or two. Not to the best of my knowledge - I think I might say that  - not to the best of my knowledge. 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 JOURNALIST: Are you any closer to a decision with Afghanistan in relation to sending  more troops? 

 MR DOWNER: We’re close - we’re closer than we were last week, Brendan. But that  won’t happen for another couple of weeks I wouldn’t have thought - I don’t have a particular  time. 

 JOURNALIST: In Iraq and the inclusion of Iran in the talks - is there a fair degree of  opportunism in terms of dealing with and negotiating with Iran?. 

 MR DOWNER: Well I’ve always said - I’ve said this in the Parliament and elsewhere  because this issue came up late last year, I think it was, with the debate about the Baker-Hamilton report - should the Administration talk to Syria and Iran? I’ve said in the first place,  we’ve talked to Iran the whole time and we talk to Syria from time to time. But we have a  particular dialogue with Iran - that’s number one. Number two - it’s not going to do any  harm, the Americans talking to Syria and Iran - it’s not going to do any harm. But I would be  very sceptical about getting an early and quick harvest out of discussions with Iran and Syria  on the basis of what I know. I mean, understand what those countries want and when you look  at what they want, it is not entirely obvious that they are offering anything terribly positive  from the perspective that the Americans come from. The American perspective is that they  just want every effort to be made by neighbouring countries - as well as internally by the Iraqi  Government - every effort to be made to stop the violence within Iraq. 

 JOURNALIST: On North Korea, where is Australia at with the initial delivery of the  initial energy aid? 

 MR DOWNER: We’ve got a delegation heading off there next week, led by Peter  Baxter - who’s a First Assistant Secretary in my Department, responsible for North Asia - and  this delegation will have talks with the North Koreans, it will remind the North Koreans of  what their obligations are under the six party talks - so the agreement reached in the six party 

 talks on the 13th February. But secondly make the point that there’s scope for the expansion or  Australia’s relationship with North Korea if North Korea fulfils its obligations. I’ve no reason  to believe they are not going to at this stage though of course I read that many commentators  are very sceptical about whether they will - I just don’t know. We’ll have to wait and see  whether that’s right or not. In any case, we will be delivering strong messages to them about 

 both the obligations that North Korea has but also messages about how we can provide more  assistance to North Korea as it de-nuclearises. 

 Thank you. 

 [Ends] 

