---
title: "Official artists to capture deployed ADF personnel."
date: "2007-02-21"
creators:
  - "Billson, Bruce"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303490
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TFAM6%22
---

 

 

 

 Minister for Veterans' Affairs  Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence   

 

 Wednesday 21 February 2007  VA023   OFFICIAL ARTISTS TO CAPTURE DEPLOYED ADF PERSONNEL 

 The Australian War Memorial has commissioned a further group of artists to capture  the activities of Australian Defence Force members in Iraq (Operation Catalyst) and  Afghanistan (Operation Slipper). 

 Minister for Veterans’ Affairs Bruce Billson said the latest appointment of three  highly regarded artists continued a proud tradition which went back to the First World  War. 

 "The Australian War Memorial places great emphasis on this program, which is of  course reliant on the artists making themselves available for this important work to  creatively capture our country’s involvement in events of historical military  significance," he said.   

 "We are very grateful to them and also to the ADF, which has again offered its full  support and cooperation and look forward to seeing in due course the work that is  produced." 

 Photographer Sean Hobbs, from Sydney, who was recently embedded with U.S troops  in Afghanistan, will join collaborative Melbourne artists Charles Green and Lyndell  Brown.  Mr Green and Ms Brown have both painted in Afghanistan previously and  are represented in numerous state galleries in Australia. 

 Following a preparation course the artists are scheduled for deployment on 27  February. 

 Many outstanding Australian artists and photographers are represented in the AWM’s  collection.  Official artists and photographers appointed in recent years include Rick  Amor and Wendy Sharpe (East Timor), Peter Churcher (Middle East and  Afghanistan), Lewis Miller and David Dare Parker (Iraq) and Stephen Dupont  (Solomon Islands). 

 In 2006, Robert Nugent, the first official cinematographer to be commissioned by the  Memorial, was sent to record Operation Catalyst in Iraq. 

 Most recently, work from photographic commissions has been featured in the  Memorial’s current exhibition, Focus: photography and war 1945-2006 and in  thebook ‘Contact - Photographs from the Australian War Memorial collection’  published in November 2006. 

 Media contacts:       Cameron Hill 0408 239 521  Colin Chambers (AWM) 02 6243 4211 

 Editor’s note: A profile of the commissioned artists follows. 

 

 

 Australian War Memorial Official Commission Profiles 

 Official Artists: Lyndell Brown and Charles Green 

 Lyndell Brown and Charles Green are two Melbourne based artists who have been  creating paintings and photographic works collaboratively since 1989.  

 Their paintings are photorealistic in style.  In developing their work they draw on an  extensive knowledge of the history of art.  Lyndell Brown received a PhD in Art  History from the University of New South Wales in 2004 and was made an Honorary  Associate Fellow to the University of Melbourne in 2006. Charles Green gained a  PhD in Art History from the University of Melbourne in 1998 and is Associate  Professor and Reader in Contemporary International and Australian Art at the same  university. Charles Green has written several books and many articles on art and art  history.  

 Lyndell Brown and Charles Green are commercially represented by private galleries  in Sydney, Adelaide, and Melbourne where they show solo exhibitions on a yearly  basis. Other major solo exhibitions of their work have been held at the Gibsone Jessop  Gallery in Toronto, USA, in 2005, and the Monash University Faculty Gallery in 

 Melbourne, in 2003. The National Gallery of Australia, along with most other State  and Territory galleries, have examples of Brown and Green’s work in their  collections. Their work has been included in many major international exhibitions and  they have been the recipient of several prestigious travelling scholarships and grants.  They were awarded the Gold medal at the Bangladesh Biennale in 2004. 

 

 Official Photographer: Sean Hobbs 

 Sean Hobbs’ dramatic image of an Afghan boy swinging high over Kabul was the  signature image of Reportage a cinematic celebration of photojournalism that toured  the Place cinema complexes of Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane from October to  December 2006. 

 He has spent about 14 months in total in Afghanistan as an independent freelance  photojournalist including a number of weeks embedded with the US Marines. His  photo-essay explored the displaced world of Afghan refugees living in border camps 

 near Pakistan. He followed US forces as they went about “Operation Enduring  Freedom” and depicted life on the streets of Kabul. In November 2006 his short photo  essay on this period was published in the on line edition of Reportage; the magazine  of University of Technology journalism program and the Australian centre for  independent journalism. 

 With a diploma in Italian language and undergraduate studies in anthropology and 

 linguistics, Sean’s Bachelor of Fine Art from the University of NSW and his Post-Graduate Certificate in Journalism from the University of Technology, Sydney, have  provided a interesting background to surviving in difficult places.  Since 2003 he has  been working as a photojournalist in Ethiopia, Uganda and Afghanistan.   

