---
title: "Zombie apocalypse - the dead are still walking."
date: "2007-11-22"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211312513
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S21P6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Queensland

 Dated: 22 November 2007  Portfolio: General 

 

 

 Zombie Apocalypse - the Dead are Still Walking

 "The Democrats have been eulogised every six months since our birth," Queensland Democrat Senator  Andrew Bartlett said.   

 "The media might keep damning our empty grave with faint praise, but there are plenty of high profile  people who recognise the necessity of keeping us in parliament."   

 "Today I have launched a YouTube video of testimonials from prominent Australians including Fr Frank  Brennan OA, Mr Julian Burnside QC and Academy Award™ nominated documentary film maker David  Bradbury. This highlights some of the work I've been doing over the last decade   

 "We shielded Australia from the extremes of WorkChoices for a decade, we negotiated the strongest  environmental laws ever seen in Australia, and we have protected students, single parents, people with  disabilities, the elderly, the young, refugees and the future of our country.   

 "We will survive this election because the country needs us. Even without the balance of power, we have  been the most effective minor party in the Senate - with major wins for Indigenous Australians, women  and child protection."   

 Launching a series of video testimonials in support of his Senate candidacy, Andrew Bartlett said  "Australians recognise the essential role that only the Democrats can play. As a centrist party, we are  uniquely poised to reap support from both sides of politics and wrest control of the Senate from the  major parties."   

 "I've been campaigning hard and receiving support from both the public and from the groups I've been  involved with over the last ten years.    

 "The work done by the Democrats to keep government accountable and the public informed did not stop  with the loss of balance of power in 2004. We've kept our promise to the public to improve laws where  we could and raise issues in the Senate and through the once strong Senate committee system.    

 "Our actions, while largely ignored, have continued unabated. We will never give up the fight for justice,  accountability and a sustainable Australia," Senator Andrew Bartlett concluded.   

 You can watch the video testimonials here: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YsuF9-mCKO0   

 To see Senator Bartlett's work this campaign click here: www.andrewbartlett.com 

