---
title: "Priorities of Australia's refugee and humanitarian intake for 2007-08"
date: "2007-08-18"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211308591
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1L0O6%22
---

 Kevin Andrews MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 

 Priorities of Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian Intake  for 2007-08 

 Saturday, 18th August 2007 

 Today I am announcing the regional priorities of Australia's refugee and  humanitarian programme for 2007-08.  

 I have determined the composition after consultations with many groups and  agencies across Australia and with the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees, taking into account the current situation for people in humanitarian  need around the world. 

 The Refugee and Humanitarian Programme in 2007-08 will be maintained at  13,000 places. 

 The intake from the Africa region will be reduced to 30 per cent. The intake  from the Middle East region and the Asia region will increase to around 35 per  cent each.  

 The intake from the Africa region reflects an improvement in conditions in  some countries and an increase in the number of people returning to their  country of origin. Processing of applications this programme year will primarily  be for applications already received while keeping open a limited capacity for  some new applications that are particularly compelling. 

 The increased intake of Iraqis from the Middle East region follows an  international conference on Iraq convened by the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees in April 2007 to discuss the situation in that  country and how best to help those who have been forced to leave the  country, many of whom are Christian. 

 This Conference 'called upon all host countries, including those further afield,  to continue providing protection, humanitarian assistance and hospitality to  Iraqis until such time as conditions have been created to enable voluntary  return in safety and dignity.' 

 The increased intake from the Asia region is part of Australia's stated  commitment to resettling Burmese refugees in Thailand and the Bhutanese  refugees in Nepal as part of coordinated international efforts to resolve these  protracted humanitarian situations. Since the early 1990's about 140 000  Burmese refugees have been living in camps along the Thai-Burma border,  and 108 000 Bhutanese refugees have been living in camps in Nepal. 

 The Australian Government is committed to responding to humanitarian crises  around the world and delivering comprehensive services that enable new  entrants to settle and become part of our community. 

 I am conscious of the particularly traumatic experiences that many people  coming to Australia under the Humanitarian Programme have experienced  over a prolonged period of time and that this can make successful settlement  and integration difficult. To increase the availability and range of settlement  programmes available to recently arrived humanitarian entrants the Australian  Government has committed an additional $209.2 million over four years. I  want to ensure every new entrant to Australia is given the best possible  chance to successfully settle, become part of our community and contribute to  our great nation. 

 The Australian Government remains committed to assisting those in  humanitarian need. Australia consistently ranks among the top three countries  in the world in terms of the number of people resettled under its Humanitarian  Programme. 

 Media enquiries: Kate Walshe 0421 588 794 

 

 

