---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Shangri-La Hotel, Jarkarta, Indonesia: 5 March 2007: JI; East Timor; Major Mori: Reinado."
date: "2007-03-05"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "JI"
  - "East Timor"
  - "Major Mori: Reinado."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211553810
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NCEM6%22
---

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE:   5 March 2007 

 TITLE:   Shangri-La Hotel Jakarta, Indonesia - JI, East Timor, Major Mori, Reinado. 

 

 JOURNALIST:  Do you believe Mr Ba’asyir is still the leader of JI?   

 MR DOWNER:  Well I think he’s the spiritual leader of JI, yes, I do.   

 JOURNALIST:  And do you think the operatives still pay attention to him?  (Inaudible)   

 MR DOWNER:  I do think they pay attention to him.  He’s certainly been the spiritual leader  of Jema’ah Islamiyah over a long period of time.  I think inspiration is still drawn from him.   

 JOURNALIST:  Was that comment in your speech a criticism of the Indonesians?   

 MR DOWNER:  No - it wouldn’t matter how hard you tried to spin it, there’s certainly no  criticism of Indonesia because I’ve included in that speech quite a lot of praise for the  Indonesian efforts to counter terrorism.  If you think that there is any criticism of the  Indonesians over Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, there’s not, because Abu Bakar Ba’asyir was released  as a result of judicial processes, not as a result of an executive action by the Indonesian  Government, and the Indonesian Government’s position in relation to him and these issues  has always been very forthright.  But I mean, Indonesia these days is a democracy and the  decisions of the courts are not the decisions of the executive.  I certainly don’t remotely  criticise the Indonesian (inaudible).   

 JOURNALIST:  But what if Indonesia is one that remains to act against JI ..?   

 MR DOWNER:  No I don’t think that’s right.  I don’t think Indonesia has failed.  I think  actually of all the countries that have been fighting terrorism, there’s no country that’s done a  better job than Indonesia.  (Inaudible).   

 JOURNALIST:  What are they up to now then, in fact, in the fight against terrorism?   

 MR DOWNER:  Well I think there are a whole lot of things we need to keep doing.  First of  all we obviously need to keep consolidating coordination and cooperation between countries  in the region as well as of course outside of the region.  I think it’s very important that  particularly leaders in regional countries, not particularly necessarily Australia, but leaders in  regional countries continue in their own different ways and they have their own ways of doing 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 this to promote the alternative vision of modernity and progress in their societies compared to  the vision that the extremists promote.  I’ve often said this.  I mean, as I said in my speech, if  you look at what the extremists are saying, what they want to do is plunge countries with  significant Muslim populations back into antiquity.  They want to destroy modernity in a  country like Indonesia.  They want to take away televisions, DVDs, radios, cell phones.  They  want to destroy the underpinnings of the modern economy.  And I have to say I think the  more people understand that, the less they support these groups.  And the truth is that there  has been a very big decline in support in Indonesia for these sorts of extremist groups over the  last couple of years, which is very encouraging.   

 JOURNALIST:  What sort of control do you think Abu Bakar Ba’asyir wields over his  supporters now?   

 MR DOWNER:  Well, I think control is the wrong word.  I think he obviously, with his  supporters, as you put it, ipso facto if they’re his supporters, they’re influenced by him.  I  don’t think he’s sitting around planning and plotting blowing up buildings.  I think he’s the  leading propagator of a particular ideology.   

 JOURNALIST:  He travels widely in Indonesia, preaching what he preaches.   

 MR DOWNER:  That’s a matter for the Indonesians.  I mean, they have their laws and this  country operates under the rule of law.  That’s the basic proposition.  See, I think in asking  questions about Abu Bakar Ba’asyir and the focus on Abu Bakar Ba’asyir in a sense misses  the point.  The point about Abu Bakar Ba’asyir is he is, if you like, a symbol of the  articulation of this extremist ideology, but in contrast to Abu Bakar Ba’asyir and what he is 

 arguing, the Indonesian Government and Indonesian authorities I think have done a simply  extraordinary job in countering terrorism.  Not only have they arrested people and disrupted  terrorist cells and so on, but what is really interesting about Indonesia is that they’ve managed  to promote the moderate narrative in contrast to the extremist views put by the likes of Abu  Bakar Ba’asyir.  And they’ve done so pretty successfully.  I mean, it’s not over yet.  There’s a  long way to go.  I’m not proclaiming victory.  But quite contrary to what you say, my  proposition is the absolute reverse.  It’s that if you want an example of a country that’s done a  good job in dealing with this issue of terrorism and extremism, then exhibit A is Indonesia.   And they haven’t always done what westerners have suggested they do.  That’s true.  But they  nevertheless have done an extraordinary job in getting results and part of getting results is  reducing public support for extremism.  And they’ve got to do that.  Foreigners aren’t going  to do that.  All sorts of suggestions we might make are considered and listened to.  But the  President and his team, they’ve got to work behind the scenes in reducing that support, and  they’ve done it.   

 JOURNALIST:  What evidence do you have that support for extremism in Indonesia is  falling?   

 MR DOWNER:  We commissioned some polling in Indonesia some time ago - no, months  ago, towards the end of last year - and the polling that we commissioned shows that support  for extremism has declined very substantially, but also there has been published polling by the 

 Pew research institute, which is an American research institute, which shows the same thing.  

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 So I think all of the indications are that there is a substantial decline in public support for  extremism.  There is still some, but it’s a small percentage of what it was.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Downer, (inaudible) JI is a (inaudible) regional terrorist group.  Should  the Indonesian organisation itself be banned (inaudible) or is the idea of banning terrorist  groups not a good one?   

 MR DOWNER:  Great question.  Because I think this illustrates exactly the point I’m  making.  I mean, at the end of the day we can give all that sort of advice, and I say so with the  greatest of respect, it’s a very western question.  But the Indonesians have got to work out  what works for them.  And the way they have been handling this difficult issue is working for  them.  So they have certainly arrested somewhere in the vicinity of 200 JI and other terrorist  operatives, charged and prosecuted, and a handful have been killed.  They have very  substantially reduced public support for extremism.  Maybe if they had always adopted the  suggestions of westerners, they may not have done so well.  Who knows.   

 JOURNALIST:  Prisons seem to be the big problem in Indonesia at the moment - recruiting,  operations being planned from there.  Are you looking at that at all?   

 MR DOWNER:  Of course, where there are extremists in prison, well, ipso facto that’s  where they are.  Better in prison than out of prison.  But let me say this.  I think a very  substantial focus has to be on the education system, on the madrasahs, the pesantren, the 

 Islamic schools.  Now, many of those are moderate but history shows that extremism has  infiltrated into some of those schools, and we have been working very closely with the  Ministry for Religious Affairs, which is the Ministry responsible for oversight of these  schools, though they are mainly private schools, and I think, I’d have to put it this way, the  Ministry for Religious Affairs has been doing a very good job in addressing some of these  problems.  It’s not solved.  Don’t get me wrong.  I’m not exaggerating.  There still is a  problem, there certainly is.  But I think the focus has got ultimately to be, if you like, the  mosques and the schools, and the Indonesians have been very focused on that.  They’ve done  a tremendous amount in that area.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Downer, after this blundered raid in East Timor, what are you hearing  about the situation there today?   

 MR DOWNER:  Well as I understand it, the situation in East Timor overnight has been  relatively quiet.  There have been a couple of incidents, one of them an attack by some  people, not a military attack but an attack on a warehouse which contains rice, and that attack  though was entirely related to rice and rice distribution issues.  So, look the important thing is  that the military just continue with their operation.  I don’t know how long that will take but if 

 I were Major Reinado - certainly the best advice I could give Major Reinado is to hand  himself in, surrender himself, and think about his country first and foremost and what’s in the  interests of East Timor.  And it’s in the interests of East Timor that the authority of the 

 democratically-elected government and its institutions is asserted.   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) reports today that there could be more delays in the trial because  of action in (inaudible), that Major Mori might have to excuse himself from representing  (inaudible).  What would be your attitude to further delays in the trial?   

 MR DOWNER:  I can’t comment on Major Mori, but I can say that we don’t want to  obviously want to see any further delays.  I mean we’ve been very concerned at the amount of  time that this has taken, regardless of who’s at fault.  I mean, there are all sort of players at  fault here, including the United States Government, including the Pentagon.  But having said  that, we have been very aggressive in urging quick resolution of this case and we want to see  the trial proceed and proceed according to the timetable and I’m still optimistic that the  timetable can be met.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr Downer, you met Minister Wirajuda yesterday.  Did you get an answer  on the issue of processing of the Sri Lankan asylum-seekers, and what’s the result and what  will now happen to those (inaudible)?   

 MR DOWNER:  We’re still having discussions about this and that will continue for a few  days yet.  We’ve been workshopping different ideas.  Let me put it to you that way.  I mean,  normally of course I’d like to tell you absolutely everything, but better not at this stage while  we continue to work through these issues.  I’ve explained before our position, which is that  ideally we would like to return these people to Indonesia and have those who are making  asylum plans processed by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, and once  they’ve been processed, those who are not refugees to be sent straight back to Sri Lanka.   Those that are found to be refugees will have to be resettled.  That’s essentially the  proposition in relation to Indonesia.  But the broader point is this:  these people are either  going to come back to Indonesia and make claims to be processed, or else they’re going to go  to Nauru.  It’s going to be one or the other.  And I don’t feel very strongly about it either way.   But given that they did come from Indonesia, I think it’s a reasonable proposition to work this  issue through with the Indonesian Government.  So we’ve had a discussion about this issue,  about how it might be possible to move forward.  I’m not sure whether we can work out an  arrangement with the Indonesians, but we’re working on it in any case as our first priority.   But if that doesn’t work, we’ll send them to Nauru instead.  (Inaudible.)  No probably not.   

 JOURNALIST:  Do you think it’s unfortunate that Alfredo Reinado has escaped?   

 MR DOWNER:  You’ve asked that question about twelve different ways now in 24 hours,  and I say if you’re as determined and diligent as me, I think you are and you deserve a lot of  credit for that, but I think the main thing is to let the Australian Defence Force continue their  operations and I think, as I’ve said already, Major Reinado will be caught in the end, if he  doesn’t hand himself in.  Somebody wrote in one of the papers - one of you - that I had said  that he should be killed.  I don’t think he should be killed.  I think he should be caught.  And  that is the challenge for us.  Not to kill him.   

 JOURNALIST:  What about the protest in front of the Australian Embassy in Dili last night?   

 MR DOWNER:  It’s broken up.  I mentioned that last night.  UNPOL broke it up.   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 

  [Ends] 

