---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 8 January 2007: [Australian national detained in Iraq; suggested funding from extremist organisations towards a mosque in Adelaide]."
date: "2007-01-08"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Australian national detained in Iraq"
  - "suggested funding from extremist organisations towards a mosque in Adelaide"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211302377
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TWWL6%22
---

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE   

 DATE:   08 January 2007    

 TITLE:  Doorstop, Adealide   

 

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Okay, are you wanting to talk about this Australian... 39-year-old Australian from Adelaide who is in Iraq. I can tell you a little bit about him; that is that he  was, as I understand it, detained in October under the United Nations Security Council  resolution, which authorises the detention for up to 90 days, of people suspected of being  involved in insurgency and terrorist activity against the Government of Iraq and coalition  forces supporting the Iraqi Government.  

 

  He was detained... we were informed of his detention through Defence channels and  our consular staff in Baghdad were able to get access to him during November and again, to  speak to him in December. At one stage, it was... he was transferred from Baghdad to Basra  and we asked that he be sent back to Baghdad so we would have better consular access to  him.    This man went to Iraq, contrary to the travel advisories that my department issues,  saying that Australians should not go to Iraq. Free to go, of course, but we advise people not  to go. He could be detained for up to 90 days under the United Nations authorisation. At the  end of that 90-day period, he would either be charged before the Iraq Criminal Court [sic]... or 

 Central Criminal Court, or else he'll be released. And there is an ongoing investigation into  his activities. So I am not, of course, prepared and at liberty to comment on that, but that  investigation is taking place.    

  This man came to Australia - had a double check made of this, as I understand it -  came to Australia as a refugee. After being in Australia for two years, he gained Australian  citizenship and then chose to return to Iraq, contrary to the travel advisory that we have  issued, of course. He says he has gone back to Iraq to find a wife and that's what he has... his 

 family are saying and that's what he himself has told our consular staff in Baghdad. So there's  an ongoing investigation.   

 REPORTER: There must be some sort of prima facie case against the person to be arrested  then.   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Sure. I mean, there's a prima facie case apparently, according to  the Iraqi authorities and the coalition forces there, and that's all being investigated.   

 REPORTER: You mentioned today on radio some... about funding from extremist  organisations towards a mosque here in Adelaide. Can you enlarge on that? 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, I'm not sure... I'm only sure of the generality rather than  the specifics. I know that through my own contacts with the Saudi Government and through  other Government agencies, we've obviously been endeavouring to ensure that there isn't  funding from extremist organisations to organisations here in Australia, including people  associated with mosques and that's ongoing work.  

 

  In relation to Adelaide, I'm advised that there was one particular incident where an  application for funding is made and the Attorney-General's department can comment on that.  But that's a somewhat different issue, because that relates to whether any funding would be  provided by the Saudi Arabian Government.    

  Now ultimately, that funding from the Saudi Arabian Government is a matter for it.  It's not a matter for us; we're able to express a view, but that's a matter for it. But I don't wish  to say more about that. That's a matter that is being dealt with by my department and the  Attorney-General's department, but we don't want to get into any of the details.   

 REPORTER: [Indistinct] all the... have all the mosques in Adelaide been investigated?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: No, they haven't been all been... no, no, no [laughs].   

 REPORTER: So how many have been...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: They haven't been investigated. The broader issue is the... I'm  just making the point that, in relation to mosques and other Islamic institutions, we obviously  want to make sure that there is no... there are no linkages with extremist organisations and  there've of course, been a matter that's been investigated. And it's a matter that we discuss  with the Saudi Arabian Government in particular, because this is of course, a matter that goes 

 back well before 9/11.    

  There has been concern internationally, not specifically to Australia, about some  elements in Saudi Arabia, which is the heartland of Wahhabism and Salafism. Some elements  in Saudi Arabia are trying to spread that particular extremist interpretation of Islam and so,  obviously we don't want to see any extremist organisations penetrating Australia. 

 

 REPORTER:  So the investigation only involved one mosque...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: No, no, no. Sorry, there might be some confusion here. In  relation to the mosque in Adelaide, I mean, there have been, of course, investigations into the  broader issue as you would expect, but in relation to one mosque, there was an application for  funding from the Saudi Arabian Government, not from extremist organisations.  

 

 And the Australian Government expressed a view about that, but that broader question is  ultimately going to be a matter for the Saudi Arabian Government.   

 REPORTER: So that funding was stopped after that investigation?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, that is a matter that I'm not ready to comment on. 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 REPORTER: Can you say which mosque it was?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: I'm not going into that, no.   

 REPORTER: So it was an existing mosque?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Yeah, sure.   

 REPORTER: But no other mosques have been looked at?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, I couldn't t... [indistinct] are being looked at. No other  mosque to the best of my knowledge has made an application for funding from the Saudi  Arabian Government. 

 

 REPORTER: Now, there's a link with the mosque down south at Park Holme, I believe,  and... 

 

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: That, I don't know.   

 REPORTER:... and Mr Kanie...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Yeah, I'm not... you know, that's...   

 REPORTER: So is there any suggestion...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Oh, are these two things related, is that what you're trying to...   

 REPORTER:  Yes.    

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Not to the best of my knowledge, no. I have no knowledge that  they're related at all. I would be highly... I'd be very surprised if there was any relationship at  all between any application for funding to the Saudi Arabian Government by any mosque in  Adelaide and this particular Australian citizen who's been detained. I'm sure there's no link 

 there.   

 REPORTER:  Do we know the nature of the crimes he's accused of?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, we know that this is a matter that's being investigated.   

 REPORTER: When was the investigation into the mosque and...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: No, no, no, no. Sorry...   

 REPORTER: No, I know. I've gone to...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Sorry, it's not an investigation into that; into... there was... there  are two things here.  

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

  There is the broader issue of funding for... funding coming from Saudi Arabia to  various organisations in Australia, whether there is any such funding and obviously a concern  that we've had and we've discussed with the Saudi Government over a number of years; not  recently, over a number of years, in relation to extremist groups in Saudi Arabia, or some  individuals as well, providing funding to people in Australia or organisations in Australia.  

 

  Secondly, there is a... not necessarily a related issue, of an application made to the  Saudi Arabian Government by a mosque for funding, from the Saudi Arabian Government -  not from extremist individuals - from the Saudi Arabian Government, and ultimately, the final  decision there rests with the Saudi Arabian Government.   

 REPORTER: And when was that application?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Oh, that's been the last, you know, recent period. I'm not going  into any more details. That's over recent years.   

 REPORTER: And have there been any more applications from other mosques in Australia?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: I've no idea.   

 REPORTER: So who gets the final say...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well no, hang on. In the whole of Australia, there may have  been... I think I'm right in saying that there may have been, but...   

 REPORTER: You said...   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: ... whether the Saudi Arabian Government's provided funding in  relation to those mosques, well I have no idea. But there, I'm trying to differentiate between  the Saudi Arabian Government and extremist organisations in Saudi Arabia. 

 

 REPORTER: So at this stage, there's no evidence that any extremist organisations are  funding any mosques in South Australia or Australia?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, you'd have to ask the Attorney-General's department  about that or the Attorney-General. I've no idea, but not to the best of my knowledge.   

 REPORTER: You said this morning that Mr Kanie's family, first he didn't want them to  know that he'd been arrested and then he changed his mind a month later. Is that right?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: That's right, yeah.   

 REPORTER:  Okay.    

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, when our consular staff saw him in October... no, sorry in  November, he said that he didn't wish his detention to be drawn to the attention of his family 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

 in Australia and to be made public. Subsequently when the consular staff spoke to him in  December, he said that he did want them to be informed.   

 REPORTER:  Okay.    

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: I don't know why.   

 REPORTER: Minister, has the Federal Government had any discussion with the US  Government about their new strategy for Iraq?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: We've had a lot of discussions with them. Prime Minister and I  had lunch with President Bush during APEC in Hanoi at the end of November. I was in  Washington in December and I met with Vice-President Cheney; had dinner with him. And I  discussed the issue with him. I met with Condoleezza Rice, my American counterpart. I met  with... let me think, I met with Stephen Hadley, the National Security Advisor and actually  quite a number of other people. And of course, we talked about many issues and one of them  was Iraq.   

 REPORTER: It would look like he's going to send, the President is going to send, more  troops to Iraq. Does the Australian Government support that?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, I can think, in the end, what we're interested in is the  objective of dampening down, and hopefully one day getting rid of, the violence that's taking  place in and around Baghdad. And how best to do that needs to be addressed at two levels,  one of those is at the political level. That is, that there has been substantial engagement with  Prime Minister Maliki, the Prime Minister of Iraq and other members of his Government,  about measures that they could take. And, bearing that in mind, what Coalition military, or  American military resources will be needed to help them fulfil their particular objectives. 

 

  And when it comes to the number of troops that are needed, the actual number of  troops on the ground, that's obviously a matter of consultation between the President and his  military commanders, and no doubt he'll take the advice of his military commanders on those  sorts of issues. We're not… we're in the business of saying that it is important that insurgents  and terrorists are not victorious in Iraq. We do not want to see them be victorious, and  therefore we support a successful outcome in Iraq where the level of violence in and around  Baghdad can be substantially reduced. 

 

  Now, how that's done both politically, and that's a matter that we discuss with the  Americans, but also militarily, that's a matter that the President will say a bit more about. But  when it comes to the actual number of troops, understandably that is a matter for military  judgement.   

 REPORTER: But if the US President sends in more troops, or if America sends in more  troops, will Australia follow suit?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Australia has no intention of changing our troop numbers. 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 6

 REPORTER:  Getting back to the funding of mosques, who has the final say in terms of, if  any funding came in from Saudi Arabia, well, an application was made, who would have the  final say whether those funds were available? 

 

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, you mean…   

 REPORTER: Would you cut off those funds?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: If the funding, well, if the funding came from the Saudi Arabian  Government, well, they could provide funding if they wanted. And, of course, historically the  Saudi Arabian Government has provided funding. I'm not saying there's anything illegitimate  about that, but historically they have provided funding to various institutions around the  world, including in Australia. 

 

  But we can obviously express a view to the Saudi Arabian government, but they'll  make their final decisions themselves.   

 REPORTER:  So you've got no…   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: In terms of the Saudi Arabian Government, we are comfortable  with the Saudi Arabian government, let me make this clear. There is a clear distinction  between extremist groups in Saudi Arabia, which the Saudi Arabian Government is fighting,  and the Saudi Arabian Government itself. 

 

 REPORTER:  Do you acknowledge there's been no, sort of, infiltration by those extremist  groups, or a want to fund mosques in Australia?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, I can't throw any light on that, no. I mean at least to the  best of my knowledge. I can't say that, you know, I can't give you the headline, Adelaide  mosques funded by extremists. I don't have any knowledge that that is the case. 

 

 REPORTER: Which federal authorities have been involved in that investigation? Is it  Federal Police, or maybe Foreign Affairs?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: No, Foreign Affairs is not an investigative agency.   

 REPORTER:  Okay.   

 REPORTER: Minister, there's been a lot of talk that David Hicks will be charged soon. If he  isn't, is there any… can Australia invoke the right to have him brought back to Australia?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, I think we've made the position pretty clear all along in  relation to both Hicks and Habib. When the Americans said they wouldn't charge Habib, we  said to the Americans, well, if you're not going to charge him, we think it best that you send  him back to Australia. In the case of Hicks, they did charge Hicks. The Americans did charge  Hicks, and for quite some time he faced those charges. 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 7

  You might recall that the US Supreme Court then said that the military commissions  had to be re-established by the US Congress, and so during the latter half of last year, that's  what happened. The US Congress re-established the military commissions, and so our  expectation and the advice we have from the Americans is that they are going to bring on the  charges again against David Hicks. And the sooner they do that the better, and the sooner the  case can be heard, the better.   

 REPORTER: If it doesn't happen soon, could he be brought back?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, I think it will happen. I mean I'm confident it will happen.  We've made the point very strongly to the Americans, I can assure you. When we met with  them in December, and I was talking about that in a different… that meeting in a different  context. When we were talking about that in December we made it very clear to the 

 Americans then that we wanted the charges to be, you know, whatever charges they're going  to bring.   

  I mean they brought forward three charges, then they have had to reconstitute the  military commissions. Our expectation is that they would bring forward charges again, and  they have given us an undertaking that they will.   

 REPORTER: Have you set a deadline for when those charges will be brought on?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Well, we told the Americans we want it to be done as quickly as  possible. Now, there are some mechanical issues here that, first of all, the regulations pursuant  to the legislation passed by the US Congress don't come into effect until, I think it's - don't  hold me to this - but I think it's 17 January from recollection. And so charges can't be laid  before then, because the regulations haven't come into effect. 

 

  So the charges are expected to be laid some time after that. I don't exactly know what  date.   

 REPORTER: So if those charges weren't, for example, laid by the second half of this year,  would he be brought home by then?   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: Oh, look, I mean my expectation… let me just tell you what my  expectation is, and on the basis of the discussions we had in December with the Americans,  my expectation is that the charges will be brought forward again, because we've already had  the three charges. But the charges will be brought forward again within a matter of weeks.  Not, you know, leaving it until the second half of the year or whatever.   

 REPORTER: The Hicks saga has been dragging on for a while now.   

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: It has, yes.   

 REPORTER: Is John Howard concerned that it's hurting him politically?   

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 8

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: I think the issue here is to do the right thing by Australia. We  are in a great and historic struggle against terrorists and terrorist organisations. If Australians  go overseas and become involved in terrorist organisations and get detained in the process,  they are going to get into a great deal of difficulty. 

 

  We provide consular assistance to all Australians regardless of the crimes, regardless -  or alleged crimes - or regardless of the offences. We have around 180 Australians who are  currently facing charges overseas, not just Mr Hicks. Now, some politicians are only 

 interested in Mr Hicks. They have no interest at all in the other 180 Australians who are  facing charges overseas, I can assure you, in all manner of jurisdictions. Some people may  think they're impressive jurisdictions, and some people may think they are most unimpressive  jurisdictions, but no doubt that's all highly debatable.   

  We have a very large number of Australians facing charges overseas. We provide  them with consular assistance. And in the case of Hicks, we have made 17 consular visits all  the way to Cuba from Washington - at great expense, of course, to the taxpayer, because it's a  big distance - but we have made 17 consular visits. 

 

  So this, sort of, allegation that somehow the Government has just turned it's back on  Mr Hicks, well, that's obviously not true. I think I'm right in saying the Attorney-General's  Department has spent $300,000 of taxpayer's money funding legal representation for Mr  Hicks. So I mean, the Government is spending all that money and making 17 visits, we're  obviously doing what we can.   

  This is not, though, Australian jurisdiction. This is American jurisdiction. And like the  other 180 Australians who's facing charges, if you get into difficulties like that, you have to  deal with the  jurisdiction you find yourself in. We can't bring all 180 Australians back to  Australia to face courts in Australia; that is obviously an absurdity. Nor would we send all  foreigners who are facing charges in Australia back to… sorry, back to their countries. We  wouldn't do that, either.   

 REPORTER:  When will consular staff next be meeting with Mr Kanie?    

 ALEXANDER DOWNER: I can't answer that. Okay, thank you.   

