---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: Monday, 28 May 2007: development funding; Therese Rein."
date: "2007-05-28"
creators:
  - "Mcmullan, Bob"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE"
subjects:
  - "development funding"
  - "Therese Rein."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211305146
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A67N6%22
---

 

 

 

 BOB MCMULLAN  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FEDERAL/STATE RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR FRASER 

 

 Transcript of doorstop interview - Parliament House, Canberra   

 Monday, 28 May 2007   

 PROOF ONLY   

 Subject: Development funding, Therese Rein   

 MCMULLAN: I just want to say a few things about this very sad story that’s in the  Sydney Morning Herald this morning.   

 Australians will be extremely disappointed. Australians are very generous with their own  money to fight global poverty and they’ll be extremely disappointed to hear that the  money they thought the Government was using for that is actually being used to fund the  Government’s tricky political exercises. To see money that Australians thought was  dedicated to fighting global poverty funding the Government’s ‘Pacific solution’ on  Nauru, is just so cynical and so disappointing for Australians, because we’re the second-most generous people in the world, in terms of how much ordinary Australians give to  fight global poverty. We’re down the bottom of the rankings as a Government, and now 

 we find that even that money is being diverted to the Government’s political motives  rather than fighting poverty.   

 JOURNALIST: Would Labor put rules in place to ensure that money that is called  foreign aid actually goes to poverty alleviation, as opposed to things like Nauru?   

 MCMULLAN: It’s not a question of rules. There are already rules in place. It’s a  question of priorities. But you’re absolutely right - what we would do is make sure that  the money that is dedicated to aid goes to fundamental things like good schooling, good  health care, clean water, decent sanitation. That’s why young children are dying  unnecessarily - because they’re not getting access to clean water, they’re not getting  access to decent sanitation and their lives are being blighted by a lack of education and  heath assistance. They don’t need the Government to provide extra money for the refugee  process on Nauru.    

 JOURNALIST: Bob, has Therese Rein paid too high a price for her husband’s political  career?   

 MCMULLAN: Well, I think that Therese is a very strong woman. She would have made  up her own mind after a lot of consideration. Personally, I think that she’s made an  ethically sound decision, and a very sensible one. It just highlights how difficult it is to be  a strong woman and very, very public figure. She did the right thing, I think.   

 

 

 

