---
title: "Parliamentary Secretary reinforces commitment to multicultural affairs."
date: "2007-02-19"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303402
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U0LM6%22
---

 

 Teresa Gambaro MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 

 Media Centre 

 

 Parliamentary Secretary reinforces commitment to  multicultural affairs 

 19 February 2007 

 Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Teresa Gambaro today reinforced the government’s commitment to a strong  and cohesive Australia through effective integration. 

 ‘Australia has been very successful as a migrant country, receiving people  from all corners of the world and this government’s policies and programmes  make a valuable contribution’, Ms Gambaro said.  

 ‘New migrants are encouraged and assisted to find work, learn English and  understand Australian values and our democratic way of life.  

 ‘A stronger emphasis on citizenship in the name of my department is intended  to reflect the warm invitation we extend to migrants to join our national family  as Australian citizens.  

 ‘The focus is on ensuring opportunities for everyone to reach their potential,  respect for each other and the rule of law and democracy.  

 ‘Although my department has a new name, its structure and the important  matters it deals with have not changed.  

 ‘The department retains formal responsibility for multicultural affairs and its  work will continue to reflect the implications of Australia’s diversity.  

 ‘This government remains firmly committed to the effective integration of  migrants and refugees and to promoting the values that underlie our  democratic way of life.  

 I look forward to working with the Australian community as Parliamentary  Secretary to the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship.’  

 Media Inquiries: Dean Savage (Ms Gambaro’s Office) 0438 171 330 

