---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: University of Queensland: 22 November 2007: new leadership; education; HECS; asylum seekers; Christmas Island; hospitals; savings."
date: "2007-11-22"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "new leadership"
  - "education"
  - "HECS"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Christmas Island"
  - "hospitals"
  - "savings."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211312484
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3Q2P6%22
---

 

 New leadership; Negative campaigning; Lindsay  scandal; Education; HECS; Asylum seekers;  Christmas Island; Hospitals; Savings  Doorstop Interview - 22nd November 2007 

 RUDD: Well it’s good to be here with Stephen Smith, the Shadow  Minister for Education and of course, Ross Daniels our candidate  for Ryan here at the University of Queensland.  

 We’ve been participating in a seminar on the nation’s future, a  seminar on the future of the nation’s education system and a  seminar on how do we go about building a world class education  system for Australia.  

 What I’ve done throughout this election campaign and all year is  offer new leadership with fresh ideas for Australia’s future. At the core of that  vision for Australia’s future is an education revolution. And the core of that vision,  a world class education system to invest in the jobs of the future. We have to  keep the economy strong and make sure it delivers for working families. But  unless we are investing in the jobs of the future, we are not serving the next  generation or this generation well.  

 The alternative that Mr Howard has offered has been a continuing negative  campaign. Mr Howard has lost touch. He has run out of ideas and has offered no  plan for the country’s future. And, his only plan for the future is to hand over to Mr  Costello without Mr Costello ever having to face the Australian people. And Mr  Costello, as we all know, would take Work Choices a lot further. 

 There are some stark alternatives then. We on our side of politics with a clear cut  plan for the future in education as we’ve discussed today, but also in critical areas  of infrastructure, critical areas of climate change, critical areas of water. Critical  areas also when it comes to cost of living pressures for working families,  childcare, housing affordability and dental treatment for teenagers. These are all  part and parcel of our positive plan for the future.  

 But the importance of this discussion that we’ve had today with educators from  the school sector, from the non-government sector, from the universities and from  students themselves and representatives of parents bodies has been to engage  the enthusiasm of the nation in building together a world class education system  for Australia.  

 I do not want to be Prime Minister of a country where we allow Australia to fall  further and further behind in the global education league. Australia needs to be at  the top of that league if we are to guarantee that the nation has a long term  economic future. It is why we are here today, I appreciate the contributions we 

 Kevin Rudd

 have had from the sector, and if we win this election, and I become the next Prime  Minister of Australia, this is but the beginning of Labor’s education revolution.  

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 RUDD: It’s hard to keep up with the detail of all of this in terms of Liberal claim  and counter claim, spin and counter-spin but after 11 years it’s clear that the  Liberals have nothing left to offer other than desperation, negativity and dirty  tactics and now more than ever is the need underlined for Australia to have new  leadership. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 RUDD: I haven’t had a chance to review Mr Howard’s answers to questions today at the National Press Club but there are many, many questions to answer about  the individuals involved in this and their connections to the top of the Liberal Party  in New South Wales. I’ll wait to see what unfolds during the course of the day. But  I go back to the core point. After 11 years all the Liberals have left to offer is  negativity, desperation and dirty tactics and it underlines now why this country is  in need of new leadership. 

 JOURNALIST: John Howard says that Jackie Kelly and the candidate for Lindsay  should not be condemned for the actions of their husbands that they are separate  people (inaudible) 

 RUDD: Well the question here is the connection with the Liberal Party. It’s quite a  separate matter but one that Mr Howard, based on what you just said, is engaged  in and the Liberal Party’s engagement in desperate tactics, negative tactics and  dirty tactics and underlining the absolute need in Australia now for new  leadership. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Where does this leave the candidate? What action  should be taken? 

 RUDD: I want to review today the answers that have been delivered by Mr  Howard. I haven’t had a chance to do so. 

 JOURNALIST: Should Mr Howard take ultimate responsibility considering he  expected you to take on responsibility for the actions of some of your own union  members. Does he take ultimate responsibility for the actions and behaviour of  Party members, state executives? 

 RUDD: Well I’ve had to show in times past that leadership on our side of politics  means taking responsibility and taking hard decisions when it involves people  who step right out of line. I think the same applies to Mr Howard but what we’ve  seen is desperation, evasion, dirty tactics and I think it underlines again the  nation’s need for new leadership. 

 JOURNALIST: If between now and Saturday the candidate in Lindsay’s husband  is found to be involved in the fliers, should the candidate have to step aside? 

 RUDD: Well let’s take this one step at a time. There is plain evidence out there  that there have been desperate, negative, dirty tactics engaged in by the Liberal  Party and let the chips fall where they may. It just underlines the need right now  for new leadership. I mean so much of this Government over such a long period  of time has been about negative political tactics rather than a positive plan for the  nation’s future and frankly this underlines, absolutely, the nation’s need for new  leadership. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)  

 RUDD: Based on the advice from the National Secretariat, no and on top of that if  I find any such activity along those lines they would be in receipt of the harshest  possible disciplinary action available within the rules of (inaudible) 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, both you and Mr Smith today mentioned that you were  both recipients of free education and questioned by young people worried about  the fact that they’re going to face tens thousands of dollars in HECS bills. You  pointed out you were doing what you could but you had to be economically  responsible. But you also said you wanted to rein this in, so if you are elected  next week, what is your long term plan about how you’re going to rein it in and  what mechanism would you use to rein it in? Are you wanting to put a lid on the  levels by which that could increase? Is this a second term option? 

 RUDD: Well the first and foremost responsibility for ourselves of course is to  obtain the people’s trust and support this Saturday. And secondly, Stephen and I  have spoken before about the challenges of the affordability of HECS for  university students and part and parcel of our education revolution is to make a  bold first step when it comes to those studying maths and science. You’re familiar  with that policy. And that is intended as the bold first step and it’s not inexpensive, 

 that in itself is a $400 million initiative. What we’ve also said throughout the year is  that we don’t want to be responsible for this country where you have a system  which is discouraging kids from pursuing university careers simply because it’s  got beyond their financial reach. 

 A priority for us in Government, if we’re elected to form the next Government, is to  take a very, very hard headed assessment about where this affordability  challenge must stop, must end, must be defined. There’s some analysis to occur  here about where the disincentives become so acute because of the cost of  university education that it actively discourages people from pursuing a university  career even if they are qualified to do so based on the marks they got at school.  We need to analyse that. But what I’d say is that this is not the end but it is the  beginning of an approach by us which has the affordability of higher education for  kids in working families at is core. We need to analyse all of this. 

 JOURNALIST: What’s your long term aim on it, though? Would you like to see it  go back to free education? 

 RUDD: Long term aim is to make sure that we have a system where no kid, no  young person in this country is discouraged from pursuing a university education 

 because they don’t believe they can afford it. That is the core objective and we’ve  made a start with maths and science, we’ve got more steps to go but it’ll be done  within a financially responsible framework. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on new leadership and fresh ideas, are you going to  retain or scrap the Pacific solution. Will you process asylum seekers on Nauru or  (inaudible)? 

 RUDD: We have Christmas Island which is an 800 bed facility which is designed  for that purpose and that is an underutilised facility. It’s been constructed at  enormous expense on the part of the Australian taxpayer and Mr Howard has  wasted hundreds of millions of dollars in facilities in Mannus and Nauru which 

 have not been utilised extensively in themselves. Our position on the Pacific  solution is absolutely clear cut and that is we should use the facility on Christmas  Island. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Wayne Swan’s commented that you’ll only spend what  you can afford. If the cost of the education revolution blows up, will you continue  funding development of your engine room at the expense of other portfolios such  as defence, health or (inaudible). Will they go out the back door? 

 RUDD: We’ve been very clear cut about our plans for education. It began in  January, education revolution chapter by chapter. It is the most comprehensive  education blueprint which has been put to the Australian people in the history of  elections in this country. But it is expensive. It is thorough and it goes from early  childhood education through to universities and research and all points in  between. It is therefore for us a core priority in government. The reason why we  have advanced it that way is so that people know what our plan is and the reason  we’ve also advanced it that way is that we’ve also put dollar figures on what we  can do now. And what I’ve said in clear cut terms to this seminar of educators and  young people here in Brisbane today is flag that for us this remains a strategic  priority for us in Government if we are elected to form Government. And if further  financial resources permit we will go further. I’ve outlined however in our blueprint,  in our education revolution document, what we can afford now and that is a  responsible way to proceed. It’s time for Australia to turn the corner in creating a  world class education system. I refuse to be Prime Minister of a country where we  simply allow our education system to fall behind the rest of the world. 

 JOURNALIST: Peter Costello reckons that you have been holding off on  delivering your policy costing to avoid economic scrutiny. Is that a fair point? 

 RUDD: Mr Costello, when I last looked, has not submitted the costing of his  proposal, Mr Abbott’s proposal for hospital boards right across the country. Mr  Abbott said one: there’ll be boards for every one of Australia’s 759 hospitals and  then there have been variations of that since. Two: that they’re going to cost 

 $10,000 a person each. Three: there’ll be ten persons to a board. Four: that  means that you’ll be up for three to four hundred million dollars and on a Victorian  average of what hospital board members might be paid, it’s more likely to be  $30,000 per individual which takes you over the billion.  

 Not one element of that submitted by Mr Costello to Treasury and Finance for  costing. Why? And the absolute double standard of the Treasurer to turn around  and make those sort of statements about us is extraordinary. All of our costings  as I indicated in statements at the end of last week, were submitted in the early  part of this week. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) three billion dollars worth of savings and now ten billion  dollars worth of savings… 

 RUDD: Well all those proposals have been submitted to Treasury and Finance.  They’re all detailed on the website. You’ll also see there is a figure for savings,  there is a figure which contains in it savings and offsets, there is a figure also for  expenditure proposals. The net cost to Budget is the figure that I have indicated  before, somewhere between $5 and $6 billion and we believe that we’ll come in  significantly less than Mr Howard’s proposals for this election and I note again  that Mr Howard and Mr Costello have not submitted anything by way of savings to  Treasury and Finance. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 RUDD: We believe that we have framed them in an entirely responsible fashion.  Before submitting them to Treasury and Finance we have taken them through our  own independent panel of costers. That’s an arduous process which HMAS  Liberal Party doesn’t have to go through. We’ve done that. Independent costers  including one of the members of our panel is a former deputy secretary to the  Department of Treasury. It’s an arduous process and we believe we have been  absolutely thorough in this. 

 JOURNALIST: On polls, there’s going to be a couple of polls coming out in the  next two days. 

 RUDD: That’s surprising. 

 JOURNALIST: What are you expecting them to show and what’s your final  message to the Australian people? 

 RUDD: Look, ever since I became leader of the Labor Party I have not  commented on a single poll, be it up or down. And that’s been the better part of a  year. My message to the Australian people is pretty straight forward. What I offer  is new leadership with a plan for the future and building an education system  which is world class to invest in the jobs of the future economy. Mr Howard, by  contrast, has offered no new plans because he’s not going to be around, he’s  retiring, handing the job to Mr Costello, who doesn’t have to face the Australian 

 people, and Mr Costello will take Work Choices further. It’s a very clear cut  alternative.  

 JOURNALIST: Just on the pamphlet again, what image do you think should be  sent to the Islamic community, and just personally, what did you find to be most  offensive about it?   

 RUDD: Well, the absolute desperate and deceptive and negative nature of these  Liberal Party tactics on the eve on an election, which summarises in itself the  desperate and negative nature of the entire Liberal Party advertising campaign.  

 It has been desperate and negative. They haven’t had anything positive to say  and you see the same desperation and negativity reflected in this document. In  terms of the wider community, and those who you’ve just referred to, can I just  say that the community can speak for itself and I just think it’s very important that  we are very mindful - very mindful indeed - that in this election season we are  straight up and down in dealing with such sensitive questions and we don’t play  around with stuff like that.  

 JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to your uncle or your cousin today, and what do  you think they have against you?   

 RUDD: Well, we all have diverse families. And that’s life.  

 JOURNALIST: Aren’t they squirming in desperation because the polls are right,  and they know you’ve got them beat?   

 RUDD: This will be a tight election. Whoever wins will win by a nose, and if you  know as much about what is going on around the country at the moment in each  electorate as I do, you reach the same conclusion. What I’m staggered about is  that Mr Howard has concluded that the only way he believes he can go forward is  to engage in this rolling, incessant, desperate negative campaign without offering  a single idea of a positive nature for the future. And there is a core reason for it.  He’s decided he’s not going to be there for the future, because he’s handing the  baton to Mr Costello without Mr Costello every having to face the people.  

 

 

 Authorised by Tim Gartrell, 161 London Circuit, Canberra City, ACT 2600 

