---
title: "Does Kevin Rudd want the obstructionist Greens?"
date: "2007-09-27"
creators:
  - "Fielding, Steve"
  - "Family First Party (Australia)"
source: "Office of FIELDING, SEN STEVE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211310254
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IW5Q6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 www.stevefielding.com.au 

 FAMILY FIRST 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 SF/195. Thursday September 27, 2007 

 

 DOES KEVIN RUDD WANT THE  OBSTRUCTIONIST GREENS?   

 Prime Minister John Howard said today that if the Coalition could not control the  Senate, he preferred that Family First hold the balance of power rather than the  Greens.   

 But what does Opposition Leader Kevin Rudd think?   

 Would Mr Rudd prefer Family First holds the balance of power rather than the  Greens, who have an extreme agenda and are obstructionist?   

 It would be a disaster for Australia to have the Greens holding the balance of  power. The Greens have shown they like to frustrate governments, whether state  or federal, Coalition or Labor. 

 

 Family First on the other hand has shown that it is willing to consider legislation  on its merits. Family First is willing to negotiate with the government of the day  to get a better outcome. Family First has also shown it is willing to oppose  legislation that is not up to scratch.   

 Family First voted against the Howard Government's unfair Work Choices  laws; the Government's privatisation of Telstra; and, the Government's  unjust changes to processing asylum seekers.    

 However, Family First voted for the Howard Government's anti-terrorism  laws; the Government's welfare changes because we believe people who  can work, should work; and, new laws to protect small business, because we  are passionate about helping small business.    

 Unlike other parties, Family First looks at every issue on its merit and  assesses its impact on our constituents; families and small business.    

 For media enquiries phone acting media adviser Jeremy Stuparich 0411 233 937 

