---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: APEC Teacher's Kit launch; UN Security Council debate on climate change; border protection; Afghanistan; Mr Rudd's visit to the US."
date: "2007-04-18"
creators:
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211304238
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DQTM6%22
---

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP   

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE:   18 April, 2007 

 TITLE:   Doorstop - APEC Teacher’s Kit Launch - UN Security Council debate on climate  change, border protection, Afghanistan, Mr Rudd’s visit to US.  

 

 JOURNALIST:  (inaudible).    

 MR DOWNER: I think both. It is a long term security threat. It has implications for  communities around the world if there are going to be, for example, resource problems -  especially water problems. These can very easily spill over into political tensions in countries.  So this of course is a medium-term project. This isn’t a short term project. But we put a  proposal into the Security Council for discussion on the climate change issue and I instructed  our Ambassador to make a statement. He made the statement reflecting not only Australia’s  concerns about climate change, but the commitment. Australia is pulling its weight and  playing its role in trying to find some answers to climate change. But also our statement  reflected very much on the need - not only to try to solve the problem in the medium term -  but in the short term to put resources towards adaptation because for some parts of the world  adaptation is going to be necessary regardless of what action the international community  takes to reduce CO2 emissions.   

 JOURNALIST: So you supported the issue being debated last night (inaudible).   

 MR DOWNER: I don’t think the Security Council is going to debate the issue of  climate change every week but I think it is appropriate for the Security Council to be aware of  the potential security problems that can flow from climate change. You can have issues, for  example, of drought and water shortage which will generate significant international tensions.  You can have rising sea levels which can create very significant population movement and the  international community would need to deal with those and if it didn’t deal with those, that  would create tension. You have issues of reforestation and deforestation and all of the  implications of those issues which would have significant political implications in a lot of  countries. There are all sorts of different ways that climate change can - not tomorrow - but  in the medium term play into security issues so it is appropriate that this is an issue that is  considered from time to time by the Security Council, that it just doesn’t turn its back on it.   

 JOURNALIST: On the issue of the refugee program with the US, the Opposition has  said (inaudible).

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

 

 

 MR DOWNER: No. The reason we take the position we do have on illegal immigration  - and this is opposed by the Australian Labor Party - is that we want to close down on people  smuggling. The more we can do in collaboration with other countries - whether that’s Nauru  or Indonesia or the United States of America - to take measures to make it increasingly  difficult for people illegally to get to Australia, the more we will close down on people  smuggling rackets. My comment about the Opposition is this: the Opposition has never taken  the issue of people smuggling seriously. That’s the core of this important issue. You only 

 have to go to some parts of Europe to see what enormous consequences flow from taking a  benign or negligible view of people smuggling. Here we have again, the Labor Party has tried  to say nothing for a little while on illegal immigration and people smuggling because Mr  Rudd gave them instructions not to speak on it but now we have once more revealed what the  Opposition’s true agenda on this issue is - which is to soften Australia’s approach. That will  encourage people smugglers, there will be more people making risky journeys in little and  dangerous boats trying to get to Australia. So it is not a humane policy - it is an inhumane  policy and it is a policy that will encourage massive rip-offs by people smugglers at the  expense of the ordinary people of Australia.   

 JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)    

 MR DOWNER: No. In the end with the people smugglers - this just shows you the  Labor Party is not interested in people smuggling. They have never bothered to try and find  out what the issues are. What people smugglers do is they sell a ticket on a small and 

 dangerous boat of people for hundreds- and in some cases thousands - of dollars to get to  Australia. Now if the clients know, or the potential clients, know that they can’t get to  Australia, that there are going to be all sorts of obstacles put in their way if they endeavour to  try to get to Australia illegally in that way, then they won’t embark on the dangerous journeys  on the boats, their lives will not be - to the same extent - at risk and what’s more, the people  smugglers won’t make any money. What the Labor Party’s policy is is a policy that will  reopen the people smuggling racket into Australia and then the Labor Party will have to think  of something else to do. But I think, to be honest with you, they have been completely  irresponsible on this issue, that the statements by Mr Burke today have flushed out the Labor  Party that it is soft on people smuggling.   

 JOURNALIST: How long have the negotiations been going on with the United States  about this proposal?   

 MR DOWNER: Months. Exactly how long - I can’t remember - I’ve spoken to them on  a couple of occasions myself. That would have been late last year I think? I’m not sure, I  haven’t checked it out.   

 JOURNALIST: The figures about 200 people, boat people, have been removed from  Australia since 2001. Won’t you end up taking more refugees?   

 MR DOWNER: No, no, no - it is an indicative number. No, because as you know, we  take 13,000 refugees officially every year in Australia. We have, I think, the 2nd biggest per  capita humanitarian re-settlement program in the world and this isn’t going to apply to these  people. It could apply in certain circumstances - if people arrive illegally here in Australia, 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

 they get transferred to Nauru and they’re dealt with in Nauru - it could apply. That’s not  saying it would, it could for 200 - that’s just a limit.   

 JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)    

 MR DOWNER: The whole aim is to continue to make it difficult for people to get to  Australia and the more it is difficult for people smugglers to get to Australia, the more you  will close down on people smuggling. That is the bottom line here.   

 JOURNALIST: We’ve got the Australian troops leaving for Afghanistan this Thursday.  Any message for them?   

 MR DOWNER: This is going to be a difficult and dangerous mission and I don’t think  we should have any illusions about the risks involved for the Australian troops in  Afghanistan. I think people’s eyes should be open to this being a very risky operation. Now in  Oruzgan province - which is where they are going in the southern part of Afghanistan - there  is significant Taliban activity, there is significant poppy farming and the money that comes  out of that, some of that is channelled into the Taliban - some of it not, but some of it is. So  this is a troubled province. It needs an awful lot of help and it is a dangerous province and a  dangerous environment. We all know that Australian troops will do - as they have done in the  past - an extraordinarily professional job but we should have no illusions that this is very  dangerous work.   

 JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd will be meeting with US officials. What are your thoughts  on that?   

 MR DOWNER: Lots of Australians meet US Government officials and good luck to  them.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think he is jumping the gun?   

 MR DOWNER: Opposition politicians through history have gone and met US  Government officials. When I was in the Opposition I, on many occasions, met US  Government officials. We sometimes lost subsequent elections. I don’t think it has any  implications for that. Mr Rudd’s not the first Opposition Leader to have gone to the United  States of America. I would guess that all of his predecessors have at some time done the same  thing. I think he needs to learn, Mr Rudd, not just playing politics. He needs to learn about  some of the serious issues people face and how to address those, not just to address opinion  polls. He’s obsessed with doing popular things but he has no interest in hard issues and hard  policies. So I hope when he’s over in America he will learn something about hard issues and  hard policies.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you think about his appearance on TV shows?   

 MR DOWNER: I don’t think in the end - I’m not being a hypocrite here, I’m speaking  more from experience - I don’t think in the end the public look to their political leaders for  cooking expertise. I think they look for a serious contribution to policy for the future of the  country. I think part of John Howard’s strength is that he doesn’t set himself up as a celebrity  chef or some sort of a karaoke star or something like that. He sets himself up as a serious 

 Prime Minister doing serious things for the great mainstream of Australian society. So I think 

 

 Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

 for Mr Rudd it diminishes him, it diminishes him to do that sort of thing. I know that Kevin  Rudd is the master of the stunt - loves stunts, publicity. He’s so obsessed with publicity. It  has got him into terrible trouble in the last couple of weeks and last week. That’s it - he just  loves publicity. So the more you love publicity, the more trouble you get into. That’s what I  think. So I’d better terminate this press conference. 

 

 [Ends] 

