---
title: "Bartlett visits Nauru: Quick, fair resolution of asylum claims the key."
date: "2007-04-26"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211304439
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2TVM6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 26 April 2007 

 Press Release Number: idlkkzcx  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Bartlett visits Nauru - Quick, fair resolution of asylum claims the key

 Queensland Democrat Senator, Andrew Bartlett, has returned from a visit to the asylum seekers' camp  on Nauru warning that there must be a much quicker resolution to all claims to avoid the major harm and  costs that have occurred in the past.   

 Senator Bartlett said the conditions the refugees are being kept in are an improvement on past years,  but the key dangers remain the same the potential for long delays and a lack of legal protections in  determining claims, along with difficulties with isolation and adequate access to legal assistance.   

 "We know beyond doubt that prolonged uncertainty and insecurity about the future, along with the  underlying fear of being sent back to unsafe situation, causes immense harm to many asylum seekers,"  Senator Bartlett said.   

 "The group of Burmese refugees have already been on Nauru for seven months and are yet to have an  initial assessment interview. This is simply unacceptable.   

 "Whilst there has been opportunity for asylum seekers to receive some legal assistance, the difficulties  with accessibility mean that full and proper help has not been provided.   

 "This not only impairs fairness, it almost inevitably means a more drawn out process, risking greater  harm for asylum seekers and greater cost to the Australian public," Senator Bartlett concluded.   

 There are 90 asylum seekers currently on Nauru 82 Tamils who have been there for about a month, and  8 Rohingya from Burma who arrived in Australian in August and were transferred to Nauru in September.   

 Senator Bartlett met with many of the ninety asylum seekers currently being kept on Nauru and  inspected the facility where they are staying. 

 

