---
title: "$32 million to drive integration."
date: "2007-05-29"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211305168
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/988N6%22
---

 

 Teresa Gambaro MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Media Centre  $32 million to drive integration 

 Tuesday, 29 May 2007 

 The Australian Government will spend $32 million in 2007-08 on a range of  services designed to help refugees and other migrants integrate into  mainstream Australia, including $19 million in new projects. 

 Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Teresa Gambaro, today  announced 231 projects, to be provided by 149 community organisations,  have been funded to help refugees and other migrants become self-reliant  and participate in Australia’s social and economic life. 

 Ms Gambaro said the Settlement Grants Programme (SGP) funding would  help migrants and refugees build practical skills to allow them connect to the  Australian community, such as obtaining a driver’s licence and learn the road  rules, access medical services, and help their children succeed in school. 

 ‘It is important migrants and refugees quickly develop a general understanding  of the Australian community and its values so they can integrate quickly to  make the most of the opportunities available in Australia,’ the Assistant  Minister said. 

 Ms Gambaro said grants were also provided to help new and emerging  communities establish themselves, build mutual assistance and participate in  the wider community. 

 ‘The organisations funded through the SGP grants are doing a wonderful job  to support their clients at the grass roots level, and I expect this new round of  grants will build upon the excellent range of services already in place,’ she  said. 

 Forty grants have been funded to service regional Australia.  

 The SGP grants are aimed at refugees, family sponsored migrants and the  dependants of those on skilled migration visas with poor levels of English. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2007-08 funding round is available on the  department’s website.  See: Settlement Grants Programme 

 Media Enquiries: Tjorn Sibma 0417 744 922 

