---
title: "Relief in Sight: Australia's International Disaster Response in Pictures."
date: "2007-06-06"
creators:
  - "Hunt, Greg"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211305424
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/91BN6%22
---

  Media Release  The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs  Federal Member for Flinders 

  AA 07 45 6 June 2007 

  Relief in Sight - Australia’s international disaster response in pictures 

  A unique photographic exhibition reflecting Australia’s commitment to helping people affected by  natural disasters and conflict will today be unveiled in Sydney. 

  Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Greg Hunt, said the exhibition, Relief in Sight: Australia’s  International Disaster Response in Pictures, places a human face on Australia’s emergency assistance. 

  “Sixty-eight compelling and confronting photographs capture the impact of natural disasters and other  humanitarian emergencies and the crucial role of Australian aid workers and volunteers in responding to  these crises,” Mr Hunt said. 

  “Relief in Sight demonstrates Australia’s role as a regional leader in providing critical humanitarian and  emergency relief. 

  “A recent example of our contribution was the provision of $3 million to assist Solomon Islands after it  was hit by an earthquake and tsunami on 2 April this year. 

  “An estimated 20,000 people were affected, with approximately 5,OOO displaced and 52 deaths. Our  assistance included sending medical teams, medical supplies and a mobile environmental team to help  with disease prevention, including sanitation. 

  “Australia was also instrumental in the provision of aid following the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004.  We contributed $71 million to Aceh for initial humanitarian and emergency relief. In addition, we  provided $18 1 million to restore services and infrastructure, including the main provincial port and  hospital in Banda Aceh. 

  “Next financial year, the Australian Government will provide an estimated $280 million to support  humanitarian, emergency and refugee programs.” 

  Mr Hunt said the exhibition was a tribute to the many people involved in Australia’s emergency aid and  reconstruction efforts, such as AusAID’s Allison Sudradjat, who died tragically in the Garuda plane  crash in March this year, along with DFAT’s Liz O’Neill and three other Australians. 

  “Allison was in charge of the $1 billion assistance package to support Indonesia’s reconstruction and  development efforts, both in and beyond tsunami-affected areas. Her efforts, and those of her  colleagues, are helping to save the lives of millions of people. 

  “I encourage all Australians to visit the exhibition as it tours more than 60 cities and towns, and see first  hand the importance of Australia’s emergency response for people in our region,” Mr Hunt said. More  information can be found at: www.reliefinsight.corn.au 

  Media contacts: John Deller {Mr Hunt’s Office) on 0400 496 596  AusAID (Public Affairs) on 041 7 680 590 

  1 

