---
title: "Illegal arrivals will be transferred to Nauru."
date: "2007-03-15"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Downer, Alexander"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211554129
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/00LM6%22
---

 

 Kevin Andrews MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 

 Illegal arrivals will be transferred to Nauru 

 Joint Media Release with The Hon Alexander Downer, Minister for  Foreign Affairs  

 Thursday, 15 March 2007 

 The Australian Government has decided to transfer to Nauru the group of  illegal arrivals intercepted by HMAS Success who are currently  accommodated on Christmas Island. 

 The Australian Government has a policy of offshore processing for people  attempting to enter Australia illegally by boat.  

 Any asylum claims they may have will be assessed in Nauru. 

 The transfer of these illegal arrivals will send a strong message to those  considering any attempt to enter Australia illegally. 

 Health and identity checks have been completed and the men will be  transferred by charter aircraft. 

 They will be accommodated in Nauru under the existing Memorandum of  Understanding between the Australian and Nauruan governments, reflecting  the continuing strong cooperation between the two governments on regional  security. 

 The Government, in transferring this group to Nauru, acknowledges Nauru’s  continued cooperation.  

 While in this case it was decided that transferring the group to Nauru was the  best option, the Government appreciates the continuing close and effective  cooperation with Indonesia on border security. 

 Two Indonesian crew members who were on board the vessel appeared in a  Perth court this week charged with offences under the Migration Act. They  were remanded in custody to reappear in court next month. 

 The trade of people smuggling is dangerous, repugnant and illegal. 

 The Australian Government has successfully stemmed the influx of  unauthorised boat arrivals through strong border security. There have been  less than 250 boat arrivals since January 2002, compared to some 12 000 in  the preceding two-and-a-half years. 

 The Government is determined to protect and secure our borders, maintaining  the integrity of our immigration system. 

 Media enquiries:  Kate Walshe 0421 588 794 (Andrews)  Tony Parkinson (02) 62777500 (Downer) 

 

