---
title: "Indonesians on Christmas Island to be returned home."
date: "2007-12-07"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211312664
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M17P6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Indonesians on Christmas Island to be returned home 

 Friday, 7 December 2007 

 A group of 16 Indonesians currently detained on Christmas Island will be  returned to Indonesia following the completion of interviews and health  checks, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans,  announced today. 

 'My department has carefully explored with the group their reasons for  travelling to Australia,' Senator Evans said.  

 'On the information provided, my department is satisfied that they have not  raised issues which might engage Australia's protection obligations.  

 'This represents a firm but fair approach to the orderly migration of people to  Australia. 

 'These people have been treated fairly and they have been dealt with  appropriately - but they simply have not engaged our protection obligations  under the Refugees Convention. 

 'I am a great supporter of the Refugees Convention and Australia is after all  among the top three refugee resettlement countries in the world,' he said. 

 The 16 Indonesians were transferred to Christmas Island for assessment after  the Royal Australian Navy rescued them from a wooden boat near an oil  platform 650km west of Darwin on November 20. 

 They arrived at Christmas Island on November 25. The three families from  Roti have been detained in the community following completion of health  checks and Department of Immigration and Citizenship interviews. 

 'My department is making arrangements to return the group, in coordination  with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Indonesian  government, as soon as possible,' the minister said. 

 Senator Evans said the handling of the group demonstrated the Australian  Government's commitment to dealing with unauthorised boat arrivals in a  timely and effective manner. 

 'Maintaining Australia's orderly and successful migration program requires  effective compliance and enforcement,' the minister said. 

 'However, people from other countries do not have a right to stay in Australia  just because they would economically be better off here,' he added. 

 Media enquiries: Tim Friedrich 0417 753 219 

 

 Last update: 07 December 2007 at 16:06 AEST  

