---
title: "Heffernan's 'Asian invasion' comments just alarmist pre-election nonsense."
date: "2007-10-03"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211310447
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F0HO6%22
---

 Media Statement  Wednesday 3rd October 2007

 

 SENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT  Queensland Democrat Senator  QUEENSLAND’S ONLY INDEPENDENT VOICE IN THE SENATE 

 

 Heffernan’s ‘Asian Invasion’ comments just alarmist pre-election  nonsense   

 

 Queensland Democrat Senator Andrew Bartlett says reported comments by Liberal Party powerbroker and  Prime Ministerial confidante Bill Heffernan that we need to develop and settle northern Australia or climate  change refugees from Asia might are just alarmist pre-election nonsense.   

 “The notion that we’ve got to ‘get in first’ before the Asians do is a throwback to the discredited ‘populate or  perish’ mantra from the White Australia days,” Senator Bartlett said.   

 “If climate change does cause catastrophe in Indonesia or Bangladesh or anywhere else, it will create a  humanitarian and regional crisis, regardless of whether we already have more heavy settlement of northern  Australia or not.   

 “People from south-east Asia have lived in, traded with and settled in parts of northern Australia since before  British colonisation.    

 “It is about time we stopped making decisions on the basis of irrational fears, and looking at what is  ecologically and economically sensible instead.   

 “We currently have over 150 000 new settlers coming to Australia every year, and well over double that again  coming here on various other long-term residency visas. It wouldn’t be a bad thing if they settled in a more  diverse range of locations than they currently do, but that has nothing to do with some sort of security issue.   

 “The bigger threat to northern Australia comes from people down south wanting to exploit its resources for  financial gain without giving due thought to protection of the ecological and Indigenous cultural values of the  region.   

 “Just because we have buggered up the southern part of the continent with bad land management practices  doesn’t mean we should shift up north and do the same thing, and we certainly shouldn’t be doing it because  of the notion that if we don’t somebody else will,” Senator Bartlett concluded.    

 

 Media contact - Tracee McPate - 0417 607 655   

 Electoral office: Suite 14 B1, 7/421 Brunswick St, Fortitude Valley, QLD 4006  t: 07 3252 7101  local call cost (Qld): 1300 301 879   f: 07 3252 8957  e: senator.bartlett@aph.gov.au   web: www.andrewbartlett.com   

 

