---
title: "A different kind of hero."
date: "2007-01-26"
creators:
  - "Davis, Glyn"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "Victoria"
  - "Secondary schools"
  - "Australia Day"
  - "Curriculum"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Teachers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211302696
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/THDM6%22
---

 Australia Day Speech  26 January 2007  Parliament House, Melbourne   

 A Different Kind of Hero   

 Glyn Davis 

 Vice-Chancellor, The University of Melbourne   

 Australia Day is an invitation to celebrate heroes - those extraordinary  people who together made possible our large and successful society.   

 At Australia Day breakfasts across this nation, speakers right now will be  describing the people they believe matter in our national story - the  famous, the notorious, the quietly achieving.   

 I too have some heroes I come to praise this morning, unlikely candidates  who get little recognition for their contribution - indeed people who find  themselves regularly pilloried in public discussion, despite their  importance in our Australian story.   

 Before starting, though, please let me thank those who kindly asked me to  speak today - above all Alan Castleman, Chair of Australian Unity, a  company with its origins in the Australian Natives’ Association, and so  with proud historical connections back into the nineteenth century.     

 Organisations such as the Australian Natives’ Association helped create  modern Australia, by campaigning hard for federation and for the  establishment of Australia Day.   

 Less often mentioned is the significant contribution of the Association to  school, vocational and university education across the country.   

 And on this Australia Day, it is a singular pleasure to speak on a morning  when the Honours list includes my wife, Professor Margaret Gardner,  made an Officer in the Order of Australia for her services to scholarship,  education and industrial relations.   

 Any speaker on Australia Day must begin by acknowledging the  traditional owners of the land on which we meet.     

 The lives of Indigenous Australians were profoundly and irrevocably  altered when the first fleet arrived in Botany Bay on 18 January 1788, 

  2

 only to discover it offered no protected anchorage, no fertile grasslands,  no fresh water.   

 As Robert Hughes records in The Fatal Shore, crowds of Aborigines  gathered around the Bay, waving spears and shouting ‘warra warra’, or  ‘go away’.   

 Two hundred and nineteen years later, a meaningful partnership between  we new arrivals and the first Australians is yet to be accomplished.  It  remains pressing business for us all.  So in acknowledging the traditional  owners I know, like everyone in this great gathering, that more than  words is required.   

 With Botany Bay unpromising, on 26 January Captain Arthur Phillip  sailed north to Port Jackson, where he found, as he famously said in a  letter to Lord Sydney, ‘… the finest harbour in the world, in which a  thousand sail of the line may ride with the most perfect security’.     

 With just 11 ships and around 1,350 people under his protection, Captain  Phillip waded ashore at a place he named Sydney Cove, to establish the  first British colony in Australia.      

 It is that act, and all that followed - settlement, expansion across the  mountains, gold rushes and droughts, the federation of colonies into a  nation, prosperity, depression, war, peace and the prospect of 

 reconciliation - we celebrate today.   

 And though the symbols of Australia Day often suggest otherwise, with  soldiers and sports stars to the fore, it is in fact a political triumph we  celebrate.     

 By slow degrees a collection of colonies became a self-governing nation.   Those who came before created in this place a democracy that welcomed  others to its shores, that awarded each citizen the right to vote in open and  free elections, that committed to equality of treatment before the law, that  respected privacy so we can each live the life we value.   

 It sounds odd to suggest that Australia Day should be about celebrating a  political settlement, but it remains our greatest achievement.     

 The problem of how to live together has eluded many through history.   Discord and civil strife have defined - and ended - so many lives.   

  3

 Indeed the great subject matter of political philosophy has been this  fundamental question of how people with different beliefs and goals can  avoid tearing each other apart.     

 Plato recommended an absolute monarch, a philosopher-king, to keep  men in check.  Thomas Hobbes too believed a powerful central authority  was essential to prevent life becoming ‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and  short’.   

 In his monumental history of the decline and fall of Rome, Edward  Gibbon concluded that the inability of the Romans to agree on an  acceptable form of government fatally weakened, and so made  vulnerable, the Empire.      

 As today we welcome refugees from civil war in the Sudan and  elsewhere, we recall again our great fortune in finding a way of  governing ourselves that makes Australia, in every sense, a civil society.   

 A democracy works when it becomes habit, the daily and unexamined  routine of us all.  When values we profess in public speeches - respect,  equity, a fair go - are echoed in private discussion.     

 Democracy rests on mutual respect and self-restraint, learned early and  ingrained through long practice.   

 So we celebrate Australia Day not because we are special, or chosen, or  green and gold, or even because we are diverse and multicultural.     

 What we celebrate, simply but profoundly, is that Australians have  created a society in which each citizen can live a rich and meaningful life.     

 Faced with the ancient question ‘how should we govern ourselves?’  we’ve found our answer - not perfect, not always living up to our  aspirations, but the foundation nonetheless for a working representative  democracy.   

 It is a system of self-government reinforced by our legal and political  institutions, reflected in the political passions of our citizens, accepted as  legitimate by the networks of public associations, private companies,  voluntary organisations and family, ethnic and religious groups that make  up Australian society.   

  4

 Democracy is underpinned by assumptions we take for granted - that, for  example, every Australian can read and write and so participate in public  life.   

 

 Our political system presumes, without much examination, that  Australians understand the purpose and operation of democracy, the value  of free expression, the importance of the rule of law, the intrinsic rights of  every person.       

 There was a time, of course, when such assumptions could not be made -  when education and literacy were not universal, when essential civic  knowledge might not be absorbed at school, to be carried through life.     

 We had to learn how to live together in peace, and we did so in large part  through education.   

 The first Australian schools appeared soon after settlement in Sydney,  supervised by chaplains.  They relied on five convicts assigned to teach.   No government funds were offered to support education, suggesting the  reach of such schools was probably erratic and incomplete.   

 Attempts at reform in the early nineteenth century founded on the  question of who should run education - state or church.  A compromise in  the National Education Board Act of 1848 established two school  systems in New South Wales - one denominational and the other  government-run, setting a pattern still familiar across Australia.   Education though remained voluntary, determined in many cases by the  economic circumstances of parents.   

 It was here in Victoria that reformers first pressed the case that a  democracy requires education for all.  A visionary Premier - James  Goodall Francis, Chief Secretary of Victoria from June 1872 to July 1874  - pushed through the necessary law.     

 A businessman, Francis represented Richmond in the Victorian  Legislative Assembly.  A moderate in a sometimes bitterly divided  Parliament, Francis held together a ministry for two years with a program 

 of often innovative legislation.   

 In 1872 he proposed, and saw passed, the Victorian Education Act, the  first in the world to set up a centralised public school system based on the  principles of free, secular and compulsory education.   With this  legislation, ahead of similar moves elsewhere in Australia, Britain, 

  5

 Canada and the United States, the colony of Victoria created government  schools that would educate all children for their future lives.     

 The philosophy underpinning the Education Act was simple and clear.   Victorian children would attend school because literacy and numeracy  matter for a productive life but, even more, because self-government  requires educated citizens who can understand, analyse and participate in  public life.  Schools would become the cradle of citizenship.   

 The Victorian lead was followed over the next twenty years across  Australia.  By the time of the federation debates in the 1890s, almost  every Australian child could read and write, knew something of the  history of this continent, and could bring an informed and independent  mind to the great issue of nationhood.   

 In the years following federation, a further wave of educational reform  improved the quality of schools and teacher training.   

 Here in Victoria, the extraordinary work of Frank Tate, a teacher at Box  Hill and then inspector for the Mallee district, exemplified the  commitment to improve education.  Tate introduced new teaching  methods then gaining popularity in Britain.  He encouraged debate about  teaching within unions and professional societies, and through the pages  of The Age.     

 Eventually appointed Director of Education for Victoria, Tate applied his  considerable energy to reforming school administration, expanding the  network of secondary schools and encouraging professional training for  teachers.  He forced a reluctant University of Melbourne to introduce the  state’s first diploma of teaching.   

 Other eminent Victorians made important contributions to ensuring the  educated population we now take for granted.   

 Charles Pearson, for example, the first Headmaster of Presbyterian Ladies  College, believed that girls should have access to an education at least  equivalent to boys, and worked hard to make this possible. 

 

 Pearson’s inaugural professorial lecture in 1875, entitled ‘The Higher  Culture of Women’ argued the case for women to be admitted not just to  secondary schooling but to university - a viewpoint resisted by Victoria’s 

 only university until 1880, when women were admitted to all degrees 

  6

 except medicine.  Today, women outnumber men in school completion  and university participation - including medical courses.   

 A similar concern to create an educated population able to take on the  rigours of self-government inspired one of the greatest acts of  philanthropy in colonial Victoria, when Francis Ormond donated a  considerable part of his fortune to create the Workingman’s College in  1887, the foundation of the modern RMIT.   

 But paying attention just to the education leaders can overlook the most  essential element of a successful education system - great teachers.   

 The great examples of how schools help create an educated and informed  citizenry are not confined to the distant past.  School teachers remain the  unacknowledged legislators of every generation. 

 

 Take, for example, the work of Debney Park Secondary College in  equipping a new generation for citizenship.      

 This small and unassuming College sits near Flemington in the  Melbourne suburbs, under the leadership of Brett New for many years,  and now with Michael O’Brien as the inspiring school principal.  Over  the gate is the school motto - ‘Towards Equity and Excellence  - Every  Child Matters’.   

 The Debney Park catchment area includes large communities of Somali  and Sudanese refugees.  Many are very recent arrivals.  Margaret Simons  (2006) reports that ‘in their home country most had been semi-nomadic  peasants’.  There are some 43 different nationalities among the school’s  340 students.  ‘Some arrived without ever having held a pen or handled a 

 book’.  More than half live in public housing, and some children arrive at  the school suffering post-traumatic shock.   

 ‘And yet’, notes Simons, ‘almost beyond belief’ the school consistently  sees about a quarter of its VCE students achieving ENTER scores above  80.  In the most recent VCE round, more than 10 percent of Debney Park  Secondary College students earned ENTER scores over 90.   

 A 2005 Victorian Department of Education On Track survey of Debney  Park graduates a year after completing school found that 96 percent had  gone onto tertiary education or training.  The remainder were in  employment or apprenticeships.  None was unemployed.     

  7

 Though data from 2006 were not as positive, the school continues to post  exceptional results.   

 Debney Park Secondary College is an example of a small and  disadvantaged school that inspires its students to learn.  The school is not  afraid to look outward for support and advice - to other local schools, to  business organisations such as the Boston Consulting Group, and to the  Faculty of Education and the Victorian College of the Arts at the  University of Melbourne.   

 This year, the College hopes to launch an international exchange  program, again encouraging its pupils to look beyond their immediate  circumstances to the possibilities beyond the school gate.   

 The strong performance of Debney Park graduates once they reach  university is testament to their excellent schooling and to their impressive  determination to overcome personal and social obstacles.   

 This small example - one of many from our education system - shows  that with imagination, hard work and community support, a school can  make a huge difference to those it serves.  Refugees from societies that  have fallen into traumatic civil war find calm, opportunity and  encouragement in one of those free, secular and compulsory schools  bequeathed to Victoria more than a century ago.   

 Every student at Debney Park Secondary College has an individual  learning program.  The school runs extra literacy programs.  It has  constructed a soundhouse to promote student learning, engagement and  wellbeing.  Parents are closely involved through the Debney Advisory  Group.  The teachers are talented and committed.  They have created,  with their pupils, a culture of learning.     

 As Principal Michael O’Brien says, ‘It is simply the best environment to  work in.  The most wonderful job you could ever have’.   

 As reporter Margaret Simons wandered through the school, she observed  African boys playing, the variety of headscarves worn by the girls, the  defiant but impeccably polite graffiti.  She sat in on a Year 10 class  learning about the Australian political system:   

 They know who the Prime Minister is.  They are less clear on the  leader of the Opposition.  Is it Mark Latham, one asks, ‘the man  who wrote the book’?  They know about Steve Bracks, the Premier 

  8

 of Victoria, because he is Lebanese.  One student carries on about  this so much that the teacher jokes with him that he must want to  be Lebanese.   

 ‘No, Miss’, he replies.  ‘I want to be white’.   

 The year 11 class includes three students who are fasting for Ramadan as  they study, by their own choice, 10 Things I Hate About You, a modern  retelling of Shakespeare’s Taming of the Shrew.  The students dissect the  morals underpinning this high school movie about the perils of dating, in  which everyone is beautiful, smart, middle class and very white.  They  identify the values promoted by the American film makers, but draw their  own, different, conclusions.   

 The work of Michael O’Brien and his team at Debney Park shows that  the work of education in support of citizenship continues today in  Australia.   

 School teaching is often thankless work, noticed at best in the classroom  and by parents.  Yet Debney Park Secondary College, like public and  private schools across this State and nation, quietly builds our democracy.  

 Schools ensure the latest arrivals to this nation can share the inheritance,  understand the values, and be part of shaping the future.   

 So here is my modest Australia Day proposal:  when we next talk about  nation builders, about famous sports stars, successful entrepreneurs,  leading politicians, let’s recall who does the work, every day, to sustain  the foundations of democratic Australia.   

 You would not guess that contribution from public discussion.  School  teachers are routinely criticised rather than praised when education is  discussed.     

 Australians apparently little value the dedication and the contribution of  school teachers.  We are unlikely to contemplate a National Teachers  Day, as happens through much of Asia, when adults take a flower to the  teacher at school or university who most inspired them.   

 Instead, school teachers get attacked all the time - by politicians, by  newspaper columnists, by people who should know better.   

  9

 As Professor Sue Willis, President of the Australian Council of Deans of  Education, observed just last week, the current sport of bagging teachers  will see fewer young people make teaching their career of choice.   

 ‘The capacity to attract our brightest and best young people into teaching  … is directly related to the way (the profession) is constructed both in the  media and by politicians’ Professor Willis told the Sunday Age (Hagan  2000).   

 ‘It’s absolutely clear that we have downturns in application rates (for  university courses) and an increased loss of teachers from the profession,  when they are constantly being slammed’.   

 ‘… If we really want to attract the brightest and best into state schools’,  she concluded, ‘we’ve got to start talking them up’.   

 She’s right.  Teachers get blamed for problems in the education system  more properly sheeted home to poor rates of pay, lack of equipment and  inadequate facilities.  We characterise teachers as unionised ratbags rather  than as a profession like lawyers or doctors.   

 Our kindergarten teachers are often the first great formative influence  beyond the family.  School is usually our first experience of working with  a group of strangers around shared goals, of living alongside difference.   School gives us a glimpse of something bigger than ourselves and our  immediate circle.     

 These early lessons make it possible to live together as adults.   Research  by Jan Pakulski and Bruce Tranter (2000) demonstrates a clear  correlation between levels of education and civic identity as an  Australian.   

 ‘Aussie values’ are not innate.  We learn them, along with multiplication  tables and critical reasoning.    

 So next time a public speaker takes a cheap shot at school teachers,  reflect for a moment on just how much our political system, our way of  associating, our peaceful streets and national consensus about the norms  of public life, are learned from teachers like those today at Debney Park  Secondary College.   

  10

 And when next reminded how some of our poorest schools struggle to  cover costs, recall just how fundamental their work is to our way of life.   As the motto says, Every Child Matters.   

 Democracies are fragile.  They endure only when the rules about living  together are understood and accepted.    

 We learn those rules from our families and those who do the essential but  unrecognised work of fostering democracy from the ground up - our  teachers.   

 The value of education is more than skills learned and employability.  Great teaching changes lives.  It sees the potential in students, respects  their ability, inspires a passion for learning, provides the young with a 

 trustworthy setting in which to set aside personal fears.  In the words of  Andrew Metcalfe and Ann Game (2006:xiv-xv), great teaching is an  invitation to open the mind, the introduction to a ‘full life’. 

 

 Teaching is the preparation of the next generation to take on the burden  of self-government.  Through education we transmit, to those who will  follow, the knowledge, the virtues, the values necessary to preserve and  carry forward our democratic society.   

 It is patient teachers, and willing students, who together will turn the 43  nationalities at Debney Park into great Australians - just as they have all  we migrants who went before.     

 Teachers are, for me, the heroes of this and every Australia Day.   

 They need our support - moral and practical.   

 For in the words of Harvard President Derek Bok, ‘if you think education  is expensive, try ignorance’.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  11

 

 Acknowledgements   

 With thanks for assistance and comments to Neville Buch, Margaret  Gardner, Larry Kamener, Andrew Norton, Michael O’Brien, John Polesel  and Field Rickards.   

 

 References   

 Hagan, K.   2007.  ‘Criticism Endangers Teaching’, Sunday Age, 21  January 2007, 8.   

 Metcalfe, A. and A. Game.  2006.  Teachers Who Change Lives,  Melbourne University Press.   

 Pakulski, J. and B. Tranter.  2000.  ‘Civic Identity in Australia’,  Australian Journal of Social Issues, 35:1, 35-51.   

 Simons, M.  2006.  ‘Beyond the Comfort Zone’, Griffith Review 11:   Getting Smart - the battle for ideas in education. 

