---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Commonwealth Parliament Offices, Sydney: 23 February 2007: meeting with Vice President Cheney; protestors; Christmas Island; asylum seekers."
date: "2007-02-23"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "meeting with Vice President Cheney"
  - "protestors"
  - "Christmas Island"
  - "asylum seekers."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303529
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8ZAM6%22
---

 FEDERAL LABOR LEADER  KEVIN RUDD MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENT OFFICES,  SYDNEY, 23 FEBRUARY 2007   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:   Meeting  with  Vice  President Cheney; Protestors;  Christmas Island; Iraq; Asylum seekers   

 RUDD:  I’ll be meeting with the United States Vice President, Mr  Cheney, later today.  The United States Vice President is a welcome guest in  Australia, any Vice President of the United States is a welcome guest in Australia  and the reason for that is we have an alliance with America which goes back  some 65 years, supported by both sides of politics.  I’ll be having discussions  with the US Vice President later today and I look forward to those discussions.     

 The sorts of topics, of course, and the contents of those discussions will be a  confidential talk between the Vice President and myself but obviously the full  range of our bilateral and regional and global interests will be on the table.  We’ll  be discussing the Asia Pacific region and China and North Korea.  We’ll also be  discussing the Middle East, Iran, Iraq and, of course, the challenges in  Afghanistan.  Then, of course, there’ll be the question of climate change, Mr  Hicks, and the US Free Trade Agreement and the interests of Australian sugar  farmers.  On the content of the conversation, it’s convention that this remains  confidential and that’ll be the case as far as this is concerned as well.   

 But I emphasise again, that this will be a good opportunity for a discussion with  the United States Vice President.  He is a welcome guest in our country and I  look forward to this meeting very much.   

 JOURNALIST: What, in particular, will you be brining up with Mr Hicks?   

 RUDD:  Well, I don’t intend to foreshadow the precise content of  what I will say to the United States Vice President.  The position of the Australian  Labor Party on the questions that I’ve just run through is well documented and  well known.  So, I simply look forward to the opportunity of raising these matters  with Vice President Cheney.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you say that Dick Cheney is welcome here in  Australia.  The protestors would suggest otherwise.  What do you think about  what’s been going on these past 24 hours?   

 RUDD:  I’ve seen some of this footage overnight.  Among these  protestors we see a bunch of violent ferals and they should expect absolutely no  sympathy from the police.  You see, in Australia we do things peacefully.  If  we’ve got different points of view we should be putting those points of view  peacefully and in the normal fashion, peaceful forms of expression of different  views.  There’s no place for violence in this country, and what I’ve seen is a lot of  violence and it’s unacceptable.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you think about some of the lengths that have been  gone to just to make Mr Cheney feel welcome?   

 RUDD:  Well, these are entirely appropriate.  The United States is  the world’s remaining superpower.  It’s been our closest ally for the last 65 years,  supported in that alliance by governments both Labor and Liberal, over 12 US  Presidents and 13 or 14 Australian Prime Ministers.  For that reason, the  President of the United States and the Vice President of the United States are  always welcome guests in this country and always will be.  It’s entirely  appropriate that all appropriate steps are taken to make sure that his visit is  conducted successfully.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, if you were elected Prime Minister, would you  expect the same treatment on your visits to Washington?   

 RUDD:  First of all, there’s a long way to go between now and the  next election.  And I’m always confident that our American friends and our friends  across the world treat visits by any Australian head of government appropriately.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there are 85 men who are now on a Navy vessel,  presumably about to claim asylum.  Should they processed on Nauru, on  Christmas Island, or should they be brought to Australia?   

 RUDD:  Well, on the facts concerning this case, I notice that Mr  Hockey, the Cabinet Minister of the Government, the Howard Government, today  was reluctant to comment on the detail of the case.  I’d much prefer to have all  those details myself on the table before commenting on their particular  circumstances.  I think the Australian Navy, based on the reports I’ve seen so far,  have been handing this matter entirely professionally.   

 JOURNALIST: But what would Labor’s policy be in such a circumstance?   

 RUDD:  Well, on the question of people being interdicted, the  question you raise is under what circumstance.  Now, I don’t know the facts  concerning these individuals, nor do I know the facts concerning what they have  said to the Australian Navy officers concerned.  Once those facts are  established, then of course we will know how our policy applies to those factual  circumstances.  Tony Burke, the Shadow Immigration Minister, will make an 

 appropriate statement once all those facts are established.  Other than that,  we’re speculating on hypothesis.   

 JOURNALIST: Given that, as yet, to the best of our knowledge, they are yet  to claim asylum, should they specifically not be brought to Australia?   

 RUDD:  The immediate circumstances, based on the reports that I’ve  seen as to whether this vessel is seaworthy or not and how this is best, therefore,  attended to by the Australian Navy.  Based on the reports that I’ve seen, the  Navy have acted entirely properly.  On the other facts concerning this, that is  what they have said to Australian authorities concerning asylum seeking or  claiming refugee status or whatever, I do not know those details yet.  We haven’t  received a factual briefing.  Once Tony Burke, the Shadow Minister, as received  it, then of course he’ll make a full statement on how our policy would apply to  these circumstances.   

 JOURNALIST:  Would your policy be to have them processed on shore or  off shore?   

 RUDD:  Again, it depends on the circumstances.  We don’t know  whether they have applied for asylum and what they have said, therefore, to the  Naval officers concerned.  Let’s establish all that clearly first up because you  cannot simply comment on a range of different hypothesis which may exist.  We  believe in a very hard line on the question of people smuggling, a very tough line  on people smuggling.  If people smugglers are involved in this sort of case, then  we believe that you have to take a hard line with it.  Of course, when it comes to  people being imperilled on the high seas, the Navy has acted appropriately in  dealing with this circumstance.   

 JOURNALIST: In general, should asylum seekers be processed in Australia  or off shore?   

 RUDD:  Well, on the question of where people are processed, it  depends entirely upon where (a) they make their application, and (b) whether it is  on Australian territory or whether it is in fact at sea, and if so, where at sea.  And  in these circumstances, these factual circumstances, let’s see what the facts of  the case present otherwise you ask us to speculate on factual circumstances  which we’re not fully briefed on.     

 JOURNALIST: But what is Labor’s policy in this area, regardless of the  circumstances in this specific case?   

 RUDD:  Labor’s policy is that if people are interdicted on the high  seas, then these vessels should be turned around.  If people are on the high  seas and then indicate that they are going to seek asylum in Australia because 

 they are fleeing persecution from the country which they’ve just come, then they  should be taken to Christmas Island for processing.  That’s our policy.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on Iraq, should you become Prime Minister later in  the year and hypothetically speaking of course, when would you make the call for  the first Australian troops to be brought back to Australia?   

 RUDD:  The first thing I would do is make contact with the  Government of the United States and the Government of Iraq.  And in terms of  what to do with Australia’s combat forces it would depend the point of which that  force had reached in its then current rotation.  Rotations are normally about six  month’s duration, say we’re half way through that rotation by then, but that  depends on military circumstances at the time of when those troops went in.  My  intention would be then to discuss a staged withdrawal of those forces with the  Iraqis and with the Americans.  I’ve also said that you wouldn’t want to leave the  Iraqis, the Americans immediately in the lurch and it may be necessary for them  to complete a further rotation of some six months in order to allow transition  arrangements to occur.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you think about Brendan Nelson’s comment that the  war as already been lost?   

 RUDD:  I’ve seen those reports overnight and I’m stunned by them -  I’m stunned by them.  Mr Howard’s Defence Minister is now saying that there is  no possibility of military victory in Iraq.  So why is Mr Howard sending more 

 Australian troops to Iraq?  It’s pretty basic.  I also note that there are comments,  reported comments from Mr Howard’s Defence Minister today likening Iraq to  Kokoda.  The Battle of Kokoda went for some seven months and Australia won  that battle with great heroism.  The war in Iraq has now gone on for four years  and the Defence Minister is now telling us we can never win that war.  Where is  the parallel between the two?   

 JOURNALIST: Would you make a pledge to have some of the Australian  troops back by Christmas, before Christmas if you were in power?   

 RUDD:  My undertaking is clear-cut that if a Labor Government is  elected I would then initiate discussions with the Americans and the Iraqis on a  staged withdrawal process consistent with the Baker-Hamilton Plan, which was  put forward by former Republican Secretary of State, James Baker.  A plan, I  also hasten to add, has already been supported by the British Government of  Prime Minister Blair.  That’s the way which we would go, consistent with the  policy statements that I’ve made so far.  Again with Mr Howard, his problem is  this: If Prime Minister Blair has a staged withdrawal strategy from Iraq, why can’t  Australia have one?  If the Danes, who are also allies of the United States, have  a withdrawal strategy for Iraq, then why can’t Australia have one?  If other US 

 allies, such as the Netherlands, Spain, South Korea and Japan can have exit  strategies from Iraq, why can’t Australia have one?  These are questions which Mr Howard has yet to answer.  JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you briefly about water if everyone’s finished  on Iraq.  The meeting today, have you made any further attempts to contact the  Premiers, particularly the belligerent ones like Premier Bracks and urge him to  support Howard’s plan?   

 RUDD:  The meeting today between Mr Howard and the Premiers is  of course a matter for them and what I said a couple of weeks ago, is that I would  try and assist in the meantime to bridge the gap and narrow the differences  between the States and Canberra.  What I did last night was I had a  teleconference with Premiers Rann and Beattie and Iemma on their position and  encouraged them to take a positive approach to today’s meeting to try and  fashion an agreement - that’s what I’ve done from the outset.  Remember a  couple of weeks ago there was only one Premier, Mr Iemma, who was 

 expressing support for this plan, since then we’ve had considerable movement  on the parts of Premiers Rann and Beattie.  And in the case of Victoria, Victoria  has a set of special circumstances, very complex circumstances concerning legal  rights to water which will take some further time to resolve between Canberra  and Melbourne.     

 JOURNALIST: Will each State have to grapple with some form of  compromise?   

 RUDD:  Well that’s a matter for Mr Howard and the Premiers as they  meet today.  What I said a couple of weeks is I would try and do my bit from the  margins to try and narrow some of these differences and I think with two or three  of the States, that has occurred.  Of course that’s no guarantee of agreement in  itself, I hope there is one and what I’ve said repeatedly is: I support Mr Howard’s  overall framework for bringing about a national solution to the Murray-Darling.  In  the last couple of weeks we’ve seen a narrowing of the gap between New South  Wales, South Australia and Queensland and there are still challenges ahead  when it comes to Victoria.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just quickly in terms of the local election here in  New South Wales, you’re not playing any real role, would you like to be helping  out Morris Iemma in one shape or form?   

 RUDD:  I’m actually in New South Wales quite a lot and I met with  Morris Iemma yesterday and had a long discussion with him about water, so I will  be doing whatever I can on the ground to assist his campaign to be re-elected as  Premier.  Let me say this about Morris:  Morris is a decent bloke, very good  bloke, I know him well I think he’ll continue to make a very good Premier of New  South Wales.   

 JOURNALIST: Has he asked for your help?   

 RUDD:  When it comes to practical matters like water, then of course  we’ve been dealing a lot on the ground with the sort of concerns that he has for  the Murray-Darling and more broadly, some of the water resource projects for  New South Wales.  Remember Mr Howard has sat on a nearly $2 billion Water  Fund, called the Australian Water Fund for nearly three years.  Many practical  water resource projects put forward by State Governments, including New South  Wales, haven’t attracted significant Federal funding yet.  What’s my job?  To try  and act in the public debate to leverage Canberra to support practical water  resource projects like that.  In the last week or so I’ve done that with water  resource projects in Queensland, in South Australia and in Western Australia, Mr  Howard should lift his game here in New South Wales as well.   

 JOURNALIST: What’s your response to the personal attack from Mr Howard  that you’re getting a bit full of yourself?   

 RUDD:  Look, I’m not into all of that, all I’m concerned about is how  we put forward our positive plans for Australia’s future.  The Education  Revolution, climate change and water, ending the blame game between  Canberra and the States and what do we do to assist with our major cities  through our Major Cities Program with critical infrastructure, transport  infrastructure, water resource infrastructure and things like broad banding to  make life in our major cities better than it is.     

 ends   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

