---
title: "Geelong to welcome Karen families."
date: "2007-08-01"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211307945
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZZYN6%22
---

 

 Teresa Gambaro MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Media Centre  Geelong to welcome Karen families 

 Wednesday, 1 August 2007 

 Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Teresa Gambaro has  congratulated the Geelong community for its continuing support for Australia’s  most vulnerable new arrivals - refugees and humanitarian entrants. 

 ‘Regional communities provide a warm welcome to newly-arrived migrants,’  Ms Gambaro said. 

 ‘They can offer intensive support and friendship for these families, many of  whom have experienced great hardship and trauma.’  

 Ms Gambaro said Geelong had a history of welcoming families from a wide  range of ethnic backgrounds, including the Karen people, an ethnic minority  from Burma. 

 Five more Karen Burmese families will arrive in Geelong this month. 

 ‘These families will have an opportunity to start a new life in one of Australia’s  most vibrant regional cities,’ Ms Gambaro said. 

 ‘Planning for their arrival has been under way for some time and has been  strongly supported by the Greater Geelong City Council, the Australian Karen  Organisation, local service providers and community groups’. 

 ‘The new arrivals will be given a range of assistance under the Australian  Government’s Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy [IHSS], including  help finding accommodation and a package of goods to set up a household. 

 ‘Adult Migrant Education Services [AMES] - the Government’s IHSS service  provider in Victoria - has consulted with people who will assist the refugees  including real estate agents, English language tuition providers, schools and  doctors. 

 ‘The Australian Government is committed to working in partnership with local  communities for the successful settlement of refugees,’ Ms Gambaro said.  

 Media Enquiries: Dean Savage (Ms Gambaro’s Office) 0438 171 330 

 

