---
title: "Terrorists only fly on jets?"
date: "2007-08-16"
creators:
  - "Bevis, Arch"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOMELAND SECURITY, JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS, AND TERRITORIES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211308508
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NF0O6%22
---

  ’: Media Release 

  Hon. Arch Bevis MP  Federal Member for Brisbane  Shadow Minister for Homeland Security;  Justice and Customs, and Territories. 

  TERRORISTS ONLY FLY ON JETS?  “The Minister for Transport Mark Vaile sat mute when challenged to give an assurance that  aviation security gaps will be fixed before the APEC conference,” said Labor‘s Homeland  Security spokesman Arch Bevis. 

  “Inexplicably the Government have provided hand-held metal detection wands but has made it  illegal for regional airport staff to use them. 

  “The Government’s regulations for non-jet commercial flights prevent airport operators or  airlines using hand-held wands to screen passengers unless there is a specific instruction  from the Secretary of the Department of Transport. 

  “In Parliament yesterday, Mr Bevis sought a commitment from Mr Vaile: 

  I would like to be assured that at least these problems have been addressed insofar as 

  Sydney is concerned for the period of APEC.. .. We need to fix these problems  systemically, and I strongly encourage the Minister to do that. 

  “The Government seem to have the view that criminals, terrorists and people who want  to do nasty things onlyfly on jet planes. 

  “Terrorists by their very nature exploit security gaps and there is no evidence that they are so  discerning that they refuse to fly on commercial propeller flights. 

  “A few years ago the Government tried to convince Australians that terrorists came on leaky  boats pretending to be refugees. Now they pretend that terrorists fly on jef aircraft only. 

  “The Government was been warned by their own aviation security expert Sir John Wheeler to  fix security on propeller flights from regional Australia. 

  “Labor has also repeatedly called on the Government to upgrade security on regional propeller  flights arriving at capital city airports. 

  “Despite these warnings, each week around 900 flights arrive at Australian capital city airports  where passengers and their carry-on luggage are not screened for bombs, weapons or guns,”  said Mr Bevis today. 

  16 August 2007 Further information: Jason Soderblom 0409 374 900 

