---
title: "Cooperation with Indonesia makes life harder for people smugglers."
date: "2007-05-03"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211539707
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0A6N6%22
---

 

 Kevin Andrews MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 

 Cooperation with Indonesia makes life harder for people  smugglers 

 Thursday, 3 May 2007 

 This week I visited Indonesia and met with my counterpart, Law and Human  Rights Minister Dr Hamid Awaludin, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs,  Dr Hassan Wirajuda, and key officials and stakeholders to discuss joint  initiatives to detect and prevent threats to our borders.  

 It was a highly successful visit, and I am delighted to announce a range of  initiatives to combat people smuggling.  

 One of the major initiatives is a proposal to establish a joint Australian-Indonesian task force of immigration and police agencies aimed at increasing  detection, investigation and prosecution of people smugglers. Senior  government officials will meet in Jakarta later this month to progress this  proposal and to establish operational arrangements for the task force. 

 To detect and deter people smugglers as well as terrorists, Australia and  Indonesia are introducing a new and highly sophisticated movement alert  detection systems at major ports in Indonesia. The project is designed in a  way that appropriate systems can be installed at smaller entry points after the  initial rollout. 

 The Australian Government will provide further funding of $450 000 to the  Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The  funding will allow UNHCR to employ additional staff and conduct more  refugee status determinations in Indonesia.  

 The International Organization for Migration will receive Australian  Government funding of more than $7 million to improve the level of care and  support for illegal arrivals in detention in Indonesia. These arrangements  provide a safe and humane alternative to unsafe and illegal maritime ventures  promoted by people smugglers.  

 People smuggling is a regional problem. These measures are part of the  ongoing development of a regional solution. 

 Media enquiries: Kate Walshe 0421 588 794  

 

