---
title: "Polar bear activist brings serious climate refugee message."
date: "2007-07-11"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211306534
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6LQN6%22
---

 

 

   Christine Milne 

 Australian Senate   Australian Greens Senator for Tasmania 

 

 media release 

 Wednesday, 11 July 2007 

 

 Polar bear activist brings serious climate refugee  message   

 Tasmania’s first unofficial climate change refugee arrived in Hobart this morning with a  mission to raise awareness about the impact of global warming on the planet’s threatened  species, and on humankind.   

 Australian Greens climate change spokesperson, Senator Christine Milne, joined a small  delegation on Waterman’s Dock to greet Mr. P.Bear with the message that he is welcome  in Tasmania. 

 

 “The Arctic and the Antarctic are the frontline of climate change.  At 40 degrees South,  Tasmanians are acutely aware of melting ice with the collapse of the Larsen B ice shelf.   

 “The plight of the polar bear, struggling for existence in a disappearing Arctic habitat, is  a global symbol of human irresponsibility on greenhouse gas emissions.   

 “Unless we as a society move fast to tackle climate change by sharply cutting carbon  emissions, and reducing our energy consumption, Mr P. Bear’s kind will simply vanish  in the wild, along with threatened and vulnerable species and habitats across the globe. 

 

 “Just as critically, climate change will affect massive populations of people, particularly  in low-lying islands and cities, where fresh water will be harder to find, and crops will  become marginal.   

 “In the not-too-distant future, Australia will be confronted with the reality of an influx of  climate change refugees from Pacific nations and elsewhere.  We have a responsibility to  help our neighbours, and we need a plan to deal with the social, environmental and  economic challenges associated with taking in new people rendered homeless by climate  change. 

 

 “Climate change is happening now.  Species are going to extinction.  We can’t wait until  the last polar bear slips off the melting Arctic ice cap to act.     

 “Australians must go to the ballot box this year understanding that how they vote will  impact on the survival chances of our Pacific neighbours and our fellow species.  It is a  heavy responsibility and time is running out,”  Senator Milne said.   

 

 

 Media contact:  Cassy O’Connor   03 6224 8899   

