---
title: "Democrats call for more positive promotion of migration and multiculturalism."
date: "2007-11-19"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211312312
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/020P6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 19 November 2007  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 

 Democrats call for more positive promotion of migration and multiculturalism

 Speaking at the Queensland multicultural summit today, Democrat Senator Andrew Bartlett called for  federal Labor and the Coaltion to give stronger support to multiculturalism and migration.   

 "The fact that migration, including refugees, brings such big economic, social and cultural benefits to  Australia is not promoted strongly or consistently enough by our leaders," Senator Bartlett said.    

 "Australia still retains a contradictory attitude to migration - we take in very large numbers of migrants  and refugees from virtually every country and culture on Earth, whilst still being suspicious of people we  perceive as different."   

 "This contradictory combination of a wanting a high migration intake while having a fearful control-freak  attitude has led to an enormously complex and ever-changing set of migration laws and inadequate  assistance and social support for newly arrived migrants.   

 "If our nation got over our apprehension about migration and instead fully promoted and embraced all  the opportunity and potential that it brings, we would have a far more fair and efficient migration system,  with even more economic and social benefits.   

 Senator Bartlett was supported in his announcement by two Democrat candidates, Mr Maaz Syed and  Mr Emad Soliman. Both candidates are Muslim Australians who arrived here as skilled immigrants.   

 "If the policies of Pauline Hanson and other political candidates opposing all Muslim migration were  adopted, Australia would be denied the benefits that these and many others like them have brought to  our country.    

 "Australia is a modern migrant country but we have yet to shake off much of our colonial mentality.    

 Our politicians must be ready not just to defend and promote migrants and refugees, not deny them  rights or be attacked for cheap political points."    

 "The government's approach of dismantling multiculturalism and playing the race card when it's under  pressure is regressive in the extreme and immensely damaging to our social fabric.    

 "There is no point spending money on community education programs or events like Harmony Day to  promote multiculturalism unless our leaders positively reinforce these messages, rather than resorting to  the race card and dog-whistle politics when it suits them,” Senator Bartlett concluded.  

