---
title: "Labor still behind on English for refugees."
date: "2007-04-19"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211304280
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JRTM6%22
---

 

 Kevin Andrews MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Labor still behind on English for refugees 

 Thursday, 19 April 2007 

 Today the Labor Party has demonstrated that they are still a long way  behind when it comes to providing the English language tuition that  refugee and humanitarian entrants need for a real chance to enjoy the  opportunities that living and working and Australia offers.  

 The Australian Government recognised the shortcomings of the  previous Labor Government's policy outlined by Mr Burke (Labor's  Opposition Spokesman on Immigration). 

 The Australian Government provides up to 910 hours of English  training for refugee and humanitarian entrants with low levels of  schooling. Those over 25 can receive 610 hours.  

 Those needing extra English tuition can also participate in further  literacy and numeracy training.  

 Mr Burke’s claim that the Government’s programs are not vocationally  oriented is simply incorrect 

 The Australian Government’s policies provide the English training  required to ensure our refugee and humanitarian entrants have a real  chance to enjoy the opportunities that living and working in Australia  offers.  

 As Australian's we have not only an opportunity, but also a  responsibility, to help new arrivals make the most of the opportunities  life in Australia has to offer.   

 Australia's strong and successful border security policies have  enabled the Australian Government to have one of the highest refugee  and humanitarian intakes in the world.  

 Today Labor has shown again that they are unfit to govern for all  Australians. 

 Media enquiries: Kate Walshe 0421 588 794  

 

 

