---
title: "Climate change: Politics vs economics: Speech at Chatham House."
date: "2007-06-25"
creators:
  - "Stirrup, Jock"
source: ""
subjects:
  - "D3.6"
  - "Environmental impact"
  - "Climate change (Anthropogenic)"
  - "Defence planning"
  - "Economic impact"
  - "Great Britain"
  - "Overseas item"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211306057
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OUTO6%22
---

  /About Defence 

 2007/06/25 - Climate change - Politics vs Economics  

 Speech by Air Chief Marshal Sir Jock Stirrup , Chief of the Defence Staff, at Chatham House - 25  June 2007  

 

 

 Sir Jock Stirrup 

 Good morning everybody.     

 It’s a great pleasure for me to be here today and be able to say few words at the opening of this  conference. 

 But you may all be wondering why I should be here at all.  What on earth has all of this to do with  the military?  Surely climate change is an issue of science, of politics and of economics?  

 Well of course to a large extent that’s true, I would add though that anyone who thinks that science,  politics and economics don’t impact on security simply hasn’t been paying attention for the past  few thousand years.   

 But I am certainly not an expert on the climate.  And no doubt there are many of you in the  audience who are and are well versed in the science and the facts of the subject and to all of those, I  suppose like Shakespeare’s chorus, I would simply beg you gently to hear, kindly to judge for my  purpose is not to instruct or to inform.  I hope rather to stimulate, to stimulate some thought and in  the end to show why it might not be such an odd thing for me to be here today. 

 Now I shall no doubt set out some contentions that are open to challenge but I think I can start by  saying two things that are, I hope,  uncontroversial.  First, climate change happens and secondly,  when it does it can have a dramatic impact on human society. 

 We all know that there have been ice ages in the past.  Equally no one suggests that we are in the  middle of one now so the climate undoubtedly changes substantially over time and the current trend  of warming, of course, has been going on with the odd reversal and intermission for some ten to 

 twenty thousand years. 

 There's been considerable debate in recent times, not least over the last weekend about whether we  here should be part of Europe.  Well of course it’s only some ten thousand years since we were in a  physical rather than a political sense. 

 When enough of the world’s water was bound up in ice so that people could walk dry shod from the  Urals to the west of Ireland or from Asia to America.  And of course this movement of peoples had  a dramatic effect on the development of humankind around the globe, as indeed did another kind of  movement.   

 We tend to think of the ice age as a difficult time for humankind when it sought to survive in a  harsh and a forbidding environment but there’s evidence to show that it was, in many ways, a  fruitful period.  Game was abundant on the fringes of the ice and people clearly had the leisure to  envisage and to create some very striking cave art and the continuity of form in this art over  millennia seems to suggest a period of considerable stability.   

 But that all changed when the ice retreated and this climate change forced a corresponding change  in survival strategies and in the pattern of societies.  The domestication of plants and animals, the  beginnings of farming and the roots of what we consider to be civilisation date from this time.  And  from that followed the production of food surpluses and the eventual emergence of cities. 

 So life altered in fundamental ways as a result, at least in part, of climate change but probably not in  a cataclysmic fashion because the changes, while ineluctable, were for the most part fairly gradual  so there was time.  There was time for adaptation and for the evolution of new coping mechanisms  and of course the relatively small total global population meant that internal frictions of such  adjustments that took place were limited.   

 So the question for me is not whether climate change is a good or a bad thing, it’s simply a fact of  the world in which we live.  My concerns focus on two other aspects. 

 First, as an inhabitant of our common home, I ask whether our actions are leading to a degree of  change beyond what we might expect from natural processes and, if so, whether we might be  rendering the planet uninhabitable over the long term.  And secondly, as a military man, I ask  whether the pace of change - natural or man made, it makes no difference in this context - whether  the pace of change is greater than the rate at which we are able to adapt safely. 

 Now I will, if I may, leave the first issue to others and concentrate on the second.  It’s been  suggested to me by those better placed than I to know that if temperatures rise towards the upper  end of the currently forecast range, then we could well start to see serious physical consequences by  2040, and that assumes that things get no worse.  That there is no acceleration in the rate at which  our activities affect the climate. And if things do get worse, well you don’t need to come forward  too much from 2040 before, in my terms at least, you’re talking about the day after tomorrow. 

 So what sort of physical consequences do we envisage and what does this mean for peoples and  societies?  Well a change in sea level is one obvious development.  The current forecast is for a rise  of between twenty-eight and forty-three centimetres, although it could be worse. 

 Well, how much of a rise would we need before Peterborough becomes a port? Or even starker,  what happens to Bangladesh?  We’ve seen the dramatic and tragic consequences of recent flooding  there - how will it fare as sea levels rise?   

 And that’s just the beginning.  Rising temperatures, changes in rainfall patterns and desertification  will affect food and water supplies.  Crop yields will fall and land once used for grazing and crop  growing will disappear into the desert sands. 

 Expanding populations around the world are already placing a strain on scarce resources.  Climate  change will make this competition more acute and history is replete with cases of resource  competition that have rapidly descended into armed conflict.  We see examples of this today in  Darfur and other regions of Africa as Arablists compete with Pasturalists.   

 In many areas of the world we are already seeing the migration of young people to urban centres.   The reduction in living and farming space associated with global warming will only serve to  exacerbate this trend.  Yet even now, those who seek a better life in the cities find that their social  and economic expectations are by no means fulfilled. 

 What happens when the overcrowding worsens and the scramble for the limited jobs available  becomes ever more desperate?  Tension, loss of cohesion, the breakdown of social order, the search  for more radical solutions all, perhaps, leading to wholesale violence.  These are some of the more  obvious possibilities. 

 And where might this happen?  Just glance at a map showing the areas most likely to be affected  and you are struck at once by the fact that they’re exactly those parts of the world where we see  fragility, instability and weak governance today.  It seems to me rather like pouring petrol onto a  burning fire. 

 The risk that these already vulnerable states could slip into failure raises the potential for large scale  humanitarian disasters.  All for exploitation by armed groups, be they straightforward criminals or  more sinisterly, international terrorists. 

 Nine/eleven, while by no means the start of international terrorism, illustrated as perhaps nothing  else had done, the threat that it could pose to our societies and it’s already clear that political, social  and economic factors play a large part in rendering people more susceptible to those movements  that rely so much on terrorism as a tool. 

 Now add in the effects of climate change.  Poverty and despair multiply; resentment surges and  people look for someone to blame.   

 As long ago as 2002, Osama Bin Laden said about America “You have destroyed nature with your  industrial waste and gases, more than any other nation in its history.  Despite this you refuse to sign  the Kyoto agreement so that you can secure the profit of your greedy companies and industries”. 

 Now imagine that you are reading this as a young man living in a refugee camp because your home  and livelihood have vanished after flooding, which was blamed on the rising sea level.  I’m sure  you get the point. 

 Well I’m conscious that I’m sounding like something of a Jeremiah here and we mustn’t forget that  the consequences of human activity aren’t all bad.  The powerful forces of globalisation,  technological advancement and the rapid development of emerging economic powers should help  drive sustained global growth, and thereby create new levels of relative wealth in the world.    

 But my job in part, involves thinking about the consequences of what might come to pass rather  than just what we wish would happen.  And it’s apparent that even if global warming is tackled  aggressively now - something that’s far from certain - a substantial degree of rapid change is  already inevitable and that rapidity, alongside the size of the global population and the complexity  of today’s society leaves us particularly vulnerable.   

 Even if we are able, over time, to limit its effects and to mitigate its consequences, it seems to me,  bound to present substantial security challenges of one kind or another so this is a debate to which i  feel bound to contribute. 

 In April the security council, the world’s premier forum for the consideration of peace and security,  held its first discussion on climate change.  The subject is now an established part of the political  landscape and it is discussed, not just by environment ministers but by prime ministers and  presidents, by foreign secretaries and yes, by defence ministers.  Commenting on the recent g8  summit in Heiligendamm, Margaret Beckett said that climate security has now become an accepted  doctrine.  Well given what I’ve said this morning, you’ll understand why I believe that she’s right. 

 But the question then of course is, what do we do about it?   Well clearly limiting the scale of the  challenge is a crucial step. There are many views on how to secure a reduction in carbon emissions,  how to encourage new technologies and no doubt, we’ll hear more on those issues as the conference  progresses but i want to concentrate for the moment on the security dimension.  And with that in 

 mind, i want to say a word about energy security.  How does this fit in with climate change?  

 Well in two ways at least i think.  The growth in demand for energy and the concentration of a  relatively limited number of suppliers in areas of historic fragility have already heightened our  awareness of the risks associated with import dependency and climate change increases the risk, not  least through more forceful and frequent extreme weather events.  We should recall that oil prices  first reached seventy dollars a barrel following the damage to energy infrastructure from hurricane  Katrina but there’s another issue. 

 We can promote energy independence while at the same time reducing carbon footprint by  increasing the reliance on civil nuclear power generation.  The non-proliferation treaty enshrines the  right to the necessary technology.   But current experience shows us how difficult it can be to  separate civil nuclear programmes unequivocally from the pursuit of nuclear weapons so one of the  responses to climate change may itself add to the security risks that we face. 

 Well, so what’s our response to all these challenges?  What can we in defence do to prepare for  such an unwelcome set of possibilities?   

 Well the first step, it seems to me, must be to understand the likely consequences in quite a bit more  detail.  We need continuing analysis of the global implications of rising temperatures, of falling  crop yields of rising sea levels or new disease patterns.   

 Not just so we that we can be ready to react to them when and where they do happen but also so that  we can anticipate them so that we can work with those states likely to be worst affected and help,  where we can, to pre-empt weakness and instability so that we can assist states in developing their  own capacity to meet the challenge.  And to do this we need to know where the worst impacts are  likely to be felt. 

 The UK’s met office, part of the Ministry of Defence, is rightly regarded as one of the world’s  foremost authorities on climate change.  Its research has produced much of the evidence to measure  the impact of global warming and many of its employees are leading authorities in their field.   Research provided by the met office has helped those in the MOD and across government to  understand just what the effects of climate change might be and which regions will be most  affected.  And this has been and will be an important tool in our international endeavours. 

 But as well as helping to build the capacity of others we need to think about our own.  A change in  climate poses some real operational challenges for armed forces and although hard power can not  solve climate change, military capability may well be required to address some of the potential  consequences that I’ve discussed. 

 We’ve seen on many occasions how armed forces are used to respond quickly in the face of  humanitarian disaster and with the predicted rise in the frequency of extreme weather events,  operations like the one we undertook in Pakistan in 2005 albeit there following an earthquake, may 

 become more common.  The agility, the speed and the equipment at the disposal of armed forces  make them well suited to dealing with such situations. 

 But temperature can also affect the performance of our equipment.  More power is needed for  cooling which means more energy.  The weight of equipment and the numbers of people that  helicopters can lift is reduced and there are many other adverse consequences and since we can not  completely reverse the trend of rising temperatures we must ensure that we are able to adapt to the  environments in which we may have to operate. 

 The challenge for us is to sustain military capability in the changed climatic conditions of the  future.  And we have to bear in mind that we are operating equipment that usually remains in  service for very long periods of time - usually upwards of forty or fifty years. And given the pace of  change over that sort of timescale, we quite clearly need to design into our equipments from the  outset, the growth potential to allow us to deal with likely changes. 

 But of course it’s not just our equipment.  Our infrastructure decisions will also need to be based on  an understanding of the threats posed by increased flood risks or changes in seasonal patterns. 

 The defence estate covers some two hundred and forty thousand hectares in the uk and abroad in a  range of different terrains and environments and we need to make sure that we are able to adapt  across that terrain to what might occur in the future. 

 And of course we have to think about our people too.  We must ensure that our soldiers, our sailors,  our airmen and the civilians who work alongside them, are prepared both physically and mentally to  deliver the same extraordinary standards that they set on operations today. 

 We do of course have extensive experience of working in extreme climatic conditions and that  experience tells us that the problems are enormous and add greatly to the complexity of operations.   

 So my overall message is that the degree of climate change that we can expect over the coming  decades is likely to present us with considerable security challenges and the more rapidly we see  substantial change, the worse those challenges are likely to become. 

 That’s clearly something i need to take into account when thinking about the future defence  landscape but it’s also a reason for me to be very interested in how we might help in keeping the  pace of change as low as possible. 

 In other words there are very pragmatic reasons for defence to want to do its part in trying to  contain the problem as well as to prepare for it - all the more so since defence is an energy intensive  business.   

 By way of example, although we’ve reduced our co2 emissions from our estate by some six per cent  compared to 1999/2000 levels, we still contribute about one per cent of the UK’s annual total.  And  if we are so concerned about the consequences of climate change we do, I think, have a  responsibility to show some leadership in addressing it and it's a responsibility we’re determined to  meet. 

 Globally we’re seeing consumers telling industry and commerce that they want greener products  and services and we see many businesses responding to this.  Well, defence is a sixteen billion  pounds a year consumer and we intend to use that spending power to drive innovative, low carbon  solutions to meet our needs.  We’re already seeing this in the approach to some of our new building  designs which have been cited by the national audit office as exemplars and we have a number of  targets, for example, to make many of our buildings carbon neutral by 2012 and to deliver a thirty  per cent reduction in the overall emissions from our estate. 

 We’re not confining our activities simply to the estate.  In a tight resource environment, energy  prices have a big impact on the defence budget and while we will not compromise our  effectiveness, we will pursue greater efficiency.  And the armed forces are in many ways at the  cutting edge of technology so we need to think imaginatively about how we leverage that advantage 

 to better effect in dealing with the use and impact of energy.  And not just because doing this will  help to address climate change, it’s very often the smart thing to do from a more parochial  perspective. 

 For example, synthetic training environments can help to reduce the effect of our activities on the  real world but they also enable us to do things that are just not possible in normal training.  They  enable us to experiment without risk to equipment or people, they enable us to practise procedures  that while necessary on operations, would be unjustifiably hazardous in a peace time environment. 

 And let me take one other example, finding alternative and renewable sources of power for the  armed forces is clearly attractive from an environmental standpoint but it could also significantly  reduce our reliance on vulnerable supply chains.   

 Imagine, for example, the efficient employment of solar power.  It doesn’t need re-supply convoys.   Convoys, which often become potential targets for an enemy.   

 We’re limited not just by the possibilities of technology but also and often more, i think, by the  horizons of our imagination and with that in mind, we shouldn’t neglect or underestimate the  importance of education. 

 In all of this, in all that I’ve said this morning, i think there runs a strong thread of self-interest.  We  in defence need to think about and prepare for the consequences of climate change because we’re  more than likely to be asked to deal with some of them and since that will be far from easy, it makes  sense to do what we can to help alleviate the effects as far as possible and in seeking to alleviate  those effects, we can do many things that make sense from a much narrower defence perspective,  just as business is finding that tackling the issue can be in the best interests of their bottom line.  

 I make no apology for trying to look at the difficult problem of climate change in the light of self  interest because it seems to me that people throughout the world and particularly those who make  the key decisions and who wield the power financial as much as political need motivations that  strike fairly close to home.  You can of course argue that it’s in everybody’s self interest to ensure a  habitable planet and a reasonable degree of global security and so it is. 

 But I have to tell you that in my professional life I’ve seen many people and groups pursue courses  that, to most sensible observers, were patently against their longer term self interests.  By and large,  it was only when the incentives and sanctions were evident within much narrower horizons that it  was possible to make progress. 

 And I think that we see this happening now with climate change.  In the developed world at least  there is a growing sense that responsibility and opportunity are converging, that there’s money to be  made out of dealing with climate change, that a federal regulatory framework in the us would be  better for business than one that varies from state to state, that energy efficiency can bring  competitive advantage in defence just as much as in industry. 

 My own view is that this is something to be welcomed and encouraged and perhaps, perhaps the  key question in trying to avoid some of the gloomier possibilities I’ve depicted here today, is how  we spread such an approach beyond the developed to the developing world. 

 Thank you very much. 

 

