---
title: "Message to Labor: time to take the fight up on refugees."
date: "2007-02-28"
creators:
  - "Bartlett, Andrew"
  - "Australian Democrats"
source: "Office of BARTLETT, SEN ANDREW"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303716
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RGCM6%22
---

 Australian Democrats Press Releases

 Senator Andrew Bartlett  Deputy Parliamentary Leader and Democrats Senator for  Queensland  Australian Democrats spokesperson for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs

 Dated: 28 February 2007  Press Release Number: injaqcrr  Portfolio: Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 Message to Labor: Time to Take The Fight up on Refugees

 Queensland Democrats Senator Andrew Bartlett has urged the federal Labor Party not to be spooked by  the 2001 election experience and to take the fight up to the government on refugee issues.   

 "The fact is the government's position on asylum seekers is just as full of bluster and bulldust as their  discredited political posturing on the Iraq war.   

 "The federal government's incompetence in this area has cost Australians billions of dollars and has  seen some of the shoddiest administrative practices on record.   

 "It is very important that asylum claims are assessed properly, but the administrative processes required  are not rocket science. Yet more than a week after this small number of asylum seekers arrive, the  federal government is still blithering around trying to decide what to do.    

 "India has 100 000 Sri Lankan refugees, we receive 83 possible refugees and the government goes into  a flap."   

 "This has nothing to do with national security. We should have simple administrative procedures which  click into gear as needed, and not pretend a small number of boat arrivals is some sort of emergency.    

 "Labor's position on the Tampa was an utter disgrace when they supported the Government in passing  the most draconian and cruel pieces of legislation which clearly breached not just our international  obligations but also the fundamental rights of asylum seekers.   

 "They were complicit in destroying the lives of hundreds of men, women and children who endured years  of trauma and isolation in detention centres which proved to the nation that they lacked the guts and  gumption to be an effective opposition.   

 "Let this be a timely reminder to Labor not to put polling success ahead of human rights and good public  policy again.   

 "They must stand up to the Howard government this election year and not let themselves be bullied by a  manipulative government which has absolutely no regard for compassion or human rights," concluded  Senator Bartlett. 

 

