---
title: "Support for refugees and migrants in North Brisbane."
date: "2007-08-09"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211308244
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UZYN6%22
---

 

 Teresa Gambaro MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Media Centre  Support for refugees and migrants in North Brisbane  

 9 August 2007 

 Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Teresa Gambaro will launch  a major new refugee settlement support project tomorrow (August 10)  targeted mainly at migrants living on Brisbane's north-side.  

 The project, to be administered by Spiritus ARMS Refugee and Migrant  Services, has been designed to respond to a growing trend of refugee and  humanitarian entrants settling in the Queensland capital's northern suburbs. 

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will provide $80 000  for the project, as part of its latest round of 2007-08 Settlement Grants  Programme funding. The launch ceremony will be held from 3-4pm at the  Newmarket Learning Centre, 8 Vivienne Street, Newmarket, Brisbane. 

 'I am delighted to announce this new ARMS settlement grants project, which  will provide much-needed orientation services, and information and advice on  subjects such as health, employment, legal and life skills, education, tenancy  laws and emergency services,' Ms Gambaro said.  

 'This help is absolutely crucial for new settlers, particularly the target group of  refugees, humanitarian entrants and family stream migrants with permanent  residency who have settled in north Brisbane in the past five years. 

 'This is one of 23 such projects in Queensland that have recently won funding  through DIAC's 2007-08 Settlement Grants Programme. 

 'In May I announced funding for 231 of these projects around Australia. All of  them are designed to help refugees and other migrants settle here  successfully and participate fully in Australia's social and economic life.' 

 Ms Gambaro said under the Settlement Grants programme alone, the  Government had committed $32 million in the next year to funding a range of  settlement support services around Australia, including $19 million for new  projects.  

 Media Inquires:  Tjorn Sibma  0417 744 922 (Ms Gambaro’s Office)  Marsali MacKinnon  0401 695 908  (DIAC Brisbane)  

 

