---
title: "Veterans' Review Board new members appointed."
date: "2007-10-01"
creators:
  - "Billson, Bruce"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211310359
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E3JO6%22
---

 

 Monday 1 October 2007  VA166   VETERANS’ REVIEW BOARD NEW MEMBERS APPOINTED 

 The Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Bruce Billson, today announced the appointment of eight new  Members to the Veterans’ Review Board (VRB).  

 Mr Billson said that one full-time Senior Member, three part-time Senior Members and four part-time Members had been appointed to the Board. 

 The VRB is an independent tribunal that reviews decisions or determinations of the Repatriation  and Military Rehabilitation & Compensation Commissions. The VRB also reviews determinations  of the service chiefs of the Navy, Army and Air Force in relation to rehabilitation for serving  members of the Defence Force. 

 "These new appointees have the experience and knowledge to make an effective contribution to the  VRB," Mr Billson said.  "They include a mix of strong military backgrounds, extensive legal  experience, and an understanding of merits review procedures that is necessary in such a position. 

 "The addition of new Members will ensure that veterans who choose to review the outcome of a  claim will continue to receive the highest standard of procedural fairness," Mr Billson said. 

 The new Members have each been appointed for a period of two years, and join the 40 current  Members, bringing total membership of the Board to 48. 

 "I congratulate the new Members of the Board, and welcome the experience and knowledge they  will bring to the VRB," Mr Billson said. 

 The appointments are:  Senior full-time Member  Mr Ivan Cahill 

 Senior part-time Members  Mr Edward Bentram Mark Jolly, Ms Andrea Marilyn Hall-Brown and Ms Amanda MacDonald 

 Part-time Members  Mr Gary Charles Barrow, Mr Graham Michael Barter, Mr Andrew Harding Braban and Mr Victor  Kent Patrick RFD 

 Media inquiries: Cameron Hill  0408 239 521 

 Editors Note: a short biography on each of the appointees is attached 

 NEW APPOINTEES TO THE VETERANS’ REVIEW BOARD 

 Mr Ivan Cahill  Mr Cahill is a graduate of the University of Queensland, Macquarie University and the Royal  Military College Duntroon, and is currently employed as the Director of Litigation with the  Department of Veterans’ Affairs. He previously served in the ADF for 25 years, including two tours 

 of duty in Vietnam and one in Papua New Guinea.  

 Mr Edward Bentram Mark Jolly  Mr Jolly has a Masters in Law from Melbourne University, and is currently a Barrister in private  practice.  He served as a Legal Officer in the Australian Army from 1993-1998 and has retained his  commission as a Major.   

 Ms Andrea Marilyn Hall-Brown   Ms Hall-Brown is a graduate in Laws and Science, and is currently a Barrister in private practice.   She is a former senior member of the Veterans’ Review Board, having held the position from 1998-2006.  

 Ms Amanda MacDonald  Ms MacDonald has a Masters of Administrative Law and Policy from the University of Sydney.   She is currently a Member of the Migration Review and Refugee Review Tribunals, after acting as  a Senior Member of those Tribunals from 2005-2006. 

 Mr Gary Charles Barrow  Mr Barrow served as a permanent officer in the Royal Australian Navy from 1960-1986. In 1983 he  graduated from the University of Sydney Law School, and also qualified as a Legal Officer in the  Royal Australian Navy. He has been in private practice as a solicitor since 1986 and has continued  to serve as a Naval Reserve officer. 

 Mr Graham Michael Barter  Mr Barter is a Barrister in private practice currently on full time military duty with the Command  Legal Office, Land Headquarters.  He is a graduate of the University of New South Wales, and  served in the Australian Army Legal Corps from 1981-1989, and again from 1999.  

 Mr Andrew Harding Braban   Mr Braban has a Masters in Law from the United States Army Judge Advocate Generals School,  and previously served as Chief Legal Officer to the Commander of the International Forces East  Timor.  He continues to work for Defence Legal Services and is the Principal Legal Officer for the  Queensland College of Teachers. 

 Mr Victor Kent Patrick RFD  Mr Patrick was a Stipendiary Magistrate and Deputy Coroner of South Australia from 1986-2007.   He also served as a Legal officer in the Australian Army from 1974-1977, and reached the rank of  Lieutenant Colonel in the Army Reserve before reaching retirement age.   

 

