---
title: "Continuing to improve Australia's tax system."
date: "2007-09-13"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR REVENUE AND ASSISTANT TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211309635
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9ZHO6%22
---

 

 

 

 Thursday, 13 September 2007 

 Continuing to Improve Australia's Tax  System  The Minister for Revenue and Assistant Treasurer, Peter Dutton, today introduced  Tax Laws Amendment (2007 Measures No. 6) Bill 2007 which implements a number  of improvements to Australia’s taxation system, including the following:  

 Capital expenditure for the establishment of trees in carbon sink  forests  

 The Government recognises the role that forests can play in reducing Australia’s  greenhouse gas emissions. Forests act as carbon sinks by absorbing carbon dioxide  from the air and storing it as carbon in their woody tissues. 

 The Government will support carbon sink forest operators by allowing them to claim  a tax deduction for the cost of establishing trees in a qualifying carbon sink forest.  

 For a five year period from 1 July 2007, an immediate deduction will be allowed for  costs incurred in establishing trees in a qualifying carbon sink forest. From 2012-13  the immediate deduction will be replaced with a write-off under the general  horticultural plant provisions.  

 To be eligible for tax deductibility, carbon sink forest operators must also demonstrate  that their projects comply with environmental and natural resource management  guidelines.  

 The Government is currently developing standards for robust and transparent offsets  to be accredited for use in the Australian Emissions Trading System.  A discussion  paper on incentives for abatement, including carbon offsets, will be issued in  September 2007.  

 Tobacco industry exit grants 

 This Bill will assist tobacco growers affected by the withdrawal of manufacturers  from the tobacco market in Australia. 

 Tobacco growers who undertake not to carry on any agricultural enterprise for at least  five years will be exempt from tax on grants received under the Tobacco Growers  Adjustment Assistance Programme 2006.  

 Deductible gift recipients 

 The Bill will update the list of deductible gift recipients (DGRs) to include the  Council for Jewish Community Security from 10 August 2007 and extend the DGR  listing of Australia for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees until 27 

 June 2012. 

 Farm management deposits (FMDs) 

 This Bill makes minor changes to the early access provisions to the FMD scheme.  In  particular, the Bill will allow eligible primary producers to retain their tax benefit  when they withdraw from their FMD within 12 months.  At the time of the  withdrawal, primary producers must be eligible for an exceptional circumstances  certificate from the Secretary of the Department of Human Services and an  exceptional circumstances declaration must not be in force when the FMD is made.  

 Media Contact:  Brad Emery   (02) 6277 7360  - 0414 225 638 

 

