---
title: "Harmony Day."
date: "2007-03-21"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211554333
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Z3KM6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson   Shadow Minister for Multicultural Affairs   

 Wednesday 21st of  March 2007 

 

 Harmony Day    

 

 Shadow  Multicultural  Affairs  Minister  Laurie  Ferguson  is  encouraging  people  to   celebrate  Harmony  day  by  wearing  their  orange  ribbons  and  taking  a  stance  against   racism and discrimination.    

 “Harmony Day enables us to reflect on the contributions made by our culturally diverse  community. Australia’s support for multiculturalism has helped make this country one of  the World’s most successful culturally diverse societies.”    

 “Australian  Parliamentarians  travelling  overseas  and  at  International  meetings  are   constantly congratulated on our success in building a harmonious society. Many countries  are seeking to emulate Australia’s practices.”    

 “In Celebrating Harmony day, I stress Labor’s ongoing support for multiculturalism and  integration as a means of achieving the best settlement outcomes.”    

 “Labor believes that for integration and successful settlement to take place, it is vital  that  resources  for  accommodation,  orientation  assistance,  English  language  instruction,   pathways to employment and Migrant Resource Centres be made available.”    

 “Labor  also  recognises  that  some  migrant  groups  will  have  particular  needs  and  may   require extra settlement assistance. This is especially the case for refugees coming from  war  torn  societies.   The  fact  that  there  are  few  resources  provided  to  help  in  the   settlement of refugees will merely form the basis for long term social disadvantage.”   

 “Meeting  the  challenge  of  settling  and  integrating  new  migrants  and  refugees  into   Australia is essential for enhancing our successful multicultural traditions.”    

 

 Contact: Laurie Ferguson 0418 601 716   

 ENDS 

 

 

 

 

