---
title: "Government lies about heartless refusal to help Pacific Island Climate refugees."
date: "2007-02-20"
creators:
  - "Nettle, Kerry"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303415
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7TAM6%22
---

 Kerry Nettle, Senator for New South Wales 

 

 

 Government lies about heartless refusal to help  Pacific Island Climate refugees  

 

 Senator Nettle, 20th February 2007   

 Greens Senator Kerry Nettle today accused senior Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade (DFAT) officials of lying to her in answer to a direct question about an  approach by Pacific Island nations to Australia for help to relocate future climate  change refugees.    

 Newspaper reports today quote officials from Tuvalu say Tuvaluan Prime Minister  Maatia Toafa asked for a meeting with Prime Minster John Howard about climate  change refugees but was refused.  

 

 "DFAT officials told me last week that there had been no approach to the Australian  Government from Pacific Island nations concerning possible relocation of population  due to climate change. This now appears to be a lie.    

 "The Government's heartless refusal to even talk to our Pacific Island neighbours  about climate refugees is appalling. To mislead the Senate Committee about it is a  serious breach of the rules.    

 "The Government needs to explain themselves. Why have officials misled the  Committee? Why won't the Prime Minister even speak to Pacific Island nations about  this humanitarian issue?    

 "Pacific Island nations including Tuvalu and Kiribati are already suffering the  consequences of human induced climate change. Australia has a humanitarian duty to  help the populations of these nations just as New Zealand has.    

 "The Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Immigration should be  planning for large numbers of climate refugees in our region but they are doing  nothing.    

 "The Greens will continue to push for a humanitarian response to climate refugees."    

 Contact - Jon Edwards 0428 213 146 

