---
title: "Status of Sri Lankan asylum seekers."
date: "2007-09-12"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211309593
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RACO6%22
---

  The Hon Kevin Andrews MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

  Media Release 

  Wednesday, 12 September 2007  KA087/07 

  Status of Sri Lankan Asylum Seekers 

  Today my department has advised 72 Sri Lankan asylum seekers that they have been  assessed as being refugees. 

  One Sri Lankan asylum seeker has been advised that he has been refused refugee  status. He is able to seek review of that decision, and he is being advised of his  options. 

  These asylum seekers are part of the group of 83 who were intercepted by HMAS  Success in the early hours of 20 February, en route to Christmas Island 

  Each case has been decided on its own merits using the tests set out in the Refugees  Convention. 

  A further two Sri Lankans were found to be refugees by the UNHCR in Indonesia  before they travelled to Australia. 

  Assessments for seven other Sri Lankans in Nauru are still under consideration. These  cases will be finalised when outstanding issues have been resolved. 

  One of the Sri Lankans is in Perth for medical treatment and his refugee status  assessment is still to be determined. 

  Australia is now exploring resettlement options in other countries for the Sri Lankans  that have been assessed as being refugees. They will remain in Nauru while  arrangements are made to resettle them elsewhere. 

  The successful reduction in the number of people seeking to enter Australia  unlawfully has been a direct result of the Howard Government’s clear policy that  persons who seek to enter Australia illegally will not be settled in Australia. 

  Australia has one of the world’s highest refugee and humanitarian intakes. This is  made possible by the success of our strong border policy. 

  Media enquiries: Kate Walshe 0421 588 794 

