---
title: "Greens push for climate refugee visa."
date: "2007-04-08"
creators:
  - "Siewert, Rachel"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211303955
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SVQM6%22
---

 SENATOR RACHEL SIEWERT 

 

 

 Greens push for climate refugee visa 

 8th Apr 07 

 Australian Greens spokesperson on Immigration, Senator Kerry  Nettle, told   protesters gathered outside the Prime Minister's  residence in Kirribilli today that The Greens will introduce a private  members bill to establish a process for recognising and accepting  climate refugees in Australia.   

 The Easter refugee protesters gathered outside the Prime Minister's  residence to call for a more compassionate approach to refugees in  Australia   

 “This century will be the century of climate refugees, and Australia  must recognise and prepare for this,” said Senator Nettle.   

 “As the major Pacific power, Australia must pull its weight in  assisting our Pacific neighbours who will be the first to be displaced  by climate change.   

 “Already the inhabitants of the Carteret Islands in Papua New  Guinea are being relocated because of rising sea levels and New  Zealand has an immigration program for climate refugees from  Tuvalu and Kiribati.   

 “The IPCC concludes that even a one metre sea level rise is "likely  to affect 200-450 million people in the Asia-Pacific region".   

 “In the next sitting of Parliament I will introduce a bill to amend the  Migration Act to insert a new visa class called a ‘climate refugee  visa’.     

 This will enable the Immigration Minister to allocate a set number of  visas for refugees displaced by a climate change related disaster.     

 “The Greens know that Australia could easily take around 300  people per year from Tuvalu and Kiribati, but the Howard  government has ignored their pleas for assistance.   

 “In the absence of an international agreement on climate refugees, 

 Australia should take a lead by formulating its own climate refugee  program.   

 “If the Greens gain the balance of power in the Senate at the next  election, we will push for a climate refugee visa as well as a yearly  quota for Pacific countries.  We will also push for Australia to work  internationally for an international agreement on climate refugees.”   

 Contact: Jon Edwards  0428 213 146 

 

