---
title: "World Refugee Day DVD launch: Australia - a new home."
date: "2007-06-20"
creators:
  - "Gambaro, Teresa"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211305882
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/B0ZN6%22
---

 

 Teresa Gambaro MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Media Centre 

 

 World Refugee Day DVD launch: Australia - a new home 

 Wednesday, 20 June 2007 

 The Assistant Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Teresa Gambaro,  marked World Refugee Day at Parliament House by launching a new DVD  resource for African refugees, Australia - a new home.  

 The DVD is a world first in providing consolidated information tailored  specifically to meet the settlement needs of African refugee and humanitarian  entrants. The DVD gives information in English and six African languages  including; Amharic, Dinka, Kirundi, Sudanese Arabic, Swahili and Tigrinya.  

 ‘When it comes to resettlement, this Government recognises that one size  does not fit all. It is not enough just to give people visas to live here. We must  also do the best we can to provide them with the information and skills they  need to participate in the community,’ Ms Gambaro said. 

 ‘The DVD is a unique audio-visual resource designed in consultation with  experts to specifically help African refugees who may not have high levels of  literacy, quickly develop a practical understanding of how things work in their  new country.’ 

 Australia - a new home has important information about services such as  000 emergency phone calls, and also provides advice on topics including  accommodation, health, budgeting, education, employment and Australian  law. 

 ‘This DVD has been welcomed by new arrivals from Africa, service providers  and volunteers who help in the settlement process. It enhances the excellent  work being done by our service providers and gives African new arrivals a  resource in their own languages to help them join the Australian community,’  Ms Gambaro said. 

 ‘The launch of Australia - a new home is a timely reminder of the fact that  Australia has a proud history of opening its arms to those in need of  sanctuary. Since 1945, Australia has welcomed over 675,000 refugees and  humanitarian entrants,’ Ms Gambaro said. 

 Media Contact: Tjorn Sibma (Ms Gambaro’s office) 0417 744 922  

 [Media Release index] 

 

