---
title: "Transcript of doorstop: Carindale, Brisbane: 6 October 2007: antenatal/postnatal depression announcement; health and hospitals; Liberal Candidate for Lyons; Tasmanian pulp mill; schools; Sudanese refugees; Work Choices; polls; Bob Brown."
date: "2007-10-06"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "antenatal/postnatal depression announcement"
  - "health and hospitals"
  - "Liberal Candidate for Lyons"
  - "Tasmanian pulp mill"
  - "schools"
  - "Sudanese refugees"
  - "Work Choices"
  - "polls"
  - "Bob Brown."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211310635
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QDIO6%22
---

 

 

 

 FEDERAL LABOR LEADER  KEVIN RUDD MP   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, CARINDALE, BRISBANE, 6 OCTOBER 2007   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY 

 

 Subjects:  Antenatal/Postnatal Depression Announcement; Health  and Hospitals; Liberal Candidate for Lyons; Tasmanian Pulp Mill;  Schools; Sudanese Refugees; Work Choices; Polls; Bob Brown   

 RUDD:  Well, it’s good to be here with Kerry Rea, our candidate  for Bonner.  We’re talking to families here in a backyard in Carindale,  talking about health and hospitals, and talking also about the  particular needs of mums with young babies.   

 This week I’ve been travelling around Queensland and NSW visiting  hospitals, and I’ve visited hospitals in Redcliffe, in Bundaberg, in  Gladstone, Liverpool in Western Sydney, and yesterday at RPA.  And it’s  quite important that we have a long-term plan to fix our hospital and  health system, not just a plan for the next election.  And that’s what  we’ve been laying out to the Australian people, a $2 billion plan to  assist hospitals plug the gaps that they currently experience and also  a plan to negotiate with States and Territories how we deal with these  problems long-term.   

 The other thing that we’ve been discussing in many of the hospitals  that we’ve visited is the particular challenges which the maternity  sections of our hospitals are facing, and the particular challenges  facing young mums.  One of those challenges concerns antenatal and  postnatal depression.  And today I want to announce that we’re  committing ourselves to an $85 million program over five years, to  assist in dealing with this real problem of postnatal depression.   

 Our plan is based on some compelling data which has been provided to us  by Beyondblue, the organisation dealing with depression, headed by Jeff  Kennett in Victoria.  This is a not for profit organisation which has  put a lot of time and research effort into dealing with the challenges  of depression across our community, including postnatal depression.   

 If you look at some of the figures they are quite challenging.  We have  something like 263,000 births in Australia.  One in 10, according to  Beyondblue, suffer from antenatal depression, one in five from  postnatal depression.  In other words, each year in Australia, we have  some 26,000 mothers suffering from one form or another of antenatal  depression, and some 50,000 mothers suffering from postnatal  depression.  This is a public health challenge for families and for the  country.     

 Beyondblue has undertaken some research into this and released its own  research findings on how best to deal with this over time.  And it’s a  product of a $5 million research program which they have put together  with specific recommendations.  And our program today builds on that.   

 Our $85 million plan has these characteristics to it.     

 Firstly, we want to design national guidelines for the country whereby  every mother in Australia, on one occasion prior to birth and within  two months after birth, is screened for antenatal or postnatal  depression.   That’s the first commitment.   

 The second is that we would also provide resources for the proper  training of personnel to do that screening.     

 Thirdly, an allocation of funds to an existing Commonwealth Government  program, an additional $10 million, to provide for the necessary  additional psychological counselling and support services and treatment  services for those mums identified with particular problems which need  early attention.   

 And beyond that, we are allocating $5 million to Beyondblue itself to  be the agency, the non-government agency, responsible over this five-year period for the oversight of the implementation of our $85 million  program.     

 This is a program to be done in partnership between the Commonwealth  and the States and we are proposing $55 million from ourselves and $30  million from the States and Territories.  We think this is a practical  way forward.   

 And I conclude by saying this.  When it comes to dealing with health  and hospitals and mothers and postnatal depression, we need a practical  plan, we’ve put one on the table, we think it’s a good way forward for  families, and if you are dealing with these sort of problems in a  preventative healthcare framework, it is much better also, not just for  mothers, not just for families, but also for the overall effective use  of the health dollar as well.   

 Happy to take your questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Will this be done via GPs or in the hospital system?   

 RUDD:  Well, obviously prior to a birth, one screening would occur  primarily in the community.  One of the reasons we’re advancing GP  Super Clinics across the country is to make sure that this sort of  screening service can be done out there in the community.  Some may be  done within hospitals as well.  But our commitment is clear-cut.  For  every mother in the country, one pre-birth screening for antenatal  depression and one post-birth screening for postnatal depression.   This, we think, is a positive step forward.   

 Jeff Kennett advised me today, when I spoke with him, that this would  be the first country in the world, if this program is implemented,  whereby every mother receives pre and post birth screening for  depression.   

 JOURNALIST: There’s been a lot of criticism about maternity services in  general.  Will you look at addressing those as well?   

 RUDD:  Well, part of our $2 billion hospital reform plan aims to  provide extra resources to hospitals.  You see, part of the problem 

 which we now confront is that we have a Federal Government, over the  current Australian Health Care Agreement, which has withdrawn a billion  dollars from the system.  We had Mr Abbott, the Health Minister;  confirm yesterday that the Commonwealth was not even faintly keeping up  with the States when it comes to expenditure on health and hospitals.   When it comes to expenditure on hospitals, I think that’s a very  important admission by Mr Abbott.  What we need to do is to plug the  funding gap, develop a long-term reform plan to eliminate  inefficiencies and waste and duplication from the system and use that  money to invest in other critical services in hospitals, including in  maternity services.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I (inaudible) the approval of a pulp mill in Tasmania,  the Liberal candidate for the seat of Lyons, today has resigned from  the Liberal Party (inaudible).  What are your thoughts on (inaudible)?   

 RUDD:  I don’t know the details of what the Liberal candidate in  Lyons has done.  I think what’s important for Tasmania is certainty for  the future on this project.  And we’ve already indicated our position  on that.  I would’ve thought that had Mr Turnbull handled this matter  more effectively over recent months, some of the angst and anxiety  concerning the actual approval process itself could have been reduced.   But what happens in the Liberal Party is a matter for Mr Howard.  I’m  responsible for what happens in the Labor Party.   

 JOURNALIST: Well, Senator Brown said that Peter Garrett has sold out  and he no longer will be friends with him.  What do you say to that?   

 RUDD:  Well, our commitment has been consistent all the way  through.  We would support a pulp mill if it had world-class standards  and world-class environmental standards.  Then the advisory process was  turned to the Chief Scientist in the end who produced a report which  says this project could proceed on the basis of a number of highly  stringent environmental conditions being met. It’s on the basis of the  Chief Scientist’s report that we have indicated our position.   

 JOURNALIST: So, Labor hasn’t sold out?   

 RUDD:  Our position is based on the science and our position is  consistent with what we have said from the beginning, which is that we  would only support a project if it met world-class environmental  standards and the Chief Scientist has delivered his report.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you’ve been quoted as saying that standards at our  schools at the moment are patchy, you won’t be (inaudible) performance-based.  Isn’t that a sort of chicken and the egg situation, to some  degree?   

 RUDD:  No, what we want to do, it’s a bit like our proposal for  hospitals.  When it comes to the future of our hospitals, we want to  lift the national investment in our hospitals but through an agreement  with the States and Territories, lift also the outcomes, the  performance outcomes of our hospitals as well, one of which would be to  reduce waiting times.  Similarly with the school system.  We want to  lift national investment in our schools.  Our teachers are doing a  fantastic job, as our nurses are, but we will not be extending a blank  cheque to either hospitals or to schools unless we have agreed 

 performance outcomes from hospitals and from schools.  I’m all for  injecting more into the system.  We’ve got to reform the system on the  way through.   

 On education, every kid from working families across the country  deserves the best start possible in life.  And that means a first-class  education with the highest literacy and numeracy standards possible.   We’ll invest the resources necessary to achieve that but there must be  performance benchmarks.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) quite a separate issue of Sudanese  refugees, do you agree with Kevin Andrews that they are linked with  crime and gang behaviour?  And if you were elected to government, what  would you do?  Would you increase the quota (inaudible)?   

 RUDD:  The interesting thing is that Mr Howard’s Government has  been in for 11 years and over that period of time, I am advised, has  brought into the country 130,000 to 150,000 refugees, and in recent  years, with a significant proportion of those refugees coming from  Africa, as a result of Howard Government decisions.  So, that’s all a  fact.  The Howard Government - 130,000-150,000 refugees.  The Howard  Government has brought in in recent times a significant proportion of  African refugees and on the eve of an election they decide to change  course.  I think the Australian people will reach their own conclusions  about all of that.  I think the Australian people will reach their own  conclusions about what Mr Howard and multiple Immigration Ministers  have authorised over the last 11 years.   

 JOURNALIST: Can Kevin Andrews (inaudible)?   

 RUDD:  Look, I think it’s very important for people simply to look  at this in terms of the facts.  The facts are that Mr Howard and  multiple Immigration Ministers have presided over a system which has  brought in 150,000 or so refugees during the term they’ve been in  office, and with thousands of those refugees coming from Africa.   That’s a fact.  If, on the eve of an election, they now choose to  change that, I think the Australian people will draw their own  conclusions about whether they’re fair dinkum or whether they’re not.   I believe, by the way, you should always be acting on the advice  properly considered by those officials who are close to the action on  all of this within the Immigration Department.   

 JOURNALIST: There are reports out today Workplace Agreements have  failed the fairness test.  Does that surprise you?  What do you think  about that?   

 RUDD:  Well, Mr Howard’s brought in an unfair industrial relations  system, Work Choices, which has stripped away penalty rates and  overtime payments to working families.  Working families are under  financial pressure.  Mr Howard says working families have never been  better off.  Mr Howard brings in Work Choices which strips away basic  conditions like penalty rates and overtime.  I think what we’re now  finding is that working families across Australia, through reports such  as this, are discovering how unfair and unbalanced this system is.   There’s one way to get rid of Work Choices and AWAs, and that’s to get  rid of the government which brought in Work Choices and AWAs.  We’re 

 committed to repealing Work Choices and we’re committed to abolishing  AWAs.   

 JOURNALIST: I’m not quite sure on your stance on the Sudanese refugees.   Do you then believe that the Government has brought in all these  refugees that (inaudible) a mistake (inaudible)?   

 RUDD:  I’m just saying it’s a fact which speaks for itself that  over an 11-year period, Mr Howard has introduced 130,000-150,000  refugees to Australia consistent with Australia’s international  obligations, that within that, Mr Howard and his ministers have brought  in an increasing proportion of refugees from Africa - that’s a fact.  I  assume Mr Howard’s been acting on the advice of his officials all the  way through that. And if on the eve of an election he suddenly changes  on this question, as I said, people will reach their own conclusions  about what the motivations may be.  I’ll let others debate that.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the popularity polls, they still sing a happy tune  for you this far out, or this close to the election?  Do you pay much  heed to those?   

 RUDD:  Winning this election is like climbing Mt Everest and, you  know, it’s going to be really tough.  We’ve got to win 16 seats.  We’ve  only ever won twice from Opposition.  And whether it’s in Western  Australia or whether it’s elsewhere across the country where opinion  polls are out today, I know we face the fight of our lives because I’m  up against a very clever politician who every day is spending a million  dollars worth of taxpayers’ money on advertising on television.  And I  think one of the reasons Mr Howard continues to delay this election is  that every day another million dollars is spent on a whole bunch of ads  out there on television.  And I just say why doesn’t that money get  spent on our health and hospital system?  That’s where it should be  being spent.   

 JOURNALIST: Just one final question.  Bob Brown is in Queensland today  and he’s asked you what your position now is on the Traveston Dam?  Is  he still a guest?   

 RUDD:  Our position in relation to all of that has not changed and  Bob is always welcome in Queensland.   

 

 ends    

 

 

 

