---
title: "Labor unveils new risk-based detention policy."
date: "2008-07-29"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211318103
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QZ4R6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Labor unveils new risk-based detention policy 

 Tuesday 29 July 2008 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, today  announced a suite of reforms to Australia’s immigration detention system. 

 Senator Evans said that under Labor’s reforms, detention in immigration  detention centres will only be used as a last resort and for the shortest  practicable time. 

 The Government will retain mandatory detention to support the integrity of  Australia’s immigration program. 

 Senator Evans said the Government’s new policy will see the Department of  Immigration and Citizenship take a risk-based approach to detention. 

 ‘A person who poses no danger to the community will be able to remain in the  community while their visa status is resolved,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The department will have to justify why a person should be detained. Once in  detention, a detainee’s case will be reviewed every three months to ensure  that the further detention of the individual is justified. 

 ‘Children will not be detained in an immigration detention centre.’ 

 Currently, people who are unlawful may be detained for years even though  they pose no health or security risk to the community.  

 The minister said mandatory detention would remain for three groups of  people who pose a risk to the community. 

 Unlawful non-citizens who present unacceptable risks to the community and  people who have repeatedly refused to comply with their visa conditions will  be detained. 

 Unauthorised boat arrivals at excised places, which include Christmas Island  and Ashmore Reef, will still be subject to mandatory detention for health,  identity and security checks. 

 Unauthorised boat arrivals at excised places will continue to be processed on  Christmas Island but will now have access to legal assistance and an  independent review of unfavourable decisions. 

 People who have no right to be here and those who are found not to be owed  protection under Australia’s international obligations will be removed.  

 

