---
title: "Federal Government "on notice" over boat people treatment."
date: "2008-10-01"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211319197
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZSPR6%22
---

 Wednesday 1 October 2008   

 Federal Government “on notice” over boat people  treatment   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has put the Federal Government “on notice”  over the treatment of a group of boat people who have been transferred to Christmas  Island, saying that it will be a test of the Government’s new immigration policy.   

 Fourteen people whose boat was intercepted near the Ashmore Islands on Monday  are being transferred to Christmas Island, ostensibly for health and security checks.  It was the first boat to have been intercepted in Australian waters this year.   

 “This is the first test for Immigration Minister Evans,” said Senator Hanson-Young.   

 “Will the Minister ensure that the detainees’ health and security  checks are carried  out expediently to limit unnecessary time in detention?   

 “We  have  heard  story  after  story  about  the  psychological  effects  that  mandatory   detention has on detainees.   

 “Will the Minister be able to guarantee that the Government’s new immigration policy  is  not  simply  a  window-dressed  version  of  the  inhumane  practices  of  the  Howard   years?”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said that isolated detention centres contributed to an “out of  sight, out of mind” attitude towards people seeking asylum in Australia.   

 “For  as  long  as  mandatory  detention  remains  a  pillar  of  the  Government’s   immigration  policy,  the  Greens  will  be  looking  very  closely  to  ensure  that  there  is   adequate  transparency  in  the  new  immigration  processes,  and  that  checks  and   balances are applied to these crucial matters of human rights and justice,” she said.   

 “The Greens will be keeping a close watch on the detainees’ progress while held in  detention on Christmas Island.”   

 

 

 For further information please call Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760   

