---
title: "People-smuggler sentenced to five years."
date: "2008-09-02"
creators:
  - "Debus, Bob"
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211537457
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YZFR6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 People-smuggler sentenced to five years 

 Joint Media Release with the Hon Bob Debus - Minister for Home Affairs 

 Tuesday 2 September 2008 

 The Australian Government today welcomed the five-year sentence in the Northern  Territory Supreme Court imposed on high-level people-smuggling organiser Olong  Achmad. 

 Minister for Home Affairs Bob Debus said the man’s sentencing followed a lengthy  People Smuggling Strike Team (PSST) operation related to the smuggling of 353  people by boat from Indonesia to Australia.  

 The joint Australian Federal Police (AFP) and Department of Immigration and  Citizenship (DIAC) PSST worked closely with Thai authorities in securing the 42-year-old Indonesian’s arrest and extradition. Achmad was extradited from Thailand in  January 2008. 

 ‘The nature of people smuggling makes it difficult to catch those who risk people’s  lives and profit from this reprehensible crime,’ Mr Debus said.  

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said people  smuggling is an abhorrent crime. ‘To exploit vulnerable people during times of  desperation demonstrates a callous disregard for the law and for humanity,’ Senator  Evans said.  

 Achmad’s conviction relates to the arrival of a boat at Ashmore Reef in November  1999 carrying 353 unlawful non-citizens. A warrant was issued for the his arrest in  relation to facilitating the bringing into Australia of a group of five or more people,  knowing they would become, upon entry to Australia, unlawful non-citizens, contrary  to section 232A of the Migration Act 1958.  

 The maximum penalty for these offences is 20 years’ imprisonment. 

 Senator Evans said the Government’s ongoing commitment to border security was  firm and resolute. 

 ‘People-smuggling undermines Australia’s borders and the integrity of its immigration  system and the Government will continue to take robust measures to deal with  unauthorised boat arrivals,’ Senator Evans said. 

