---
title: "Coalition maintains strong regional focus to combat people smuggling, trafficking and crime."
date: "2008-03-31"
creators:
  - "Ellison, Chris"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211314578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DE1Q6%22
---

 

 

 Senator the Hon. Christopher Ellison  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate  Senator for Western Australia 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Coalition maintains strong regional focus to combat people smuggling, trafficking and crime   

 Coalition Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Ellison, will depart for  Singapore and Jakarta today for a three day visit to discuss emerging issues and the success of  initiatives to combat people smuggling and trafficking, transnational crime and terrorism in our  region.   

 “Regional co-operation is fundamental to ongoing efforts to combat people smuggling and  trafficking, terrorism and transnational crime. The Coalition put in place a number of initiatives to  combat the criminal networks that engage in these activities and prevent vulnerable people falling  victim to their operations” said Senator Ellison.    

 Senator Ellison said it was important that Australia have a bi-partisan approach in these areas and his  visit was aimed at ensuring that countries such as Indonesia understood that the Coalition in  Opposition had not changed its policy.    

 Senator Ellison will meet with His Excellency Mr Andi Mattalata, Minister for Law and Human  Rights as well as members of the Indonesian Government and Indonesian non-government  organisations.    

 “It is important that the Australian Government resource the current initiatives we have in place in  the region particularly in relation to border control and the Coalition will be supportive of any such  measures,” said Senator Ellison.   

 “I am looking forward to discussing the effectiveness of the current initiatives that we have in place  in Indonesia and expressing the Coalition’s bipartisan support for joint co-operation to tackle issues  of concern in our region,” said Senator Ellison.    

 In Singapore, Senator Ellison will meet with the Director of Immigration Checkpoints Authority, in  Jakarta he will meet with the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), the office of the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations office on Drugs and Crime  (UNODC) and visit the Transnational Crime Centre.      

 “These organisations play a vital role in the work they do and the advice they provide to government.  I am looking forward to meeting with the regional representatives and discussing the work of their  organisations,” said Senator Ellison.    

 Senator Ellison paid tribute to the Australian personnel working in the region who are involved in  these areas which are of vital importance to Australia.    

 Senator Ellison was a Minister for Justice and Customs in the Coalition Government and oversaw a  significant expansion of Australia’s co-operation with Indonesia to combat people smuggling and  trafficking, transnational crime and terrorism. Senator Ellison was involved in the negotiation of the  Bali bombing investigation as well as other regional issues including mutual assistance and the  International Transfer of Prisoners Agreement between Australia and Indonesia. He is one of the first  Coalition Shadow Ministers to visit Indonesia since the 2007 Federal Election.   

 31 March 2008  Contact:  Kate Walshe on 0411 472 299 

