---
title: "Address to the United Nations High Commission for refugees on World Refugee Day."
date: "2008-06-20"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211317128
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZKDR6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Address to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees  on World Refugee Day 

 Canberra, Friday 20 June 2008 

 Thank you to our hosts, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for  organising today’s event.  I’m very pleased to participate in this celebration of World  Refugee Day. 

 The Australian Government works closely with UNHCR on a number of fronts to  promote and support the protection rights of refugees. So it is only appropriate that  today we stand under the same banner of ‘Refugee Protection’. 

 This is a perfect theme for World Refugee Day, but it inevitably leads us to ask: how  is Australia’s role in providing refugee protection understood?  What does it mean to  average Australians? 

 It is no secret that under the previous government, the issue of refugee protection  was the subject of a deeply divisive debate. Australia’s international reputation was  tarnished by the way the previous government sought to demonise refugees for its  own domestic political purposes. This is unfortunate, since it overshadowed some of  the positive work on refugee protection that continued during those years. 

 The Rudd Labor Government brings a different approach to refugee and  humanitarian issues. 

 We believe that Australia has a very good story to tell about its commitment to  refugee protection, and that it’s time that Australians heard about it. 

 Australians should feel proud that we have one of the most generous offshore  humanitarian programs in the world. 

 Australians should feel proud that we have a system for refugee protection that is  designed to ensure a fair go for those who seek Australia’s protection, and a humane  response to those who need that protection. 

 Australians should feel proud that our nation enjoys international recognition for its  role in responding to the protection needs of refugees and other displaced people;  that we are a world leader in key areas of refugee protection. 

 And, in particular, Australians should also feel proud of our world class settlement  program that is so successful in helping refugees and humanitarian entrants rebuild  their lives in Australia. 

 The Rudd Labor Government is focused on strengthening and promoting Australia’s  contribution to refugee protection to ensure it continues to be a source of national  pride for Australians into the future. 

 Today, I’d like to speak on each of these four areas in more detail. 

 1. A fair go 

 A fair go means having robust and effective arrangements for considering the claims  of people who seek Australia’s protection. 

 This Government is committed to exploring ways to enhance Australia’s asylum  system and improve the efficiency of Australia’s determination processes. 

 One way of doing this would be the introduction of complementary protection for  people who may not be Refugees, but who are owed protection under other  international human rights instruments, such as the Convention Against Torture. I  have requested my Department to initiate consultations on how this might be  achieved. 

 We aim to rebuild confidence in the integrity of our immigration system, to ensure  that we are meeting our international obligations and to reaffirm our commitment to  protecting some of the world’s most vulnerable people. 

 Where people are found to be in need of protection, Australia should provide it, and  we should feel proud that we have done so. 

 I am very proud to be able to say that this Government has already fulfilled a number  of commitments to revisit Australia’s protection policy settings. 

 Since coming into office, the Rudd Labor Government has brought an end to the  shameful Pacific Solution by closing the centres on Nauru and Manus Island, and by  resettling in Australia those people who in some cases had been languishing there  for years. 

 We have also abolished the unjust Temporary Protection visa, thus enabling about  1000 refugees access to permanent residence to rebuild their lives in Australia and  reunite with separated immediate family members.    

 I am proud to be able to say that in future, asylum seekers who are found to be  refugees will receive a permanent visa. 

 Maintenance of the integrity of our borders is critical and will continue to be a priority  under this Government - but it is important that Australians understand that this has  little to do with how we treat people once they’re here. 

 Strong border security includes working to stabilise displaced populations in source  countries, strong regional engagement and cooperation on issues such as people  smuggling. 

 2. Offshore humanitarian program 

 The controversies of recent years have sadly clouded over the fact that Australia has  a proud history of providing a generous offshore Humanitarian Program. 

 Since 1945, Australia has resettled around 700 000 people in humanitarian need. 

 Australians should know that this nation offers one of the three largest humanitarian  settlement programs in the world, alongside the USA and Canada. 

 The Rudd Government is deeply committed to building on Australia’s Humanitarian  Program. 

 This commitment is reflected in the 2008-09 budget, which increases the number of  refugee and humanitarian places available to 13 500. 

 This includes 6500 places for refugees, with a one-off increase of 500 places in the  coming financial year to assist people affected by the conflict in Iraq. This represents  the largest refugee component of the Program since 1985/86. 

 The remaining 7000 places will be offered to Special Humanitarian Program  including Protection visa entrants. From 2009-10 onwards, the 7000 will be  increased by 750 places - to 7750 places. 

 Today I am pleased to announce the regional allocations for the 2008-09  Humanitarian Program. 

 The composition of Australia’s Program is always decided after taking into  consideration the views expressed across the Australian community, non-government organisations and the UNHCR.   

 The 2008-09 refugee and humanitarian intake will draw equally from Africa, the  Middle East and Asia.  Each of these regions will be allocated 33 percent, with the  remaining one percent allocated for contingencies. 

 In addition to this, 500 further places have been set aside specifically for Iraqi  refugees in 2008-09. 

 In relation to the our Government’s commitment to African refugees, I would like to  take this opportunity to state publicly that the Rudd Government rejects the  provocative remarks made by the former Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Kevin Andrews, about the settlement prospects of Sudanese refugees. 

 I would also like to make the point that, contrary to what some have claimed, there is  not - and never was - a stop put on refugee arrivals from Africa, and the annual  intake of African refugees has not reduced because of concerns about settlement. 

 It is true that over the period from 2005-06 to 2007-08, the proportion of the program  for African refugees was reduced from 70 per cent to 30 per cent; however, the 70  per cent intake was a historical high because Africa was where the greatest need  was. 

 A change in global circumstances over subsequent years has been reflected in the  reduced allocation of places to refugees from Africa over a period of years. 

 What I want to stress today is that the Rudd Labor Government is firmly committed  to supporting African refugees and others from that continent in humanitarian need. 

 This commitment is reflected in next year’s program, which increases the number of  places set aside for people from Africa to 3548 or 33 per cent of the total program -  up from the current allocation of 30 per cent. 

 This means almost 300 more people from strife-torn regions in Africa will arrive in  Australia. 

 Australia has continued its commitment to the Middle East by making a major  contribution to resettle those affected by the conflict in Iraq. 

 In addition to the 500 extra places for Iraqi refuges that I have already mentioned,  the Government had previously set aside 600 places for Iraqi employees who  supported Australian troops in Iraq, and their families, to resettle in Australia. 

 This policy was developed in recognition of the grave risk these people faced in Iraq  because of their engagement with the Australian Government. 

 3. International recognition and leadership 

 In many ways, Australia’s offshore Humanitarian Program represents world’s best  practice. 

 That is why we believe Australia has a responsibility to take opportunities, wherever  possible, to promote to other countries the benefits of an offshore Humanitarian  Program and to share what we have learnt from our own experiences. 

 Another area which will be a focus of the Government is working with other countries  and UNHCR to resolve protracted refugee situations. 

 In particular, Australia is committed to working with UNHCR’s Asia and the Pacific  Bureau in efforts to find durable solutions for the protracted situations of the  Burmese refugees in Thailand and the Bhutanese refugees in Nepal. I am pleased to  note that in the last 12 months, more than 10 000 refugees from Burma have left  Thailand under the auspices of the world’s largest current resettlement effort. 

 Some 2800 of those people have been granted visas for resettlement in Australia in  2007-08. 

 Since November 2005, Australia has also had a key role in working with other major  resettlement countries and the UNHCR as part of a coordinated international effort to  develop practical strategies to resolve the caseload of Bhutanese refugees in Nepal. 

 To date Australia has granted a total of 165 visas to Bhutanese refugees. Last month  we welcomed the arrival of 24 people for settlement in Australia, the first in a  continuing program of resettlement. 

 On another front, Australia has also been involved in meetings with Ambassadors in  Dhaka to discuss the protracted situation of the Rohingyas in Bangladesh. 

 We have been active in seeking to improve the conditions of these people from  Burma, who are living in particularly difficult circumstances. 

 In 2008-09, we plan to resettle 100 Rohingya refugees from Bangladesh in Australia. 

 The Rudd Government is committed to continue to look for opportunities to assist in  unlocking these and other protracted situations. 

 One of this Government’s key priorities is to enhance Australia’s engagement with  the United Nations, and strengthening our partnership with UNHCR is an important  part of this commitment. 

 Today, I am pleased to announce that Australia has extended a guest of  Government invitation to High Commissioner Guterres for an official visit to Australia,  at a time to be mutually agreed. 

 We believe that this will present an excellent and timely opportunity to strengthen the  important relationship between UNHCR and Australia, and for Australia to share the  knowledge and expertise it has to offer with the UNHCR and - through it - the  international community. 

 By working cooperatively with UNHCR and other states, Australia has been able to  ensure that places available under our program have been used to maximum effect,  in a way that not only benefits the people resettled but also contributes to the  international system of refugee protection. 

 The Government continues to look at ways in which Australia can strengthen its  support to UNHCR and the international protection system. 

 The Australian Government’s 2008-09 Budget includes $9.9 million of unrestricted  core funding for UNHCR - an increase of $1.6 million from the last financial year. 

 Additional contributions to UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies working to  assist refugees will be made through AusAid’s $15 million International Refugee  Fund and my Department’s $ 6.5 million Displaced Persons Program, which in 2008-09 will be supplemented by an additional $10m to help address the situation of  displaced Iraqis in neighbouring and transit countries. 

 I am pleased to say that we have recently been recognised by UNHCR as a major  donor. 

 4. Settlement programs 

 It’s important that Australians know that our country offers one of the most  successful and comprehensive humanitarian settlement programs in the world. 

 Once visas are granted under the Humanitarian Program, Australia provides a wide  range of services to ensure that people are able to make that journey from a refugee  camp safely, in good health and with the information and support necessary to  integrate into Australian society. 

 We provide pre-departure medical screening to ensure that any medical conditions  are identified and treated and to ensure that people are fit to travel. 

 We also provide cultural orientation classes - a fantastic program to give people a  taste of what their new life in Australia will be like, of the support they will receive,  and what will happen upon their arrival. 

 Once people arrive in Australia, my Department provides a comprehensive program  of initial, intensive settlement support for humanitarian entrants under the  government-funded Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy. 

 These services are generally provided for about six months, but may be extended for  particularly vulnerable clients. 

 Services for these clients include on-arrival accommodation, a package of household  goods, linking up mainstream services such as Centrelink and Medicare, access to  professional counselling, information and orientation to their new community and  English language classes. 

 The Rudd Government intends to place more of a focus on delivering effective ways  to assist humanitarian entrants into employment as quickly as possible. 

 This will include examining the expansion of the regional resettlement program,  particularly in areas where there are critical labour shortages. 

 It is worth noting here, that approximately 75 per cent of humanitarian entrants are  under of 30 years of age. 

 Settlement support provides these young people with a real opportunity to rebuild  their lives and to make a worthwhile contribution to Australian society. 

 We are always looking for ways to improve the services and support that we provide  for our humanitarian entrants. 

 We are currently in the process of enhancing the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement  Strategy services. 

 From early July we will have in place Complex Case Support. My Department has  been provided with $35.2 million over four years to establish this program. 

 Complex Case Support is designed to deliver specialised and intensive case  management to recently arrived humanitarian entrants where pre-migration  experiences, such as severe torture and trauma, significant medical conditions  and/or crisis events after arrival in Australia present significant barriers to successful  settlement. 

 This is a positive initiative that will support the small number of humanitarian entrants  who have extensive needs beyond the scope of existing settlement services. 

 While Complex Case Support is primarily for persons who enter Australia under  Australia’s Refugee and Special Humanitarian Program, other visa holders may also  be eligible under exceptional circumstances. 

 Concluding remarks 

 The Humanitarian Program has changed the face of this nation. 

 Many of our ethnic communities, such as those from Vietnam and Africa, first arrived  in Australia as refugees. They arrived with nothing and have rebuilt their lives in  Australia, and our nation is far richer as a result. 

 The Government is committed to building on Australia’s Humanitarian Program in a  way that Australians can be proud of. 

 We are a lucky country, but we’re also a generous country, and we can and should  be proud of our contribution to meeting the protection needs of refugees. 

  

