---
title: "Lenders must exercise due care dealing with refugee arrivals."
date: "2008-03-31"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211314593
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OV8Q6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services 

 

 Lenders must exercise due care dealing with  refugee arrivals  Monday, 31 March 2008 

 Lenders should exercise care when offering loans to the newest and most  vulnerable Australians, the Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs  and Settlement Services, Laurie Ferguson, said today. 

 Mr Ferguson's call on lenders follows the ABC television documentary  screened tonight that claims loans have been extended to recently arrived  refugees who had little understanding of the repayment requirements. 

 ‘I am concerned about reports of loans being made to refugees in their early  settlement period,’ the parliamentary secretary said. 

 ‘I will be writing to the relevant consumer advocacy groups around Australia  who work with newly arrived migrant groups. They too have a keen interest in  protecting consumers from exploitation and unfair contracts. 

 ‘I would urge banks to be conscious that newly arrived refugees often have  tight incomes and limited understanding of the Australian financial system.  The Australian Government provides substantial assistance to refugees in this  early period to ensure they are well-supported.’ 

 Such measures include material support such as accommodation for their first  four weeks in Australia, a package of household goods and access to  Centrelink payments for which refugees are eligible. The Australian  Government has recently expanded initial assistance under the Integrated  Humanitarian Settlement Strategy (IHSS). 

 ‘For eligible arrivals, the IHSS now covers the total cost of rent and utilities for  the first four weeks after arrival,’ Mr Ferguson said. ‘Public transport tickets  will also be provided to new arrivals. Orientation and information is also  provided, with a considerable focus on understanding money, budgeting and  financial services in Australia.’  

 This information is provided pre-arrival through the Australian Cultural  Orientation program and is reiterated onshore by IHSS providers, and through  Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) classes and the onshore orientation  DVD for African refugees. 

 ‘The Get Wise and Your Money components of the AMEP cover paying the  rent, bills and general money management,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 ‘However, I would expect lenders to act in good faith and ensure recently  arrived refugees are made fully aware of, and able to meet, their  responsibilities under any complex financial commitment  - before they make  it,’ the parliamentary secretary added. 

 Media contact: Khaldoun Hajaj - 0404 078 692 

 

