---
title: "New initiative to help employment praised."
date: "2008-02-20"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211313630
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TNQP6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services 

 New initiative to help employment praised  Wednesday, 20 February 2008 

 The Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services,  Laurie Ferguson, today congratulated two of Australia's settlement service  providers for taking the initiative in preparing newly arrived refugees and  migrants for the workforce. ‘This is essential in building the base for a  successful life in Australia,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 Mr Ferguson acknowledged the excellent work of ACL New South Wales and  the Adult Multicultural Education Services (AMES), in better equipping new  arrivals to find work by providing preparation courses in two areas confronting  skills shortages. 

 Students taking English classes at the ACL College in Fairfield in Sydney can  study an Occupational Health and Safety and forklift preparation course or a  basic computer course. 

 ‘This new initiative is an excellent example of how English-language programs  will increasingly need to be designed to prepare people for the workforce,’ Mr  Ferguson said. 

 ‘Clients facing barriers to employment need as much help as possible and  programs like this will help achieve successful settlement outcomes. Whether  it's a lack of Australian workforce experience, recognition of qualifications or  other impediments, new arrivals face clear challenges which we need to  minimise.’  

 Mr Ferguson said partnerships between English language and employment  service providers will help humanitarian entrants and migrants to attain their  goal of successful settlement. 

 ‘Language skills are essential in order to be competitive on the employment  market,’ the Parliamentary Secretary said. 

 ‘The future of our newly arrived migrants and refugees depends largely on the  cooperation of our funded settlement service providers. 

 ‘The fact that many of these students have gained employment and attended  job interviews shows how successful these kinds of partnerships can be. I  hope to see many more examples like this in the future,’ Mr Ferguson added. 

 

 Media contact: Khaldoun Hajaj - 0404 078 692 

