---
title: "Refugee week: a place to call home."
date: "2008-06-15"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211316950
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6KDR6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Refugee Week: A Place to Call Home 

 Sunday, 15 June 2008 

 People around Australia will join in events through the coming week across the  spectrum of the nation’s diversity to mark Refugee Week, the Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said today.  

 ‘Events in every state and territory will celebrate the remarkable journeys of the  people who come here as refugees under Australia’s Humanitarian Program,’  Senator Evans said. 

 ‘Every new Australian citizen has a special story, but I think all Australians would  agree that the people who arrive here as refugees add particularly vibrant threads to  the material that is building our nation.  

 ‘Many humanitarian entrants will become Australian citizens at Refugee Week  ceremonies throughout Australia. 

 ‘For these people, Refugee Week carries two meanings - a reminder of their journey  to a new life in Australia and the day they embraced Australia as home by becoming  citizens of this proud nation.’ 

 Australia consistently ranks among the world’s top three resettlement countries -  along with the United States and Canada - in providing comprehensive resettlement  programs for refugees and others in humanitarian need. 

 In last month’s Budget, the Rudd Government increased the Humanitarian Program  to 13,500 places in 2008-09. This includes 6500 offshore refugee places, with a one-off increase of 500 places in the coming year to assist people affected by the conflict  in Iraq.  

 From 2009-10 onwards, there will be an increase of 750 places in the Special  Humanitarian Program to 7750 places. 

 ‘The offshore component of the 2008-09 Humanitarian Program will focus on  refugees from Africa, Asia and the Middle East,’ Senator Evans said.  

 Since the end of World War II, Australia has welcomed more than 660 000 refugees  and other people in need of humanitarian assistance.  

 ‘Other events around the country will include a candlelight vigil in Brisbane, public  lectures in Hobart and Launceston, a national conference on refugee issues in  Adelaide and a United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees celebration in  Canberra,’ the minister said. 

 ‘There will be many other events around the nation on the theme A Place To Call  Home as Australia marks Refugee Week from June 15-21 and World Refugee Day  on June 20.’  

