---
title: "Towards a social inclusion agenda for Australia: making it a reality together: address to the Blacktown Community Services Conference, Sydney."
date: "2008-04-17"
creators:
  - "Stephens, Ursula"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - SOCIAL INCLUSION AND THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR"
subjects:
  - "Participation in education"
  - "Social inclusion"
  - "Community participation"
  - "Low income"
  - "Employment participation"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Nongovernment organisations"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211315152
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VJ7Q6%22
---

 Skip To Content Skip To Navigation 

  z Media Centre home  

  z Julia Gillard  

  z Brendan O'Connor  

  z Kate Ellis  

  z Maxine McKew  

  z Ursula Stephens  

  Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens 

  Parliamentary Secretary for Social Inclusion and the Voluntary Sector  Parliamentary Secretary Assisting the Prime Minister for Social Inclusion  18 April, 2008 

  Speech 

  Towards a Social Inclusion agenda for Australia:  making it a reality together 

  Blacktown Community Services Conference 2008, Nirimba TAFE, 17 April 2008  

  Introduction  

  Good morning and thank you Michael for your kind words and introduction. 

  Thank you also to Clr Tony Bleasdale for inviting me here today to speak to you about the Australian 

  Government’s Social Inclusion agenda, and what we can do together to make Australia a fairer and more 

  compassionate place to live. 

  Before I do that, I would first like to acknowledge Aunty Gloria who welcomed us to country this morning on 

  behalf of the Dharug People. What a wonderful story Gloria told us.  

  Blacktown remains the home of the largest Indigenous population in New South Wales, adding to the rich 

  diversity of your community. 

  Thanks also to the Simply Voices choir - the Irish say good stories and singing are "great craic" - the best ways 

  to share culture, language and music, which are so important to inclusion. 

  Apart from being the largest population centre in the Western Sydney region, within Blacktown City more 

  Page 1 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus... 

  

  

  than 184 countries and 156 languages are represented. 

  Conferences such as this, where we can explore our new Social Inclusion agenda, cannot come at a better time 

  as we renew the fight against inequality and disadvantage. 

  The fact is, while Australia has enjoyed strong economic success in recent years, there are far too many 

  missing-out. Over the Howard years, the proportion of long-term income-support recipients actually doubled. 

  Many of the challenges we face are evident here in Blacktown. When we look at data in the 2006 Census - 

  with social disadvantage grouped by the total population which lives in an area - Blacktown south-west comes 

  in as the second-most socially disadvantaged in the country. 

  At the time of the census, it had 34,702 people living in areas classified as the "top disadvantage decile" - the 

  ten per cent most disadvantaged. 

  That is a sobering statistic. 

  The overall Blacktown area has seen a steadily increasing unemployment rate - from an average 6.4 per cent in 

  December 2006 to around 7.5 per cent in December of last year. 

  In his report - "Dropping off the Edge" - Professor Tony Vinson told us the people growing-up and living in 

  Australia’s poorest postcodes are up to seven times more likely than the average to suffer from low incomes, 

  long-term unemployment, early school leaving, physical disability and mental illness, prison admissions - and 

  to be at risk of child abuse and neglect. 

  And this occurred during one of our most significant periods of economic prosperity. 

  Well, Kevin Rudd has said it has to improve under his watch - that this is what he wants his government to be 

  remembered for. 

  We have a huge job ahead of us. But what this Government believes in is making a real difference in the lives 

  of Australians who face the greatest hurdles in life. 

  And from the Prime Minister down, we believe in working closely with local government, communities and 

  community leaders to achieve our goals. 

  Australia’s Social Inclusion Agenda 

  Since being appointed as the first-ever Federal Parliamentary Secretary for Social Inclusion, I have often been 

  asked "what exactly is Social Inclusion, what does it mean for me, and what will it mean for disadvantaged  Australians?" 

  When a person is socially included, it means they have easy access to taking part in all of the great aspects of 

  Australian life. They are able to engage in work and education, partake in education and play, and make 

  connections with family, friends and their local community. 

  A person who is socially excluded is essentially being left behind. They face barriers to the participation most 

  of the rest of us take for granted. 

  Page 2 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus... 

  

  

  These barriers include poverty; poor education; drug or alcohol dependence; inadequate access to housing; 

  disability; chronic ill health; or mental illness. 

  Often within many new and growing regions - like those here in Blacktown on the edge of our major cities - 

  community services, public transport and social infrastructure have struggled to keep pace with population 

  and economic growth, in turn creating isolation and exclusion. 

  Also here in Blacktown, many new migrants and refugees may find themselves excluded due to language and 

  cultural barriers.  

  Those who’ve escaped from war-torn areas of the world, such as the Sudan, have arrived here to live in and 

  around Blacktown after surviving different experiences of torture, trauma and social dislocation in their first 

  country, living for years in refugee camps with poor health and nutrition. 

  Many of these adults experience disrupted education or limited recognition of their prior skills and 

  qualifications in their new home. 

  What we have to realise is that these barriers are different, and require holistic, evidence-based solutions. At 

  the Federal level - this hasn’t been done - there have been no successful whole-of-government approaches to 

  these kinds of problems. 

  The Indigenous COAG trials were found to have imposed extraordinary pressures on communities and 

  community organisations, and failed to achieve their objectives because they actually excluded Indigenous 

  people from decision-making. 

  We have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity with Commonwealth and State Governments all of the same 

  persuasion and Kevin Rudd is certainly taking the opportunity by restructuring the work of COAG. 

  He hit the ground running on the 17th of December, when his National Reform Agenda highlighted new 

  approaches to dealing with entrenched disadvantage. 

  We have new levels of cooperation on water reform, health, education, environment and children’s services.  We also have commitments to reducing regulation for businesses and a renewed focus on harmonising state-based regulation. 

  We believe that Social Inclusion is about putting people at the centre of policy development, where all levels of 

  government work in partnership with business and the not-for-profit sector to address the array of different 

  needs. 

  So, from our perspective, Social Inclusion means coordinating policies across national, state and local 

  governments - along with business and the non-profit sector - to make sure no Australian misses-out on 

  meaningful participation in the civic and economic life of our nation. 

  It is also about building a culture of participation. 

  Building on great local initiatives, like those being developed here in Blacktown and I note are your program 

  today: 

  The Willmot Cyber CafÃ© - which is providing residents with access to the internet, e-mail, job networks, 

  Page 3 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus...

  training courses and many other services to help them access new skills and employment opportunities. 

  Football United - this is engaging local residents from all backgrounds and different age groups, using the 

  world game of soccer. Out on the field, this program is fostering inclusion and respect for cultural, religious 

  and ethnic differences. 

  And the Second Annual Burbs Festival - which was held at Blacktown Olympic Park on 12 April - and saw 

  young people from across the region rock on stage, show-off their skateboarding skills, set-up markets and get 

  involved in sporting activities. 

  The common thread with these successful programs and events - and the many others we’ll hear about today 

  - is that they all work because of partnership between local government, local business, and local not-for-profit organisations. 

  They all build a sense of participation and involvement; ensuring those people who are most likely to be 

  excluded get a fair go. 

  More than talk - our Social Inclusion investments so far 

  I’ve explained the theory behind our Social Inclusion Agenda, but what are we doing about it? How do we go 

  beyond rhetoric? 

  Starting with community sector organisations - we realise how critical hard-working staff and volunteers 

  within the not-for-profit sector are in the fight against disadvantage. They are on the frontlines everyday, at 

  the pointy-end of service delivery, changing lives and helping people experiencing hardship. 

  This is where the innovative policy ideas emerge. We know you have many great ideas, and you know best how 

  to implement them. 

  We want to build a new era of partnership because we recognise the relationship is critical to the 

  Government’s capacity to combat disadvantage. 

  I recently read an article about the former Howard Government’s approach to the non-profit sector - which 

  refers to "taming and training" NGOs. This limited their capacity to advocate - as they were threatened with 

  having their funding and contracts removed if they criticised government policy. 

  My work to remove these so-called "gag clauses" - which the previous government used to generate a climate 

  of fear and intimidation about advocacy activities - is well underway. 

  The Rudd Labor Government wants to make it easier for the not-for-profit sector to not only provide services 

  effectively, but to advocate for the voiceless and provide advice to government on how to improve policy. 

  Right now, we are working on creating a National Compact with the not-for-profit sector. This will lay-down 

  the principles of the new relationship we want to build with the sector. 

  It’s about building and rebuilding trust with the sector, bringing us together to focus on our important work, 

  to go forward with shared values. 

  Consultations on the new National Compact will take place in coming months, and I look forward to hearing 

  Page 4 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus...

  from as many people in the sector as possible. 

  To build a culture of participation we are also looking at ways to value, reward and encourage the development 

  of our volunteers - the people out there who keep our society going. 

  One of the ways this could be achieved is through the development of a national volunteering policy 

  framework - for consistency, accreditation and skills transfer. I will talk to the States and Territories about 

  this soon. 

  I want to look at how a framework for relevant training and accreditation could encourage, instead of 

  hindering, participation in volunteering. 

  I believe it’s also important we look at ways to better recognise and acknowledge the contribution volunteers 

  make; celebrate and give praise to the people who work so selflessly and tirelessly for their communities; and 

  to raise the public profile of volunteering, and get away from some of those older stereotypes of what it means 

  to volunteer. 

  As of July 1, the new Volunteer Grants Program will begin to help voluntary organisations continue to support 

  their communities. The implementation of this significantly re-vamped and expanded $69 million program 

  represents the delivery of a major election commitment. 

  Over the next three years, the program will: 

  ·                 Inject an extra $15 million in funding, allowing another 6,000 non-profit organisations to be eligible 

  for assistance; 

  ·                 For the first time, organisations will be able to meet the soaring cost of petrol thanks to fuel 

  vouchers, and; 

  ·                 The program will roll two existing Federal Government community organisation support programs 

  into a single, stream-lined Volunteer Grants Program. 

  As we work to prevent disadvantage by long-term planning, another top priority for Kevin Rudd is early 

  childhood development. 

  We all understand the need to get this right. Investment in early education is of critical importance, and down  the track, it will yield the greatest returns. 

  We’ve introduced a universal right for all children to have access to 15 hours of early learning programs per 

  week, in the year before they start school. Degree-qualified teachers will deliver these programs over a 

  minimum of 40 weeks a year. 

  This will be of great importance here in Blacktown, where I note 16 per cent of the population is aged between 

  0 and 9. This is an amazing statistic. 

  At the other end of the spectrum, the age-group with the largest proportional increase has been among 80 to 

  84 year olds. 

  We have to start asking ourselves, how is Blacktown going to develop the services and workforce which meet 

  Page 5 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus...

  the needs of these demographics? 

  Of course, our early education commitment includes that made when Prime Minister Rudd apologised to the 

  Stolen Generations. That is, within five years, every Indigenous four-year-old in a remote Aboriginal 

  community will have access to a proper early-childhood education program. 

  COAG also recently agreed to a new National Partnership to boost school education, which has a keen focus on 

  the educational needs of students attending schools within poorer suburbs and regions. 

  The indicators at the moment are horrific on school attendance. In many areas, too few children are staying at 

  school, to complete their final studies. 

  We’re creating trade schools within high schools - 450,000 new vocational training places to boost skills and 

  workplace participation - and we’re making university fairer, abolishing full-fee degrees, doubling 

  Commonwealth scholarships and halving HECS for students studying key disciplines such as teaching, 

  nursing, aged care and child care. 

  Homelessness is another one of the nation’s biggest challenges, and the Government has been focussed on it 

  from day one. I know many of you would have seen ABC TV’s confronting documentary "The Oasis". It was a 

  damning indictment on our nation’s failure of many of our young people.  

  On any given night, there are more than 100,000 homeless people across Australia, with half of them under 

  the age of 24. We’ve had 17 years of economic growth, and clearly we should have done better than this. 

  A quarter of these people on the streets are families, who may have fallen victim to domestic violence or other 

  kinds of abuse. 

  To start our work on homelessness, the Federal Government is spending $150 million to create 600 new 

  houses and units for homeless people. We’ve also preparing a White Paper on homelessness with the 

  Brotherhood of St Laurence’s Tony Nicholson and others in the sector, which will set-out our long-term 

  strategy to reduce homelessness. 

  This will be a very important piece of work. 

  We also want to know why people with a disability - or who are living with mental illness - find participation, 

  especially in employment, so difficult. 

  Participation in work is empowering - but Australia has one of the lowest rates among OECD countries, of 

  people with disability engaged in work. 

  Right now the Minister for Workforce Participation and the Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities and 

  Children’s Service are travelling to every capital city to speak with stakeholders and listen to ideas on how we 

  can help people with disabilities, as well as those with mental illness, participate in the workforce. 

  Their National Mental Health and Disability Employment Strategy will be released by the end of the year. 

  These are the first steps of the enormous task ahead; and our work will only be successful if we in Canberra 

  are in partnership with business, the not-for-profit sector, the States and Territories, and of course, local 

  governments. 

  Page 6 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus...

  The importance of Local Government in Labor’s Social Inclusion Agenda 

  The Australian Government is committed to a new approach to local government, which is the closest level of 

  government to the people. Your work will be critical in ensuring our Social Inclusion initiatives are helping 

  those most in need. 

  I am so pleased to see here today presentations of many of the programs set-up locally to tackle disadvantage 

  and provide pathways to inclusion. 

  I outlined some of them, and I see Blacktown City Council has also recently adopted a new Social Plan based 

  on the WHO Solid Facts: The Social Determinants of Health. A key element of this framework is the area of 

  Social Exclusion - and I congratulate you for this. 

  Your programs and initiatives again prove Governments don’t have all the answers when it comes to building 

  a better and more inclusive Australia. 

  I can’t wait to hear the flood of initiatives and proposals which will come from Australia’s best and brightest 

  minds at this weekend’s Australia 2020 Summit - which of course includes a discussion dedicated to Social 

  Inclusion. 

  And, the many ideas you have brought here today. 

  Conclusion 

  This is an exciting time. The Social Inclusion Board will be appointed shortly, to give a high level strategic 

  framework for our Social Inclusion agenda. 

  The board will then advise the Social Inclusion Unit inside the Prime Minister’s Department on where, when 

  and how our first investments can begin - who should be targeted, which communities should be engaged - 

  and what is, and what is not, working. 

  Our Social Inclusion initiatives are not just about welfare. If we are going to get this right, and put people at 

  the centre of policy making and service delivery, we will need input from both social and economic thinkers, 

  and the Commonwealth will keenly take advice from both sources.   

  

  Partnerships are crucial. Partnerships will be needed across levels of government and across government 

  agencies, and with not-for-profit and private sectors if we are to drive 'joined up' policy solutions - it’s a very 

  new way of working and will be challenging for all of us.   

  I believe the road ahead to an inclusive Australia is not a destination, but a journey where innovation and 

  original ideas will be needed from all sections of our community to meet the challenges of the future. 

  We in Canberra won’t be able to achieve this without you in Local Government and the not-for-profit sector. 

  We have the drive and determination to make a difference for the people we are looking to empower. 

  Congratulations on today’s forum, and I look forward to working with you in this new era of partnership and 

  Page 7 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus...

  cooperation. 

  Thank you. 

  Media Contact:  

  Simon Robson 0434 736 519  

  

  Page 8 of 8 Media Centre - Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens - Towards a Social Inclusion agenda ...

  18/04/2008 http://mediacentre.dewr.gov.au/mediacentre/Stephens/Releases/TowardsaSocialInclus...

