---
title: "People smugglers try again."
date: "2008-11-17"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, INTEGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211320513
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PPFS6%22
---

 Mon, 17th November 2008   PEOPLE SMUGGLERS TRY AGAIN 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP   Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 This fifth boat that has been intercepted on its way to Australia, once again  demonstrates that the Rudd Labor Government may still be guilty of not clearly  articulating Labor policy in relation to continuing the Coalition’s excised migration  zones and mandatory detention policies.  

 “It may also be that the queues are becoming so much longer in Australian High  Commissions and Embassies as migration officials try to deal with ever growing  workloads with seriously slashed funding. Some 221 Departmental officials have  been removed from the system.  

 “Clearly the people smugglers are back in business taking advantage of those with  the cash and the contacts, who are willing to risk all in a sea dash to the nearest  landing place in Australia,” Sharman Stone said.  

 “The forty illegal migrants, from Iraq, are being questioned by Indonesian authorities  after being found stranded off the southern Sumbawa Island on their way to  Australia. It is believed they were having engine troubles when they were found.  

 “The international criminals, the people smugglers clearly have no conscience when  it comes to packing people into unseaworthy vessels, given the business tends to be  cash up front, as well we must wonder if the Indonesian crew are aware that the  penalties for aiding or abetting people smuggling can be up to 20 years in prison.  

 “The boatload of people including nine children, were picked up by police mid last  week and are currently housed at police headquarters in the town of Dompu in  Indonesia, close to where they were found. Australia needs to be very grateful to the  Indonesian Government who continues to cooperate closely in trying to stop people  smuggling,” Sharman Stone said.  

 “Too many people have lost their lives attempting to enter Australia illegally and the  current Government’s complacency and lack of understanding could result in even  more attempts, some with very serious death tolls.  

 “Minister Evans needs to publically state his Government’s policy of the continuation  of the excise migration zones, the penalties for people smuggling and Australia’s  intention to maintain a strong border security.  

 Minister Evans should also make it known that Australia will again offer settlement to  humanitarian and refugee settlers, among the biggest targets in the world, including  500 extra refugees from Iraq.   

