---
title: "Royal Commission, Bill of Rights needed to right wrongs of immigration detention."
date: "2008-07-09"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211317631
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HWRR6%22
---

 Thursday 9 October 2008   

 Royal Commission, Bill of Rights  needed to right wrongs of immigration detention   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young’s call for a Royal Commission into immigration  detention, to investigate the psychological impact of Australia’s immigration policies on  detainees, has been backed by a leading human rights expert.   

 The Joint Standing Committee on Migration, of which Senator Hanson-Young is a member,  today heard evidence at a Perth hearing from Curtin University’s Professor Linda Briskman  that a Royal Commission is required to address the negative impact of mandatory detention  and to determine better immigration policies.   

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said: “A Royal Commission would mean we could ensure that  the abuses that have occurred under mandatory detention never happen again.”   

 “Only with the level of investigation and scrutiny a Royal Commission would bring will we see  a complete picture of the damage caused by Australia’s immigration policies.   

 “The Government must commit to providing transparency and accountability on these crucial  matters of human rights and justice.”   

 On 3 September, Senator Hanson-Young asked Immigration Minister Chris Evans if a Royal  Commission could be set up specifically to investigate the psychological effects of  immigration detention on children and their families.    

 In response, Minister Evans said the Government was “not convinced that a Royal  Commission - given the cost and the diversion of resources - would be the best way  forward."   

 Today’s parliamentary inquiry hearing also heard from a number of witnesses that a Bill of  Rights should be introduced in Australia to better protect human rights, including those of  asylum seekers.   

 “Introducing a Bill of Rights is a long-standing Greens policy, and as such it is encouraging  that respected experts agree that such a charter is necessary in Australia,” said Senator  Hanson-Young.   

 “Our country’s treatment of asylum seekers has demonstrated the importance of putting in  place a new legal framework for the protection of human rights.   

 “We must bring Australia into line with the rest of the world and enshrine fundamental human  rights and responsibilities in law.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young called on the Federal Government to make the necessary legislative  changes to back up its pledge to create a more humane immigration policy.   

 “Only with formal changes to legislation will we be assured of human rights being set in  stone, rather than being vulnerable to abuses.”   

 

 Contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760 

  

