---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 10 December 2008: Foreign Affairs Minister, Stephen Smith discusses his travel to Fiji today for the second meeting of the Pacific Island Forum Foreign Minister's Ministerial Contact Group."
date: "2008-12-10"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211321322
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R1ES6%22
---

 

  1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP 

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE:   10 December 2008 

 TITLE:  FOREIGN AFFAIRS MINISTER STEPHEN SMITH DISCUSSES HIS TRAVEL TO  FIJI TODAY FOR THE SECOND MEETING OF THE PACIFIC ISLAND FORUM  FOREIGN MINISTER'S MINISTERIAL CONTACT GROUP. 

 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well later this morning I'll be leaving for Fiji as a member of the Pacific Island  Forum Ministerial Contact Group. This'll be the Ministerial Contact Group's second visit to Fiji this  year. Our objective of course is to see the restoration of democracy and the rule of law to Fiji. 

 The interim Prime Minister Commodore Bainimarama gave a faithful and unconditional undertaking  to the Pacific Island Leaders Forum in 2007 that he would conduct an election by the end of March  next year. 

 In our previous visit to Fiji, the interim government were not definitive about whether they would hold  an  election  by  the  end  of  March  or  not.  And  the  Pacific  Island  Forums  Ministerial  Contact  Group   reported to the Niue Leaders Forum that the only thing standing in the way of an election by the end of 

 March was the political will of the interim government. 

 Since  we  were  last  there,  Commodore  Bainimarama  has  said  publicly  he's  not  proposing  to  hold  an   election. So the first thing the Ministerial Contact Group will do will be to hear that from Commodore  Bainimarama himself to ascertain from him whether he's proposing to conduct an election or not. 

 Given his public statements, it seems clear from afar that he's not proposing to do that. So that's the  first  thing  we  will  need  to  have  from  the  Commodore,  a  definitive  statement  one  way  or  the  other   whether he's proposing to conduct an election, and we'll proceed from there. 

 

  2

 The Ministerial Contact Group of course is made up of foreign ministers from Tonga, New Zealand,  Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Tuvalu and Australia. So I look forward to joining my colleagues in Fiji  in the course of the day. 

 Just some other matters I'd like to make reference to before taking your questions on Fiji. Of course  today is Human Rights Day and the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,  and the Attorney-General has made some announcements today. 

 I'm releasing today a list of $1.5 million-worth of projects to countries in the Asia-Pacific, Africa and  the Middle East to support human rights activities, so those details have been distributed to you. The  $1.5  million-worth  of  projects  throughout  the  Asia-Pacific,  Africa  and  the  Middle  East  reflect  the   importance  that  the  Australian  Government  attaches  to  human  rights,  reflects  the  importance  of  our   commitment to the universal declaration, and makes the point that protection of human rights is a very  high  priority  of  the  Australian  Government  and  the  Attorney-General  has  been  making  that  point  in  the course of the day. 

 Next can I announce that we're providing $4 million-worth of food aid to Sri Lanka. We've become  increasingly  concerned  with  the  deteriorating  human  rights  and  humanitarian  position  in  Sri  Lanka,   and so we're providing $4 million-worth of assistance for immediate food aid assistance in Sri Lanka.  And  we  again  call  upon  all  sides  of  the  conflict  in  Sri  Lanka  to  respect  human  rights,  to  allow  aid   workers  and  humanitarian  assistance  to  be  delivered  to  displaced  persons  and  people  in  the  conflict  

 areas. And we again make the point that we call on all parties to respect human rights in Sri Lanka and  make the point that the conflict in Sri Lanka cannot be solved by military means alone. There needs to  be a political settlement to that issue. 

 So some announcements on Fiji, on human rights and Sri Lanka. And I'm pleased to respond to your  questions on those, or other issues. 

 QUESTION: Mr Smith, given that the interim government has made it clear that they're not going to  hold the elections by March 2009, what exactly can the Ministerial Contact Group do? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well  as  I  say,  the  first  thing  we  want  to  do  is  to  hear  it  from  Commodore   Bainimarama himself. We were in Fiji for our first visit in July, he wasn't definitive one way or the  other. And our report to the Leaders was that the only thing standing in the way of an election was the  political  will  of  the  interim  government.  Since  we  were  there  he  said  publicly  on  a  number  of  

 

  3

 occasions  he's  not  proposing  to  conduct  an  election.  We'd  like  to  hear  that  from him first,  that's  the   first thing. 

 Secondly,  after  we  have  our  conversations  with  Commodore  Bainimarama  we  will  of  course  have   conversations with other political leaders in Fiji, with the former Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase, with  the former Leader of the Opposition, Mr Beddoes, and with all the political parties in Fiji, including  Mr Chaudhry's Labour Party. We'll then present a report to the Pacific Island Forum Leaders. You'll  recall  that  when  the  leaders  met  in  Niue  they  resolved  to  request  the  Ministerial  Contact  Group  to   return  to  make  a  further  report,  and  for  that  to  be  the  subject  of  consideration  by  the  Leaders  at  a   special meeting in Papua New Guinea, which one can expect to be held in the early part of next year. 

 There are of course consequences which flow from the interim government not having an election, and  not returning Fiji to democracy. And those consequences include ongoing sanctions which Australia  has  in  place,  so  far  as  travel  is  concerned.  But  there  will  also  be  consequences  so  far  as  the  Pacific   Island Forum itself is concerned. And at Niue the leaders contemplated the possibility of suspension of  Fiji from the Pacific Island Forum. 

 There are also consequences for Fiji so far as its membership of the Commonwealth is concerned. Fiji  is of course subject to the Harare Declaration, and so the Commonwealth will also be interested in the  failure,  if  that  is  to  be  the  case,  of  Fiji  to  have  an  election  by  the  end  of  March  next  year.  So   consequences do follow and flow and I suspect that will form part of our report to the leaders. 

 QUESTION: Minister, what are your briefings telling you about the consequences and the impact of  the failure to restore democracy in Fiji on the ground? [Indistinct] having an effect [indistinct]. 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  The  consequences  are  seriously  adverse,  both  economically  and  socially.  Fiji   should be the Pacific's premier economy. It's not. We have seen since the interim government and the  coup a decline in Fiji's economic and social circumstances. So there are adverse consequences which  flow from moving away from democracy and the rule of law, and in Fiji it's living standards, social  and economic conditions. 

 QUESTION: Minister, you mention the possibility of suspension from the Pacific Islands Forum and I  gather even hint at it from the Commonwealth for Fiji. It - but could you be explicit for us? Would you  support  that  measure  yourself,  and  would  our  Government  support  those  measures,  if  there  is  no   election soon in Fiji? 

 

  4

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we always take these things step by step. The first step in the process is for  the  Pacific  Island  Forum  Ministerial  Contract  Group  to  go  to  Fiji,  which  we're  doing,  to  assess   circumstances in Fiji and make a report to our Leaders, to the Prime Ministers and to the Premiers. 

 It'll  then  be  a  matter  for  the  leaders  to  consider,  which  they've  made  clear  they  will  do  at  a  special   Pacific Island Leaders' Forum in Papua New Guinea, which I suspect will be held early next year. So,  it'll be a matter for the leaders to consider that. So far as the Commonwealth is concerned, it'll also be  a  matter  for  the  Commonwealth,  when  it  next  meets,  for  leaders  to  contemplate  what  consequences   flow. 

 QUESTION: But presumably, our Prime Minister will take advice from his Foreign Minister. What's  his for… what are you going to advise on this if there is no election? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  my  advice  will  be  contained  in  the  Ministerial  Contract  Group's  report,   which will be made to all of the leaders. 

 QUESTION:  Minister,  in  relation  to  the  issuing  of  a  passport  to  the  drug  baron,  Jack  Lam,  what  -   information do you have on that and what action's being taken? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: I'm sorry, I'm not in a position to respond to that. I'm happy to take it on notice  and provide you with details later. 

 QUESTION:  But  obviously,  there's  some  sort  of  problem  with  resourcing  over  in  some  of  the   consulates, in terms of vetting. 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, as I say, I'm not in a position to give you a response on the detail of that  matter. I'm happy to take it on notice and provide you with a response in the course of the day. 

 QUESTION:  Minister,  are  you  concerned  about  the  issue  of  people  smugglers?  Is  this  becoming  a   growing  concern  for  you  and  do  you  think  there  will  be  more  boats  coming  to  Australian  waters  in  coming weeks and days? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: I think there are two issues here. Firstly, there is the question of what is causing  the  boats  to  come.  And  the  Government's  analysis  and  very  strong  view  is  that  what  is  causing  the   boats to come are what I've described as push factors. In other words, difficulties in countries in our 

 

  5

 region. Afghanistan is one example. Sri Lanka, I've mentioned earlier, is another example. So, there  are  the  push  factors  which  are  causing  people  to  flee  from  countries  where  there  are  very  difficult   circumstances. 

 That's the first point. Secondly, of course, is our border protection and security measures. We've made  it  clear  that  a  combination  of  the  excision  of  various  islands,  the  continuing  utilisation  and  use  of   Christmas  Island  and  the  resources  that  we've  applied  to  border  protection,  by  way  of  aerial   surveillance and sea surveillance, is effective. Very effective. And the Minister for Home Affairs, Mr  Debus, has made it clear that if we need to add to those, you know, we have and we will. 

 We've  seen,  in  the  last  couple  of  months  an  arrival  of  boats.  We  put  that  down  to  two  factors,  both   seasonal and also we have become very concerned that  the  people  smugglers,  the illegal traffickers,  are becoming more sophisticated. And we are responding to that. The best response, in our experience,  and  this  analysis  I  think  is  true  for  the  history  of  this  over  the  last  half  dozen  years,  is  very  close   working relationships and cooperation with our neighbours, particularly Indonesia. 

 And  we  have  a  very  good  and  close  working  relationship  with  Indonesia,  we've  been  in  intense   conversation with them in recent times, including at the recent Australia-Indonesia Ministerial Forum,  which was held here in Canberra recently. So, we're very happy with the cooperation which we have  with Indonesia on the ground. But we are very vigilant about this and we will continue to be vigilant. 

 Can  I  make  this  point?  I  see  the  Opposition,  in  part,  because  I'm  a  bit  confused  about  what  the   Opposition is really saying on this point, but I've seen the Leader of the Opposition out there saying he  ascribes,  over  the  weekend,  the  recent  arrivals  to  our  change  to  the  temporary  protection  visa   arrangements. 

 The  Government  made  the  change  to  the  temporary  protection  visa  arrangements  in  the  first  half  of   this year. Six or seven months, or eight or nine months elapsed before we saw the boats arrive. There's  no relationship in our view to the change in the temporary protection visa arrangements, which make 

 life  easier,  more  suitable  and  more  appropriate  for  people  who  are  given  refugee  status  in  Australia   than under the previous Government's regime. 

 QUESTION: Minister, will there be a side meeting today in Bali on this issue between Mr Rudd and  [indistinct]… 

 

  6

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, you'd need to ask Mr Rudd's Party about that. But we have been in regular,  ongoing  conversations  with  the  Indonesian  Government  about  this  matter.  It's  part  of  the  regular   conversation I have with my counterpart, Foreign Minister Wirajuda. And the cooperation at agency  level, police to police, military to military, is very, very effective and we're very pleased with that - 

 with that relationship. 

 Of  course,  Indonesia  is  not  the  only  government  or  nation  in  our  region  where  we  have  these   conversations. It's clear that we need to have, and we do have those conversations, with other nation  states in our region. A growing issue of concern is Sri Lanka, so, obviously, we are looking at that in  detail as well. 

 QUESTION:  Overnight  General  Petreas  canvassed  a  [indistinct]  surge  in  Afghanistan.  Is  this   something Australia would support and would we consider sending troops to boost those numbers? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, the Minister for Defence and the Prime Minister and I have made it clear  that we're the largest non-NATO contributor to Afghanistan and we're not proposing to increase the  number of troops we have in Afghanistan. President Elect Obama made it clear in the course of the  election campaign that he was proposing to increase the US troop complement in Afghanistan and we  think that is a good thing. 

 We also very strongly believe that there are, if you like, three things that need to occur in Afghanistan.  There  does  need  to  be  an  increase  in  the  troop  complement  to  ensure  peace  and  security  in   Afghanistan. I made this point to the NATO Secretary General, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, when I met  him in Brussels a week ago, and we see that coming from the NATO members. 

 As  I  say,  Australia  is  the  largest  non-NATO  contributor.  We  have  nearly  1100  troops  in  Oruzgan   Province. So an increase in the troop numbers for peace and security reasons is, in our view, essential. 

 Secondly of course is the view that, which we strongly hold, that Afghanistan is not something where  the only contribution is a military contribution. 

 There  has  to  be  a  substantial  civil  capacity  building  contribution  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the   institutions of state in Afghanistan - police, army, justice, and administration - to manage their own  affairs. Which is why at the Afghan Donors Conference in Paris in the first half of this year, Australia  announced a substantial civil contribution; civil capacity building contribution. And it's something like 

 

  7

 $600 million over the last half dozen years. And I think the effect of the announcements in Paris were  something like $250 million over the next two or three years. 

 We are open-minded about giving consideration to increasing that contribution. 

 The third element which is required in Afghanistan is of course, at some point in the cycle, the Afghan  political  leadership  do  have  to  have  a  political  dialogue  and  have  a  political  settlement  to  ensure  a   long-term enduring peace in Afghanistan. 

 QUESTION:  [Fiji]…tourists  are  starting  to  go  back  there  now,  and  it's  starting  to  revive  their   economy. Do you, do you think that's a good thing? Would you advise Australians to go? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well  we,  we  want  to  see  Fiji  as  a  fully  fledged  member  of  the  international   community.  We  want  to  see  Fiji  as  a  fully  fledged  member  of  the  Pacific  Island  Forum  of  the   Commonwealth. We want to see Fiji return to democracy in the rule of law. 

 That  will  make  a  significant  contribution  to  Fiji's  economy.  We  want  Fiji  to  be  one  of  the  premier   economies in the Pacific region. 

 QUESTION: [Indistinct] that they haven't returned to democracy; so, at this point, now, and coming  into Christmas holidays, do you think Australians should be going there? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, it's a matter for Australians to make their own judgement about that. It's a  matter for Australians to make their own judgement about that. 

 From the moment, the moment of the first coup in Fiji, over a decade ago, tourists have continued to  go to Fiji.  That's a matter for, for them. 

 But  I  make  this  substantial  point:  one  of  the  adverse  consequences  of  the  coup  in  Fiji  has  been  a   deterioration  of  their  economic  and  social  circumstances.  And  that  has  in  part  been  as  a  result  of   sanctions  imposed  by  Australia  as  one  nation  state,  New  Zealand  as  another,  but  it's  also  been  the   economic  response  of  other  nation  states.   The  European  Union  for  example  continue  to  refuse  to   apply their sugar levy to Fiji because Fiji, because of Fiji's refusal to return to democracy. 

 

  8

 There are adverse consequences which flow as a result of Fiji not returning to democracy. 

 QUESTION: Minister, what's the latest you've had about the situation in Greece? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: The advice I had this morning was that we're not aware that any Australians have  been caught up in the demonstrations or the violence. 

 Of course we want to see the issue in Greece resolved peacefully and peaceably. 

 We urge Australians, if they are in Greece, to obviously avoid demonstrations and to exercise caution.  And we hope that the, that the political dispute resolves itself as quickly as possible. 

 But, my most recent advice this morning was that we're not aware of any Australians have been caught  up  in  the  events  in  Greece,  and  we  certainly  urge  Australians  who  are  in  Greece  to  avoid   demonstrations. 

 QUESTION: Minister, as at today, our forces in Iraq - unlike the US forces - don't have a status of  forces agreement to remain beyond the end of the year… 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well that's not true. There's a United Nations Security Council sanction which is  good till 1 January. 

 QUESTION: Right. But beyond, beyond the first - beyond the end of the year, our Australian forces  have no legal agreement to remain in the country. 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Which is, which is why, together with other nation states who have forces there,  we're working very assiduously with the Iraqis, as we speak, to effect a status of forces agreement. 

 The same applies for the United Kingdom and other nation states. 

 We effectively agreed some time ago with the Iraqi Government that we would wait until their status  of forces agreement with the United States had been resolved to then enable us to follow. And that's  what we're doing. That's what the United Kingdom is doing. 

 

  9

 QUESTION:  And  how  confident  are  you  that  you'll  achieve  that  in  time,  and  if  you  can't,  what   happens? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we are confident that we'll achieve it in time. And, as in all these things, we  take it step by step. 

 QUESTION:  Minister,  just  back  on  the  people  smuggling  issue  -  does  the  government  have   intelligence to suggest that there will be more boats coming to Australia soon?  

 There's been some stories suggesting that there are a lot of people amassing in Indonesia, coming to  Australia. 

 And  secondly  you  said  that  people  smuggling  operations  were  becoming  increasingly  sophisticated.   What does that mean? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  firstly,  I  never  talk  about  intelligence.  Secondly,  we  are  always  vigilant   about these matters, which is why we are always in conversation with our partners and our neighbours,  and why we continue to ensure that both our cooperation with our neighbours and our border patrols -  both aerial and seaborne - are adequate and appropriate. 

 QUESTION: On Zimbabwe, do you support military intervention there? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well,  we're  a  long-standing  supporter  of  the  United  Nations,  and  we  support   military intervention which is supported by the United Nations Security Council under the charter. 

 And,  I'm  not  expecting  that  in  the  near  future  the  United  Nations  will  provide  such  authority  for   military intervention. 

 Having made that point, let me make the point I have been making since I think February this year, it's  simply time for Mr Mugabe to walk off the stage. He should go. 

 He was rebuffed in the first round of the election, despite all his efforts at rorting. 

 

  10

 Mr  Tsvangirai  did  his  best  to  effect  a  government  of  national  unity.  And  we've  seen  Mr  Mugabe   stalling on that for a matter of months. 

 We've  seen  a  terrible  situation  in  terms  of  a  terrible  humanitarian  situation  in  Zimbabwe  go  to  an   absolutely devastating situation, with an outbreak of cholera. 

 In  the  last  week  or  so  I  have,  I  announced  $8  million  additional  humanitarian  assistance  for   Zimbabwe, both for food and also for assistance on cholera, with water sanitation. 

 And  I'm  currently  giving  consideration  to  more  humanitarian  assistance  for  Zimbabwe  for  cholera   purposes. 

 QUESTION: Would, I mean, you say, you're leaving it to the United Nations Security Council… 

 STEPHEN SMITH: No, but let me make another point that I have been making consistently since all  of this year; since January, February of this year; we continue to urge Zimbabwe's neighbours and the  organisations in Africa, the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, SADC to  put  maximum  pressure  on  Mr  Mugabe  to  go.  And  I  was  very  pleased  and  welcome  very  much  the   recent remarks by the Prime Minister of Kenya, Mr Odinga who essentially said Mr Mugabe should  go.  That's  our  long  standing  position.  He  should  go  and  the  African  neighbours,  the  African  union   SADC should continue to put maximum pressure on Mr Mugabe to do precisely that. 

 QUESTION:  Do  you  think  the  Liberals  would  be  a  more  competitive  opposition  if  they  weren't   encumbered by the National Party? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: I'll simply make this point; Shane Stone was right when he said that the Howard  Costello Government was mean and tricky, and he's right today when he says that you cannot paper  over an organisation when it is subject to massive division. 

 Shane Stone has today said they are wracked by division. He was right when he said the Liberals were  mean and tricky, and he's right when he says they're currently wracked by division. 

 QUESTION:  Mr  Smith,  you  mention  a  need  for  the  Afghanistan  Government  to  eventually  have  its   own  peace  talks.  Hamid  Karzai's  already  mentioned  the  possibility  or  reached  out  extensively  for   peace talks with the Taliban's Mullah Omah, should the Australian Government, or will the Australian 

 

  11

 Government  therefore  support  efforts  by  the  current  Afghanistan  Government  to  talk  with  Mullah   Omah? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well  in  the  first  instance  it's  a  matter  for  the  Afghanistan  Government  and  the   Afghan leadership. That's the first point. Secondly, I think everyone in the international community is  saying the time for that to occur is not yet there because circumstances in Afghanistan don't allow it. 

 From the Australian Government's point of view we don't have conversations with terrorists and we  don't have negotiations with terrorists. 

 But in the first instance it will be a matter for the Afghanistan political leadership to have a political  dialogue and a political settlement. 

 Now  it  may  well  be  President  Karzai  who  does  that  or  it  may  well  be  someone  else.  The  Afghanis   themselves  are  subject  to  elections  in  the  course  of  2009  and  2010,  both  presidential  and   parliamentary. 

 QUESTION: Minister have you had any updates in the Britt Lapthorne case at all? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well I've seen the reports overnight. We continue to have an Australian Federal  Police  officer  in  Croatia  who  is  in  liaison  with  the  Croatian  authorities,  and  the  advice  I  have  is   consistent  with  the  reports  you've  seen  from  the  Croatian  authorities  overnight.  The  investigation  is   ongoing.  We  of  course  continue  to  want  to  see  a  successful  conclusion  to  that  investigation  and  we   continue to be at police level in consultation and liaison with the Croatian authorities. 

 QUESTION:  Sorry.  Back  to  Zimbabwe,  do  you  -  how  do  you  see  the  -  there  appears  to  be  some   disaffection  among  members  of  the  Zimbabwean  army  who  haven't  been  paid  obviously,  and  done   some looting in Harare. Do you think this is a significant sight in terms of the breakdown of Mugabe's  support? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  I  think  it  is  a  sign  that  the  essential  cause  of  the  problem  in Zimbabwe is Mr  Mugabe.  And  the  sooner  he  goes  the  sooner  we'll  have  the  chance  of  rebuilding  Zimbabwe,  of   rebuilding  it  in  a  humanitarian  sense,  in  an  economic  sense,  in  a  social  sense  and  in  a  democratic   sense. It's another reflection that the essential problem in Zimbabwe is the brutal Mugabe regime; the  essential problem in Zimbabwe is Mr Mugabe. 

 

  12

 QUESTION: Are you close to making a decision on whether or not you'll alter restrictions on foreign  aid that allows people to be educated on abortion? 

 STEPHEN SMITH: We continue to have that under consideration. 

 QUESTION: You've talked a bit about the responsibility to protect doctrine. Can you say how it might  apply to Zimbabwe? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  Well  we  very  strongly  support  the  notion  of  responsibility  to  protect  becoming   part of the international norms, becoming part of international law, and I strongly supported that at the  United Nations general assembly in September. We've announced a program where we have a fund of  $2 million to support projects which add to the discussion internationally of responsibility to protect.  We think that it is well worthwhile seeking to enhance that notion in international law. 

 Again when it comes to the notion of the use of force or military intervention unless there is a request  from a nation state the use of military force has to be sanctioned by the United Nations, and that will, I  suspect, continue to be an aspect of responsibility to… 

 QUESTION: Australia's not a member of the Security Council but it can still discuss its own position  with members of the Security Council. 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, as we do, … 

 QUESTION: And what will it be urging members of the Security Council… 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well we are a strong supporter of the responsibility to protect notion and we are a  very strong supporter of seeking to resolve matters in Zimbabwe. And as I say, the advice we give to  all and sundry, including Mr Mugabe, is that the essential problem in Zimbabwe is Mr Mugabe and  the sooner he leaves the better. 

 QUESTION: [Indistinct] to Indonesia. Have you made any decision on that? 

 STEPHEN  SMITH:  As  a  matter  that  continues  to  be  under  consideration  by  the  Treasurer  and  the   Government. 

 

  13

 Okay, thanks very much. Thank you. Oh this may be the last opportunity or the last occasion we do  this  this  year.  So  can  I  just  take  the  opportunity  firstly  in  thanking  you  for  the  civil  and  peaceful   exchanges in the course of the year, and can I wish you all the best for Christmas and the New Year. 

 Thanks very much.  

 

