---
title: "Clear messages are needed with a fourth boat load intercepted."
date: "2008-10-20"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211319652
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/E2ZR6%22
---

 Mon, 20th October 2008   CLEAR MESSAGES ARE NEEDED WITH A FOURTH BOAT LOAD INTERCEPTED 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP   Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The interception of a fourth group of people being smuggled to Australia in the past  10 weeks shows Labor’s border security intentions and capacity are being put to the  test, the Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Dr Sharman Stone, said  tonight.  

 “Unfortunately, the criminal networks and their prospective clients in Indonesia and  East Timor continue to get mixed messages from Australia,” Dr Stone said.  

 “While people smuggling carries a penalty of up to 20 years in prison and hefty fines  in Australia, the younger member of the crew that reached Ashmore Reef has been  flown home to Indonesia without being charged.  

 “Despite many promptings the Minister for Immigration, Senator Evans, still has not  announced if the Labor Government will retain the Coalition’s migration excision  zones. The introduction of these zones in 2002 helped stem the flow of over 12,000  boat arrivals in the previous two years, and undoubtedly saved lives.  

 “It is not fair or reasonable to expect authorities in East Timor, who intercepted the  latest group, to deal with problems made worse by our government’s indecisiveness.  

 “The Labor government was quite forthright in announcing the abolition of Temporary  Protection Visas from the end of August 2008. This means unlawful arrivals found to  be refugees will no longer have to wait to access to the same entitlements as those  arriving through the official channels.  

 “Another major problem is the short and long term consequences of the more than  $67.4 million ripped from the Government’s critical border security and immigration  processing functions.  

 “Australia’s overseas posts have had significant staffing reductions. In all, more than  221 immigration officers have been removed from service, leaving greater  dependence on local staff in missions undertaking key processing roles.”  

 Dr Stone said there were reports of increasing frustration with the time it takes and  mistakes being made in processing applications off-shore.  

 “If someone has the means and the contacts to deal with the global networks of  people smugglers and Australia seems to have gone soft on border security, then  more will push off in leaky boats to try their luck,” Dr Stone said.  

 “It is essential that the Rudd Government restores critical funding to our border  protection and immigration management. As well, Minister Evans needs to urgently  clarify the government’s position in relation to border management and security,” Dr  Stone said.   

