---
title: "Asylum seekers belong on mainland for checks and claims processing."
date: "2008-12-19"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211321607
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/08IS6%22
---

 Friday 19 December 2008   

 Asylum seekers belong on mainland  for checks and claims processing   

 The Greens say Immigration Minister Chris Evans should not be opening the  Christmas Island detention centre to detain recently arrived asylum seekers.   

 The $400 million, 800-bed detention centre on Christmas Island was built by the  Howard Government but left unoccupied until now.   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said the Christmas Island detention centre  should never have been built and should not be housing asylum seekers now.   

 “This facility, of monstrous size and cost to taxpayers, is not an appropriate way to  accommodate people who have arrived in Australia seeking our assistance,” she  said.   

 “It has been described even by Government MP Michael Danby as an ‘enormous  white elephant’.   

 “Minister Evans is making a big mistake in opening up this symbol of the Howard  regime’s appalling mishandling of asylum seekers.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said asylum seekers should be brought to mainland  Australia for prompt processing of their claims, health and security checks.   

 “Offshore processing of claims entrenches an out-of-sight, out-of-mind attitude  towards asylum seekers, and the psychological and physical effects of remote high-security detention are now well known,” she said.   

 “These people deserve timely attention from officials, and access to community  services and support - which is made very difficult when they are being detained  thousands of kilometres away from the nearest capital city.   

 “Public scrutiny and media access are also important to ensure all practices are in  accordance with human rights and dignity of treatment.   

 “The Greens will continue to push for the Government to re-think their offshore  claims processing, and instead introduce better practices adopted from overseas,  such as promptly carrying out health and security checks in residential housing  arrangements on the mainland.”   

 

 Media contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760   

