---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 10th Anniversary of Election as Member for Griffith; National Compact; infrastructure; global financial crisis, US Congress, NRL Grand Final, morning tea."
date: "2008-10-03"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211319241
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1KRR6%22
---

 Prime Minister of Australia 

 

 Interview 

 Press Conference  Brisbane 

 03 October 2008 

 Subject(s): 10th Anniversary of Election as Member for Griffith, National Compact, Infrastructure, Global Financial Crisis, US Congress, NRL Grand Final, Morning Tea 

 E&OE 

 PM: It’s good to be back here with my own community here in Brisbane at a time which is 10 years on since I was first elected  as  the  local  Member  of  Parliament.  It’s  great  to  be  here  with  members  of  these community  organisations,  with   Meals on Wheels, school P&Cs, P&Fs, sporting clubs, refugee advocacy groups and others in the RSL. 

 It is great to be among them because they actually are the building blocks of this local community which I have proudly  represented now for the last 10 years. 

 And also to have the opportunity here to make some comments about what we intend to do as a national government in  building a new compact with the community sector, with the not-for-profit sector. 

 The not-for-profit sector is part of the building blocks of the Australia of the 21st century. We will need a new compact with  them so that we engage their ideas, we take the red tape burden off them and we provide them with greater support to go  out there and do the job which they are best capable of doing and most passionate about doing. 

 One  of  the  things  I  will  touch  on  before  taking  your  questions  is  this. Nation  building,  this  Government  is  passionately   committed to the project of nation building for Australia. Because we have major infrastructure challenges for the future,  our ports, our roads, our rail, our need for high speed broadband. 

 So  many  people,  including  here  in  Brisbane,  are  sick  and  tired  of  sitting  in congested  traffic  all  the  time.  What  are  we   going  to  do  about  that?  Building  the  infrastructure  for  our  major  cities  of  the  future  is  one  of  the  priorities  of this   Government. We intend to put our shoulder to the wheel in partnership with other levels of Government and in partnership  with the private sector. 

 Building Australia, nation building. Big priorities for the future. It is part and parcel of who we have been as a country in  decades past and now the national Government is back in the game of infrastructure development for the future. 

 Last thing I will say is this, for this to happen the Building Australia Fund needs to be passed by the Australian Parliament.  And here is my challenge to the Liberals. Up until now they have opposed it. They have shouted their opposition to this on  the floor of the House of Representatives, said all sorts of negative things about it. 

 I think they are radically out of step with the mood of the Australian nation and the needs of the Australian economy. So  my challenge to them is act responsibly, support this legislation through the Parliament because we want to get on with  the business of nation building and do it with a significant fund to back it through. And that is the Building Australia Fund. 

 Over to you folks. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) opposition has said this will be used to bail out Labor Governments (inaudible) 

 PM: Last time I looked the Government of Western Australia was not a Labor Government. Secondly, the Government of Western  Australia  also  wants  to  partner  with  us  on  infrastructure  developments  across  that  state.  Infrastructure   developments  in  the  north  of  Western  Australia.  Those major  resource  communities  which  need  support,  which  need better port access, which need better general infrastructure support. 

 Do you know, this is a national challenge as well.

 Page 1 of 4 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Press Conference, Brisbane

 8/10/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/interview/2008/interview_0520.cfm

 The other thing I would say to the critics and the naysayers is this. The Reserve Bank for years and years and years has  warned the previous Australian Government of our infrastructure bottlenecks in Australia as pulling back Australia’s future  economic growth. 

 The previous Government ignored all that, 20 warnings they got. That’s contributed to inflation. It’s also created a problem  for long term productivity growth in the Australian economy. Well, we don’t intend to stand still on this. We are going to get  on with the business. Because we budgeted for a budget surplus we have the money to deliver to the Building Australia Fund, an important buffer for the future at this time of global financial uncertainty, an important platform for investing in our  nation’s future infrastructure needs. 

 JOURNALIST: When will that money be made available? 

 PM: One of the decisions we reached yesterday at the Council of Australian Governments was to bring forward an interim report from Infrastructure Australia. Infrastructure Australia has been doing two things - auditing the stock of the nation’s  infrastructure and secondly compiling a national infrastructure priority list for the future. 

 That  was  scheduled  for  March  next  year,  we  have  now  brought  forward  an interim  report  to  be  deliberated  on  by   Government by the end of this year. That is the first step. 

 Second, on the money which is the Building Australia Fund, it depends on when the Liberals get their act together in the  Senate, and whether they are going to support it or vote it down. Their present remarks have been negative. My challenge  to them is this - at this time of global financial uncertainty, unblock the surplus in the Senate and secondly support this important measure for the nation’s future. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 PM: In the budget we allocated some $20 billion for this. So the funding has been allocated, its dedication to this particular fund depends on the passage of the relevant legislation through the Parliament. 

 JOURNALIST:  In  light  of  Bill  Henson’s  interview with  Fairfax  newspapers  (inaudible)  do  you  stand  by  your  previous comments (inaudible) and how do you feel about (inaudible) 

 PM: Oh look, I have nothing to add to what I’ve already said on this matter. Of course, I stand by my earlier remarks. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM:  Well  can  I  just  say,  the  Libs  should  have  a long  hard  look  at  what  happens  elsewhere  around  the  world  when politicians for short term political reasons get in the road of major national initiatives which need to happen. 

 There’s too much short-termism in Australian. There has been in the past. 

 We need long term plans for the future, and guess what, they cost money. You’ve got to do it. 

 If people had this view in the 19th century, and you know something, there never would have been built railroads around  Australia. Because the  arguments back then were  that they  were  too  expensive  and  how  would  governments  roll  them out. 

 My argument for the 21st century is let’s build a national high speed broadband network, let’s make sure that our national  infrastructure  is  up  to  scratch,  and  let’s  not  just  throw  our  hands  up  in  desperation  at  the  huge  challenges  of  urban   congestion. Let’s get on and do something about it. And it costs money. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Are you talking about the American measures? 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: On the American measure, I just spoke with - I thought you were referring to the attitude of the Liberal Party in the Senate on the question of the Building Australia Fund - 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: So that was the answer to that third question.

 Page 2 of 4 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Press Conference, Brisbane

 8/10/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/interview/2008/interview_0520.cfm

 On  the  other  legislature  that  we  were  talking  about,  which  is  that  in  the United  States,  I  spoke  to  our  ambassador  in   Washington only an hour or so ago about how things are shaping up for the House of Representatives debate and the vote. 

 This is still very tight, and I think we’ve got to watch very carefully what happens in the day or so ahead. 

 I spoke yesterday with the House Majority Leader in the United States, Steny Hoyer of the Democrats, made our views  known, and those of other friends and allies in the United States. 

 This is still going to be a very tight vote. 

 I note also what the Speaker, Mrs Pelosi, has had to say about her stated intention of not taking the Bill to the Congress  for a vote, the House of Representatives for a vote, until she’s confident the numbers are there for a passage. 

 The  passage  of  this  measure  is  really  important  for  stabilisation  of  US financial  markets,  which  is  really  important  for  stabilisation of global financial markets, which is really important for unfreezing credit worldwide. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Well, we’ve made our case with the Administration and with the Congress in the United States. I’ve also been on the phone  to  friends  and  allies  with  the  United  States,  the  British  Prime  Minister on  a  couple  of  occasions  and  the  Prime   Minister of Japan yesterday before speaking directly with the House leadership. 

 We have made every argument possible, it’s now down to the vote. In Australia itself though, I’ll say this. We, throughout  the course of this year, the Government, the Treasurer and myself, have been working actively to ensure sufficient liquidity  in the Australian economy through the interventions by the Reserve Bank. 

 Secondly, assisting further on that with the measures the Treasurer announced recently, the Australian Office of Financial  Management. And thirdly, increasing the Australian bond market by the measure we announced to increase the available funds by $25 billion into that. 

 These  are  practical  measures  we’ve  implemented  during  the  course  of  the  year,  together  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s   continued action on the liquidity front. 

 Australia is well positioned. A strong balance sheet, strong regulation, a strong Budget surplus. 

 These are three qualities which we have in Australia which are not evident in many  other countries which are currently  being buffeted. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Well, the importance in Australia is for us to be clear sighted about the difference between US financial institutions and those in Australia. 

 Can I make this point - of the 20 AA rated banks around the world, Australia’s four major banks are among those 20. And  that’s really important. It’s really important in terms of the future of credit arrangements worldwide because when credit  unfreezes - and that’s why the passage of this package before the United States Congress is so important - then lenders  will look at credit ratings of major banks around the world. Which is why it is important to ensure that our banks remain in  first class reputational order and our major banks which represent 85 per cent of the banking system are so important in that respect. We’re different to the United States, obviously we’re not immune from what’s happening in the United States.

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Infrastructure Australia, which has been set up under legislation, will go through the infrastructure audit. It’s not just of capital cities, it’s for the regions of Australia as well. And secondly, provide recommendations on an infrastructure priority  list for the nation. 

 Obviously,  we  can’t  meet  every  expectation  -  that’s  just  being  honest  about it.  But  we  are  going  to,  as  rationally  as   possible through the advice we receive through Infrastructure Australia, put together that priority list. And that will mean  dealing with regional challenges, not just those of the capital cities. 

 But can I add this. 

 National  high-speed  broadband,  the  infrastructure  of  the  21st  century,  the core  part  of  it,  goes  everywhere.  And  those  

 Page 3 of 4 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Press Conference, Brisbane

 8/10/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/interview/2008/interview_0520.cfm

 most disadvantaged now through non-investment in the past are those in regional and rural Australia. 

 JOURNALIST: On footy, the Grand Final’s on this weekend. You’re going? 

 PM: Yep, I’ll be there. 

 JOURNALIST: Now, you’re obviously a proud Queenslander, you’re patron of the Broncos. Who should we hate more - Melbourne or Manly? 

 PM: Let me rephrase the question. Who will I be supporting? Let’s put it in a positive frame of mind. 

 I’ll be supporting the Storm. And the reason is the Storm wouldn’t exist if it was not for Queensland, in players, that is. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: My answer to your question is ‘I didn’t do it’ 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: I think in terms of dress standards about two. In terms of demeanour and attitude, positive attitude, five and a half. Quality of tea itself, right up there with a seven or eight. 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 

 PM: Thanks to B105 for the catering today. It was good. Although I haven’t had any yet. It’s spectacular. But like most spectacular cakes they’re often best looked at rather than consumed. 

 Okay guys, I better run. 

 Page 4 of 4 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Press Conference, Brisbane

 8/10/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/interview/2008/interview_0520.cfm

