---
title: "African restaurant a Brisbane settlement success story."
date: "2008-02-06"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211313330
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CBLP6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services 

 

 African restaurant a Brisbane settlement  success story  Wednesday, 6 February 2008 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services  Laurie Ferguson today gave Brisbane's latest dining sensation - Mu'ooz, a  restaurant specialising in Eritrean delicacies - the ‘thumbs up’ following an  inspection during consultations in the Queensland capital. 

 The recently opened Mu'ooz Restaurant is operated by former refugees from  Eritrea which Mr Ferguson and local Member of Parliament Graham Perrett  visited today. 

 ‘This was a great opportunity to see first-hand the achievement of refugee  women who have taken a huge step and established this business,’ Mr  Ferguson said. 

 ‘It was inspiring to see them using their skills and culture to develop and  operate this restaurant and contribute to the Brisbane community. This is a  true settlement success story. 

 ‘I know as the new MP for Moreton, Graham Perrett is looking forward to  getting to know all of his constituents and today's visit was a good opportunity  to do that, as well as an excellent opportunity to try some Eritrean delicacies  such as injera, a kind of pancake, and zigni, a combination of beef, onions,  tomatoes, chili and spices.’ 

 Mu'ooz Restaurant opened in the Brisbane suburb of Moorooka last month. It  developed from a catering business started by the Eritrean Women and  Family Support Network in 2004. Its name means ‘tasty and healthy’ in the  Eritrean language, Tigrinya. 

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship, through its settlement grants  program, provided Spiral Community Hub with $50 000 to help establish  businesses in new communities in Brisbane. This includes providing  administrative advice and support to the women operating Mu'ooz. 

 ‘The settlement grants program currently provides about $32 million each year  to organisations that help new arrivals settle in Australia,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 ‘Grants are made to projects that help new arrivals orient themselves to their  new community, help new communities develop and promote social  participation and integration,’ he added. 

 While in Brisbane, Mr Ferguson also met representatives from ACCESS  (Assisting Collaborative Community Support Services Inc), the Refugee and  Immigration Legal Service, Boystown, the Townsville Migrant Resource  Centre and the Queensland African Communities Council. 

 Media contact: Khaldoun Hajaj - 0404 078 692 

 

