---
title: "White Ribbon ambassadors speak out on violence against women."
date: "2008-11-24"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211320725
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6A9S6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans   Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 White Ribbon ambassadors speak out on violence against  women 

 Monday 24 November 2008 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, and the  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie  Ferguson, have joined the growing list of prominent Australians who are White  Ribbon ambassadors. 

 The White Ribbon Foundation of Australia aims to eliminate violence against women.  White Ribbon ambassadors are prominent men from many fields who use their  leadership skills and networks to raise awareness, including the importance of  wearing a white ribbon tomorrow (November 25), the International Day for the  Elimination of Violence Against Women. 

 ‘Violence against women is unacceptable in Australian society and I encourage all  men to take a stand on this issue,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘We are all role models with a voice, whether as fathers, brothers, uncles, community  members or workmates and we can all make it clear that we will not condone the  violence. 

 ‘Within the broader Australian community and within Australia’s increasingly diverse  population, we still have much to do to change attitudes and behaviour that condone  domestic violence.’ 

 Senator Evans said Australia’s humanitarian program offered specific protection to  refugee women in particularly vulnerable situations. 

 ‘The "woman at risk" program helps women who are in danger of victimisation and  serious abuse because of their gender,’ Senator Evans said. 

 The minister said 13.7 per cent of the 13 014 refugee visas granted in 2007-08 were  for the ‘woman at risk’ category, well ahead of the program’s 10.5 per cent target. 

 The Rudd Government also recently approved $553 000 in funding for a United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) project in Syria to support Iraqi  women and girls who are victims of sexual or gender-based violence. It includes  funding for a safe house where victims will receive counselling, support and other  assistance in the case of emergencies. 

 Mr Ferguson encouraged all men to wear a white ribbon tomorrow to show their  personal opposition to violence against women. 

 ‘We want an Australia in which everyone benefits from our diverse society and in  which people work towards a socially progressive, fair and united country,’ Mr  Ferguson said. 

 ‘I commend those community leaders from Australia’s migrant and ethnic  communities, under the leadership of the Federation of Ethnic Communities Council  of Australia, who have recognised and addressed problems of violence within our  communities.  

 ‘White Ribbon Day is an occasion to encourage all Australian men, especially from  new and emerging communities, to take on the challenge.’ 

 White Ribbon Foundation chairman Andrew O’Keefe welcomed Senator Evans and  Mr Ferguson as ambassadors.  

 ‘It's a campaign that reaches out to all men, of all backgrounds and all stations. And  the personal commitment of Senator Evans and Mr Ferguson to working with  culturally and linguistically diverse communities will be a very important contribution  to strengthening the broad community of support we have in place,’ Mr O'Keefe said. 

 For more information about the White Ribbon Foundation of Australia and its aims,  visit www.whiteribbonday.org.au 

 

 See:   Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2008/ce08112.htm   Last update: 24 November 2008 at 17:12 AEST  

  

