---
title: "Advancing Australia's global and regional economic interests: address to the East Asia Forum in conjunction with the Australian National University."
date: "2008-03-26"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Foreign policy"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211314435
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WXZP6%22
---

 Prime Minister of Australia 

 

 Speech 

 Address to the East Asia Forum  in conjunction with the Australian National University,  Advancing Australia's Global and Regional Economic Interests 

 26 March 2008 

 E&OE 

 The Australian Government’s mission is to implement a reform agenda to build a modern Australia capable of meeting the  challenges of the 21st century - to secure both the nation’s long-term future, and a future for working families. 

 During its first three months, the Government has focussed primarily on the implementation of its domestic policy agenda.  Now,  given  the  uncertainty  in  global  financial  markets  and  the  increasing  challenges  facing  the  global  economy,  the   Government will use the period ahead to engage critical economic decision makers and business leaders abroad. 

 To advocate the strength of Australia’s economic credentials. As well as continuing to engage our economic partners in  the  US,  Europe  and  China  on  the  best  global  response  to  the  current  crisis.  The  Government,  through  the  RBA,  the Treasury and APRA has been actively engaged in monitoring the impact of this crisis since the Government’s election in  November.  This  is  because  the  Government  believes  the  maintenance  of  global  economic  and  financial  stability is   fundamental to Australia’s future and therefore should command the full resources of government as a first priority. 

 Future Challenges for Australia 

 Beyond  the  immediate  and  important  challenges  facing  the  global  economy, Australia  faces  a  range  of  additional   challenges that are as formidable as they are fluid. These include: 

  z inflation at its highest level in 16 years;   z the second highest interest rates among advanced economies;   z productivity growth that has been in decline throughout this decade;   z rising cost of living pressures for working families across the board, including the pressures faced by the poorest 

  Australians;   z global demographic change, including the ageing of Australia’s own population and workforce;   z economic and environmental pressures arising from global climate change;   z the continuing threat of global and regional terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction;   z the security, economic and environmental challenges of our immediate island neighbours in the Pacific, and   z the adequacy of our existing global and regional economic and security architecture to deal with the challenges of 

  the future.  

  Not only are the policy challenges the nation now faces formidable, the policy environment in which the nation must now  operate is increasingly complex and interconnected. There is no longer a clear distinction between that which was once  clinically  defined  as  “foreign”  as  opposed  to  “domestic”;  “internal”  as  opposed  to  “external”;  “national”  as  opposed  to   “international”; “global” as opposed to “local”. 

  What we have witnessed in the post-World War II, post-Cold War, post-ideological age of the late 20th century, and now  the  increasingly  digital  world  of  the  21st  century,  is  the  progressive  globalisation  of  the  security  and  economic  policy   domains of the future. 

  Acting nationally now requires acting internationally 

  The  challenge  this  presents  to  Australian  policy  makers  of  the  future  is acute.  Australia  today  lives  in  an  increasingly   joined-up  world.  If  Australia  fails  to  engage  with  the  global  economic,  security  and  environmental  challenges,  we  will   simultaneously fail to deal with their impact on our own country. 

  That  means  in  order  to  advance  Australia’s  interests  at  home,  we  must increasingly  be  engaged  with  other  nations  in  

  Page 1 of 5 Prime Minister of Australia - Speech - Advancing Australia's Global and Regional Ec...

  27/03/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/Speech/2008/speech_0145.cfm

  responding  to  the  challenges  to  those  interests  abroad.  Foreign  policy,  foreign  economic  policy  and  national security   policy must increasingly be seen as the natural expression and extension of the nation’s domestic policy interests - not as  some sort of policy exotica removed from the Australian mainstream, but as part and parcel of the interests of main-street  Australia.  Those  who  would  still  believe  (or,  for  the purposes  of  crass  partisan  advantage,  pretend  to  believe)  in  the   splendid isolation of the Australian continent live in a fool’s paradise. 

  For example: 

  z a failure to engage with the global community on climate change would exclude us from the chance to shape the  global response in ways consistent with our national interests;   z a  failure  to  act  effectively  on  terrorism  in  our  wider  region  affects  our ability  to  act  effectively  on  terrorism   domestically, and   z a  failure  to  act  on  the  development  challenges  of  the  South  Pacific  Island states  will  result  long  term  in  rolling  

  Australian military interventions, together with the risk of a large-scale influx of refugees from the region.  

  Australia therefore has no option other than to be fully globally and regionally engaged if we are to effectively prosecute  our  national  interests.  The  purpose  of  my  remarks  tonight,  the  first  on  foreign  policy  since  the  election  of  the  new   Government, is as follows: 

  z to outline why the challenges Australia faces will require us to be more internationally active, not less;   z second, to outline why this will require a new period of active, creative Australian middle-power diplomacy, and   z third,  to  outline  a  range  of  economic  policy  considerations  that  will underpin  my  upcoming  visit  to  the  United   States, Europe and China.  

  Australia acting in global and regional partnership 

  For  Australian  policymakers,  this  increasingly  interconnected  policy  terrain underlines  the  importance  of  acting   cooperatively with other states. 

  Australia’s national assets are of course not insubstantial. 

  z Of the 192 members of the United Nations, Australia has the sixteenth largest economy.   z Australia has the fifth largest economy in East Asia.   z Australia is a major supplier of energy and mineral resources to China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.   z And, in purely military terms, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute this year ranked Australia’s defence spending 

  as the 11th largest in the world.  

  Nonetheless, to achieve the sort of global and regional outcomes that are consistent with our interests, we cannot simply  rely  on  our  national  assets  but  instead  must  act  in  partnership  with  our  allies,  friends  and  the  broader  international   community. Australia has a deep, abiding national interest in the furtherance of a robust, international rules-based order  that underpins our long-term security, economic and environmental interests. To maximise those interests, our capacity to  act effectively bilaterally, plurilaterally and multilaterally must continue to be enhanced. 

  Towards a Creative Middle Power Diplomacy 

  That is why the new Australian Government is committed to the principle of creative middle power diplomacy as the best  means of enhancing Australia’s national interests. It is also the best means of acting as effective international citizens in  enhancing  the  global  and  regional  order  on  which  we  all  depend.  That  means  operating  in  partnership  with  our  long-standing ally the United States - as the Government argues that the US continues to be an overwhelming force for good  in the world. 

  It  means  acting  in  partnership  with  our  friends  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  in organisations  including  APEC,  the  ASEAN   Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit. It also means acting in partnership with the United Nations across the range of pan-global challenges from climate change, the Millennium Development Goals and the continuing challenge of nuclear  weapons proliferation. In all these domains, Australia intends to prosecute an active, creative middle power diplomacy in partnership with the community of nations. 

  We believe this is the rational thing to do in pursuit of our own core economic and security interests. We also believe this  is the right thing to do because Australia can be a greater force for good in the world. The truth is that Australia’s voice has  been too quiet for too long across the various councils of the world. That is why during the course of the next three years, the  world  will  see  an  increasingly  activist  Australian  international  policy  in areas  where  we  believe  we  may  be  able  to   make a positive difference. 

  We have begun this process in the Government’s first few months in office with our ratification of Kyoto and the active role  we  played  at  the  Bali  Conference  on  climate  change.  Also  with  our  immediate  response  to  the  security  crisis  in  East  

  Page 2 of 5 Prime Minister of Australia - Speech - Advancing Australia's Global and Regional Ec...

  27/03/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/Speech/2008/speech_0145.cfm

  Timor. 

  And more recently with our new response to the acute development challenges facing the Pacific Island states through the  Port  Moresby  Declaration  -  reinforced  by  our  pre-election  commitment  to  increase  Australia’s  overseas  development   assistance  to  0.5  per  cent  of  GNI  by  2015.  That  commitment  will assist  us  in  fulfilling  our  obligations  towards  the   realisation of the Millennium Development Goals in our own immediate region. For the Australian Government, this is the  beginning of Australia’s renewed international engagement. There is much, much more to be done. 

  Australia’s Global and Regional Economic Interests 

  The area which right now underlines starkly the absolute interconnectedness of Australia’s national, regional and global  interests  is  the  impact  on  the  global  economy  of  recent  instability  in  global  financial  markets.  This  global economic   uncertainty has underlined the decision early in the Government’s term to visit the United States, Europe and China - all  critical to the shape of the global economy for the critical year ahead. 

  A primary reason for this visit is to communicate to the economic and business leadership of the US, the UK and China  the  continuing  fundamental  strength  of  the  Australian  economy  in  the  face  of  international  turbulence.  I  will  meet  with   economic  policymakers  in  Washington,  New  York,  London,  Brussels and  Beijing.  Decisions  taken  in  these  capitals  will   directly  shape  the  global  financial  environment  and  impact  on  Australia’s  economic  future.  It  is  the  Government’s   responsibility  to  influence  international  decision-makers  as  we prepare  the  Australian  economy  to  the  greatest  extent   possible for the turbulence ahead. That is why I will also be taking the opportunity to argue strongly Australia’s economic  case, the robustness of the Australian financial system and the strength of our corporate balance sheets in my meetings with international business leaders. 

  It  is  important  for  our  interests  that  overseas  observers  understand  the different  economic  conditions  in  Australia   compared with other economies. 

  z That Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence.   z That we have a strong regulatory framework for Australia’s financial market.   z That Australia has very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults.   z That the balance sheets of our principal corporates are strong.   z That resources demand (from China and India) is holding up strongly and well into the future.   z That the Government continues to be committed to a conservative approach to budget policy.   z That the Government has zero net public sector debt.   z And  that  the  Government  is  not  complacent  about  the  need  to  push  ahead  with  further,  long-term  economic  

  reform.  

  I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia’s long-term economic future despite the challenges that lie ahead. 

  The Global Financial Crisis 

  The current financial crisis represents the unwinding of the extraordinary global credit boom of the last several years. As  with  previous  credit  market  cycles,  the  top  of  the  cycle  was  characterised  by  a  period  of  strong  economic  growth,  low   interest  rates  and  rapid  increases  in  asset  prices  (especially  the housing  market  and  share  markets).  These  conditions   created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap. 

  Advances  in  information  technology  and  financial  engineering  allowed  the development  of  sophisticated  new  financial   instruments.  Regulatory frameworks did not always keep up with the rapid pace of change. The risks inherent in these   financial innovations were not always well understood by various ratings agencies and regulators. 

  Investors  became  overconfident  and  began  to  accept  higher  risks  and  lower  returns  -  as  reflected  in  the  decline  in   corporate investment yields. In 2007 there was a sudden loss of confidence in the value of mortgage-backed securities when banks began to report large losses on mortgage backed assets. 

  This led banks to hold on to their cash reserves. Interbank spreads rose and interbank lending volumes fell. Banks were  less willing to lend to each other because they feared that they would need the cash themselves, and they were worried  about the risks in other banks.This has led to the significant tightening of credit markets that we have been witnessing. 

  Conditions  in  global  financial  markets  remain  difficult.  There  is  continuing uncertainty  about  the  size  and  distribution  of  losses from the sub-prime crisis. To date, banks have announced write downs totalling $195 billion. Equity markets have  also  fallen  dramatically  with  several  major  bourses,  including  the  ASX, having  fallen  more  than  20  per  cent  from  their  peaks last year. 

  Credit markets remain tight with elevated spreads and securitisation markets are largely closed. There are concerns that  the financial crisis and its flow on effects in the US housing market will cause a wider downturn in the US economy. The 

  Page 3 of 5 Prime Minister of Australia - Speech - Advancing Australia's Global and Regional Ec...

  27/03/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/Speech/2008/speech_0145.cfm

  IMF expects the US economy to slow markedly in 2008 and to grow on average by just 0.8 per cent over the year. 

  Global growth is also expected to slow in 2008. The IMF expects global growth to slow from 4.9 per cent in 2007 to 4.1 per  cent  in  2008,  with  risks  largely  on  the  downside.  In  this  uncertain  environment,  the  Government  is  working  with other  governments and regulatory agencies on how we coordinate the most effective global response to these new challenges  facing the international economy. 

  Engaging our global and regional economic partners 

  The  economic  challenges  we  face  and  the  need  for  cooperative  action  in response  highlight  the  importance  of  the   Australian  Government  engaging  closely  with  our  economic  partners  around  the  world.  The  Australian  Government  is committed  to  pursuing  our  overriding  interest  in  greater  openness  in  global  markets  -  rather  than  retreating  towards   protectionism in the face of global economic uncertainty. 

  For me this message is as relevant in Washington as it is in Brussels and Beijing. 

  The  United  States  is  the  biggest  economy  in  the  world.  It  is  the  largest trading  nation  in  the  world.  The  US  dollar  dominates global financial transactions. For Australia, too, the United States is a crucial economic partner. 

  Our trade is robust - it was worth around AUD$47 billion last year, making the US our third-largest trading partner overall.  The  US  also  accounts  for  nearly  30  per  cent  of  our  incoming  investment  and  for  nearly  40  per  cent  of  our outwards   investment. The United States is more than a close economic partner. In many ways, it plays the most important role in  sustaining global growth and sustaining the momentum underpinning open global markets. 

  US leadership is crucial to getting a good outcome on the Doha Round of trade negotiations. An outcome that delivers  immediate market access gains will give a much-needed confidence boost to business with a signal that the governments of the world are committed to ongoing trade liberalisation. Of course the United States cannot achieve a result on its own. 

  It  also  requires  European  cooperation.  That  is  why  I  will  be  raising  these matters  in  Brussels  as  well  as  Washington.   Australia and Europe have well known differences on agricultural policy. We also have very closely aligned interests on  pushing to make it easier for services businesses to trade across international boundaries. 

  As the policy centre of a unified Europe, Brussels speaks for a trading group that is bigger than even the United States.  And taken as a whole, the European Union is Australia’s biggest trading partner. The United Kingdom is Australia’s largest  trading partner in the European Union and is second only to the United States as a source and destination of investment  for Australia. London is now the world’s largest financial centre. And in London I will argue that Australia remains a first  class place to invest. 

  Australia’s economic engagement spans the globe. But our trading interests are closest with the Asia-Pacific region. Over  70 per cent of our trade is with the member economies of APEC. Our top three merchandise export markets are Japan,  China  and  the  Republic  of  Korea.  India  is  our  fastest  growing  major  export  market.  Our  two-way  trade  with  Indonesia,   Malaysia and Singapore is worth over $40 billion. 

  For  Australia,  it  is  crucial  that  the  Asia-Pacific  region  remains  open  to trade  and  investment.  We  need  open,  inclusive   regional  institutions.  And  we  need  to  ensure  that  bilateral  and  regional  free  trade  agreements  support  the  rules-based   trade system of the WTO. The region’s economic importance to the world continues to grow. Japan is the world’s second-largest economy with a GDP of around USD$4.5 trillion - and Japan remains Australia’s largest export market. That’s why  Australia places great priority on the negotiation of a free trade agreement with Japan. 

  In Beijing I will be discussing our free trade agreement negotiations with China. Progress to date has been slow. It is a  complex  process  to  negotiate  comprehensive  improvements  in  market  access  with  a  country  undergoing  such  rapid reform and development. I will be urging my Chinese counterparts to join with us in collectively redoubling our efforts on  the negotiations to get a high quality outcome. 

  Australia’s trade with China has already been the subject of many economic headlines - last year it became our largest  merchandise trading partner, and over the last decade the value of our merchandise exports has grown by 20 per cent per  year.  And  China’s  global  importance  continues  to  grow  -  it  is  already  the  world’s  third-largest  trading  nation  and  it  has   foreign exchange holdings in excess of USD$1.6 trillion. 

  In all the capitals I will visit, advancing Australia’s economic interests will be at the top of the Government’s agenda. But in  an interconnected world, the economic agenda also has to be seen in the context of global politics and global strategic  stability.  That  is  why  security  policy,  climate  change, development  assistance,  humanitarian  intervention  and  broader human rights will also feature prominently during this visit. Because on the economy, foreign policy and security policy,  Australia is a nation with both regional and global interests which the Government is resolved to prosecute. 

  Page 4 of 5 Prime Minister of Australia - Speech - Advancing Australia's Global and Regional Ec...

  27/03/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/Speech/2008/speech_0145.cfm

  Four years ago at the national conference of the Australian Labor Party, I introduced an amendment to the party’s foreign  policy platform entrenching as the three pillars of our foreign policy: our alliance with the United States, our membership of  the United Nations and our policy of comprehensive engagement with Asia. 

  That  trilogy  is  very  much  reflected  in  the  structure  of  this  upcoming  visit. We  will  work  closely  with  our  ally,  the  United   States - the world’s pre-eminent power. 

  We are committed to re-vitalising our engagement with the United Nations - and working more closely together in the UN  with our partners around the world, including Europe. And we are committed to close engagement with the countries of Asia and the Pacific. It is our neighbourhood. And it is a natural focus for our foreign policy. 

  That is why the Government awaits with interest the views of this conference on the emerging stresses and strains of our  region’s existing institutional architecture. 

  Institutional  reform  is  long  overdue.  But  Australia  will  be  moving  cautiously on  this  score  in  close  consultation  with  our  partners in the region. Our common resolve must be to pursue both a peaceful and prosperous future for the Asia Pacific  region. 

  And it is through this wider process of continuing regional and global engagement that the new Australian Government is  now  determined  to  make  its  contribution  to  the  future  development  of  a  robust  international  rules-based order  that   enhances the security and economic wellbeing of us all. 

  Page 5 of 5 Prime Minister of Australia - Speech - Advancing Australia's Global and Regional Ec...

  27/03/2008 http://www.pm.gov.au/media/Speech/2008/speech_0145.cfm

