---
title: "Navy is on Christmas holidays: come on down!"
date: "2008-12-08"
creators:
  - "Johnston, David"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211321219
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FJCS6%22
---

 NAVY IS ON CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS - COME ON DOWN! 

 The people smugglers have cottoned on very quickly that Labor is soft on border  protection with yet another load of asylum seekers attempting to enter Australia  illegally. 

 What started as a testing of the waters with several small boat incursions in Mid  August is gathering momentum at an increasing rate with people smugglers sending  their largest boat load yet of forty seven illegal entries into Australia. 

 Shadow Defence Minister Senator David Johnston said he was told late on Friday  afternoon that the Navy was scrambling its resources and cancelling leave in an  attempt to intercept this latest brazen effort by people smugglers. 

 “It is clear that the people smugglers are well and truly aware that our surveillance  measures on our northern borders are vulnerable and that they think now is a good  time to risk it, Senator Johnston said. 

 The Navy's Media Release of 18th November 2008 said the "New Generation Navy"  Christmas Holiday program would not have any adverse impact on national security.  It said: 

 

 "The stand down will not impact operations …... Our ships will continue to undertake  border protection duties and meet our commitments in the Middle East Area of  Operations. 500 Navy personnel will remain on active duty over the Christmas  period.”   

 The problem is of course going to be exacerbated when in the next few weeks navy  personnel go off on two months of Christmas holidays. With the current ideal  conditions prevailing and a further reduction in our capabilities to protect our borders 

 it is clear that people smuggling attempts will be on the rise. 

 “I am very concerned that the people smugglers are venturing a lot further south than  would normally be expected. Of two recent attempts, one boat load was detected at  Shark Bay which is only eight hundred kilometres north of Perth and the other, with  forty seven potential asylum seekers on board, off the coast of Broome. The people  smugglers are very deliberately and strategically starting to stretch our border  protection resources. To think that at this time our naval patrols are going to be  reduced because they are sending all but five hundred of naval personnel on  Christmas holidays defies logic,” said Senator Johnston. 

  

