---
title: "Remarks by P. J. Keating in response to inquiries on the Prime Minister's diplomatic initiative in Asia, Sydney."
date: "2008-06-05"
creators:
  - "Keating, Paul"
source: "Office of KEATING, PAUL MP"
subjects:
  - "Regionalism (International relations)"
  - "Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation"
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
  - "Asia"
  - "Pacific Rim"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211316717
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QUVQ6%22
---

 PJ KEATING Tusculum 

 3 Manning street  potts point  NSW  2011  Australia  PO Box 1265  Potts Point  NSW  1335  Australia  Tel 612 9358 5466  Fax 612 9358 5477   

 

 Remarks by PJ Keating in response to inquiries  on the Prime Minister’s diplomatic initiative in Asia   

 I certainly applaud the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd’s renewed focus on the  region in which we live.   

 For eleven years, under Mr Howard and the foreign policies of Mr Downer,  Australia altered its strategic gaze from a balance between Asia and North  America to one predominantly about North America.   

 This change in policy from that of the government I led to 1996, cost Australia  dearly in terms of both perception and reality that we were a country  determined to find our security in Asia rather than from Asia.  And Mr  Howard’s celebrated flirt with Hansonism and his government’s infamous  contempt for refugees, further reinforced what Asians believed was Australia  returning to its old habits and to the creases of the old Western alliance.   

 The real question is, have we lost ground that we are incapable of recovering?   Broadly, I think we have.   

 Twelve years ago, China particularly, was not the nation it is today, yet here we  are, strategically knocking on its door, when twelve years ago we had the door  completely ajar.   

 So anything the Prime Minister does to lean against that door and to prise it  open for China, for Indonesia and for the other important states of the region is  good for us.   

 That said, I believe it will be a very difficult task and not necessarily an  appropriate one, to seek to superimpose some sort of Union across the disparate  societies that make up the Asia Pacific.   

 The principal piece of political architecture in the Asia Pacific is the one I  played the principal role in founding: the APEC Leaders’ Meeting.   

 For the first time in political history we had the President of the United States  sitting in common cause in a body which also represented the President of  China, the Prime Minister of Japan and the President of Indonesia.  Along with  the rest of us. 

  2

 

 The difficulty in creating this body as distinct from APEC the economic body  of 1989, was getting the Chinese President to sit at a meeting which also  represented Hong Kong and Taiwan; getting the President of Indonesia to put  aside Indonesia’s fifty year status as a non aligned country, to join a body with  the President of the United States and for the Prime Minister of Japan to sit  down for the first time since the War, with the leader of China.   

 This is why APEC, the Leaders’ meeting is a jewel of Australian foreign policy  and why it is the overarching and principal piece of political architecture in the  Pacific.  Distinguishing it from the 1989 APEC proposal, which was a mini  OECD of the Pacific: ‘You show me your economic statistics and I’ll show you  mine’.   

 At the moment, Australia has a seat at the APEC Leaders’ table.  We have  already hosted one of its annual gatherings.  We are not a member of the G8  and not a member of the G15.  We have to be careful we don’t end up being a  member of nothing, especially if we pull away the bindings of the APEC  leaders’ meeting itself.   

 As the developer of the APEC Leaders’ Meeting, I can say with singular  authority that it was developed primarily for strategic policy reasons.   Primarily, it was set up to deal with the then unsettled, still unsettled  arrangements between Japan and China and South Korea, in a construct which  included the strategic guarantor of both Japan and South Korea, the United  States.   

 Importantly, the United States, was at first not included in the 1989 APEC  design, though I saw the participation of the United States as being central to  the APEC leaders’ design, over which point I famously fell out with the then  Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohammed.   

 The deal I did with Bill Clinton was that we would set up this strategic body  but we would keep the word ‘economic’ in the title so as not to frighten off  both China and Indonesia from seeing the United States as beginning an  involvement in their strategic affairs.   

 The important thing about the APEC leaders’ meeting is that the heads of the  most powerful nations in the world can meet annually in an informal way to get  to know each other while discussing matters, including strategic ones, under  the aegis of an economic body, requiring no high summitry of the Nixon-Mao  variety.   

 The APEC leaders’ meeting is capable of discussing strategic, security and  economic matters and any other things which are topical or urgent, be it flu  pandemics or multilateral trade initiatives. 

  3

 

 The idea of an Asia Pacific union, though not referred to directly by the Prime  Minister, implies a loss of state sovereignty of the kind European states have  willingly offered in the interest of having a common market, a common  currency and a shared basis for security.   

 I do not believe such a model will or can be adopted by the states of East Asia  or for that matter by the United States.  Problem sharing and dialogue is one  thing, the surrender or partial surrender of sovereignty is an altogether different  thing.   

 God knows it has taken the Chinese 350 years of the modern age to truly  recover their sovereignty, I do not see them sharing much of it with anyone  else.   

 And Japan remains one of the most insular, monocultural countries in the  world, whose political leadership, at least for the last Japanese Prime Minister,  was still reminiscing about China’s war experiences including its foray into  Chinese Manchuria in the 1930s.   

 Indeed, even the basic first step made towards a European community, the  European steel plan of the 1950s, would not, I believe, be capable of emulation  these days, across East Asia and the subcontinent.   

 In the 1990s, there was still space in the big picture of Asia for Australia to do  its stuff; to make the most of open regionalism at the end of the Cold War; to  leave on it the imprint of Australian creativity and values.  But 1996 is now  twelve years ago.  In those critical twelve years, John Howard let the game get  away from us, such that it will now be much harder to put our name on any  maker’s label.   

 

 Sydney  5 June 2008 

