---
title: "Government welcomes 2020 Cultural Diversity Forum."
date: "2008-03-19"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211314309
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JW8Q6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services 

 

 Government welcomes 2020 Cultural  Diversity Forum  Wednesday, 19 March 2008 

 The Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services,  Laurie Ferguson, today welcomed the Australian Multicultural Foundation and  Cultural Infusion's initiative to stage its Cultural Diversity in Australia: to 2020  and Beyond Forum. 

 Mr Ferguson said Australia is, and will remain, a society of people from a rich  variety of cultural, ethnic, linguistic and religious backgrounds. 

 'We have always been a culturally diverse country, from the Indigenous  peoples who have lived in this land for tens of thousands of years, to the  Anglo-Celtic peoples who colonised it and the immigrants and refugees who  have made it their home over the past two centuries,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 'Australians can be proud of the high level of social cohesion this country has  enjoyed. The vast majority of people respect the law, support the human  rights of their fellow Australians and value the freedom and democracy our  country offers.  

 'Whatever our backgrounds, we desire peace, prosperity and opportunity for  ourselves, our children and our nation. We all want to be accepted and  respected for who we are and for what we can contribute.' 

 In pursuing these aspirations together, Mr Ferguson said all Australians must  be prepared to respond to the challenges that lie ahead, including a  globalised economy, an ageing population and overseas conflicts. 

 'If we are to be successful in this we must have strong policies and a clear  sense of direction for the future,' the parliamentary secretary said. 

 'Mr Ferguson said participants could use their discussions from the forum  which will be held in Melbourne on March 19 to help develop that clear sense  of direction for the future.  

 'Australia has achieved extraordinary successes in building a cohesive,  progressive and modern country,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 'But we need to make the most of our cultural diversity to meet the challenges  that lie ahead and I look forward to the forum making a contribution to the 

 Prime Minister's 2020 Summit to be held on April 19-20,' the parliamentary  secretary added. 

 Media contact: Khaldoun Hajaj - 0404 078 692 

 

