---
title: "How community volunteers help refugee settlement."
date: "2008-04-28"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211315340
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GKGQ6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services 

 

 How community volunteers help refugee settlement 

 Monday, 28 April 2008 

 The Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services,  Laurie Ferguson, has recognised the work of community organisations and  volunteers in helping humanitarian entrants begin new lives in Australia. 

 Mr Ferguson recognised the community's work in Hobart today as he  launched the latest Australian Government settlement publication - New  beginnings: Supporting new arrivals on their settlement journey 2006-07. 

 'The book tells stories of refugee and humanitarian settlers and gives an  overview of assistance for new arrivals,' Mr Ferguson said.  

 'It shows how community volunteers work with all levels of government,  service providers, neighbours, families and friends to assist settlement. 

 'These inspirational stories remind us of the importance of the settlement  journey and the need for compassionate and practical approaches to the  challenges faced by new arrivals.' 

 New Beginnings includes the story of humanitarian entrant Irene  Nyiransabimana, who attended the launch. Ms Nyiransabimana was a finalist  in the 2006 Southern Cross Young Australian of the Year competition and is  now an Australian citizen. 

 Guests at the launch at Hobart's International Wall of Friendship also included  volunteers, settlement workers, former migrants and humanitarian entrants. 

 'This place symbolises Australia's warm welcome to many different people  from many different lands,' Mr Ferguson said.  

 'Since 1945, Australia has welcomed more than 6.6 million migrants, including  690 000 refugee and humanitarian entrants fleeing violence and the denial of  basic human rights. 

 'Our 2007-08 Humanitarian Program has 13 000 places. 

 'Australia benefits from people who bring the richness of their cultures, talents  and strengths, and their hopes and dreams,' Mr Ferguson added.  

 Copies of New Beginnings are available from state and territory offices of the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC).  The publication will also  be available from the DIAC website at  www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/settle/index.htm 

 Media contact: Khaldoun Hajaj 02 6277 4920 or 0404 078 692 

 

