---
title: "Permanent visa granted to Robert Jovicic."
date: "2008-02-23"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211313695
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LNQP6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Permanent visa granted to Robert Jovicic 

 Saturday, 23 February 2008 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, has  decided to grant a Permanent Resident visa to Robert Jovicic. 

 Senator Evans said he had moved promptly to resolve yet another  immigration ignominy left over by the Howard/Costello Government. 

 Robert Jovicic was removed from Australia to Serbia in June 2004 on  character grounds after serving a prison term for burglary and theft charges. 

 The former Minister allowed Mr Jovicic to return to Australia in March 2006  after he became destitute and began sleeping on the steps of the Australian  Embassy in Belgrade. 

 However, the Howard Government refused to grant Mr Jovicic a permanent  visa to live in Australia until he became a Serbian citizen, instead issuing him  with a temporary Special Purpose Visa. 

 This left Mr Jovicic in limbo, unable access Medicare and without any  certainty of his future immigration status. 

 Mr Jovicic first arrived in Australia with his parents in 1968 at the age of two,  has only visited Serbia once and does not speak the language.  

 Senator Evans said Mr Jovicic will now be able to remain in Australia with his  family and access social service benefits such as Medicare.  

 ‘The case of Robert Jovicic is one of the many regrettable immigration matters  left unresolved by the Howard Government,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘I have made it a priority to act on those legacy cases and return integrity to  Australia's immigration system.  

 ‘The case of Binh Van (Tony) Tran, who was wrongfully detained for five  years, was a priority on coming to Government and I moved swiftly to grant  him permanent residency. 

 ‘The Rudd Government committed to settling Cornelia Rau's compensation  claim as quickly as possible and we did so in less than three months. 

 ‘We resolved the cases of the seven Burmese and 82 Sri Lankans who were  classified as refugees but had been left languishing on Nauru for months on  end. 

 ‘As a matter of priority, the Rudd Government has also moved quickly to  honour its election commitment to end the former Government's failed Pacific  Solution - a policy that cost taxpayers $300 million and ultimately saw the  majority of refugees who were held offshore end up in Australia. 

 ‘The Howard/Costello Government politicised Australia's immigration system  to serve the interests of the Liberal party, not the interests of Australia.’  

 

 Media contact:Simon Dowding - (02) 6277 7860 or 0411 138 541 

 

