---
title: "Minister Evans must act decisively to send a message to the people smugglers."
date: "2008-10-07"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211319307
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4QRR6%22
---

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for Murray  Tuesday, 7 October 2008 

 Media enquiries: C. R. Evans (Mr), 0417 148 110 

 

 Minister Evans must act decisively to send a  message to the people smugglers.    

 Shadow Minister for Immigration, Dr Sharman Stone, has urged Minister Evans to take  urgent and decisive action to communicate that the Labor Government intends to  retain key elements of Coalition policy to help thwart the people smugglers.      

 Unfortunately, Dr Stone said, Minister Evans may have given a very good impression  to the criminals that the Labor Government has reopened the borders to whoever has  the cash or contacts to make the trip from Indonesia to the nearest parts of Australia. 

 

 “For example, Minister Evans made much of the closing of the detention and  processing centres at Nauru and Manus Island, but failed to mention that these  facilities were being replaced with the just-completed detention and processing facility  at Christmas Island,” Dr Stone said.    

 “Minister Evans has also made much of the Labor Party’s abolition of Temporary  Protection Visas for unlawful arrivals, stating that from August this year, refugees  would receive a permanent visa, regardless of how they get here.      

 “Neither at that time, or at any time since, has Minister Evans announced that the  penalties for anyone convicted of assisting unlawful arrivals is now 10 years jail under  one act and 20 years under another, with fines of more than $100,000 also possible.”       

 Dr Stone said she was concerned that the criminal networks who annually smuggle   thousands of desperate people through international borders may have been  encouraged to again “test Australian waters.”    

 She said the hapless Indonesian crews were probably not aware of the penalties that  will apply if they are convicted, nor are they likely to have much of a share of the cash  paid.    

 “In previous times when a great many boats were arriving, a second boat often  accompanied the first to take off the crew when they were virtually in sight of land.   With these recent arrivals, there does not seem to have been any attempt to assist the  five Indonesians, including a youth, to avoid arrest,” Dr Stone said.      

 “Minister Evans must restate to the international media that Australia has just  committed to one of the biggest refugee intakes ever, including an additional 500  Iraqis who assisted the Coalition of the Willing in the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.    

 “The Federal Opposition fully supports this commitment, but we are concerned that the  Rudd Government’s slashing of funding for immigration processing may mean refugees  and those seeking family reunion are waiting much longer for selection and settlement  in Australia.    

 “This could be driving some of the better resourced into the hands of  the criminals,  literally risking their lives.”    

 “Minister Evans must insist that immigration and border security funding is  immediately reinstated. He should also carefully consider how border protection has  been impacted by this substantially reduced funding.”    

