---
title: "Indonesian meeting focuses on border security enhancement."
date: "2008-08-06"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211318314
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LS7R6%22
---

 Search this site  

    Go

 Home

 Biographical details 

 Media Centre 

 Contact details 

 Department 

 Parliamentary Secretary 

 Links 

 Indonesian meeting focuses on border security  enhancement 

 Wednesday 6 August 2008 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris  Evans, and the Indonesian Minister for Law and Human Rights,  Andi Mattalatta, today announced the successful implementation  of a major border movement alert computer project. 

 Senator Evans said the Enhanced CEKAL System was a  partnership between Australian and Indonesian immigration  services and an example of the close cooperation between the  two countries to enhance border security. 

 ‘The CEKAL system is an Indonesian system used in ports and  offices in Indonesia, and also in embassies and consulates around  the world, to check the names of people applying for visas or entry 

 permits,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The Enhanced CEKAL System is a major upgrade to the CEKAL  system and it is now operational at five Indonesian ports -  Jakarta, Denpasar, Surabaya, Medan and Batam - it will enable 

 more reliable detection of people of concern, as well as assist to  prevent people-smuggling and irregular migration.  

 ‘Projects like these help make travel in the region safer and more  secure.’ 

 The total cost of the project was about $A10 million. An additional  $A2.4 million was allocated in 2008-09 to provide support and  maintenance of the project until 2010.  

 Other measures to further enhance regional cooperation on  border security were also high on the agenda during the ministers’  meeting. 

 ‘Indonesia is a key partner for Australia and the Government is  committed to a close, practical working relationship,’ Senator  Evans said. 

 ‘We are doing a lot together to improve border security, including  through forensic document examination training and initiatives to  detect people who seek to travel on fake or altered passports.  

 ‘We are also exploring ways to better share information between  our countries, and with other countries in the region, on  immigration issues and trends which will help prevent people-smuggling, human trafficking and other forms of trans-national  crime.’ 

 Senator Evans said the commitment to mandatory detention along  with the excision arrangements and immigration processing at 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Page 1 of 2 Indonesian meeting focuses on border security enhancement

 8/08/2008 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/2008/ce08076.htm

 Home  Copyright & Disclaimer  Privacy  Department of Immigration and Citizenship   

 Christmas Island signalled the Australian Government’s strong  stance against people-smuggling. 

 ‘The new 400-bed centre on Christmas Island is now available for  use and people encouraged by people-smugglers to try to  improperly enter Australia will be taken to Christmas Island for  processing,’ Senator Evans said 

 ‘It also demonstrates to our regional partners our strong  commitment to addressing these issues and the value we place on  their cooperation. 

 ‘I want to acknowledge the outstanding work of the Indonesian  authorities to prevent and disrupt the work of people-smugglers.’ 

 Senator Evans also met senior representatives of the Indonesian  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the regional representatives of  International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the Office of the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 

 ‘A robust immigration program benefits both countries through  forging closer people-to-people links and we have seen a steady  growth in Indonesian visitors to Australia with nearly 60 000 visitor  visas granted last year,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘In Jakarta, I also met the regional representatives of the IOM and  UNHCR. IOM is a major partner in the delivery of many of my  department’s - the Department of Immigration and Citizenship’s -  programs in Indonesia including those which assist people who  may be vulnerable targets for people-smugglers. 

 ‘UNHCR also plays a crucial role in dealing with the situation of  asylum seekers in the region and addressing protection issues,’  Senator Evans added. 

 As part of a senior Australian Government delegation, Senator  Evans will now travel to Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore to  discuss a range of border security, migration, humanitarian and  tourism initiatives. 

 See:   Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2008/ce08076.htm   Last update: 06 August 2008 at 16:19 AEST  

 Page 2 of 2 Indonesian meeting focuses on border security enhancement

 8/08/2008 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/2008/ce08076.htm

