---
title: "Centrelink: still caring for the community after 11 years."
date: "2008-09-25"
creators:
  - "Ludwig, Joe"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211319057
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7KOR6%22
---

 MINISTER’S MEDIA CONTACT: Sarah Cosson 0423 823 843    

 

 MEDIA RELEASE  Senator the Hon Joe Ludwig  Minister for Human Services   

 25 September 2008 

 

 Centrelink - still caring for the community after 11 years    

 Minister for Human Services, Senator Joe Ludwig, has congratulated Centrelink  for embracing its compassionate side as the agency celebrates its 11th birthday.    

 “As Centrelink marks another year this week, I’m very pleased to see staff playing  a more inclusive and collaborative role across the welfare sector,” Senator  Ludwig said.    

 “The Rudd Government is committed to progressing a social inclusion agenda.   With over 6.5 million Australians accessing Centrelink services, it is clear  Centrelink will have a large role to play in this mission.”  

 

 “Centrelink is a central player in important programs such as the Northern  Territory Emergency Response, the delivery of flexible services through the  Drought Bus and its efforts to tackle homelessness.”   

 “I wish Centrelink’s 26,000 staff a very happy birthday and applaud their efforts in  doing a difficult job extremely well.”   

 The Senator said this year Centrelink’s birthday coincided with the agency’s  National Awards in Canberra.   

 “I congratulate the winners on their outstanding achievement and exceptional  performance,” Senator Ludwig said.    

 “It’s not always an easy job, but these dedicated men and women continue to find  innovative ways to expand their role to benefit their fellow Australians.”   

 “Last year, Centrelink Social Workers assisted more than 54,000 Australians who  were homeless or experiencing accommodation problems.”    

 “Centrelink’s outreach servicing teams have been at the forefront of addressing  the issue of homelessness for many years and I commend their engagement with  the community sector and the important work they do.”    

 For more information about the services Centrelink offers to customers  experiencing accommodation problems visit the website www.centrelink.gov.au    

 MINISTER’S MEDIA CONTACT: Sarah Cosson 0423 823 843    

 Centrelink National Award winners   

 Ross Divett Memorial Award  Tim Webster, Centrelink Indigenous Response Team   Tim is an inspirational leader working in the Centrelink Indigenous Response Team,  delivering Income Management to remote Indigenous communities in the Northern  Territory. Tim’s innovative approaches to gaining community support, including his  magic skills - which are a hit with the kids - has helped build strong relationships  with communities.   

 Customer Service Award   Tanya Maloney, Remote Area Service Centres    Tanya, Acting Remote Area Service Centre Manager on Palm Island, Queensland,  identified major service and program gaps, which were impacting on living standards  in the community, particularly for children. Tanya set about closing these gaps and  has had enormous success by utilising her strong negotiation skills and winning the  support of the local community, delivering improved outcomes for residents.   

 Employee Profile Award   Robert Luke, Special Benefit and Refugees Servicing    Robert, from Melbourne, has been recognised for his exceptional initiative and  leadership in the development and implementation of the Special Benefit and  Refugee Servicing Team. He’s also well known for his dedication to helping and  training staff to ensure a comprehensive and quality service for customers. 

 

 Network and Relationships Award  Jill Garratt, Senior Social Worker    Jill has been recognised for her role in Centrelink’s response to the Mackay floods.  Jill impressed with her ability to balance community liaison and response co-ordination to ensure the highest level of service possible was provided to those  devastated by this natural disaster.   

 Responsiveness to Government Award  Families and Child Care IT team    This team has been recognised for its ability to implement major changes to IT  systems in an extremely short time frame, to ensure systems were able to quickly  reflect new policy.     

 Centrelink Gold Business Award  Digitisation project    This project is designed to improve efficiency by ensuring information required for  Business Integrity is captured once, can be instantly retrieved and shared simply,  and leads to improved response times for customers.      

 CEO Special Commendation  Fraud Investigation Manual Development Team    This team has been recognised for the introduction of the online Centrelink Fraud  Investigation Manual (FIM). The online manual further enhances Centrelink’s ability  to undertake consistent and compliant fraud investigation activities that meet the  Australian Government Investigation Standards. The FIM was implemented  nationally across 11 Fraud Investigation Teams, and the team trained in excess of  600 Centrelink investigation and intelligence staff.    

 

