---
title: "People smuggling charge sends strong warning"
date: "2008-10-09"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211319385
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2484778%22
---

 

 

 People smuggling charge sends strong warning 

 Thursday 9 October 2008 

 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said the arrest  and charging by the Australian Federal Police of an Indonesian man on a charge of  people smuggling would send a strong message to would-be organisers in the region  that such activity would not be tolerated by the Australian Government. 

 

 

 An immigration officer escorts a 35-year-old Indonesian man from the Christmas Island immigration  detention facility at Phosphate Hill for hand-over to the Australian Federal Police who charged him on  October 9 with people smuggling a group of Afghans and Iranians. The man was allegedly the skipper  of a vessel carrying 12 passengers that was intercepted by Border Protection Command near 

 Ashmore Islands on September 29.  

 

 

 The 35-year-old man is allegedly the captain of a vessel carrying 12 passengers that  was intercepted by Border Protection Command near Ashmore Islands on  September 29. 

 ‘The Australian Government will take all steps possible to ensure those people  behind the practice of people-smuggling are brought to justice,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘People smuggling is an abhorrent crime. To exploit vulnerable people during times  of desperation demonstrates a callous disregard for the law and for humanity.’ 

 The maximum penalty for the offence of organising to bring a group of five or more  non-citizens into Australia contrary to section 232A of the Migration Act 1958 is 20  years’ imprisonment. 

 Senator Evans said the government’s ongoing commitment to border security was  firm and resolute and it would continue to take robust measures to protect Australia’s  borders. 

 ‘People smuggling undermines Australia’s borders and the integrity of its immigration  system and the Government will continue to deal resolutely with unauthorised boat  arrivals,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The government has maintained extensive patrolling of our borders by Border  Protection Command and has consistently made clear its commitment to maintain a  system of mandatory detention and excision.’ 

 ‘The government has also renewed efforts to work closely with regional countries  including Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand to prevent and deter people from  attempting to enter Australia unlawfully.’ 

 Department of Immigration officials on Christmas Island have now completed initial  interviews with the 12 passengers who were on the intercepted vessel.  

 They will remain in detention on Christmas Island while immigration officials make a  thorough assessment of any claims against Australia’s international protection  obligations. 

 The teenage crew member on the vessel will be transferred to Perth and  arrangements made for his removal to Indonesia. 

