---
title: "Extradition of alleged people smuggler."
date: "2009-05-26"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211325787
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AJ4U6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Extradition of alleged people smuggler 

 The Hon Bob Debus and Senator Chris Evans - Joint media release 

 Wednesday, 26 May 2009 

 The Minister for Home Affairs, Bob Debus and the Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, have welcomed the arrest of alleged people  smuggler Hadi Ahmadi following his extradition from Indonesia. 

 Hadi Ahmadi was arrested and taken into custody upon his arrival in Perth today. 

 Ahmadi will face prosecution for 21 people smuggling offences relating to his alleged  involvement in four boat arrivals in 2001.  

 He was arrested in Indonesia on 29 June 2008, and an Indonesian court later found  him eligible for extradition to Australia. On 20 April 2009 President Yudhoyono  signed a decree approving the extradition. 

 Mr Debus said the extradition was the result of ongoing and close cooperation  between Australia and Indonesia in the fight against people smuggling. 

 'Australia is grateful to Indonesia for its bilateral cooperation which demonstrates the  strength of the Lombok Treaty and the broader cooperation of the Bali Process.'  

 Senator Evans said the Australian Government would continue to work with regional  partners to deal with issues involving irregular migration and people smugglers.  

 'The Government has renewed efforts to work closely with regional countries  including Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka to prevent and deter  people from attempting to enter Australia unlawfully,' Senator Evans said.  

 Serious penalties and prosecutions are part of this Government's tough approach to  combating people smuggling, which is a dangerous crime that exploits vulnerable  people.  

 The maximum penalty for the offence of people smuggling is 20 years' imprisonment  under section 232A of the Migration Act 1958. 

 The Rudd Government has committed $654 million for a whole of government  approach to people smuggling in this year's budget and has maintained a system of  excision, mandatory detention and offshore processing on Christmas Island of all  unauthorised boat arrivals. 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09044.htm   Last update: 27 May 2009 at 09:47 AEST  

 

