---
title: "Humanitarian intake must not be sacrificed as skilled migration cut."
date: "2009-03-16"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211323442
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2G1T6%22
---

 Monday 16 March 2009   

 Humanitarian intake must not be sacrificed  as skilled migration cut   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has reminded the Federal Government of its  responsibilities to Australia’s migration intake on humanitarian grounds, as it moves to cut  skilled migration.   

 It was reported today that Immigration Minister Chris Evans announced that Australia’s  permanent skilled migration program would be cut by 14 per cent over the next three months  - the first decrease in this category in more than a decade - to better protect Australian  workers.   

 “While the current economic situation means that we may need to re-assess certain  numbers in skilled migration, we should not lose sight of our commitments to other types of  migration,” said Senator Hanson-Young.   

 “The Greens will be watching carefully as to which trades and professions are being  removed from the Critical Skills List, and what impact this will have on the industries  targeted.   

 “Training should be looked at so that Australian workers can effectively fill any labour gaps  that these cuts create.   

 “The Greens also want to know what the Government is planning to do with the 457 visa  intake.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said she would be writing to Minister Evans today to ask for his  assurance that Australia’s humanitarian migration intake would not be reduced.   

 “Regardless of the Government’s decision to trim some fat from skilled migration, we must  maintain our responsibilities to our humanitarian intake - which is a different category of  migration altogether,” she said.   

 “As a member of the global community, Australia has a responsibility to provide refuge for  those who need our assistance and protection.   

 “Minister Evans must make clear that Australia’s humanitarian intake will be sustained, and  that this category of migration is properly funded in the upcoming Budget.   

 “To see an across-the-board ‘pull up the drawbridge’ approach from the Minister would be  most disappointing.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young also responded to recent reports of a boatload of suspected asylum  seekers from Afghanistan being intercepted by the Navy off the Northern Territory coast.   

 “Christmas Island is not an appropriate place for asylum seekers to have their claims  processed,” she said.   

 “These people should be brought to the Australian mainland for health, identity and security  checks and the processing of their claims.   

 “Rather than the out-of-sight, out-of-mind attitude that offshore detention propagates, asylum  seekers deserve access to community support and public scrutiny of their claim process and  detention.”   

 

 Media contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760   

