---
title: "Address to the 9th International Conference on North Korean Human Rights and Refugees, Melbourne."
date: "2009-03-20"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Korea, North"
  - "Human rights"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211323627
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/513T6%22
---

 

 

 

 Stephen Smith MP 

 Minister for Foreign Affairs 

 

 

 Address to the 9th International Conference on North Korean  Human Rights and Refugees    

 

 

 Melbourne 

 20 March 2009 

 

 (Check Against Delivery)

  2

 

 Thank you, Michael, for your introduction.     

 I congratulate you on your work as Chair of the Australian Committee for  Human Rights in North Korea.   

 I acknowledge the support of the Citizens Alliance for North Korean  Human Rights in organising this event and welcome our international  participants to Australia and to Melbourne.   

 The Australian Government is firmly committed to international efforts to  protect human rights.    

 The human rights situation above the 38th parallel is appalling.  Famine,  torture, disappearances, arbitrary detention, repression and countless  other indignities have been visited on the people of North Korea by their  own leaders.   

 It is over 60 years now since the Universal Declaration on Human Rights.   The international structures and systems that have developed to support  that Declaration have faced and still face a severe test in dealing with  North Korea.   

 Today I will outline the Australian Government’s action in support of the  international protection of human rights.     

 We seek to strengthen international action by working to bolster  international systems and promote international respect for human rights  standards.   

 We act where we can to promote human rights in North Korea but, like  many members of the international community, we are under no illusion  that our actions alone will bring about change.     

 The Human Rights Situation in North Korea   

 There are many experts here today, from Korea and elsewhere, who will  be able to give you first hand information about human rights abuses in  North Korea.     

 I particularly welcome the participation of the UN Special Rapporteur on  the Situation of Human Rights in the DRPK, Professor Muntabhorn.  He 

  3

 has recently reported to the Human Rights Council and I am sure he will  bring a well-informed and current perspective to discussions later today.   

 Professor Muntabhorn’s report makes for troubling reading in its  cataloguing of the systematic violation of human rights in North Korea.   

 From denial of the simple right to food and basic necessities to State-sanctioned torture and execution, millions of innocent people in North  Korea are suffering under a brutal regime.   

 This situation is all the more galling given the considerable expenditure  of resources in North Korea on missile and nuclear programs.   

 Much of the international community’s attention is understandably  focused on these programs and Australia has long held grave concerns  over them.   

 Australia deplores provocative North Korean actions like its current  planned missile launch, and urges that this not proceed. 

 Australia also strongly supports Japan’s call for a full accounting of the  fate of Japanese citizens abducted by North Korea. 

 Pyongyang’s continuing unpredictable behaviour is a stark reminder of  the dangers of nuclear proliferation.   

 We are using our strong non-proliferation credentials to support  international efforts towards denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula,  including the Six Party Talks.   

 The Australian Government does not, however, believe that these efforts  should impede parallel action to address the grave humanitarian situation  in North Korea.   

 That is why events like today’s Conference are so important.  We need to  continue to raise awareness, exchange information and explore new  approaches to addressing the appalling violation of human rights in North  Korea.     

 We must remember that behind the statistics there are thousands of  individual lives being lived and lost.   

  4

 I was particularly struck by the recent story of Shin Dong-hyuk, the only  person living in South Korea known to have escaped from a North  Korean prison camp.   

 Shin was born in the camp, sentenced with his family to a life of  unimaginable horror and misery because of the supposed crimes of his  uncles.     

 Shin was tortured by fire, had a finger amputated and witnessed the  shooting of his brother and the hanging of his mother before escaping to  the South.     

 To read of these almost unfathomable cruelties is to glimpse State-sanctioned behaviour that is anathema to our common human dignity.     

 The true magnitude of the situation comes with the realisation that Shin’s  ordeal is by no means an isolated case.   

 Australia’s response in an international context   

 

 How do we respond to the tragedy of a State’s blatant disregard for its  own people’s welfare?   

 Our priority must be to provide assistance in those areas where we can do  so with immediate effect.     

 For Australia, this means providing humanitarian assistance including  food, water, sanitation and medicines and ensuring this assistance is well-targeted and delivered effectively to those in need.   

 Since 1994-95, Australia has contributed $75.7 million in humanitarian  assistance to the people of North Korea.  Our commitments this financial  year are A$6.75 million to date.   

 Australia also consistently registers our deep human rights concern  bilaterally with the North Korean Government.  Our Ambassador to  South Korea visited Pyongyang earlier this month to express our position.   

 We are, however, keenly aware that effective pressure on human rights  standards in North Korea will best come from concerted international  action.   

  5

 North Korea may be isolated, insular, and indeed sometimes impervious  to the outside world but we continue to believe that action by the  international community can produce positive results.   

 Australia is therefore active in international fora in encouraging human  rights institutions to take coordinated action.     

 Australia co-sponsored a resolution on the human rights situation in  North Korea at the most recent UN General Assembly late last year.     

 That resolution expressed serious concern over reports of systematic  violation of human rights, including torture and inhuman conditions of  detention as well as violations of economic, social and cultural rights  which have led to severe malnutrition and health problems.   

 We are looking to co-sponsor a similar resolution in the Human Rights  Council over coming days and are working in Geneva to ensure a robust  text.   

 Australia also supports the renewal of the mandate of the Special  Rapporteur, Professor Muntabhorn, to ensure that a human rights expert  appointed by the Human Rights Council continues to report specifically  on the situation in North Korea.     

 Supporting and strengthening multilateralism   

 Australia’s strong support for international action in response to the  human rights situation in North Korea reflects our longstanding  commitment to multilateralism and, in particular, the United Nations. 

 

 In fact one of my distinguished predecessors, Foreign Minister, H V  Evatt, who led Australia's delegation to the UN’s founding meeting in  San Francisco, was a powerful advocate for giving the new body a human  rights mandate.   

 Evatt’s vision of an international body that would protect human rights,  and advance global economic and social development, was a significant  formative influence on the development of the United Nations.    

 The member states' pledge to pursue these goals within the UN became  known in San Francisco as “the Australian pledge” . It now forms article  56 of the United Nations Charter.    

  6

 Evatt's vision is more important today than it has ever been. The need for  effective, global responses to the challenges such as the human rights  situation in North Korea is more urgent and necessary than ever before.     

 Australia is determined to play a constructive role in shaping those  responses and, in doing so, to consolidate our reputation as a good  international citizen.   

 The assistance to North Korea I have mentioned is part of our  commitment to the realisation of the Millennium Development Goals.      

 That commitment also guided our pledge to increase our official  development assistance from 0.3 to 0.5 per cent of gross national income  (GNI) by 2015.    

 We have also committed $200 million over four years under the “UN  Partnership for the MDGs” budget measure. Through this initiative,  Australia will work closely in partnership with key UN agencies leading  international efforts to achieve the goals.    

 Our commitment to strengthen Australia’s engagement with the  international human rights system is reflected in the action the Australian  Government has taken since coming to office in 2007. 

 We have extended a standing invitation to United Nations human rights  experts to visit Australia.  

 In July last year, Australia became one of the first Western countries to  ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  

 The Government has also commenced the process towards becoming a  party to the Convention's Optional Protocol.  

 The Optional Protocol to the Convention on ending all Forms of  Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) entered into force in Australia  on 4 March 2009.   

 Being a party to the Protocol enables Australian women to bring  complaints under CEDAW to the United Nations where domestic  remedies have been exhausted.  

 The Government has also begun consultations with State and Territory  counterparts and NGOs on Australia becoming a party to the Optional  Protocol to the Convention Against Torture.  

  7

 The Optional Protocol establishes a system of United Nations visits to  places of detention and requires states to establish a domestic mechanism  to monitor detention.   

 In last year’s budget the Government announced an additional $200  million over four years in dedicated funding to key United Nations  agencies such as UNICEF and the United Nations Office for the  Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.    

 This commitment enables Australia to contribute directly to work on  issues as diverse as increasing child literacy, improving maternal and  child health and the empowerment of women in countries beyond our  own region.   

 Earlier this month, on International Women’s Day, Tanya Plibersek,  Minister for the Status of Women, and I committed over $17 million from  this additional funding to UNIFEM to address inequality between men  and women.   

 This will support programs to reduce women’s poverty and exclusion,  end violence against women, reverse the spread of HIV and AIDS among  women and girls and support women’s leadership.   

 Conclusion   

 The strength of the Government’s engagement on human rights reflects  our conviction that only global responses will be effective in addressing  human rights challenges.   

 Australia regards the situation in North Korea as one of the most critical  challenges in this context.  It is not a situation the international  community can afford to ignore.   

 Australia will continue to do all it can to maintain international focus on  ways in which we can assist the people of North Korea.     

 Events such as today’s Conference contribute to that focus and provide  important perspectives on a complex and appalling situation.     

 Thank you for your ongoing efforts.       

