---
title: "Climate expert gives voters in Higgins strong alternative."
date: "2009-10-23"
creators:
  - "Brown, Bob"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330486
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4O1V6%22
---

 Bob Brown   Climate expert gives voters in Higgins strong  alternative  Media Release | Spokesperson Bob Brown  

 Friday 23rd October 2009, 8:54am 

 in Climate Change & the Zero Carbon World Elections   

 Australian Greens Leader Senator Bob Brown has today announced the Greens candidate in the Higgins by-election, Dr Clive Hamilton AM.  

 "Clive Hamilton is an outstanding Australian who has pioneered national debate on climate change and social 

 justice. He offers the voters of Higgins a sharp intellect, a very strong social conscience and hard work as their 

 representative in parliament. He will raise the level of debate on climate change and other national issues to a 

 higher level in the House of Representatives," Senator Brown said.  

 Dr Hamilton said: "With our country once again a laggard nation in response to global warming, and the 

 government and opposition competing to vilify asylum seekers, never has a national and international standpoint 

 been more sorely needed. Only the Greens can rise above the cheap politicking and take a principled stance, and I 

 feel privileged to be their candidate. The people of Higgins and I now have the opportunity to make a bold 

 national statement - Australia must take a lead in global issues."  

 "The voters of Higgins are used to having high profile representatives. Dr Clive Hamilton will once again provide 

 Higgins with a leading voice in the national political arena," Senator Brown said.  

 A brief biography of Dr Hamilton is printed below.  

 Media contact: Peter Stahel 0433 005 727  

 

 Dr Clive Hamilton AM  

 Clive Hamilton is one of Australia's leading public intellectuals. He founded The Australia Institute in 1993 and built 

 it into Australia's leading progressive think tank, serving as its executive director until early 2008 when he took up 

 a position as professor of public ethics at the Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics.  

 Clive is particularly well known for his expertise and commentary on the politics and science of climate change, on 

 which he has written two books, with a third on the way. His work on ‘affluenza' and consumerism, including the 

 ‘downshifting' phenomenon, has stimulated a national debate on materialism and the sources of happiness.  

 In 2009 Clive was made a Member of the Order of Australia for his contributions to public debate and public 

 policy. He has held a number of visiting academic positions, including at the University of Cambridge and Yale 

 University. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of the Arts. In 2007 he was a finalist for the Australian of the Year 

 (ACT) and in 2001 a finalist for the Prime Minister's Environmentalist of the Year.  

 Clive holds a first-class honours degree in economics from the University of Sydney and a doctorate in the 

 economics of development from the University of Sussex. He has served as a university teacher, a senior public 

 servant and a resource economics adviser to the Government of Indonesia. In 2005 he founded the Climate 

 Institute with a large grant from a philanthropic trust.  

 Page 1 of 2 Climate expert gives voters in Higgins strong alternative | Bob Brown

 Site Map | Contact Us | Privacy | Disclaimer & Licence | RSS Feeds and Podcasts | Unsubscribe  This website's content is licensed under a Creative Commons License. Some  rights reserved.  Authorised by B. Brown, C. Milne, R. Siewert,  S. Hanson-Young & S. Ludlam, Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 

 

 Clive is the author of a number of best-selling books, including Growth Fetish, Affluenza (with Richard Denniss), 

 Silencing Dissent (with Sarah Maddison) and Scorcher: The dirty politics of climate change. 

 

 Page 2 of 2 Climate expert gives voters in Higgins strong alternative | Bob Brown

