---
title: "Labor’s policy sinks as 43rd boat arrives."
date: "2009-10-22"
creators:
  - "Ley, Sussan"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330447
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0O1V6%22
---

 Thu, 22nd October 2009   LABOR’S POLICY SINKS AS 43RD BOAT ARRIVES 

 The Hon Sussan Ley MP   Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Just over 2000 people on 43 boats have now arrived since the Rudd Labor Government  started softening our border protection policies in August 2008.  

 The HMAS Albany, operating under the control of Border Protection Command (BPC),  intercepted the vessel approximately 10 nautical miles North West of Ashmore Island late  yesterday evening. The vessel was identified by a BPC Dash 8 surveillance aircraft.  

 Less than a day later we have yet another boat arrival which has been intercepted today by  HMAS Armidale only 7 nautical miles west of Christmas Island. This unauthorised boat was  identified by a P3 maritime patrol aircraft.  

 Initial indications suggest there are 32 passengers on board the vessel; however numbers are  yet to be confirmed.  

 “With such a drain on BPC’s resources, Labor is finding it increasingly hard to defend their  failed policy” said Shadow Minister for Customs Sussan Ley. “There are only so many times  the Home Affairs Minister Brendan O’Connor can trumpet the successful interception of yet  another boat arrival.”  

 “The Australian public can hardly be proud of a Government that decides our borders aren’t  worth protecting,” Ms Ley said.  

 “There is certainly nothing humane about a policy that encourages people to risk their lives  on dangerous voyages and puts strain on personnel assigned to border protection duties.  

 “Yesterday in Senate Estimates it was revealed that two of the four sailors thrown into the  water when unauthorised vessel SIEV 36 exploded on April 16 remain too stressed by the  experience to return to work.  

 “The Government seems to ignore the strain on people and resources their failed border  protection policy is causing.  

 “Despite what Minister O’Connor might say, we can hardly be celebrating every time another  boat arrives. Labor cannot spin the boats away, they are real and they are coming. We need  action - not spin,” Ms Ley said.   

