---
title: "No ordinary journey."
date: "2009-08-28"
creators:
  - "Mcmullan, Bob"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211328922
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OJUV6%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   BOB MCMULLAN MP 

 PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 

 MEMBER FOR FRASER  

 

 AA 53  28 August 2009 

 No Ordinary Journey   From wading knee-deep in mud in a Bangladeshi village to counselling street  kids in Vietnam's night markets, these and other incredible experiences of  young Australian volunteers feature in the new documentary No Ordinary  Journey.  

 No Ordinary Journey follows six Australian Youth Ambassadors for  Development (AYAD) as they share skills and knowledge with people in  neighbouring countries, packing more into a year than many will achieve in a  lifetime. 

 Since the AYAD Program began in 1998, more than 2700 young Australians  have contributed to reducing poverty in 20 countries. The volunteers work with  international and local organisations to improve the lives of millions of people  in the developing world to achieve sustainable development.  

 AusAID, the Australian Government's Agency for International Development,  funds and supports hundreds of Australians aged between 18 and 30 every  year as they take up the challenge of helping make our world a better place. 

 The roles they undertake are as diverse as the people themselves but they all  have one thing in common - a desire to make a difference. From carpenters  to engineers and nurses to sports coaches, they all impact on the people and 

 places they work and come back changed by the experience. 

 Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance, Bob  McMullan, is encouraged by the number of young Australians who volunteer  their time and energy to support people in developing countries in our region. 

 “We have one of the most internationally engaged younger generations in the  world and you know the future is in good hands when we have these young  people supporting those less fortunate,” Mr McMullan said.  

 More often than not, an AYAD assignment is just the start of a life-long  journey in the development field. 

 No Ordinary Journey highlights the important contribution young Australians  are making in developing countries in our region, such as: 

 · South Australia's Alice Moffett following her passion for the environment to  Aceh to work with an organisation helping restore the tsunami-devastated  landscape. 

 · Pierre Johannessen swapping a comfortable desk job in Canberra to raise  funds for rebuilding homes destroyed by cyclones in poverty-stricken  Bangladesh. 

 · Vietnam refugee Tam Tran, from Melbourne, returning to his birth country as  a social worker, counselling street kids and encouraging them to return to  school. 

 · Nurses Kylee St George, from Darwin, and Christian James, from Brisbane,  meeting the challenges of an under-resourced health system in Papua New  Guinea. 

 · Melbourne's Tina Macumber establishing a new career and discovering how  sport can help a small country like Samoa move ahead. 

 Entertaining and enlightening, the documentary, No Ordinary Journey will be  aired on the Ten Network at 3pm (AEST) on Sunday 30 August. Segments  will also be available for viewing via the AusAID YouTube channel accessible 

 through the AusAID website http://www.ausaid.gov.au/. 

  

