---
title: "Immigration focus at community forum in Sydney's inner west."
date: "2009-09-28"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329567
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4WSU6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Immigration focus at community forum in Sydney’s inner west 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, chaired a  community forum in Sydney's inner west last night to discuss immigration issues. 

 About 200 people attended the Marrickville forum where they had an opportunity to  raise matters with the minister. 

 The minister addressed a number of issues including recent changes for temporary  skilled overseas workers, migrant settlement services and Australia's humanitarian  program. 

 Senator Evans outlined recent changes to the temporary skilled overseas worker  program (subclass 457 visas) designed to protect the rights of temporary overseas  workers and ensure Australian wages and conditions are not undermined. 

 New worker protection laws that came into effect on 14 September require that all  new workers on subclass 457 visas are paid market salary rates. Employers  currently paying less than the market salary rate to temporary skilled overseas  workers have until 1 January 2010 to commence paying market rates. 

 The laws also enable the Australian Taxation Office to disclose information to the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) in order to ensure correct salary  levels are being paid to visa holders. Information will also be able to be shared with  other enforcement bodies including the Fair Work Ombudsman and occupational  health and safety agencies. 

 The government's package of subclass 457 reforms strengthens the integrity of the  temporary skilled visa program by ensuring it is responsive to market rates, while  protecting the employment opportunities for Australians and the rights of overseas  workers. 

 The minister detailed the government's permanent skilled migration program intake  which has been reduced to 108 100 places for 2009-10 to take into account the  changed economic conditions. 

 The family component for this year is 60 300 places which includes an additional  2500 places for partners, 1000 places for contributory parents and 300 for child  visas. 

 Senator Evans said Australia will also welcome 13 750 people under its  humanitarian program in 2009-10 with the main resettlement focus on refugees from  the three key regions of Africa, Asia and the Middle East. 

 The minister said DIAC assists refugees and humanitarian entrants with a range of  settlement support services that are focused on building self-sufficiency, developing 

 English language skills and facilitating connections with mainstream services to help  them settle in Australia and become contributing members of the community as soon  as possible. 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09092.htm   Last update: 28 September 2009 at 14:17 AEST  

 

