---
title: "55th boat almost slips into Christmas Island."
date: "2009-11-27"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332021
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0ICV6%22
---

 Fri, 27th November 2009    

 55TH BOAT ALMOST SLIPS INTO CHRISTMAS ISLAND 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Another people smuggler boat escaped detection to almost make it to the beaches of Christmas Island yesterday 

 morning.  

 The 55th boat carrying 49 passengers and three crew managed to get within six nautical miles north of Christmas 

 Island.  

 Is this a further sign of resources for the Border Protection Command and the Department of Immigration being 

 stretched to the point of further failures?  

 Since the Rudd Labor Government began changing immigration policy and unravelling Australia’s border security 

 last August, over 2400 people have been taken to Christmas Island to be processed. In the five years before the 

 Rudd Labor Government was elected only 18 boats carrying over 300 people arrived in Australian waters.  

 The new boatload will stretch the population in the Detention Centre to nearly 1200 detainees. Prime Minister 

 Rudd says the facility can hold 1400, with people now being housed in tents and packed into the recreation area 

 where the riots occurred last week.  

 Minister Evans has said the overflow will be diverted to the Darwin Detention Centre and Villawood Detention 

 Centre is being ramped up to deal with “potential surge conditions.”  

 Australia’s orderly immigration and strong border protection reputation is now in tatters. The Australian 

 Government has lost control of who comes into this country. Criminal syndicates are making millions at the 

 expense of those who wait patiently in war zones and refugee camps elsewhere in the world, who cannot afford 

 to buy their way into Australia.    

