---
title: "In the zone: speech."
date: "2009-11-09"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS, INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS AND THE SERVICE ECONOMY"
subjects:
  - "Regionalism (International relations)"
  - "Western Australia"
  - "Infrastructure"
  - "Economic development"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330996
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GPBV6%22
---

 Ministers for Innovation, Industry,  Science and Research 

 IN THE ZONE  

 [Check against delivery]   

 What a wonderful privilege it is to be asked by Ambassador-designate Kim (Bomber)  Beazley to join such a distinguished gathering here ‘in the zone’.   

 It is with some regret that later tonight I must fly out of the zone back east, but I  certainly intend enjoying tonight as I catch up with friends of old like Narongchai  Akrasanee, who supported me as a 24 year-old young fella at the United Nations in  Bangkok where I started my professional career.   

 Narongchai, never back in the late 1970s, wearing my safari suits, did I imagine that  we would both have the opportunity of becoming ministers in governments in our two  countries.   

 Neither then did I imagine that the city around us would develop as it has over only  three decades. I will ask Narongchai tonight whether his imagination was better than  mine.   

 When I returned to Bangkok in January with our 19 year-old son, Ben, I barely  recognised the place; though I did remember our telephone number - song, jeth,  badth, si, si, badth, ha (278 4485), back before the mobile phone was invented.   

 Back in 1979, Vietnam had invaded Kampuchea, as it was then called, and we  travelled to the hastily assembled Sa Kaeo refugee camp to help Cambodian refugees  in distress, many of them dying. After being elected to Federal Parliament in 1998,  one of my early delights as a new MP was to present my annual academic  encouragement award to a Year 12 student at Woodridge High School for achieving  academically against overwhelming odds. Her earliest days on earth were as a tiny  infant in Sa Kaeo refugee camp.   

 My purpose in relaying this story is as a stark human reminder of the profound  changes that have occurred in the zone in the last three decades.   

 And within that 30-year period the pace of change has indisputably accelerated. The  internet as we know it did not exist for the first one-third of that period, having  opened to general subscribers in 1992. And in the last 30 years the population of  countries in the zone has increased by more than 1.3 billion!   

 But if we agree that the zone has changed rapidly in the last 30 years, we can only 

 Innovation Minister > The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP   

 

 Speech   

 The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP   

 09 Nov 2009 

 Page 1 of 6 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 imagine the face of the region in another 30 years’ time. Yet we must prepare for that  change, to shape it in a most positive way.   

 In just a decade from now, China alone will have 15 cities each with more people than  live in Australia - and a further 22 cities each with more than 10 million people.  It it far from a coincidence that the enormous economic growth occurring in the zone,  lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, is being achieved as the  countries in the zone make the transition to market economies.   

 China has been liberalising its economy since 1978, India since the early 1990s, and  Indonesia and the rest of southeast Asia for more than two decades.   

 Along the way there have been setbacks, such as the Asian financial crisis of the late  1990s. Astonishingly, while affected by the global financial crisis when it struck in  late 2008, that setback has been temporary and brief; China, India and Indonesia are 

 now growing strongly again. While recession is still gripping much of the developed  world, the market forces unleashed by economic liberalisation in the zone seem so  powerful as to overcome any obstacles placed on the pathway to prosperity.   

 Nor do China and India aspire to become struggling middle-income countries looking  up to their affluent peers in the West. In the pre-industrial era, China was among the  richest countries on earth and it intends competing for that proud position once again.  India, too, was one of the world’s three great, sophisticated civilisations and aspires to  become so again.   

 Professor Ross Garnaut was one of the speakers at a Twenty-Twenty Vision Forum  series I convened in the early 1990s. He predicted that: “Australians in the year 2020  will live in a world in which the centre of gravity of economic production and power  has shifted decisively to East Asia. The Chinese economy alone will be as large as  the United States; Japan a clear number three in the world league; and a united Korea  sharing fourth spot with Germany. The Indonesian economy will be as large as any in  Europe other than Germany”.   

 Ross went on to suggest that East Asia would produce as many goods and services in  2020 as the United States and Europe combined.   

 A check of the latest purchasing power parity tables bears out most of Professor  Garnaut’s predictions. China is already in second place, Japan at number three and  South Korea at 13 and rising. But, in 1992, Professor Garnaut underestimated the rise  of India to fourth place right now, since India had only just begun to open up.   

 I joined the book club in 2006, writing in Vital Signs, Vibrant Society, launched by  Kim Beazley, that: “For its first two hundred years of European settlement, Australia  suffered the tyranny of distance from European and American markets. Now, in the  twenty-first century, Australia needs to rise to the challenge and seize the  opportunities of proximity to an Asian centre of global economic activity whose five  biggest economies together will soon be the same size as the nine biggest economies  of Europe and North America”.   

 In The Weekend Australian’s feature on this In the Zone conference, Jennifer Hewett  writes: “WA’s geography and abundance of resources, combined with the rise of  China and India, and the continuing importance of Japan, translates into the tyranny  of distance becoming the triumph of proximity”.   

 In fact, the location of this beautiful city close to opportunities in China and India was 

 Page 2 of 6 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 the principal reason that Captain Stirling gave when trying to persuade the Colonial  Office of the merits of establishing a settlement on the Swan River. That was a  century and a half before this, the Asian Century. Now that’s what I call vision!  As the global centre of economic gravity shifts towards the time zone Western  Australia shares with 60 per cent of the world’s population, so too will the Australian  centre of industrial economic gravity continue to shift westward. Further massive  mineral and natural gas projects will be established in Western Australia to provide  the raw and processed materials needed to feed the industrialising processes occurring  in the zone. And with the right vision and planning, the north of Western Australia  could well become one of many food bowls for the zone.   

 With Australia’s population now projected to rise by 60 per cent by the middle of this  century to almost 35 million people, 3½ million of whom would be residents of Perth,  Australia’s urban infrastructure requirements over the coming decades will be  enormous.   

 Add to the urban infrastructure challenge the task of providing the export  infrastructure needed to capitalise on the industrialisation of countries in the zone and  only one conclusion can be reached: the national infrastructure challenge confronting  Australia is colossal.   

 Are we up to the task and what new policy measures are needed if Australia is to meet  this infrastructure challenge?   

 To answer these questions, we need first to accept that Australian infrastructure  investment is coming off a low base. National investment in economic infrastructure  averaged less than 4 per cent of GDP between 1990 and 2007, only rising to 5 per  cent of GDP in 2008 (Port Jackson Partners 2009, p. 34). Even if we were to assume  that 5 per cent is adequate - and it is not - then the underinvestment in infrastructure  over the last decade and a half has been at least $11 billion a year in today’s dollars.  The Rudd Government’s $22.5 billion Nation Building Plan for the Future announced  in the 2009-10 Budget commits a major new investment in the nation’s infrastructure.  It includes an investment of $8.4 billion in expanding Australia’s transport networks -  essential road, rail and port infrastructure.   

 As part of this package, the Government has allocated $339 million for Oakajee Port,  near Geraldton.   

 This deepwater port will help prevent future bottlenecks emerging by supporting the  loading of cape-sized vessels which are increasingly used, worldwide, to transport  iron ore at lowest cost.   

 The $4 billion Oakajee Port development will facilitate the economic development of  the region and its growing iron ore industry. Over the next 20 years, it will handle up  to 35 million tonnes of iron ore exports annually.   

 While it is a project driven by private sector investment, the massive Gorgon LNG  project is also part of the story of the Australian government’s commitment to  supporting Western Australia’s infrastructure. The Rudd government will be  honouring its election commitment to set aside 25 per cent - that’s up to $100 million  a year - of the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax generated from this project for  investment in Western Australian infrastructure.   

 This is another example of the Rudd government working in partnership with the  Western Australian government to plan for the state’s long-term infrastructure needs. 

 Page 3 of 6 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 But the Commonwealth and state governments will not be able to do all the necessary  extra heavy lifting in meeting the nation’s colossal infrastructure challenge.    

 The Commonwealth has committed to holding real growth in spending to 2 per cent a year  in order to return the Budget to surplus in 2015-16 and several states are expected to  scale back their infrastructure spending from the record levels of 2009.   

 At present the private sector is responsible for less than half of national investment in  economic infrastructure. The policy challenge is to improve private sector incentives  for investing in infrastructure, especially export infrastructure.   

 The Rudd government has put in place the institutional arrangements needed to realise  a strategic, nationally-coordinated approach to the future planning and development  of Australia’s critical infrastructure.   

 In 2008, the Rudd government established Infrastructure Australia under Sir Rod  Eddington’s chairmanship as an independent, statutory advisory council to drive the  development of a long-term, coordinated national approach to infrastructure planning  and investment.   

 Infrastructure Australia provides advice to governments, private investors and  infrastructure owners on nationally significant infrastructure priorities, identifies  possible impediments to the efficient use and provision of national infrastructure and  develops policy and regulatory reforms needed to use national infrastructure more  efficiently.   

 For example, Infrastructure Australia has developed a list of ‘pipeline’ infrastructure  projects to help inform governments, investors and infrastructure owners in planning  and coordinating long-term infrastructure investment priorities. 

 

 With the establishment of the Major Cities Unit within Infrastructure Australia, the  Commonwealth government is providing national leadership in the development of  strategic planning frameworks for our largest cities.   

 And, working with the states and territories, the Rudd government has established a  Cities Taskforce to examine how we can ensure our cities are liveable, productive and  sustainable in the future.   

 In addition to putting in place the right institutional arrangements for meeting  Australia’s colossal infrastructure challenge, the Rudd government has worked with  the states to develop a consistent national approach to developing public-private  partnerships (PPPs).   

 But crucially, we will need to ensure that there are strong private sector incentives to  invest in vital export infrastructure.   

 The regulatory arrangements governing access by third parties to public and private  infrastructure are set out on Part IIIA of the Trade Practices Act. These arrangements  were developed in the mid-1990s as an important part of the national competition  policy reforms.   

 Building on the liberalising microeconomic reforms initiated in the 1980s, the  national competition policy reforms were the second wave of reforms in fashioning  Australia’s open, competitive economy.   

 Page 4 of 6 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 The national competition policy reforms were largely directed at government-owned  enterprises, moving them to a position of competitive neutrality with private  investment projects and operations.   

 While the National Access Regime was intended to apply access rules regardless of  whether infrastructure was publicly or privately owned, much of the focus was  initially on publicly-owned infrastructure. But a wave of subsequent privatisations  means that much of that infrastructure is now privately owned.   

 These considerations led to regulatory arrangements that promoted more efficient use  of existing infrastructure, but arguably less emphasis was placed on ensuring strong  private incentives to invest in new infrastructure.   

 If this analysis is correct, it might be timely to revisit the National Access Regime to  ensure it is consistent with the imperative of meeting Australia’s colossal  infrastructure challenge.   

 On 29 October 2009, I introduced a bill into Parliament to improve regulatory  certainty and streamline administrative processes under the National Access Regime.  The establishment of time limits for decision making about third-party access to  private infrastructure and limiting reviews to information provided to the initial  decision-maker are both designed to streamline the processes of deciding whether a  third party can gain access to private infrastructure.   

 And importantly, the amendments will provide greater regulatory certainty for private  investors in new infrastructure. The existing Regime does not allow a private investor  who is considering building an infrastructure facility to determine with certainty  whether or not the proposed facility would be declarable for possible access by a third  party. The amendments provide for an upfront decision to be made by the relevant  minister. If the minister decides upfront that third-party access will not be granted,  that decision holds for at least 20 years.   

 This reform will enhance regulatory certainty for potential investors in major new  infrastructure.   

 But will private infrastructure investors not wanting to run the risk of having to  negotiate access by other private users to their infrastructure assets have strong  incentives to build to size instead of building to ultimate desired capacity?   

 That is, will they size their infrastructure capacity to meet only their shorter-term needs in  order to avoid having to deal with rivals seeking access to short-term excess capacity?  From a national perspective, is it an economically inefficient way of investing in  private infrastructure if private investors deliberately under-size their infrastructure  capacity as a consequence of the National Access Regime?   

 On the other hand, if rivals cannot gain access to infrastructure assets, does this result  in wasteful duplication of infrastructure and/or the stranding of mineral and natural  gas deposits?   

 I pose these questions not because I have an immediate answer but because they  deserve an answer if we are to meet Australia’s colossal infrastructure challenge. The  Government will continue to monitor whether the National Access Regime is meeting  its objectives and is striking the right balance between the rights and interests of  infrastructure owners and the competition benefits of facilitating access. And I make  this important point: simply asking these questions has no bearing upon the issue of 

 Page 5 of 6 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 access to rail assets in the Pilbara.   

 Let a public discussion begin about the suitability of the soon-to-be-amended National  Access Regime in meeting Australia’s infrastructure challenge. In posing these  questions, I have an open mind to what is undoubtedly an exceedingly complex but  vitally important issue.   

 The sense of excitement about the role of Western Australia in the zone is palpable.  The Rudd government understands the dynamics at play and will do whatever it  reasonably can to help seize the enormous opportunities for Western Australia to lead  wealth generation in Australia in this, the Asian Century. 

 END 

 

 

 

 

  z Privacy  

  z Copyright  

  z Disclaimer  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  Page 6 of 6 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

