---
title: "New asylum seekers should be taken to mainland: Greens."
date: "2009-04-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324380
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UKBT6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young  Greens Senator for South Australia  

 Saturday 18 April 2009   

 New Asylum Seekers Should Be Taken to  Mainland:Greens   

 The Australian Greens have called for future asylum seekers arriving by boat to be taken  to the Australian mainland by the most direct route, ending the policy of successive  Australian Governments to process asylum claims on remote islands.   

 Greens Spokesperson on Immigration, Senator Hanson-Young, said the moment asylum  seekers were contacted by Australian security personnel marked the start of Australia's  duty of care for the health and safety of the arrivees.   

 "From that moment, arrivees should be taken to the Australian mainland as quickly as  possible where they can be removed from danger and given medical attention."   

 'Humanitarianism is a fundamental Australian value - it is one of the great attributes we  cherish as Australians."   

 "Sadly we have allowed hysteria and prejudice on the part of some politicians and  commentators to drive more than a decade of immigration policy down the wrong track."   

 "It's time Government policy reflected Australia's fundamental humanitarianism and  support for human rights."   

 Senator Hanson-Young said that with another boat of asylum seekers now expected to  be contacted by Australian security personnel in the next few days, and the world-wide  increase in refugee movements generally, a full review of immigration policy should be  initiated by the Government.   

 "We should be seeing this issue through a humanitarian lens rather than a punitive  approach."   

 "Australia must recognise that the last leg of the journey of refugees who arrive by boat  is harrowing and fraught with danger and risk."   

 "It makes no sense to transport arrivees back across hundreds of kilometres of ocean to  Christmas Island for example - further putting lives at risk."   

 "The Government must act to ensure that the potential for the loss of human life is  minimised, and arrivees are taken by the most direct route to the Australian mainland  where their claims for asylum can be assessed."    

 

 

 

 Media contact: Russell Kelly 0438376082 

