---
title: "Refugees have freedom from fear in Australia."
date: "2009-06-15"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211326367
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OI4U6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Refugees have freedom from fear in Australia 

 Communities across the country will celebrate Australia's role in providing people  with a new life free from fear and persecution during Refugee Week (June 14 - 20),  the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said today.  

 'All Australians should feel proud of our contributions to international refugee  protection. Helping refugees reflects an important value - compassion for those in  need. It is something that we do well and will continue to do well in the coming  years,' Senator Evans said. 

 This year, Refugee Week will revolve around the theme Freedom from fear, which  demonstrates how people can overcome incredible hardships to start new lives free  from fear and persecution.  

 Events will be staged in each state and territory this week to celebrate the  remarkable journeys made by refugees who have come to Australia under the  humanitarian program. 

 Senator Evans said that Australia provides comprehensive support systems for  refugees and others in humanitarian need and consistently ranks among the world's  top three resettlement countries, along with the United States and Canada. 

 In last month's Budget, the Australian Government increased its humanitarian  program to 13 750 places in 2009-10 from 13 500 places in 2008-09. 

 The regional priorities within the 2009-10 program will continue to focus on the three  key regions of Africa, Asia and the Middle East, including South West Asia. The  program will particularly focus on the resettlement of refugees who have been  languishing in camps for years, many of whom have limited options, other than to be  resettled in a third country. 

 Australia has already committed to resettle up to 5000 Bhutanese refugees from  Nepal over coming years and is actively engaged in the resettlement of Burmese  refugees from camps along the Thai-Burma border, Afghans in Pakistan and  Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh, among other groups in protracted situations. 

 Australia is an international leader in the resettlement of refugee women without the  protection of partners or male relatives and in 2009-10 will increase the intake of  women at risk and their dependants from 10.5 per cent to 12 per cent of the refugee  program. 

 Senator Evans said the Government will also ensure it meets all of Australia's  international protection obligations by introducing complementary protection 

 arrangements for people at risk of the most serious forms of harm in their home  country.  

 'This will allow Australia to meet our protection obligations under international human  rights treaties to people who may not meet the Refugees Convention definition, but  who cannot return home because they would be killed or tortured,' Senator Evans  said. 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09052.htm   Last update: 15 June 2009 at 14:18 AEST  

 

