---
title: "Asylum seekers on Christmas Island granted protection."
date: "2009-01-16"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211321870
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5L4U6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Asylum seekers on Christmas Island granted protection 

 Friday, 16 January 2009 

 A group of asylum seekers on Christmas Island has been granted protection visas to  live in Australia after the Department of Immigration and Citizenship found they faced  persecution or even death if they returned to their home countries. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said today that  the 28 refugees from Afghanistan and Iran were granted visas after a thorough  assessment of their claims determined they were entitled to Australia’s protection  under the Refugees Convention. 

 The Minister allowed the asylum seekers to formally apply for protection visas under  the Migration Act following a non-statutory refugee status assessment process. 

 ‘These people clearly demonstrated a well-founded fear of persecution or death  should they be returned to Afghanistan or Iran,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘Their cases have been finalised promptly under the Rudd Government’s new  processing regime for offshore entry people, which also included health, security and  identity checks. 

 ‘Under the Howard Government, asylum seekers were left to languish in detention  for years on end before eventually being resettled in Australia as refugees.’ 

 The 25 Afghans and three Iranians were passengers from boats that were  intercepted by Border Protection Command in Australian waters on September 29,  October 6 and November 24. The group comprises 26 males and two females and  includes 10 children. 

 ‘While the passengers from the boats have been granted visas, the skippers of their  respective vessels have been charged with people smuggling and are currently in  custody awaiting trial,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The Australian Government is committed to meeting its refugee protection  obligations and ensuring viability of the international protection system, while at the  same time doing all that is possible to combat the dangerous practice of people  smuggling.’ 

 The refugees will be transferred to the mainland over the weekend where they will be  resettled in South Australia. They will receive settlement support to help them  integrate into the community as permanent residents of Australia.  

 ‘We ensure humanitarian entrants are provided with appropriate clothing, a package  of basic household goods, English language tuition and short-term torture and  trauma counselling, if required,’ Senator Evans said. 

 The department is continuing to process the asylum claims of the remaining 134  unauthorised arrivals on Christmas Island.  

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09002.htm   Last update: 19 January 2009 at 09:34 AEST  

 

