---
title: "How much proof does Rudd need before action is taken to reverse soft policy message?"
date: "2009-04-24"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324612
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MQUT6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Friday 24 April 2009 

 

 How much proof does Rudd need before action is taken to reverse soft policy message?   

 Asylum seekers have been given a voice today on the ABC airwaves. They are declaring that the  Rudd Labor Government’s softer policies on border protection are encouraging asylum seekers  to retry the people smuggler routes to Australia.    

 “The words of the asylum seekers still awaiting their boats in Indonesia echoes what the  Coalition have been saying for months together with comments from the Indonesian  Ambassador, Primo Alui Joelianto, the Organisation for Migration, Chief of Mission in Indonesia,  Steve Cook and the Australian Federal Police,” Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship said.   

 “Mr Debus, Minister for Home Affairs has also conceded that his government’s soft message has  given comfort to the smugglers but he says “it is not significant”. This can leave most Australians  with little faith in the resolve or understanding of the Minister,” Dr Stone said.   

 “The asylum seekers have heard the Rudd Government’s message loud and clear and now they  are prepared to make another push into Australia, putting their lives and the lives of Australian  Border Security Agencies at risk,” Dr Stone said.   

 “It is reported that Indonesia is growing increasingly restless about being the holding place for  thousands of asylum seekers bent on starting a new life in Australia. Some asylum seekers have  been there for more then a decade, living securely in Indonesia, some in part supported by  Australian Government funding, however Prime Minister Rudd and his Ministers refuse to  acknowledge the urgency of the need to change strategy and reinstate slashed government  resources to their front line agencies.”   

 Media enquiries: Jo Shannon 071718110   

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

