---
title: "New listings and changes to PBS from 1 August 2009"
date: "2009-08-01"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211327848
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VGUV6%22
---

 

 THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP 

 Minister for Health and Ageing   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 1 August 2009   

 New Listings and Changes to PBS from 1 August 2009   

 Several new listings and changes to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)  from 1 August will bring health benefits to many Australians.  Full details of the new  listings and changes are available at www.pbs.gov.au.   

 The health care needs of refugee and humanitarian entrants to Australia will see the  listing of Praziquantel for the treatment of schistosoma infections due to various  types of blood fluke.    

 Schistosomes are rare in Australia but can affect refugees and Australians coming  from infected areas.  The infections are caused by a major human parasite,  threatening 650 million people worldwide and causing severe morbidity, especially in  children under the age of 14.  The estimated cost to the PBS is $59,000 per year.    

 Arsenic trioxide will be listed for the treatment of relapsed acute promyelocytic  leukaemia (APL), a form of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) that accounts for about  10% of acute AML diagnoses.  This listing provides a PBS-subsidised treatment for  patients who have either failed to respond to or have relapsed after treatment with  standard first-line therapy.   

 Bimatoprost with timolol maleate eye drops will be listed to treat elevated intra-ocular pressure in patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension.  This  fixed combination product provides an alternative to administering two individual  therapies of the same components.  Using a single, combined product avoids the  problem of ‘wash out’ where the first administered drug is ‘washed out’ of the eye by  the second.     

 Hypromellose oral gel will be available to palliative care patients where dry mouth is  a symptom.  This product provides a longer duration of relief than the currently listed  carmellose sodium mouth spray.     

 Oxybutynin transdermal patches will be listed on the PBS for treatment of urge  urinary incontinence or urgency due to uncontrolled contraction of the bladder wall in  a patient who cannot tolerate or swallow oral oxybutynin.  The patches provide a  treatment option for patients with these conditions who are unable to tolerate the oral  dose form.   

 Rivaroxaban will provide an oral alternative to the currently available injectable anti-thrombotic drugs used to prevent venous thromboembolism (VTE) in patients who  have undergone total hip or knee replacement.   

 About 51,000 patients will be treated in the first year of listing, increasing to 66,000  over the following five years. The estimated additional cost to the PBS is $6.75  million in year 1 increasing to $8.5 million in year 5.   

 An additional formulation Voriconazole powder in oral suspension which can be  used by children and people having difficulty swallowing is to be listed for the  treatment of serious fungal infections in immunocompromised patients.   

 For all media inquiries, please contact the Minister's Office on 02 6277 7220.   

