---
title: "Labor indifferent as another boat arrival puts Christmas Island offshore processing at risk."
date: "2009-12-21"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332761
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/H5JV6%22
---

     Mon, 21st December 2009  

 LABOR INDIFFERENT AS ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVAL PUTS CHRISTMAS  ISLAND OFFSHORE PROCESSING AT RISK 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The illegal arrival of the 64th boat since August 2008 has been treated as routine by the Rudd Government, 

 highlighting their chronic indifference to their failed policies, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, 

 Scott Morrison said today.  

 “Under Labor, Christmas Island is now full, with 55 new arrivals following the latest illegal boat to arrive in 

 Australian waters off Ashmore Reef,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “Now there will be more than 1,500 people detained on Christmas Island in a facility that was originally planned to 

 accommodate just 800 people,” he said.  

 “With Christmas Island now a tent city and having reached capacity, the failure of Labor’s border protection 

 policies is putting the cornerstone of our border protection regime, offshore processing, at risk.  

 “Offshore processing, including the excision of Christmas Island, was a critical factor in the Coalition’s plan to 

 combat people smuggling and it worked, reducing boat arrivals to zero in 2002/03 and 2004/05.  

 “Under Labor only Christmas Island remains for offshore processing and it is full. The Coalition has real concerns 

 that Labor will now start transferring detainees who have not had their asylum claims tested to the mainland, 

 starting in Darwin.  

 “This will only encourage people smugglers in their terrible business and open up a legal can of worms for the 

 status of people transferred to the mainland, with the courts likely to take an interest in the claims of any people 

 whose application is refused.  

 “Labor are completely indifferent to the way they have compromised our borders through their failed policies and 

 weak decisions, such as their special deal for the passengers on the Oceanic Viking, who are now en-route to 

 Australia as promised by Mr Rudd.  

 “Each new illegal boat arrival is treated as just another day at the office for Minister Evans, whose only response 

 is to buy more beds and tents rather than taking action as the Coalition did to stop the boats.  

 “Labor have compromised our borders and It clearly doesn’t seem to concern them and the people smugglers 

 know it.  

 “The only way Australians can now send a message to people smugglers that they will understand is to elect an 

 Abbott-led Coalition Government,” Mr Morrison said.    

