---
title: "People smugglers out to break all records."
date: "2009-09-22"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329378
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Z5RU6%22
---

 

 

 Tue, 22nd September 2009    

 PEOPLE SMUGGLERS OUT TO BREAK ALL RECORDS 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 In just 12 months, 34 boats and over 1,600 unauthorised arrivals have made their way into Australian waters.  

 Unknown numbers of asylum seekers have been intercepted in Indonesian waters on Australia’s behalf and are 

 now in detention in Indonesia.  

 The number of those drowned at sea is also unknown, but we do know it is more then those killed and burned 

 after the explosion on the (suspected illegal entry vessel) SIEV 36 on 16 April this year.  

 “Given these facts, it is extraordinary that the Rudd Labor Government has disregarded Federal Police advice 

 that its softened policies have created new waves of the lucrative business of selling unlawful passage into 

 Australia on unseaworthy vessels,” Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship said.  

 “While the Indonesian authorities continue to do their best to intercept the boats pushing from their shores, the 

 best the Australian Government seems able to do is create a new full time position of Ambassador for People 

 Smuggling Issues. This invisible man Mr Peter Woolcott is also silent. We do not know where he is or what he is 

 doing to at least deter if not destroy the people smuggling syndicates.”  

 Dr Stone said each new unauthorised arrival receives $3,000 worth of legal advice, totalling over $4.5 million 

 worth of advice so far. These funds have been committed at a time when Department of Immigration and 

 Citizenship services are being severely constrained through budget cuts which has reduced the number of 

 officials on the ground and English language teaching for our official refugee and humanitarian intake.  

 “We are told the new managers of the detention centre at Christmas Island are looking to import the unemployed 

 of Cocos Islands in order to save the cost of fly-in-fly out professionals from as far away as Queensland.  

 “The unauthorised arrival inflow is taking its toll and the Rudd Labor Government is making no effort to address 

 the factors that are encouraging the smugglers to ply their trade. The Rudd Labor Government’s softened border 

 protection policy began in August 2008 with the abolition of Temporary Protection Visas, the removal of 

 mandatory detention for all while their identity, security and health status was being investigated and established, 

 the abolition of detention debt for asylum seekers and the creation of a new upfront option for permanent 

 residency for those who do not meet refugee criteria,” Dr Stone said.  

 “The Rudd Labor Government must urgently review the impact of its softer policies and also the penalties for 

 people smugglers whose profits from this new back door into Australia being opened by Rudd Labor already 

 exceed well over $US20 million.  

 “Simply bringing more portables from the mainland or recruiting extra staff from Cocos Islands is not going to 

 restore government control of who comes into this country or protect asylum seekers on unseaworthy vessels” Dr 

 Stone said.  

