---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 12 October 2009: ETS; border protection."
date: "2009-10-12"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330061
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L4XU6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Mon, 12th October 2009    

 TURNBULL DOORSTOP - ETS, BORDER PROTECTION 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 E&OE  

 QUESTIONS:  

 Tell me, which opinion polls do you believe?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 The only opinion polls I believe are the ones on election day.  

 QUESTION:  

 I think we’ve heard that before.  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Yeah well, it’s an oldie but a goodie.  

 QUESTION:  

 What about the $3.2 billion hole in your ETS costings?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well we haven’t seen the modelling that apparently reveals that, but I think that’s something that the Treasury 

 should raise and discuss with Frontier Economics. I mean, Danny Price’s firm is unquestionably one of the 

 leading economic consultants in this area. They have offered to sit down with the Treasury and go through it. I 

 think if the Treasury has a criticism of Frontier’s numbers then they should sit down with Frontier and publish 

 their…  

 QUESTION:  

 [Inaudible] those numbers yourself?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well they’re not my numbers. That’s why we said at the time…  

 QUESTION:  

 You did go with them though, didn’t you?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well at the time I was quite clear and I said it didn’t represent our policy. It was a contribution to the debate and 

 what we sought to do was to engage both industry and the Government and the community generally on the 

 economics of Mr Rudd’s emissions trading scheme.  

 The real issue here is not a question of commitment to action on climate change. The question is the design of 

 the scheme. At the moment Mr Rudd has a scheme that is disliked by almost everybody right across the board 

 and in principle because it’s going to destroy thousands of jobs for no environmental gain. So a lot of economic 

 pain, no environmental gain.  

 QUESTION:  

 What is your view of the Government’s current handling of the issue of boat people? It seems as though there is 

 an expectation out of people who deal with trafficking that it’s easy to come here and you’ll just get escorted 

 down to the relevant holding area.  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well there is, as we’ve said, there is no question that Mr Rudd softening of the policies of the Howard 

 Government has been perceived and taken advantage of by people smugglers as a marketing tool. So we’ve 

 seen in the media numerous examples of that being confirmed. I mean that is the people smugglers are selling 

 the message Australia is a soft target. That is being believed by their would-be customers. Hence we’ve got a lot 

 more boats and since Mr Rudd started rolling back the border protection policies of the Howard Government 

 we’ve had about 2,000 unlawful arrivals.  

 Now what should be do about it? The first thing Mr Rudd’s got to do is acknowledge that he’s got a problem. He’s 

 got to acknowledge his policy has failed and we need urgently an independent inquiry to examine this with the 

 benefit of all the expert advice, in particular intelligence advice, so that we can see why those policies are not 

 working, what measures can be introduced now to ensure that Australia’s borders are secure and that we can 

 stop this dreadful, dangerous scourge of people smuggling.  

 QUESTION:  

 What do you think about Ken Henry’s, your old mate, Ken Henry’s support of the stimulus package? Is he up to 

 no good?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well with great respect that’s a silly question but I won’t give a silly answer. You’re asking me about Ken Henry’s 

 support for the stimulus. Well of course he supports it. It’s his policy. He is the Secretary of the Treasury, so 

 naturally he designed the stimulus package, that’s part of his job, he’s part of the Government and naturally he’s 

 defending it.  

 QUESTION:  

 He’s supposed to be independent, isn’t he?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well I have to say to you that is not correct. Dr Henry is part of the Government. He is the Secretary of the 

 Treasury. Now when I was the environment minister and water minister I undertook a huge reform of water 

 reform in Australia. If I had put the head of my department David Borthwick up and got him to say Mr Turnbull’s 

 plan is an outstanding work of economic reform, people would have said well of course he’d say that, he’s the 

 head of the department that put the plan together. And that’s exactly Dr Henry’s position. He is an outstanding 

 economist, he’s an outstanding public servant but he is part of the Government and so he will defend…  

 QUESTION:  

 That hasn’t stopped you taking a swipe at him in the past, has it?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 No one’s taking any swipes at Ken Henry. I don’t always agree with him but I always respect him.    

