---
title: "Harmony Day: celebrating diversity."
date: "2009-03-13"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of STONE, SHARMAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211323392
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FL2T6%22
---

 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Friday 13 March 2009 

 

 

 Harmony Day: Celebrating diversity  

 

 Dr Sharman Stone, Federal Member for Murray is encouraging the community to  celebrate our special diversity and tolerance in the Goulburn and Murray Valleys by  celebrating Harmony Day on Saturday 21 March.   

 Harmony Day promotes respect, fairness and a sense of inclusion for all members of the  Australian community.   

 “It is important to take time to recognise the culturally diverse communities we have in  Murray Electorate, in particular in the Goulburn and Murray Valleys, and learn about,  celebrate and respect each others histories,” Dr Stone said.   

 “Some of our population are descendants of the earliest British settlers, some came from  the gold rushes and others were part of the great migrations of the early and mid  twentieth centuries.   

 “We are fortunate to live in one of the most ethnically and racially diverse regions of rural  Australia and have been a location of choice for generations of new settlers from Britain,  Europe, Middle East, Asia, Africa, the pacific and New Zealand.”   

 “We were selected to be the pilot for the first settlement of refugees directly into rural  Australia. The Congolese families were warmly welcomed into the community.”   

 Dr Stone said the Diverse Australia Program aims to stamp out any cultural, racial and  religious intolerance, while promoting the benefits of cultural diversity.   

 “The Diverse Australia Program has included a Small Community Grants designed to  combat any racism at a community level.”   

 “The grants of up to $5000 will help provide additional resources for groups such as  schools, not for profit organisations, service clubs, sporting bodies, ethnic communities,  youth organisation and local government to develop projects that help build stronger 

 community relations,” she said.   

 “The program is also offering Emerging Issues Funding to promote intolerance where  communities identify a need.   

  

 

 Application closing date details for Small Community Grants and the Emerging Issues  Funding are not yet available.    

 “Anyone seeking to lodge a grant application can contact my office to go onto a register  to be kept informed of details,” Dr Stone said.   

 “Join in a Harmony Day event near you or alternatively if you wish to run your own  Harmony Day event or would like more information visit the Harmony Day website  www.harmony.gov.au .”   

 

  

 Media Enquiries: Jo Shannon 0417148110. 

