---
title: "New NHMRC Health Care Committee announced."
date: "2009-09-08"
creators:
  - "Butler, Mark"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - HEALTH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329343
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8OMU6%22
---

 

 THE HON MARK BUTLER MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Health   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 

 8 September 2009   

 New NHMRC Health Care Committee Announced   

 The Australian Government today announced the establishment and membership of a new  Principal Committee of the National Health and Medical Research Council - the Health Care  Committee.   

 The Health Care Committee’s major role is to provide NHMRC’s CEO, Professor Warwick  Anderson, with advice on applying the results of the best available research to health care in  hospitals, surgeries and clinics.   

 It will provide expert advice on evidence and knowledge transfer to improve healthcare  across all domains including primary care and aged care and will draw on NHMRC support  for clinical and health services research and findings.   

 The Health Care Committee will have a significant role in supporting NHMRC's response to  the National Health and Hospitals’ Reform Commission report and in addressing the National  Primary Health Care Strategy.   

 It is one of two new committees established for NHMRC’s 2009-2012 triennium, the other  being the Prevention and Community Health Committee.   

 They join three other NHMRC committees that have served Australians and the country’s  health and medical researchers for many years.   

 The Health Care Committee will complete a three-year term on 30 June 2012 and will be  chaired by Professor John Horvath, formerly Chief Medical Officer for the Commonwealth.  Professor Horvath has exceptional skills in public health and clinical practice.   

 He will be joined by 15 other committee members who bring to the table knowledge from the  community and have expertise across a wide variety of medical, clinical and public health  research activities.   

 They include Dr Tamara Mackean, a senior researcher with expertise in capacity building and  Dr Mark Wenitong, an Indigenous clinician and general practitioner.   

 

 Media contacts: Lisa Sedgwick, Parliamentary Secretary’s Office, 02 6277 4414    Carolyn Norrie, NHMRC, 0422 008 512 

 

 

 - 2 -

 Members of NHMRC’s new Health Care Committee   

 Chair   

 Professor John Horvath AO   

 Professor Horvath is currently Principal Medical Consultant for the Australian Department of  Health and Ageing and was formerly Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer (CMO) from  2003-2009. Prior to his appointment as CMO, Professor Horvath was Professor of Renal 

 Medicine at the University of Sydney and a specialist renal physician at Sydney’s Royal  Prince Alfred Hospital. He was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) in 2001  for his services to medicine.   

 Members   

 Professor Chris Baggoley   

 Professor Baggoley is Chief Executive of the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality  in Health Care (ACSQHC). He is a specialist emergency physician and was previously  Director of Emergency Medicine at three Adelaide facilities: Flinders Medical Centre,  Ashford Community Hospital and Royal Adelaide Hospital. He was also president of the  Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, Chairman of the Committee of Presidents of  Medical Colleges and Chair of the Board of the National Institute of Clinical Studies. Prior to  his role at ACSQHC he was Chief Medical Officer and Executive Director, Public Health and  Clinical Coordination at the South Australian Department of Health.   

 Professor Chris Del Mar   

 Following an education in science and then medicine at the University of Cambridge,  Professor Del Mar worked in London before moving to Mackay in Northern Queensland in  1977, where he worked clinically until 1988. He then joined the University of Queensland  and was Professor of General Practice from 1995 to 2004 and Visiting Professor of General  Practice at Oxford University from 2007. He has published on evidence-based practice,  primary care, skin cancer management and acute respiratory infection, and is a Coordinating  Editor in the Cochrane Collaboration.   

 Dr Mukesh Haikerwal   

 Dr Haikerwal is a general medical practitioner in Melbourne’s western suburbs. He is a past  Federal President and Vice President of the Australian Medical Association and has spent  five years on the board of AMA Victoria, including two years as Victorian State President.  He was the founding Chair of the Westgate Division of Family Medicine and is currently  working with the National e-Health Transition Authority. Internationally, he is the Chair of  the World Medical Association Finance and Planning Committee. He was awarded Honorary  Fellowships by both the Australian Medical Association and the Royal Australian College of  General Practice and presented with the Australian Medical Association President’s Award.  He is a Commissioner to the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission and a  Professor in the School of Medicine in the Faculty of Health Sciences at Flinders University  in Adelaide.   

 

 

 - 3 -

 Professor Amanda Henderson   

 Professor Henderson is an Australian Learning and Teaching Council Associate Fellow and  Professor in the School of Nursing and Midwifery at Queensland’s Griffith University. She is  also Nursing Director, Education at the Princess Alexandra Hospital, one of Queensland’s  largest tertiary referral facilities. Her scholarship is focused on the establishment of clinical  settings that promote the development and use of healthcare knowledge that can ultimately  impact on patient care. She has an extensive career in education, research and leadership  overseas and nationally within both academic and clinical healthcare settings, and an  outstanding international publication record in leading nursing and health journals.   

 Professor Clifford (Cliff) Hughes AO   

 Professor Hughes is CEO of the Clinical Excellence Commission in NSW. He spent 25 years  in a cardiothoracic unit in the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney as a Senior Partner and  Head of the Unit. He led five medical teams to China, performing cardiac (open heart)  procedures in China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, India and Bangladesh. He was a  member of the Australian Council on Safety and Quality in Health Care and Chair of the  Therapeutic Device Evaluation Committee. He was Secretary and then Chair of the Division  of Cardiothoracic Surgery for the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons as well as  Chairman of the Ethics Committee. Professor Hughes was appointed an Officer of the Order  of Australia (AO) in 1998 for ‘service to cardiac surgery, international relations and the  community’.   

 Mr Demos Krouskos   

 Mr Krouskos migrated with his family from Greece in 1954. He was educated at Fitzroy High  School, La Trobe University and Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology. Since 1985 he  has held a number of voluntary and professional positions in health care. In 1991 he was  appointed Chief Executive Officer of North Richmond Community Health Centre and in  1999 as Director for the Centre for Culture Ethnicity and Health, positions he still holds  concurrently. His health interests include health and cultural diversity, health equity, health  and human rights and research into the cultural contexts of health care.   

 Dr Tamara Mackean   

 Dr Mackean is a descendant of the Waljen clan of the Wongai Peoples from the Goldfields  region in Western Australia. Following varied clinical experience in obstetrics, psychiatry,  ophthalmology and general practice, she became involved in medical education. She is  currently a Senior Research Fellow with the Centre for Aboriginal Medical and Dental Health  at the University of WA. She is also a trainee with the Australasian Faculty of Public Health  Medicine of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP) as the recipient of the  inaugural RACP Indigenous Trainee Scholarship. Dr Mackean is the immediate past  President of the Australian Indigenous Doctors’ Association and works with governments,  organisations, communities and individuals to bring about positive change for Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islander peoples. 

 

 

 - 4 -

 Professor Guy Maddern   

 Professor Maddern holds the R.P. Jepson Chair of Surgery at the University of Adelaide. He  is Director of Research of the Basil Hetzel Institute based at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital,  Adelaide. For the past 11 years he has served as the Surgical Director of the Australian Safety  and Efficacy Register of New Interventional Procedures run by the Royal Australasian  College of Surgeons. In his College role he has headed the roll-out of the national Audit of  Surgical Mortality aimed at informing surgeons, hospitals and government of improvements  required in the care of surgical patients. He is a practising hepatobiliary surgeon with  research interests in techniques of tumour ablation. As the Director of Surgery at The Queen  Elizabeth Hospital and Head of the Discipline of Surgery of the University of Adelaide, the 

 constant tension between service, teaching and research provide a daily challenge.   

 Professor Leonie Segal   

 Professor Segal joined the University of South Australia in 2007 as Foundation Research  Chair in Health Economics and Policy, after eight years as Deputy Director at Monash  University’s Centre for Health Economics. She has a Masters of Economics and a PhD in  Health Economics. Professor Segal has five current ARC/NHMRC grants and contracts with  Commonwealth and state governments worth more than $10 million. Her research focus is in  health system reform, priority setting and economic evaluation of complex interventions,  covering issues such as the health workforce and child protection. She has produced more  than 95 publications in the last 12 years and is on several policy committees including the  Minister for Health and Ageing’s Preventative Health Taskforce and the Australian Medical  Council Strategic Policy Advisory Committee.   

 Professor Helena Teede   

 Professor Teede is an endocrinologist, Jean Hailes Foundation Director of Research,  Southern Health Head of Diabetes, Monash University Professor of Women’s Health and  NHMRC Research Fellow. She is a Director of Diabetes Australia - Vic, a council member  of the Australian Endocrine and International PCOS (polycystic ovary syndrome) societies  and sits on the Australian Government’s women’s health policy roundtable. With more than  130 publications, she leads a multidisciplinary research team focused on national health  priority areas. Professor Teede translates evidence into improved healthcare outcomes within  a Jean Hailes translation framework encompassing clinical care, education, research,  collaboration and leadership across community, clinicians and policy makers.   

 Mr George Toemoe   

 Mr Toemoe joined St Luke’s Hospital Complex in 1997 as Director of Business and  Corporate Services, was appointed Chief Executive Officer in August 1998 and retired from  that position in March 2009. He has always had a strong interest in medical and clinical  matters, associated medical technology and IT initiatives and capabilities, particularly from a  patient care point of view. He has also been strongly involved in a number of health and  industry associations. Mr Toemoe has tertiary qualifications in industrial chemistry and  accounting/finance, is a Certified Practising Accountant and a member of the Australian  Council of Health Service Executives. 

 

 

 - 5 -

 Professor John Wakerman   

 Professor Wakerman is the inaugural Director of the Centre for Remote Health, a joint centre  of Flinders University in Adelaide and Charles Darwin University in Alice Springs. He is a  public health medicine specialist and general practitioner, with a long background in remote  primary healthcare services as a medical practitioner, senior manager and researcher. He is an  active advocate for rural and remote health issues. He has specific academic interests in  remote health services research and health management education.   

 Dr Mark Wenitong   

 Dr Wenitong is from the Kabi Kabi tribal group of South Queensland. He is currently the  Senior Medical Officer at Apunipima Cape York Health Council and was previously the  Senior Medical Officer at Wuchopperen Health Services in Cairns. He is a past president and 

 founder of the Australian Indigenous Doctors Association. He has been heavily involved in  the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health workforce and has helped develop several  national workforce documents. Dr Wenitong is involved in several research projects and has  worked in prison health and refugee health in East Timor as well as studying and working in  Indigenous health internationally. He was a member of the Northern Territory Emergency  Response Review expert advisory group in 2008. He is involved in clinical and policy work  with the aim of improving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health outcomes in Australia.   

 Professor Doris Young   

 Professor Young is Professor of General Practice at the University of Melbourne and has  been a practising GP in a community health centre in the north-western region of Melbourne  delivering comprehensive care to a disadvantaged, diverse and multicultural community for  more than 20 years. She has been actively involved in undergraduate, vocational and  postgraduate GP education and has extensive knowledge and experience in establishing and  evaluating different models of teaching and research practices in general practice and primary  care settings. She has had long-standing involvement in the development, support and  evaluation of the Divisions of General Practice program in Australia. She has also been a  board member of the Northern Health Regional Health Service in Victoria for eight years.   

 Dr Helen Zorbas   

 Dr Zorbas is Chief Executive Officer of the National Breast and Ovarian Cancer Centre. She  has directed a number of key national projects and programs in evidence-based practice,  clinical guidelines, monitoring, service improvement and psychosocial support to improve  cancer care. Dr Zorbas has held a number of positions on key national cancer and health  committees, most notably Chair, BreastScreen Australia Evaluation Advisory Committee;  member, NHMRC National Health Committee; member, NHMRC Health Advisory  Committee; Chair, Australian Screening Advisory Committee Quality Improvement and  Workforce Working Group; Chair, NHMRC Microwave Cancer Review Committee; and  Acting Chair, Cancer Institute NSW Board. She has past experience as a GP and currently  holds a Staff Specialist appointment.   

