---
title: "Announcement of the strategic settlement framework: speech."
date: "2009-09-25"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Service delivery"
  - "Consultative processes (Open government)"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329526
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OYSU6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 Parliamentary Secretary announcement of the Strategic  Settlement Framework 

 25 September 2009 

 Thank you for taking time out of your busy schedules to meet with me today. 

 I am not here to discuss or launch the IHSS request for tender. The tender will be  released soon and responses will be invited when that occurs. 

 Instead the purpose of this gathering is to foreshadow some of our thinking around  new directions in settlement — directions that may be taken forward into a new initial  settlement program, replacing the IHSS. 

 The promise of protection only begins with a refugee visa. 

 Disembarking at a crowded airport — often with no English, no understanding of the  world you have entered, and no idea where you are to be taken — is both a point of  desperation and an act of trust.  

 Leaving everything that is familiar would send fear and trepidation through most of  us.  

 Protection should mean security and safety — it should also mean a chance to build  a new life.  

 Refugees have remarkable resilience and a great willingness to contribute.  Settlement services are our commitment to provide a means — a path — to achieve  full participation and to help them begin their new life. 

 I have been committed to Australia’s refugee program throughout my parliamentary  career. I think it is a program that defines Australian values — it is an expression of  humility and compassion — it is about a fair go.  

 I also have a long standing commitment to the settlement sector — to organisations  and dedicated individuals who have worked tirelessly to make Australia a world  leader in settlement services.  

 It is with this commitment in mind that I undertook to consult extensively with the  sector as a basis for forming the new model of settlement services.  

 While I could not attend every single consultation, I attended almost all. The public  response was inspiring.  

 In total we held 17 community and government consultations and 11 focus groups  with refugees.   

 Four hundred and sixty individuals representing 210 community organisations and  more than 80 Government agencies participated and shared their views.  

 Most importantly we met with 195 refugees from 18 different nationalities. 

 As Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs, I meet regularly with refugee  groups — Sudanese, Somali, Hazara, Sierra Leonean, and Burmese.  

 However, it is a different experience to sit and listen to their accounts of going  through the services we provide.  

 The consultations confirmed that the fundamentals of the program — the core  services — are still relevant and appropriate. In fact, these are a front on which we  are an acknowledged world leader.  

 However, the consultations also revealed gaps and issues around isolation, lack of  youth engagement, problems accessing housing, problems accessing employment  and training and some weaknesses in cultural orientation. 

 In certain instances clients spoke of ‘tick and flick’ services - feeling as though they  were not provided with enough tangible assistance or support beyond the first few  weeks.  

 On a national level, IHSS does a good job in meeting the immediate needs of  refugees — services such as airport pickups, household goods, health checks,  Centrelink and school enrolment. 

 However, settlement is as much a mental and emotional re-alignment as it is a  physical relocation.  

 We are less successful when it comes to creating sustainable settlement outcomes.  By this, I mean working with the client to identify their strengths and providing the  necessary tools to advance them along their settlement pathway. 

 The minister and I are looking to set out a new settlement framework — to provide a  continuum from offshore to onshore to deliver long-term sustainable settlement  outcomes. 

 This continuum covers the broad range of settlement services delivered by the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship including our offshore Australian Cultural  Orientation Program (AUSCO), IHSS, the Settlement Grants Program, Adult Migrant  English Program, Complex Case Support and interpreting services. 

 We must ensure these programs work cooperatively to support our clients on their  pathway to independence. 

 The pathway for clients between these programs needs to be as seamless as  possible.  

 Any improvements to the programs will be consistent with the government’s social  inclusion agenda. 

 The framework will lay the foundations for an integrated service delivery network that  will support new arrivals to rebuild their lives in Australia. 

 At the crucial, axiomatic centre of the new settlement framework are our clients. We  must not lose sight of this and must develop programs that are client-centred and  achieve real and practical outcomes.  

 It is a matter of working with clients to build their capacity to deal with the many  barriers they will face along the way, and equally it is about identifying their individual  strengths and capacity to contribute.  

 As you are all aware, since the last tender of IHSS services, the complexity of the  caseload has increased. We now receive many entrants who have lived in refugee  camps for several years and children who may not have known any other life. 

 Many entrants have no or low literacy in their own language and no English skills.  This is a result of no or interrupted education. 

 Equally, a significant portion have had limited opportunities for employment  experience. Many arrive with health needs and have experienced torture and  trauma.  

 So what does the future hold for settlement support? 

 The first step in building a new settlement framework is the redevelopment of the  new model, currently known as the IHSS. 

 We are considering wholesale improvements in the way in which we address our  clients’ immediate and longer-term settlement needs, particularly accommodation,  pathways to education, training and employment and connections with other  settlement and community services. 

 We need to be more responsive to client needs. 

 The way in which we deliver services to humanitarian entrants will need to change.  

 We need to provide entrants with greater hands-on support and guidance to navigate  Australian systems, to understand Australian culture and to give them every chance  to make it in Australia. 

 We will look at strengthening the flexible client-centred approach to case  management that we currently have — working directly with clients, tapping into  their strengths, building on them, and developing their capacity in other areas. 

 Emphasis will be placed on tailoring case management to individual needs and  developing and cultivating a path to education and employment. 

 During a client focus group here in Brisbane one client told us that he had been a  bus driver for more than 20 years in his home country of Burundi. 

 He said he would love to work as a bus driver but he did not know how to get a  licence or how to get Australian workplace experience — experience that would  mean Australian bus companies would hire him. 

 This story too often resonated throughout the consultations, with clients stuck in a  vortex of ‘no Australian experience — no Australian jobs’. 

 Along with English proficiency, and participation in community life, employment is a  key settlement marker. Effective case management is about working with clients to  identify their path to meaningful and appropriate employment.  

 Part of a client-centred approach lies also in the capacity to be flexible in the  intensity of support provided. We are exploring options for innovative housing  solutions - including group housing and other community housing models.  

 For select clients initial group housing allows for services to be concentrated and  structured around their needs.  

 Vulnerable clients will benefit from increased contact time, ongoing case  management, intensive cultural orientation; group-based learning and collective  support structures.  

 For clients who may face issues of isolation it will create opportunities to form  friendships and links which are the basis of a new life.  

 However, group housing will not work in all places or for all clients.  

 For many clients, settling directly into a new community and locality and connecting  to local facilities through hub-style services will deliver the best settlement outcomes.  

 Accommodation should be about a flexible approach based on the needs of the  client.  

 Consultations have confirmed our views that structured onshore cultural  orientation is lacking under the current program. 

 Resounding support was received from those clients we met for the introduction of  an onshore orientation program that reinforces and builds on the messages  delivered through AUSCO. 

 Many clients commented that the offshore cultural orientation program gave them  some good basic information but they often found it difficult to contextualise and  absorb.  

 The purpose of delivering an onshore cultural orientation program is to equip  entrants with information and knowledge to assist them become lawful and  participating members of our community. 

 Such a program will present information about Australian social and cultural norms,  law and order, finance and budgeting, tenancy training, health literacy and much  more. 

 Emphasis will be on skill development and competency-based learning rather  than time-based service delivery. 

 With almost 70 per cent of the current intake being under 30 years of age (and this  trend likely to continue), we need to ensure the needs of young people are not  forgotten. 

 To that end there will be a stronger focus on youth — with greater consideration of  the individual needs of our young refugees. 

 The program will provide entrants with more effective links to other settlement  and community programs and stronger connections with community supports  such as ethnic organisations, and recreation and social groups. 

 A number of clients reported to me during consultations that they were not  introduced to their local ethnic community and only became acquainted by chance  meetings with people from their home country in the streets or shops. 

 Connections with ethnic and cultural groups soon after arrival can often combat  feelings of loneliness and isolation. I see this as an important function of an initial  settlement program. 

 We listened carefully to the feedback received from current service providers around  the complexity of the current pricing structure and intensive administrative  management. 

 We will aim to simplify the cost structure of the new program and reduce costs  associated with administering the contracts.  

 A national consultation process naturally raises many issues from clients and from  organisations - issues such as consistency in the quality of household goods across  contract regions or the role of volunteers. This feedback has been recorded and will  assist in shaping the new model. 

 Conclusion 

 We must remember that an initial settlement program such as IHSS can only do so  much. 

 In outlining the new directions, I am not talking about guaranteeing that on exit from  this program every client will be successfully settled — because realistically  speaking settlement is a lifelong process. 

 What we are looking at is a program built around sustainable settlement outcomes,  strength based case management, competency based transitions and client focused  service.  

 We recognise that not all refugees start from the same point and not all entrants  settle at the same pace. 

 To this end, the new initial settlement program is client-centred, flexible and  adaptable.  

 

 See:  

 Index of Speeches 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /parlsec/media/speeches/2009/lf090925.htm  

 Last update: 28 September 2009 at 11:57 AEST  

 

