---
title: "20 years on and still no decision on intervention powers."
date: "2009-01-29"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211322191
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7SNS6%22
---

 Thu, 29th January 2009    

 20 YEARS ON AND STILL NO DECISION ON INTERVENTION  POWERS   

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP   Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 The 30th of January marks the first year anniversary of the submission of the report on  ministerial discretionary powers to Senator Evans,” Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship said.  

 “One year on there has been no response to this review commissioned to be undertaken by  Ms Elizabeth Proust. The Minister’s request for the review followed on his concerns about  taking on the full ministerial powers that have been part of the Minister for Immigration since  1989.  

 “Immigration law in Australia has long had the Minister as a critical part of the review  process. For those rejected in their bids for residency in our country can after a rejection of  their application by the Department of Immigration, can appeal to the Migration Review  Tribunal or Refugee Review Tribunal. If unsuccessful, applicants have been able to make a  direct appeal for ministerial intervention. Following this appeal they may have far more  recourse to the courts.  

 “The problem is that there are now hundreds of cases stacked on the minister’s desk over the  year of his indecision about the use of these powers,” Sharman Stone said.  

 “There have been the well published cases of the skilled migrants with children with Downs  Syndrome who through the sheer weight of media publicity have obtained the attention of the  Minister for a decision.  

 “However, for all those anonymous men and women whose lives are on hold awaiting a  decision, this is a fairly distressing and unsatisfactory situation.  

 “If the Minister is determined to not exercise the powers of his portfolio, the powers  embedded in the Migration Act, he must urgently restructure the appeals process so that the  log jam on his desk can be removed, Dr Stone said.  

 “Alternatively on behalf of the Coalition I appeal to the Minister to consider the fact that  regulation and legislation cannot in every case cover all the intricacies and complexities of  life’s circumstances.  

 “The ministerial discretion was always considered to be more appropriate than leaving,  literally life changing decisions, to unrepresentative bureaucrats who are not required to  account to the public for their action.  

 “While Mr Ruddock was Minister for seven years, he exercised his discretion on 2523  occasions. These discretionary powers are no doubt difficult to apply, but it’s simply part of 

 the job of a very complex portfolio engaged with human individuals and families in great  need.  

 “I urge Minister Evans to make a decision on his under use of his ministerial interventionary  powers under the act, and I strongly urge him to in fact continue to exercise his discretion in  the name of justice for all,” Sharman Stone said.    

