---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Adelaide: 17 April 2009: Transparency in schools; asylum seekers."
date: "2009-04-17"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
  - "Transparency in schools"
  - "asylum seekers."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324358
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UETT6%22
---

 The Hon Julia Gillard MP 

 Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister 

 17 April, 2009  

 Transcript 

 Transparency in Schools, Asylum Seekers - Press  Conference - 17 April 2009 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE ADELAIDE  115PM FRIDAY  17 APRIL 2009 

 ISSUES: Transparency in schools, asylum seekers 

 JANE LOMAX- SMITH: These meetings are convened throughout the year to progress the  agenda that’s been set both nationally and locally, and we’re delighted that, with the massive  investment from the Federal Government, we’re able to really look at the quality of our  education, not just our buildings and our infrastructure, but also the teaching and the progress  that occurs within schools.  

 We’ve made very substantial agreements and progress on how we’re managing the Building  the Education Revolution, building the Digital Education Revolution and also the National  Partnerships in Schools. All these areas have been worked upon this morning, and we’re very  pleased that we’ve progressed the transparency measures, in order to publish documented  material about how schools perform.  

 This is a way, not of having league tables, but making sure parents have transparent  information and understand how schools are doing, but most particularly, so that we, as  managers of the system, can look at our schools and make sure that best practice is followed  and like schools can really work from the information got from other schools who may be  performing better.  

 This is a big step forward for us, a lot of work involved in collecting documentation, but  we’re very pleased with that change. We’ve also met with Minister Garrett, who was very  keen to work on curriculum for the arts, and we’ve made progress in that area, and we’ve  worked together collaboratively to design the way we’ll work on all the agendas across the  country, but if I could let the Deputy Prime Minister discuss these matters. 

 JULIA GILLARD: Thank you very much to Minister Lomax- Smith for hosting important  meeting of Education Ministers from around the country, and for chairing today’s meeting.  It’s always great for me to be back in Adelaide, my home town. It’s also always great to have  the opportunity to meet with my colleagues from around the nation.  

 Today we have made some important steps forward on the biggest reform agenda for  Australian schools this country has ever seen. I’m very pleased that my ministerial colleagues  from around the country are working with enthusiasm; indeed, I would say a sense of delight,  on delivering the Building the Education Revolution program, the biggest school  modernisation program the country has ever seen. It’s taking a lot of effort and collaboration,  I thank them for that, and we’ve discussed today continuing to work very closely together to  quickly roll out this huge, new investment in Australia’s schools.  

 Today we’ve also talked about continuing to work together on delivering the rest of the  reform agenda we all want to see for Australian schools; better quality teaching, new  resources in literacy and numeracy and new resources for those schools who might find that  they struggle from time to time and need that extra helping hand. We are working on all of  those with a great spirit of cooperation, to make a difference for every Australian child in  every Australian school.  

 We’ve also, today, taken a big step forward in the agenda of transparency as to what’s  happening in our schools. We want Australian parents and members of the community, who  care desperately about the quality of school education, to have reliable, clear information  about what is happening in schools and to be able to compare schools in similar  circumstances. We are committed to publishing that information, to having it available in  2009.  

 We’ve worked today on a set of agreements about how test data from last year, as well as this  year, will be used in that new transparency arrangements, how people will be able to view  that for their local school, and compare their local school to like schools around the country. 

 This is a new era for Australia, a new nationally consistent system for all state schools around  the country, but also for all non government schools around the country; the same reporting  framework for every Australian school. It’s been great to make that progress. It was also  great to see my ministerial colleague, Peter Garrett here, advocating with passion, as one  would expect, on behalf of arts education, with an agreement that arts education will be part  of our national curriculum process. 

 REPORTER: When you talked about the transparency in schools, when this year will that  be available and how will parents get it? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Our transparency agenda is to have information available in this new  form in 2009. In 2009, people will be able, through a website, to look at and get information  about their own school and, importantly, be able to compare it with like schools. Of course  we are still committed to publishing the NAPLAN data so that for parents around the country  whose child goes and does one of the national tests, they will get a comprehensive report of  that national test so that they can see how their child is going. What is new is the school by  school information, available publicly, with people able to compare the circumstances of like  schools. 

 REPORTER: Is there a date for that? 

 JULIA GILLARD: That will happen in 2009. 

 REPORTER: But do you have a particular month? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We have the national testing from 2008. Obviously that has been  concluded and reported on. We’ll have the national testing this year. When those tests are  concluded and the data is available then we will be able to put the two sets of data out for the  first time in this new format. 

 REPORTER: Does that mean parents will be able to compare schools and perhaps, rank  them? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Parents will be able to look at their local school. They’ll be able to look  at schools in their local area and they will be able to easily compare their school with schools  that are in similar circumstances. We want parents to have information; we want the  community to have information. We want that information to be meaningful. What Education  Ministers have always said is there’s no point in reporting on raw scores, or having simplistic  league tables. What is powerful is to be able to compare similar schools and to see how  they’re going, and if one is going much better than the other, to share that best practice and if  one needs a helping hand, to make sure that helping hand is there. 

 REPORTER: Just on another issue. There seems to have been little emotion so far on the  injured asylum seekers. Are you concerned for their welfare? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Of course. Human beings, I think, are naturally concerned when  someone else is hurt or injured. As I’m advised, for the asylum seekers who were injured in  this incident, medical care has been made available and people have been appropriately  evacuated to medical facilities where they can be properly cared for. 

 REPORTER: The Opposition is accusing the Government of going soft on asylum seekers  (inaudible) policy? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I think this is the kind of cheap politics we’ve come to associate with  Malcolm Turnbull and his Liberal Party. The Government, obviously, has been very  concerned to make sure that all information that’s available publicly about this matter is  accurate information. I would note that the Liberal Party, when it was in government, didn’t  show the same care and concern for getting accurate information into the hands of  Australians. 

 REPORTER: You mentioned greater resourcing for teaching literacy and numeracy, will  that be backed by more money in the Budget? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We are in a circumstance where already agreed, already budgeted for,  and already available from the Commonwealth, is a historical set of new investments in our  schools. If we include our Building the Education Revolution program and compare the  commonwealth expenditure over these four years with the last four, the amount of money has  almost doubled. Almost twice as much will be spent on Australian school education by the  National Government in these four years, compared with the last four years. These huge new  investments have been agreed, they’ve been budgeted for and they are being made available.  The work we do, administerial councils like this, which is so important, is we work on the  delivery of those precious extra dollars so that they can make a real difference and there are  substantial new resources already there, already available, already budgeted for. 

 REPORTER: Do you believe, once again, we could see resentment in the community over  this asylum seeker issue, much like we did with the children overboard? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I think what was resented, ultimately, about the children overboard  affair was that the then Liberal Government politically used inaccurate information for its  own benefit. What I think Australians don’t like, in circumstances like these, is to see  politicians trying to profit from the circumstances and Mr Turnbull might care to remember  that. What Australians want is they want us dealing with border protection. We are dealing  with border protection, with more dedicated resources in border protection than there have  been in the past. 

 REPORTER: Minister, just on another issue again, 40 odd jobs have been lost or sent  offshore at Westpac, some of them from Adelaide, is that a concern for the Government, so  many jobs being shipped offshore, especially in light of the current economic situation? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The loss of any job is of concern to the Australian Government, and I  would say to governments around the nation, including the governments the Ministers  standing with me represent, we understand of course that globally these are tough economic  times, with the global recession. We know that unemployment is rising right around the  world.   We know when we compare this nation with countries overseas that while we’re seeing  increase in unemployment, that in the US and the UK and countries in Europe, countries in  Asia, there are people with higher unemployment rates who are faring worse.  

 What the Australian Government has always sought to do, and what we’ve said to the  Australian people, is we are not immune from the global recession hitting Australian jobs.  We can’t stop the global recession coming to this country and impacting on the jobs of  Australians. What we can do is cushion the effect and what we are doing is stimulating the  economy by investing in things like the biggest school modernisation program this country  has ever seen. 

 REPORTER: Colin Barnett said that it seemed the asylum seekers were looking to test the  Government’s lighter stance on border security and everything. How do you react to that? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Well, look, that’s a statement Premier Barnett’s made. We’re sticking to  the facts as we know them, and the Australian Government has made the facts available, as  soon as they could be conclusively ascertained and given to the Australian people. 

 REPORTER: Have any more details come to light as to what started the fire? 

 JULIA GILLARD: That matter is being investigated in a joint Australian Federal Police,  Northern Territory Police investigation, and obviously we will get the conclusions of that  investigation when they’re available. 

 REPORTER: Just quickly, how many more instances like this is it going to take before  there’s a rethink on border protection? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We’ve got the greatest degree of dedicated resources in border  protection that this country has ever seen. We’re focusing on border protection with that kind 

 of investment and that kind of effort, so border protection is already being dealt with. Thank  you. 

 ENDS. 

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au  

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

 

