---
title: "Evans celebrates minimum sentence for people smugglers."
date: "2009-07-02"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211327053
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S5BU6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

     Thursday 2 July 2009 

 Evans celebrates minimum sentence for people smugglers   

 The giving of minimum sentences to those charged with people smuggling through the magistrates  courts announced yesterday is no the great outcome as claimed by Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans.   

 “This Government should be aiming to deliver a strong message that Australia will not tolerate  people smuggling or people trafficking,” Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship said.   

 “Prime Minister Rudd described people smugglers as the “vilest form of humanity", however that  message is blurred if minimum sentences are delivered and Senator Evans celebrates the fact.   

 “Now is the time for this government to not only review minimum sentences but also the maximum  fine of only $200,000 for people smuggling.   

 “When you have profits of over $1 million per unauthorised boat arriving and being escorted to  Christmas Island, a $200,000 maximum fine does not constitute a serious deterrent.”   

 “While Christmas Island Detention Centre is now reaching full capacity with over 700 detainees on  the island, we need to do more than simply line the ambulances up at the bottom of the cliff.”  Sharman Stone said.   

 “The Rudd Government must urgently address the consequences of their unraveling of migration  policy designed to ensure those most in need are offered Australian permanent protection.      

 “Publicly celebrating a minimum sentence given to smugglers participating in this inhuman trade is  not a message which is consistent with Prime Minister Rudd‘s statement about the criminality and  heinous behavior of the smugglers who are sending people into Australia Waters in unseaworthy  vessels,” Sharman Stone said.   

 Media enquiries: Jo Shannon 0417 148 110 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

