---
title: "Third boat arrival in a week: how much more evidence does the Rudd Government need?"
date: "2009-09-13"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536724
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/86OU6%22
---

 

 

 Sun, 13th September 2009    

 THIRD BOAT ARRIVAL IN A WEEK: HOW MUCH MORE EVIDENCE DOES  THE RUDD GOVERNMENT NEED? 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The arrival of the third boat carrying asylum seekers in the last week is further proof that the Rudd Government 

 has lost control of who comes into Australia, Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, said today.  

 “It’s now firmly established that Australia is the latest cash cow for people smugglers,” Dr Stone said.  

 The most recent boat, carrying 65 asylum seekers and three crew members, was intercepted on Saturday night 

 by the Australian Navy.  

 This brings the number of asylum seekers to 1456 on 31 boats since August last year when the Rudd 

 Government began unravelling its immigration policy opening the back door for people smugglers.  

 Over the weekend a boat carrying 87 asylum seekers was intercepted off Ashmore Reef and Indonesian officials 

 intercepted a boat on Friday carrying 56 asylum seekers on their way to Australia.  

 “At the rates we have seen over the last week, Australia could see between eight to ten thousand unauthorised 

 arrivals each year. These numbers would replace and completely swamp Australia’s own refugee program,” Dr 

 Stone said.  

 Dr Stone said the Rudd Government was warned that their softening of border protection would have dire 

 consequences.  

 “The Government has not denied that the AFP warned them last year of the consequences of their softened 

 policy. Since then we have had further unravelling. This week we will see complementary protection visas 

 introduced as an alternative pathway to permanent migration when the individual does not meet refugee criteria.  

 “Enough is enough. The Rudd Government must urgently launch an inquiry into the relationship between their 

 softening of border protection and the surge in people smuggling in Australia.”    

