---
title: "Transcriprt of doorstop interview: Perth: 22 April 2009: comments on the Government's response to the 2020 summit; Sri Lanka and other issues."
date: "2009-04-22"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324506
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GPCT6%22
---

 

  1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP 

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE: 22 April 2009 

 TITLE:  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW: FOREIGN AFFAIRS MINISTER  STEPHEN SMITH, PERTH 

 SUBJECTS: COMMENTS ON THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE  2020 SUMMIT, SRI LANKA AND OTHER ISSUES.   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  Thanks very much for coming. Firstly, I welcome very much the fact  that the Cabinet is meeting in Perth, in the seat of Cowan, and I very much welcome my  Cabinet colleagues to Western Australia. 

 Chris Evans and I, of course, are very pleased that the Cabinet's meeting here. And later this  evening,  of  course,  there'll  be  another  community  Cabinet  meeting  just  down  the  road  in   Ballajura.   

 Today, the Prime Minister has released the Government's response to the 2020 Summit. We  were very pleased with that process. There are a very large number of good ideas, very many  of which the Government is taking forward.   

 If  I  can  just  comment  on  a  couple  in  my  own  area, firstly, the deployable civilian capacity.  This is an idea from the 2020 Summit which AusAID, as the lead agency, has been working  on  for  some  time  and  we  expect  that  by  about  August-September  of  this  year  we'll  have  a   complete policy framework in place.   

 We  see  civilian  deployable  capacity,  of  course,  in  other  countries:  United  States,  United   Kingdom,  and  our  ambition  here  is  to  complement  the  good  work,  for  example,  that  our   military  and  defence  assets  do  and  perform  in  the  aftermath  of  disasters,  whether,  for   example, it's the Chinese earthquake or the tsunami.   

 What we've discovered in recent years is that the initial response is often coordinated between  defence or military assets of different countries. But in the aftermath, we need very much to  look at technical assistance and reconstruction.   

 So we're very pleased that we're able to take that idea from the 2020 Summit forward. Also,  I'm very pleased to see that the Prime Minister has announced that his Australia- 

 

  2

 Asia Endeavour Awards, funded to the tune of $15 million, will also be progressed. This will  enhance  the  educational  engagement  and  the  people  to  people  engagement  between  young   Australians and our Asian neighbours. This is also a very good initiative.   

 Very quickly, can I just make a couple of remarks in other areas? Sri Lanka, I've released a  further statement today. We remain very concerned about the risk to a very large number of  civilians in Sri Lanka. We again call upon the Sri Lankan Government and the Tamil Tigers  to cease hostilities, to enable civilians to withdraw from the area of hostilities.   

 We welcome the fact that there are reports that many thousands of civilians were able to leave  the hostile areas in the last 24-48 hours, but there are, clearly, very many thousands more who  are caught in the hostile territory, and we call upon both the Sri Lankan Government and the  Tamil Tigers to allow civilians to remove themselves from the area.   

 Finally, later this evening, tonight, I will be leaving Perth to go to Turkey. I have the great  honour of leading the Australian delegation at the Anzac Day celebration or commemorations  in Gallipoli. I'm looking very much forward to that. Anzac Day these days, of course, not just  commemorates  the  Gallipoli  battle,  but  also,  I  think,  commemorates  the  sacrifice  that   Australian servicemen and women have made over a long period of time. I think Anzac Day,  the modern celebration or commemoration of Anzac Day, also underlines some of our great  Australian characteristics and values and virtues. So I'm very much looking forward to getting  to Gallipoli for the Anzac Day commemorations.   

 I'm happy to respond to your questions.   

 QUESTION:  On the civilian capacity, can you explain how that would actually work, who  would  be  involved?  Would  it  be  attached  to  a  department?  Would  it  be  like  the  US  Peace   Corps?   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  Well, AusAID will be the lead agency and we will have, potentially, a  civilian  contribution.  They  may  be  civilians  who  are  already  engaged  in  public  service  or   civilians  from private  enterprise  who  have  the  necessary  technical  expertise  and  capacity  to  assist  in  either  long  term  reconstruction  or  other  non-military  activity.   For  example,  I  was   recently  in  China  in  the  aftermath  of  the  earthquake  in  Sichuan  Province  and  had  a  look  at   some  of  the  contribution  that  Australians  are  making  there,  including  the  rebuilding,   effectively, of a hospital.   

 So,  whether  the  technical  expertise  is  in  construction,  whether  the  technical  expertise  is   building the capacity of the adversely affected communities, it takes on a role which is non-military, non-defence assets.    

 Generally,  we  have  found  that  they  are  used  in  the  immediate  aftermath,  in  the  immediate   crisis where you need to quickly deploy emergency relief. It's the longer  term rebuilding  of   communities,  rebuilding  of  infrastructure,  rebuilding  of  societies  that  this  complementary   effort is aimed at.   

 

  3

 QUESTION:  On the 2020 priority list, the Republic is left off. Was it something that was  still popular or...   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  We've  made  it  clear  that,  of  course,  we  support  Australia  becoming  a   Republic, but the Prime Minister has made it clear that we don't see it as being a priority in  terms of timing. The Prime Minister has also made the point from time to time that he sees the  best opportunity for Australia to move to a Republic when the current monarch ceases in that  role and that's a personal view that I also share.   

 But,  of  course,  the  2020  Summit  wasn't  the  first  institution  or  gathering  to  contemplate   Australia being a Republic. We support that, but we think it's best done in due course. It's not  a timing priority for us.   

 QUESTION:  Are you aware of the extradition process of Hadi Ahmadi has begun?   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  I was in Bali last week for the Bali Process conference, which was very  successful.  I  had  a  bilateral  meeting  with  my  counterpart,  Foreign  Minister  Wirajuda.  He   made the point to me at the time that the extradition approval was subject to the President's  approval. That's now occurred. And now the normal processes will take place.    

 Our  officials  will  now  be  pursuing  that  extradition  in  conjunction  with  the  Indonesian   authorities. So I'm very pleased that the Indonesian authorities have made that decision. I'm  very pleased to see the extradition processes start.   

 QUESTION: When can we expect to see him back here?   

 STEPHEN SMITH: That will depend upon the Indonesian legal and judicial processes, but  the threshold level has been reached and that's a very good thing.   

 QUESTION: The civilian force, is there going to be any military component at all, training  or escorted by the military?   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  The only time that we would see a role for the military would be if, for  example,  the  civilian  deployed  capacity  required  force  protection  or  security  arrangements.   We're not envisaging that on an ongoing basis, but that is a possibility.    

 We've also learned a lot of useful and good experience from the civilian reconstruction work  we do in the Solomon Islands and in East Timor. There, of course, you have Australians and,  also, New Zealanders, as part of a defence or military attachment, but there are also civilian  attachments to that.   

 It's also possible that people who can become part of the civilian deployable capacity are also  reservists. There are a lot of army or armed services reservists who, for example, from time to  time are rotated through either East Timor or the Solomon Islands. So we don't discount the  possibility that some people who had experience in East Timor or the Solomons might form  part of a civilian deployment - deployed capacity, having had prior experience as a reservist in  one of those two locations. 

 

  4

 

 QUESTION:  But for civilians involved, would they have to take time off work to do this?   

 STEPHEN  SMITH:   We're  certainly  not  proposing  to  make  it  compulsory.  It  would  be   effectively a voluntary community effort. That's one of the issues we want to look at in terms  of the formal policy framework, the extent to which people might be able to be compensated  for taking time off from work and the like. So that's one of the precise points that we'd want to  have a closer look at.   

 QUESTION:  So they might get paid to a certain minimum level while they're away?   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  It's a possibility but I don't want to get too far ahead of ourselves. It's  one of the issues that we do want to have a look at.   

 QUESTION:   Mr  Smith,  should  Indonesia  sign  up  to  the  United  Nations  convention  on   refugees?   

 STEPHEN  SMITH:   That's,  of  course,  a  matter  for  Indonesia.  That  was  one  of  the  issues   which was the subject of discussion at the Bali process but as a general proposition I'm very,  very happy with the cooperation that Australia has with Indonesia.    

 Foreign Minister Wirajuda has indicated, for example, that he proposes to continue to pursue  through  the  Parliament  the  question  of  people  smuggling  becoming  a  domestic  offence  in   Indonesia.    

 Whether  Indonesia  chooses  to  join  up  for  the  convention  is  a  matter  for  Indonesia  and  I'm   very happy to leave that to Foreign Minister Wirajuda.   

 QUESTION:   Given  how  close  -  I  mean,  obviously,  the  latest  boatload  of  asylum  seekers   isn't from Indonesia but given how close they actually came, is it time that we put a bit more  pressure on Indonesia to make sure, especially with rumours…   

 STEPHEN  SMITH:   I  won't  make  that  assumption.  My  colleague,  the  Home  Affairs   Minister, Mr Debus, has made a detailed statement today and answered questions. We, as a  matter  of  longstanding  process,  announce  when  there's  been  an  interception.  My   understanding  is  that  this  boat  was  under  surveillance  for  effectively  a  24  hour  period,  was   intercepted - that was aerial surveillance - was intercepted when it came into the Australian  migration zone and is being escorted to Christmas Island. I think there are about 30, 32 adult  males on board.   

 They'll go through the assessments, the usual assessments at Christmas Island, to determine  where they're from and how they arrived there so I'm not making any assumptions but what  we  do  know  is  this  and  I've  made  this  clear  in  the  past,  in  the  run-up  to  the  Bali  process   meeting, in the aftermath of that and before, is that we see the dangers and the risks of very  considerable push factors and those push factors, historically or in the recent period generally,  so far as Australia's concerned, have come from Iraq and Afghanistan. More recently we've 

 

  5

 become very concerned not just about Afghanistan but also the Afghanistan-Pakistan border  area and also Sri Lanka.   

 And  I've  made  some  separate  remarks  about  Sri  Lanka,  but  there  is  clearly  very  grave   potential  for  displaced  people  coming  from  Sri  Lanka  so  we're  acutely  conscious  and   concerned about these things. That was one of the reasons it was at Australia's request that we  saw, for the first time in half a dozen years, a Ministerial meeting of the Bali Process which is  aimed  at  regional  cooperation  so  far  as  displaced  people  and  people  movements  are   concerned.   

 QUESTION:  In terms of the push factors in Sri Lanka, do you have discussions with your  Sri Lankan counterparts about what they can do to try and stop people coming over or is it too  hard over there?   

 STEPHEN  SMITH:   The  Sri  Lankan  Foreign  Minister  Bogollagama  was  in  Australia  last   year. That was one of the issues that I discussed with him but our officials in Sri Lanka and  our officials in Canberra have been in very detailed conversations with the Sri Lankans about  the risks posed by displaced people from Sri Lanka.   

 Historically,  of  course,  we've  seen  Sinhalese  people  coming  to  -  or  Sinhalese  people  being   displaced from - Sri Lanka or leaving Sri Lanka and coming close to our shores and there's,  of course, a very significant risk that in the future it'll be Tamils who will be displaced and  seek  to  move  to  Australia  via  the  sea  and  it's  an  issue  that  we're  very  concerned  about  and   very conscious of.   

 QUESTION:  Are you expecting that number to rise, given what's happening at the moment?   

 STEPHEN  SMITH:   As  I've  said,  you  know,  we're  seeing  very  serious  difficulties  for   civilians in the north-east of Sri Lanka. We continue to urge the Sri Lankan Government to  not  just  attempt  to  resolve  these  matters  through  military  means  but  to  enter into a political  dialogue. We continue to urge the Tamil Tigers to lay down their arms. We continue to urge  cessation  of  hostilities  to  enable  civilians  to  remove  themselves  from  danger  zones  but  the   ongoing conflict in Sri Lanka is seeing a very considerable number of displaced peoples and  that does add to the risk that some of them will seek to leave Sri Lanka by boat, heading in  Australia's direction. We are acutely aware of that.   

 QUESTION:  But do you know if the Sri Lankan authorities are actually doing anything to  patrol their coast or is that just unrealistic given the situation?   

 STEPHEN SMITH:  We have been in contact with the Sri Lankan Government and officials  but we obviously want to, and will be, doing much more so far as Sri Lanka is concerned. So  we have, for example, a very, very good relationship with Indonesia and the work that we do  with Indonesia, the work that Indonesia does on our behalf, the work that Indonesia does in  this area, is first class work and we appreciate it very much. We need to make sure that other  transit countries, whether it's Sri Lanka, whether, for example, it's Malaysia, that we have the  same  working  basis  and  arrangement  with  them and  that's  what  we're  working  very  hard  to   achieve.  [End] 

