---
title: "Coalition's strong stand on border protection."
date: "2009-11-13"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331196
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HX6V6%22
---

     Fri, 13th November 2009 

 

 COALITION'S STRONG STAND ON BORDER PROTECTION 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Coalition takes the national government’s responsibility for border protection very seriously.  

 Australians know that the Coalition has always been prepared to take the tough decisions on national security.  

 We are determined to keep our borders secure, to prevent and discourage asylum seekers from risking their lives 

 in perilous journeys and to protect the integrity of our generous immigration program.  

 Our border protection policy is to stop the boats. We have done this before and we will do it again. We are 

 prepared to take the tough decisions that Kevin Rudd and Labor seek to avoid.  

 The only way to deter people smugglers is to have tougher laws. Only tougher laws send the right signal to these 

 criminals and their prospective customers.  

 By recklessly unpicking the policies of the previous Government that had successfully stopped the people 

 smuggling trade, Mr Rudd has given the people smugglers a powerful marketing tool where they can offer the 

 near certainty of permanent residence in one of the richest societies in the world to those who have the cash and 

 contacts to buy a seat on a boat.  

 Having done this, the Rudd Government has created the reality and the perception that Australia is a soft target. 

 Lives are placed at risk and the integrity of our borders and our immigration program are being compromised.  

 The principles set out below will reduce the ability of the people smugglers to market the certainty of permanent 

 residence in Australia and will therefore deter unauthorised arrivals.  

 The Coalition will not shirk this responsibility the way Labor does.  

 We will announce further details of our border protection policy closer to the election, but today we are restating 

 four core principles:   1.We will once again secure our borders. Our aim is to stamp out people smuggling and effectively deter  unauthorised arrivals while at the same time treating refugees compassionately in accordance with our  obligations under the UN Convention on Refugees.  

 2.All processing offshore. We will ensure that unauthorised arrivals seeking asylum are intercepted and 

 processed offshore at Christmas Island, not on the Australian mainland as Mr Rudd is preparing to do.  

 3.A non-permanent visa for unauthorised arrivals. We will introduce a non-permanent visa for asylum seekers 

 who arrive without authorisation. Asylum seekers who arrive without authorisation will be granted this safe haven 

 visa rather than Labor’s permanent residency. It will be reassessed after a specific period not longer than three 

 years, and if they are found to be in need of continued protection they will then be eligible for permanent 

 residency. If they are found not to be in need of such protection, they will be returned to their country of origin.  

 4.A compassionate and fair refugee and humanitarian program. A Turnbull Government will maintain 

 Australia’s substantial humanitarian program for refugees who come to Australia through legitimate processes. 

 This intake will always favour those most in need. 

 These principles will be the core of our border protection policy at the next election. They represent the tough 

 decisions the Rudd Government is not prepared to make.  

 Labor has weakened our border protection regime and caused a surge of unauthorised boat arrivals. Labor is 

 outsourcing Australia’s humanitarian immigration program to people smugglers.  

 Only a Turnbull Government can stop the boats and secure our borders.    

