---
title: "Bill to abolish detention debt passes first hurdle."
date: "2009-06-25"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211326744
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4IZT6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Bill to abolish detention debt passes first hurdle 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, welcomed the  passage of the Migration Amendment (Abolishing Detention Debt) Bill 2009 through  the House of Representatives today. 

 'The Bill will be debated in the Senate in August and I urge all Opposition Senators to  join the Liberal MPs in the lower house who supported the abolition of an unjust and  ineffective regime,' Senator Evans said. 

 'The Rudd Government is committed to establishing a fairer, more humane and more  effective system of immigration detention and this Bill represents the first legislative  step of the Government's reforms in this area.' 

 The Bill abolishes the charges imposed on immigration detainees and waives all  existing debts for current and former detainees, but there will be no refunds of debts  already paid. 

 People convicted of people smuggling or illegal foreign fishing will still be liable for  their costs of detention and removal, to recognise the seriousness of these offences. 

 The liability for costs associated with the removal or deportation of unlawful non-citizens will remain unchanged. The Government has no intention of encouraging  visitors to Australia to become destitute and then rely on the Australian Government  to pay for their return. 

 The Bill is in line with the unanimous recommendation of the Joint Standing  Committee on Migration in December 2008 that the Government repeal the liability of  immigration detention costs and waive existing debts. 

 'Making immigration detainees liable for the costs associated with their detention has  not contributed to minimising costs of immigration detention to the Australian  community, nor has it acted as any form of deterrent,' Senator Evans said. 

 Most immigration detention debts are written off because they are uneconomical to  pursue. If a person is granted a permanent protection visa or a humanitarian visa, 

 then in keeping with the spirit of Australia's obligations under the UN Convention for  Refugees, the is debt written off and no further action is taken to recover it.  

 During 2006-07 and 2007-08, immigration detention debt raised was $54.3 million of  which $1.8 million (or 3.3 per cent) was recovered. A total of $48.2 million was  written off by the department as uneconomical to pursue while $4 million was  waived. 

 This financial year, the cost of administering the scheme will exceed the funds  recouped. Year to date receipts to 30 April 2009, from repayment of detention debts  for the 2008-09 financial year is $477 613 while the cost of administering detention  debts for 2008-09 is approximately $709 000.  

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09059.htm   Last update: 25 June 2009 at 14:48 AEST  

  

