---
title: "Labor's immigration strategy is weak and chaotic."
date: "2009-10-12"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330056
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X4XU6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP   

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

   Monday October 12 2009 

 

 Labor’s immigration strategy is weak and chaotic   

 The granting of permanent protection visas for all the surviving asylum seekers from the  boat that exploded near Ashmore Reef in April once again raises some serious concerns  about the judgement of the Minister Senator Evans, and the messages that will be sent back  to Indonesia about the softening of immigration policy.   

 42 Afghan men who were on the SIEV 36 are to be granted permanent residency  immediately despite suspicions remaining that some may have been personally implicated  in actions which led to the explosion on board the boat.   

 Apparently Minister Evans has only just called for a brief on the situation some six months  after this explosion at sea. His immediate conclusion was to release the 42 men despite the  Northern Territory Police alleging that one or more may have been responsible for the  explosion. The Indonesian crew have been cleared of any suspicion.   

 Apparently Senator Evans is concerned about the anxiety levels of some of the 42 men and  wishes to have them immediately released with permanent residency and all other rights  that accompany the granting of such a visa.   

 We are told that these 42 were in dentition in Brisbane and Perth with unfettered access to  sporting activities, cinema, shopping, migration advocacy, legal services, an imam and full  medical and psychological services.   

 The men themselves state that nothing was left undone to make them comfortable and to  meet their every need.    

 My concern is that the anxiety for some of theses 42 may not be relieved by their release  into the community given some or all of them may be required to give evidence at the  upcoming Northern Territory coronial enquiry.   

 It could be expected that any who have information not yet shared with the police will be  most tempted to disappear into the Australian community.   

 MEDIA RELEASE  

 Given the coronial enquiry is due to start in January it would have been much more sensible  for the 42 individuals to have remained where they were, so when the coronial enquiry is  finally completed, including any reference to future charges to be laid, any of this group  facing charges can be readily contacted and if charged with a serious offence they can be  readily deported.   

 Minister Evans has simply provided further messages of weak policy to the people  smugglers and those contemplating a dangerous journey to Australia. This is weak strategy  and chaotic policy.   

 

 

 Media enquiries - Andrew Cox 0427 460 063 

