---
title: "Asylum seekers deserve consistent legal status on mainland."
date: "2009-04-22"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324521
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XACT6%22
---

 Wednesday 22 April 2009   

 Asylum seekers deserve  consistent legal status on mainland   

 The Greens say all future asylum seekers must be brought to the Australian  mainland, and granted consistent legal safeguards in having their claims for asylum  processed.   

 Reports today say that 29 asylum seekers who were taken to the Front Puffin oil rig  in the aftermath of last week’s fatal boat blast will not be able to access the same  legal avenues to claim asylum as those who were taken to the Australian mainland.  The oil rig is considered as an offshore excised territory, outside of the migration  zone for refugees.   

 “The inconsistency in the options available to these asylum seekers - who arrived on  the same boat - throws a spotlight on the arbitrary and unfair nature of these laws,”  said Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.   

 “The discrepancy in the laws that apply to mainland and offshore arrivals creates a  two-class system of asylum seekers - in this particular case, members of the same  family could potentially be presented with different legal entitlements.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said Australia’s policy contravenes the United Nations’  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Article 31 of which states that people  must not be discriminated against in the assessment of their refugee status based on  their method of arrival.   

 “The tragic example of last week reinforces the need for all asylum seekers who  arrive in our waters by boat to be brought to the Australian mainland to have their  checks carried out and claims processed,” she said.   

 “Transporting asylum seekers back out to sea to Christmas Island to have their  claims processed there, even when the mainland is much closer, is unfair, inefficient,  and not economical in these challenging times.   

 “All asylum seekers should be able to apply for immediate refugee status on the  Australian mainland, within reach of community support, legal aid and public  scrutiny.”    

 

 Media contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760   

