---
title: "Boat tragedy must lead to greater understanding."
date: "2009-04-17"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324354
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9UAT6%22
---

 Friday 17 April 2009   

 Boat tragedy must lead to greater  understanding   

 The Greens say the fatal explosion on board a boat yesterday is a humanitarian tragedy that  should lead to a greater understanding of and empathy with asylum seekers.   

 Up to five people are reported dead, two are missing and many more injured are arriving on  the mainland for medical treatment following an explosion on a boat carrying suspected  asylum seekers near Ashmore Reef.   

 “This tragedy highlights the dangers faced by those who are forced to seek asylum without  the assistance of the United Nations,” said Senator Hanson-Young.   

 “In places where there are no refugee camps to go to, or queues to join, human beings will  take risks to save their lives, and the lives of their loved ones.   

 “Details will come to hand as the inevitable inquiries unfold, and we must gain from this  information a better understanding of the plight and needs of asylum seekers.   

 “Calls for regression back to a time when the human rights of the world’s most vulnerable  people were disregarded in the interest of political opportunism are not appropriate.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said it was a myth that Australia was being flooded by asylum  seekers arriving by boat.   

 “The sheer numbers disprove this claim,” she said.   

 “Asylum applications in Australia increased by 19 per cent last year, from 3980 to 4750.  Fewer than 4 per cent applicants arrived by boat.    “Refugees are, first and foremost, human beings who deserve to be treated with dignity as  they receive the urgent medical attention they require.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said those who risked their lives travelling to Australia for protection  and assistance deserved compassionate treatment.   

 “The Greens call on the Government to process claims and carry out checks on asylum  seekers on the mainland, just as it has been able to offer medical assistance on the  mainland in the aftermath of yesterday’s tragedy,” she said.   

 “The current practice of transporting people to the Christmas Island detention centre, more  than 1600km from the mainland - even when the mainland is much closer - is  questionable.”   

 

 Media contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760   

