---
title: "Abolition of detention debt another positive for people smugglers."
date: "2009-09-09"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536526
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/HCNU6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Wed, 9th September 2009    

 ABOLITION OF DETENTION DEBT ANOTHER POSITIVE FOR PEOPLE  SMUGGLERS 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Government’s abolition of detention debt for all but a few sends more messages down the line that Australia 

 has weakened its resolve in relation to maintaining control of our immigration policy, Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, said today.  

 “Abolishing all detention debt for asylum seekers does not change the current practice. Detainees found to be 

 refugees have long had their debt waived or written off. In fact, less than five per cent repay any of their debt, 

 which is subject to means testing.  

 “However, changing the law will be seen by people smugglers as more evidence of this Government having lost 

 control of border protection.  

 “The Coalition has always been committed to an orderly and humanely managed immigration and refugee 

 program.  

 “Under the Coalition, there were safeguards in the legislation to ensure asylum seekers who did not have the 

 means to pay were given manageable repayment schedules, or have their detention debts waived or written off.  

 “If the Immigration Department had problems administering these debt write-offs or waivers, their efficiency and 

 productivity should have been lifted.  

 “Since the Rudd Government abolished Temporary Protection Visas (TPVs), detention debt and has been 

 releasing asylum seekers into Australia before their proper checks are completed, people smugglers have 

 revamped their human trade.  

 “They have sold over 1300 asylum seekers a passage on leaky boats, with an unknown number drowned at sea 

 or now held in detention in Indonesia.”    

