---
title: "Labor passes the buck for people smuggling."
date: "2009-04-15"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324309
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZQST6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Wednesday 15 April 2009 

  Labor passes the buck for people smuggling   

 The Rudd Labor Government would have Australians believe that the upsurge of people  smuggler boats coming to Australia is the failure of other countries efforts to prevent people  smuggling and improve their domestic legal arrangements.   

 Blaming the most recent surge on other countries like Sri Lanka and Afghanistan does not excuse  the Rudd Labor Government for the 39 asylum seekers who delivered themselves undetected  directly to Christmas Island Detention Centre last week.   

  “Leaving a boat jammed on Warrior Reef for four days cannot be blamed on the Sri Lanka or  Afghanistan Governments,” Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  said.   

 “While Australia must more actively cooperate with all of the countries along the route of  the  people smugglers it cannot simply pass the buck while it slashes funding and clearly leaves its  new renamed agency Australian Customs and Border Protection Authority in chaos,” Sharman  Stone said.   

 “The fault of missed boats and stranded vessels over the last ten days lies squarely with the Rudd  Labour Government.”   

 “We have to be grateful that the majority of people smugglers efforts have in fact been thwarted  by Indonesia, whether before the un-seaworthy coach pushed off from Indonesia, or before they  left Indonesian waters.”   

 “Indonesia has been doing a sterling job on our behalf and it deserves better than to be included  in Labors back passing and blaming as lives continue to be put in danger with this latest surge in  people smuggling.”    

 “I have been calling for an urgent inquiry since the grounding of the asylum seekers on Warrior  Reef. This comprehensive inquiry needs to be commenced as soon as possible for the sake of the  new Australian Customs and Border Protection Authority and the Department of Immigration  who may just find disastrous news when the May budget further slashes funding,” Dr Stone said.   

  

 Media enquiries: Jo Shannon 0417148110   

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

