---
title: "Greater transparency for refugee and migration tribunals."
date: "2009-02-17"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211322714
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JK4U6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Greater transparency for refugee and migration tribunals 

 Tuesday, 17 February 2009 

 The Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) will publish its country of origin research to  provide greater transparency in its decision making, the Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said today. 

 Senator Evans said the information will be available online from this week so the  community can better understand the reasons behind the tribunal’s decisions. 

 ‘This is an important development in demonstrating the openness and accountability  of the tribunal and its decision making processes,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The publication of the Refugee Review Tribunal’s country of origin research will  provide greater access to justice to protection visa applicants, migration advisers and  the public.’ 

 More than 450 research documents from the major countries of reference for RRT  reviews will initially be published, including country of origin information from China,  India, Malaysia, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Lebanon, Sri Lanka, South Korea, Pakistan  and Vietnam. 

 The research published includes general background information, commissioned  research and opinions from academics and experts as well as responses researched  in answer to specific questions posed by RRT members in relation to particular  reviews. These responses are carefully edited to protect the identity and privacy of  individual visa applicants and to maintain the integrity of the review process. 

 The RRT will publish country of origin research dating back three years.  As new  research is added to the website, older and out of date material will be archived, so  that the research readily available to the public is the most recent and current.   

 ‘The Research and Information Section has earned a high reputation among refugee  agencies worldwide and is considered a quality research model for refugee decision-making in other countries,’ Senator Evans said. 

 Senator Evans said that the RRT and the Migration Review Tribunal (MRT) will also  double the number of decisions published online so that 40 per cent of all decisions  made by the tribunals will be publicly available. The move follows community  requests to see more tribunal decisions published.  

 ‘The tribunals publish a broad cross section of their decisions in the public interest  and doubling the number available will increase the transparency of the decision  making and further improve understanding of this important merits review function,’  Senator Evans said. 

 The tribunals’ research and decisions can be obtained online along with further  information about the roles of the RRT and MRT.  See: www.mrt-rrt.gov.au  

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09018.htm   Last update: 23 February 2009 at 12:21 AEST  

 

