---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 10 November 2009: National Conversation with Principals; school transparency; asylum seekers; climate change."
date: "2009-11-10"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
  - "National Conversation with Principals"
  - "school transparency"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "climate change."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331077
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U76V6%22
---

 The Hon Julia Gillard MP 

 Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister 

 10 November, 2009  

 Transcript 

 Transcript - Doorstop, Canberra 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  1230PM TUESDAY  10 NOVEMBER 2009  CANBERRA  

 ISSUES:  National Conversation with Principals; school transparency; asylum seekers;  climate change 

 JULIA GILLARD:  Can I say it’s a great pleasure, a great privilege, indeed very exciting  for me to be able to welcome to Canberra today more than 150 school principals. 

 These school principals are going to be with me today and tomorrow talking through the  challenges they face in their schools and talking about the implementation of the  Government’s Education Revolution. 

 So much is happening in school education as a result of our Education Revolution reforms we  thought it was the right time to bring principals from around the nation to Canberra for a  national conversation on school education and our reforms. 

 Today as part of our reform process I have unveiled the My School website. This is the  website that will deliver our new transparency measures at the start of next year. This is the  website that parents, teachers, school principals and community members will go to learn  about Australian schools.  

 It will show for them comprehensive information about what is happening in every school in  this country, 9500 of them. They will be able to see how the school is going on national  testing, on attendance, on retention to Year 12, on the provision of vocational and education  and training. 

 They will be able to see the characteristics of the school population, who’s in the school, they  will be able to see the numbers of teachers and powerfully they will be able to compare one  school to schools around the country that serve similar student populations. They will be able  to asses whether their school is going better or worse compared to schools that teach similar  kids.  

 We want to do that because we want to share best practice around the country. And when we  see schools going streets ahead we want to make sure that similar schools share in that  learning and that best practice. And when we see schools falling behind we want to make a  difference for those schools. That’s what our Education Revolution reforms are all about -  better teaching, new resources, new endeavours in literacy and numeracy, our commitment to  closing the gap for Indigenous students. 

 Kids only get one go at education and we’ve got to make sure that every child in every school  is getting a great education and the best start in life. Knowing what’s happening school by  school is an important part of our Education Revolution reforms and I was very pleased to be  able to unveil the My School website today.  

 People should access the website, they should look through it. I would invite Australians to  become familiar with the website and the look and feel of it before next year it gets all of the  information about Australian schools on it. 

 We will continue the conversation with principals today. It will be about school transparency,  it will be about our new arrangements for better teaching, more resources, our new  arrangements in literacy and numeracy, our national curriculum, it will be about Indigenous  education, our measures to modernise schools through Building the Education Revolution,  the Digital Education Revolution and Trade Training Centres and importantly it will also be  about student wellbeing. 

 This is a great opportunity for me as the nation’s Deputy Prime Minister to meet with  Australian principals. I am very much enjoying the day and looking forward to the rest of the  conversation with Australia’s school principals. 

 JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that it won’t lead to the naming and shaming of schools  that don’t do as well as others? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I can absolutely guarantee there’s not one part of the Education  Revolution that’s about naming and shaming schools. I won’t do that, I don’t believe in doing  that and we have put this website together so that it’s not about league tables, it’s not about  naming and shaming. It’s about comprehensive information on schools and I invite people to  look at the website and to see how much information is there and to see the ability to compare  to similar schools around the country. 

 This is a powerful part of our Education Revolution reforms. 

 JOURNALIST: What information will the website include about the reliability of the  NAPLAN tests and how parents can interpret those results? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The website has click-on questions so for people who want to learn  about NAPLAN, who want to look at the information that lies behind the terminology on the  website that will be available for them. 

 Of course, when we use the terminology NAPLAN not everybody would immediately  recognise that we’re talking about the national testing for literacy and numeracy. Last year in  this country, in 2008, was the first time that children around the country sat down on the  same days and did the same tests. 

 This website will show those test results. Those test results are available for Grades 3, 5, 7  and 9. They are available for 2008 and 2009 and they will be on the website. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you encourage parents to use this website to shop around for what  school they are going to send their kids to? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I would encourage parents to use this website to gain all of the  information that they want to about schools. This website will enable parents to look at  schools in their local community. It will bring up the nearest 20 schools for metropolitan  areas. Obviously, in regional and remote Australia it will bring up the geographically near  schools.  

 And people will be able to go through and look at this comprehensive information for schools  in their local community. That can certainly inform school choices, but I also want it to  inform parents when their kids are in school, they should go and have a conversation with the  principal about what this means, they should see if their school is performing in different  parts of what it teaches better or worse than schools teaching similar students, they should  ask, if they’re going worse, what are we doing to improve now. 

 We want that conversation happening in every school. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept the view put to you by principals in there that the  information provided to parents does not actually provide a comprehensive and complete  picture of what happens in school and isn’t that therefore potentially damaging? 

 JULIA GILLARD: This is the most comprehensive information that Australia has ever had,  school by school, to show what is happening in our schools. Who is going ahead, who needs  an extra helping hand to make sure that they are developing kids as well as we want to see  our young people get that start in life.  

 This is the most comprehensive information we’ve ever had. From my point of view that’s a  huge step forward. Is it the only step we’re going to take? No. Now we’ve taken that huge  step forward we’re going to keep striding forward. There will be more and more information  available on this website over time. 

 But can I say, to have the most comprehensive information this nation has ever seen, school  by school, available next year is a huge stride forward in our Education Revolution.  

 And what does it matter for? It matters for the kids. It matters so we know where best  practice is and we share it. It matters so we know where underperformance is and we make a  difference to it. And compare it to now where we don’t have that information. We don’t  know rigorously, systematically who’s going well and who’s falling behind. Well, this  website, these new transparency measures are going to transform that. 

 JOURNALIST: Why did Indonesia reject the Government’s compromise deal on the  Oceanic Viking asylum seekers and what does that say about our relationship with Indonesia? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The Government made an agreement with Indonesia to disembark the  people now on the Oceanic Viking who were rescued at sea in Indonesia. We continue to 

 work methodically through, making sure that that agreement happens and people are  disembarked in Indonesia.  

 I’m not going to comment on operational matters as they’re worked through. 

 JOURNALIST: Just back onto the schools report, this information won’t actually stop third  parties from creating league tables though, will it? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I think when you see the design of this website, what this website is  about is giving comprehensive information. The website has been specifically designed so  that you get a comparison of similar schools.  

 It has been specifically designed so it is not a league table. There is no part of this website  that is a league table. There is no part of this website that can be sorted into a league table by  using sort functions on the computer. That is simply not possible. And why? Because league  tables don’t tell you anything you need to know. 

 What tells you what you need to know is the comprehensive rich information that is on this  website. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept that literacy and numeracy tests are an incomplete or  imperfect story about how schools are going? 

 JULIA GILLARD: What I accept is that literacy and numeracy tests measure literacy and  numeracy. So they don’t measure creativity or proficiency at sport or religious studies or  developing other characteristics of individuals, of course they don’t. 

 But can I say this, to be a great sportsperson, to be a great religious leader, to be someone  who is going to excel as a member of a team, to end up being a leader and showing leadership  capacity; you really need to be able to read and write.  

 We want every Australian child to read and write. Do I want them to get a well-rounded  education that takes them through the worlds of creativity and sport and leadership and team  work, of course I do. But I also want them to be able to read and write. That’s what national  testing measures, that’s what’s on this website. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, should state governments provide more flexibility and more  choice for parents as to which school to send their children to including schools outside their  geographic area? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I am certainly a believer that parents should be able to exercise choice  about their kid’s education. But what I would say about choice is we’ve heard a lot about  choice in the Australian education debate. Well, choice without rigorous, systematic, easily  available information isn’t choice - it’s guessing. 

 Now there are some parents who have gone to hell and back to find out as much information  as they can about schools in order to make choices for their children. Well, parents shouldn’t  have to go to hell and back to get that information. It should be there in front of their eyes and  it now will be. 

 You can exercise a choice when you have the information before you which enables you to  make it. That’s what this website is about. 

 JOURNALIST: But even with that information the reality is it’s still not easy to take your  kid out of one school and put them in the one that you want to. Isn’t this an area that needs to  be addressed? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Absolutely and that’s why choice is one component but you know what  the other component is - it’s looking at what’s happening in your school and if your school is  falling behind schools that teach similar kids then you should go down to your local school  and you should say, look this isn’t about the kids because this is a comparison of schools  teaching similar kids. This is about what’s happening in my school. Why isn’t my school  keeping pace? What’s going wrong here? What are we going to fix? What’s the school  improvement plan? We’ve got to do something about this, my kid’s in this school. 

 Parents should do that. The information on the website will enable them to do that. 

 JOURNALIST: To go back to the ship Ms Gillard, are you confident that the people will be  got off the ship in time to meet the Friday deadline or don’t you have any idea whether they  will or won’t? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I’m not going to comment on operational matters. What I will say is the  Government continues to show patience and resolve in making sure that the agreement we  made with Indonesia is honoured and we end up in a situation where these people rescued at  sea in Indonesian waters under international law are disembarked in Indonesia. 

 JOURNALIST: But do you think the public is as patient as the Government says it is? 

 JULIA GILLARD: These are difficult problems. I think people recognise that people  smuggling is a difficult problem, that dealing with the people who move around our globe  each year because of fear of persecution is a difficult problem for nations. 

 We are making decisions in the national interest as we deal with this difficult problem and  we’ll continue to do so. 

 JOURNALIST: Did you have any sympathy with the student yesterday who confronted the  Prime Minister and called for a more humane approach and a bit of a circuit breaker? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I think a great thing about Community Cabinet, and one of the reasons  we put Community Cabinet in place, once again something that’s never been done in this  nation’s history that you’d take the Federal Cabinet out to local communities and local  community members get to come and have a say, I think that’s a great initiative, it enables  people to say what they think. 

 Now people are going to agree with the Government sometimes, they’re going to disagree  with the Government on other occasions, that’s exactly what should happen at Community  Cabinet. 

 JOURNALIST: But what do you think of the emotion she was expressing? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Obviously, I as Shadow Minister for Immigration way back when,  Michelle you would probably recall, worked on Labor’s Immigration Policy. It’s important to  get the balance right.  

 We need to protect Australia’s borders. We need to have secure borders. We need to be able  to deal with asylum seeker claims quickly and expeditiously. If people are genuinely refugees  then obviously we want them to be resettled, if they’re not we want them to be returned.  

 That’s the kind of policy I put together, it’s the kind of policy that the Government has  implemented. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you set a couple of hurdles for the Opposition to jump when it  comes to fair negotiations on the Emissions Trading Scheme, that it be environmentally  effective and economically responsible, how does the Government’s scheme leap those bars? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I think you would see from our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme  which we put to the Parliament, we’re in the process of putting to the Parliament again  because the Opposition blocked it in the Senate, has been worked on for almost two years  now in a consultative way so that it will make a difference for climate change and carbon  emissions while making sure that we are protecting jobs and protecting the economic  competitiveness of this nation. 

 Now, views on these things are going to vary and views have been listened to as we’ve put  the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in place. The issue here for the Opposition, is seems  to me, is we’re certainly prepared to keep negotiating in good faith but I remember Malcolm  Turnbull put his leadership on the line and said that he didn’t want to be leader of a party that  wasn’t as committed to tackling climate change as he was. 

 He didn’t want to lead a party unless they were on the same page as him on climate change.  Well, I had the opportunity to watch Four Corners last night and what I saw were senior  Coalition figures, like Nick Minchin, basically saying the party doesn’t agree with Malcolm  Turnbull. 

 Well, it’s Mr Turnbull who has put his leadership on the line. If he has put his leadership on  the line then he has to get his party to follow him. 

 JOURNALIST: But why should the Australian voters take the Government seriously when  it seems you’re so eager to play the politics on this? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We are trying to get some legislation through, that’s what we’re trying  to do. We’ve been to this Parliament once with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme  having been through a very consultative process, having promised at the 2007 election to  tackle climate change, having won that election when people endorsed our policies to tackle  climate change. 

 We’ve gone to the Parliament once and the Coalition in the Senate said no. In response to that  we’ve said we’ll come to the Parliament again, prepared to negotiate in good faith and we  are. But in order to negotiate in good faith we need Malcolm Turnbull to do no more or no  less than he said he would. He said he didn’t want to lead a party that wasn’t with him on  climate change. All we’re asking him to do is honour his words. 

 JOURNALIST: But why highlight the divisions in the Coalition rather than build on the  support that you have from the leadership, that you understand you have from the leadership.  It seems that the Government’s far more interested in playing the politics of this rather than  actually building on what support you do have on that side? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Number one; we are continuing negotiations in good faith. Number two;  I think having seen senior Coalition figures like Nick Minchin last night put a radically  different view from Malcolm Turnbull…. 

 JOURNALIST: But if he is sidelined then what does it matter… 

 JULIA GILLARD: Well, if, your question started with an ‘if’ and I’m going to that same  ‘if’. We are negotiating in good faith, we saw senior Coalition figures like Nick Minchin last  night basically trash Malcolm Turnbull’s agenda. 

 I think we’re entitled to ask a question which starts with the word if and that question is; Is  Malcolm Turnbull in a position to say that in negotiating with good faith he has his party’s  support because if he isn’t then what are we negotiating about?  

 To negotiate in good faith, you’ve got to negotiate with people who can say confidently and  comprehensively they speak on behalf of the group they purport to represent. 

 JOURNALIST: But you’re making his task harder within his party, what is the motive for  doing that? 

 JULIA GILLARD: What I’m trying to do is make negotiating changes to the Carbon  Pollution Reduction Scheme and getting this vital piece of legislation through the Senate so  that we can get about further steps to tackle climate change. I’m trying to make that happen.  

 To make that happen we have to negotiate in good faith with people who can say yes, I am  here to do a deal on behalf of these people behind me and these people behind me accept my  authority to do that deal. Is Malcolm Turnbull in that position having seen what we saw on  ABC’s Four Corners last night? 

 JOURNALIST: Back to the My School website, what does it say to you about the culture of  teaching in Australia that there should be so much resistance to giving information to  parents? 

 JULIA GILLARD: What it says to me is, I understand there’s nervousness about change but  from my point of view it’s all about the kids and to the extent that the adults are a bit stressed  or discomforted as we move through a period of change then we’ve got to keep our eyes here  on the goal and it’s all about the kids. 

 I also understand that school transparency in this country was given an appallingly bad name  by the very silly policies of the Liberal Party. The Liberal Party wanted to rank schools so  that you could see Vaucluse School in New South Wales or a school in Vaucluse was doing  better than an Indigenous school in the Northern Territory. Well, that wasn’t going to tell you  very much. And then they wanted to name and shame the schools that were at the end of the  list and then they wanted to correlate teacher pay with raw student scores. So teachers in  Vaucluse would get a pay rise and teachers in those Indigenous schools in the Northern 

 Territory get a pay cut. I mean no wonder when we had a government that so neglected  education and came out with such silly policy statements in this country, that some of these  concepts got a bad name. 

 What we’ve done is we’ve obviously said Liberal Party, no real reform agenda and many of  its ministers off on a silly frolic. Let’s forget about all of that. Let’s get something  comprehensive and systematic done and that’s what the My School website is. And of course  the thing at the centre of it, the powerful thing at the centre of it, is the comparison of the  schools that are teaching similar students - something the Liberal Party never talked about  because they didn’t care about doing that. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, you’re saying that you don’t want to negotiate with Mr Turnbull  unless he has the support of his party room so are you threatening to pull out of negotiations? 

 JULIA GILLARD: It’s Senator Wong who is negotiating with her counterpart, Ian  Macfarlane. The only question I’m asking is the question that Mr Turnbull raised himself  when he used the words that he didn’t want to lead a party that wasn’t on the same page as  him about climate change. Well, last night’s TV exposure means Mr Turnbull has to answer  as the leader of the party - is his party endorsing his views on climate change or not? 

 It’s a pretty simple question - yes/no answer - and he should give it particularly given he  staked his leadership on it. 

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you personally know why Indonesia rejected the Oceanic  Viking deal? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I’ve already answered that and I’m not commenting on operational  matters. 

 Thank you. 

 ENDS 

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au  

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

 

