---
title: "Bali conference gives Australian Government a chance to strengthen people smuggling policies."
date: "2009-04-14"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324251
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SORT6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Tuesday 14 April 2009 

 Bali conference gives Australian Government a chance to strengthen people smuggling policies 

 The current Bali Regional Ministerial Conference focusing on people smuggling and trafficking could not  have been timelier for the Minister for Foreign Affairs Steven Smith, Minister for Home Affairs Bob Debus  and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Evans. 

 The conference over the next 48 hours will be co-chaired by Minister Smith and his Indonesian  counterpart Hassan Wirajuda. 

  Indonesia has been doing a mighty job working with the Australian Government intercepting numbers of  boats before they leave Indonesia, however they clearly can not wage this war against the inhuman trade  alone. 

 Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship said out of this conference, she  hoped  the Australian  Labor Government  would realise it  could not continue to squeeze the resources    away from border security, quarantine services and immigration processing  both off and on shore. 

 “In the last ten days we have seen the appalling results of this resource squeeze and lack of focus of  Australia’s border security,” Dr Stone said. 

 “Last week’s bungles were a major concern, not only for the safety of the people on the boat (particularly  those that were left stranded on Warrior Reef for 4 days), but also the quarantine risks involved and the  protection of Australia’s boarders - as was the case of the undetected arrival directly to Christmas Island  last week.” 

 “We are told the most recent people smuggling boat passed by a Naval vessel which carrying other  asylum seekers, but the Naval vessel failed to see it.” 

 “The last ten days has shown the Rudd Government is failing the Australian people by not locating the  smuggler vessels, as they approach or land on Australian territory.” 

 Dr Stone said the slowing of the people smuggling trade required regional cooperation as well as working  very closely with the asylum seekers home countries. 

  “The coalition hopes this conference will put more steel in the resolve of the Labor Government in  tackling the initial problem which manifests itself too often in human tragedy.” 

 “This is a significant regional conference in Bali and while Prime Minister Rudd promotes all of his other  overseas conference activities with great fanfare, the Rudd Government is remaining silent on this  important meeting in Indonesia. This particular conference has been quietly left unheralded. 

 “The Australian people deserve to have a comprehensive report of the conference when Ministers Smith,  Debus and Evans return. 

 

 Media enquiries: Jo Shannon 0417148110   

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

