---
title: ".Australia's response to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea."
date: "2009-06-15"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211326366
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/O6VT6%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  The Hon Anthony Albanese MP   Minister for Infrastructure, Transport,  Regional Development and Local Government  

 

 15 June 2009   AA305/2009 

 AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE TO COMBAT PIRACY AND ARMED  ROBBERY AT SEA  

 On 12 June 2009 in a Joint Media Release with the Foreign Minister, Hon Stephen  Smith MP, I announced that Australia has strengthened its commitment to  international efforts to combat piracy off the Horn of Africa. 

 Australia will provide $500,000, as well as skills and expertise, to the Joint European  Commission/United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Counter Piracy  Program to assist Kenyan authorities in receiving and processing apprehended piracy  suspects. 

 Australia will provide an official through the Office of the Inspector of Transport  Security and the Australian Federal Police to work with the UNODC in the Nairobi Office  in Kenya on dealing with piracy in the region. 

 The international community, and particularly the UNODC, recognises that if an  effective deterrent is to be created in the prosecution of suspected pirates, there needs  to be a capacity for the legal processing to occur within the North East African Region.  

 The Official will work with local authorities in Kenya in dealing with apprehended piracy  suspects.  

 This is one of a range of measures undertaken by the Australian Government to  combat the growing international problem of piracy. 

 International Maritime Bureau figures show that more than 100 ships were attacked  and 42 hijacked in the Gulf of Aden and the Somalia region in 2008.   

 There have been around 60 attacks and 25 successful hijackings this year. 

 Piracy is an issue that impacts on the entire international community, as the attack on  the Italian cruise ship MSC Melody in April demonstrated. 

 With over 1500 passengers and crew, including 74 Australians, the Melody was  attacked by pirates in a speedboat at least 600 miles from the Somali coast- a  practical demonstration that this issue is a global one that affects every country.  

 The threat of piracy needs to be taken seriously, especially by countries such as  Australia, which relies almost exclusively on international shipping for our exports and  imports.  

 With 99 percent of our exports by volume being transported by sea, a safe and secure  maritime industry is paramount - to our economy, to our maritime industry, and to the  safety of many Australians who travel through international waters each year. 

 Page 1 of 3 AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE TO COMBAT PIRACY AND ARMED ROBBERY AT...

 In May this year, the Government announced that Australia would contribute  Australian Defence Force resources to international anti-piracy efforts off the Horn of  Africa.  Our contribution includes tasking of our Navy Anzac-class frigate and RAAF AP-3C Orion patrol aircraft, which are already contributing to counter-terrorism activities  in the region.  

 Flexible employment of our assets across several Coalition task forces allows the ADF  to contribute in an agile way to the highest-priority activity. 

 It is broadly recognised that the best long term solution to the problem of piracy is to  restore peace and stability in the Horn of Africa.  

 At the International Conference on Somalia in Brussels on 22-23 April this year, the  Government committed $2 million in security and humanitarian assistance to support  international efforts to restore peace to Somalia.  

 The United Nations estimates that over half the population of Somalia is in need of  humanitarian assistance and that one in six Somali children under five is acutely  malnourished. 

 Australia will contribute $1.5 million to the United Nations Humanitarian Appeal which  will go towards security protection for humanitarian workers in Somalia to support vital  health services for women and children, and $500,000 to the African Union Mission in  Somalia which is aiming to help Somalia's transitional government stabilise the country  through strengthening financial systems and further medical assistance. 

 Since 2005/06 the Australian Government has contributed $9 million of humanitarian  asistance to Somalia and assistance has also been provided to neighbouring countries  dealing with Somalian refugees. 

 In December 2008, the Office of Transport Security issued Maritime Security Notice (2-08) on 'Security Regulated Australian Ships: Protective security arrangements for  transiting through high risk shipping lanes' to Australian ship owners in response to the  increase in acts of piracy and armed robbery in shipping lanes and waters surrounding  the Gulf of Aden and the Somali coast.  

 The Notice emphasised the importance for regulated Australian ships to apply robust  and layered protective security measures when transiting through shipping lanes in  high risk locations.   

 The Australian Maritime Safety Authority Marine Notice (10/2009) on 'Piracy and  armed robbery against ships in the Somali Basin and the Western Indian Ocean' of  June 2009 advises the Australian shipping industry to implement International  Maritime Organisation preventive measures to deter and suppress acts of piracy and  armed robbery against ships.   

 In February 2009 I asked the Inspector of Transport Security, Mr Mick Palmer, a  former head of the Australian Federal Police, to undertake a comprehensive inquiry  into maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea as it affects Australia. 

 Mr Palmer is investigating the impact of piracy and armed robbery at sea on Australian  registered and international trading ships and on Australian maritime trade more  generally. 

 The Australian Government wants to make sure we have an appropriate security  framework to deal with these threats. 

 As part of the Inquiry process, the Inspector and key members of his team have liaised  with a range of senior stakeholders including the UNODC, Interpol, International  Maritime Organization, International Maritime Bureau, Military, Industry and  Diplomatic Stakeholders to ensure his inquiry complements wider international efforts.  

 Page 2 of 3 AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE TO COMBAT PIRACY AND ARMED ROBBERY AT...

 

 URL: http://www.minister.infrastructure.gov.au/aa/releases/2009/June/aa305_2009.htm 

 It was a result of the conduct of his inquiry that the opportunity for Australia to make a  contribution to the UNODC Counter Piracy Program came to light.   

 The inquiry will assist the Australian Government in determining whether any changes  are required to our domestic security framework. Mr Palmer is due to report in the  second half of 2009. 

 Within our own region, The Malacca Straits has for many years been a focus for pirate  and criminal activities.   

 This narrow Strait contains thousands of islets, and is an outlet for many rivers,  making it an ideal location for pirates to hide and evade capture.    

 It is an important passageway between  China, and India and is on the route between  Europe, the Suez Canal; and the Persian Gulf; and the busy ports of Singapore, Hong  Kong, Taiwan, Pusan and Tokyo. 

 Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand have formed the Malacca Straits Security  Joint Working Group in response to the problem.   

 Under the initiative, the maritime forces of the four countries coordinate sea patrols of  the area.  

 Overall, there has been a significant reduction in attacks in this important maritime  area. 

 In conclusion, the Palmer Inquiry, the ADF commitment to anti-piracy efforts and the  contribution of financial support and skills and expertise to the UNODC demonstrate  Australia's commitment to work with effective international forums such as the  International Maritime Organisation and the United Nations to deal with the threat of  international piracy off the Horn of Africa.  

 A threat that directly affects the lives of Australians travelling through this region and  our economic interests that are reliant on the safety and security of international  shipping.   

 Media Contacts 

 ( Parliament House ) 02 6277 7680 

 Page 3 of 3 AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE TO COMBAT PIRACY AND ARMED ROBBERY AT...

