---
title: "Biometrics testing introduced for protection visa applicants."
date: "2009-12-05"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332287
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X3UV6%22
---

 Biometrics testing introduced for  protection visa applicants 

 Saturday, 5 December 2009 

 Biometric information will now be collected from people seeking  asylum in Australia under a new identity security initiative, the  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans,  said today. 

 As part of the new initiative, protection visa applicants in Sydney  and Melbourne - where the biggest caseloads are found - will  now be asked to provide a digital facial image and a scan of their 

 fingerprints. 

 Biometrics uses measurable biological characteristics to establish  a unique identity for a person. Those characteristics are recorded  and referred to for identification purposes. 

 ‘Establishing the identity of non-citizens is a fundamental part of  both visa assessment and border processing. Better identity  management and the use of biometrics are crucial to keeping  Australia’s borders secure and maintaining the integrity of our  migration program,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘This initiative will improve our current processes for identity-checking and assessing people’s claims for protection under the  Refugees Convention. 

 ‘It will also strengthen our ability to detect inconsistent identity and  immigration claims.’ 

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) has  already successfully rolled out biometrics collection of fingerprints  and facial images from immigration detainees - including irregular  maritime arrivals on Christmas Island - and illegal foreign fishers.  Facial images are also collected from all people sitting the  citizenship test and as part of health assessments. 

 Through data-sharing arrangements under the Five Countries  Conference (FCC) processes, fingerprints collected through the  protection visa process may also be checked against the biometric  records of the United Kingdom, USA and Canada to determine if  the person has an immigration record or has previously applied for  protection in those countries. 

 Data-sharing trials under these arrangements have already  proven effective. In one case, a fingerprint match with an FCC  partner country has revealed a person currently seeking asylum in  Australia is known by several different names in that country, in  addition to having numerous criminal convictions. This information  will now form part of any assessment of this person’s claims and  application. 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Page 1 of 2 Biometrics testing introduced for protection visa applicants

 ‘Biometric data is widely used in the international community as an  effective tool to manage visa and immigration processes, improve  identity management and combat fraud,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘This is part of Australia’s ongoing cooperation with other countries  such as the UK and Canada to strengthen international border and  immigration management through the secure and confidential  cross-checking of identity information.’ 

 Participation in the initiative will be voluntary and limited to  applicants in Sydney and Melbourne for the first six months. If  people choose not to participate, their applications will continue to 

 be processed in line with standard procedures. At the end of the  pilot, the government will consider national expansion of the  process and making it compulsory. 

 The Minister said biometrics data would only be shared in  accordance with the Privacy Act 1988 and the disclosure  provisions of the Migration Act 1958. 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09104.htm   Last update: 07 December 2009 at 12:29 AEST  

 Page 2 of 2 Biometrics testing introduced for protection visa applicants

