---
title: "27th boat of asylum seekers arrives on anniversary."
date: "2009-08-13"
creators:
  - "Ley, Sussan"
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, INTEGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211328286
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/W99V6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP   

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP  Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs   

          Thursday 13 August 2009 

 27th Boat of asylum seekers arrives on anniversary 

 As if on cue, on the 12 month anniversary of the Rudd Government’s softening of border  protection policy, the 27th boat of asylum seekers has been picked up by Australian  authorities for delivery to Christmas Island. 

 This brings the number of asylum seekers to 1240 since August last year who have had the  cash and contacts to come via the now wide open back door to Australia. 

 The Rudd Government’s border protection policies have clearly failed said Dr Sharman  Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Sussan Ley, Shadow Minister  for Justice and Customs. 

 Dr Stone said that people smugglers can make more than AU $1 million in a boat of 77  asylum seekers like the one that arrived today. 

 “The Rudd Labor Government should immediately address the sanctions that have a  maximum $20,000 dollar fine for the crime of people smuggling.” Dr Stone said 

 “This Government should also review the impacts of the abolition of the Temporary  Protection Visas, the fast tracking of people through Christmas island onto the mainland,  the alternative complimentary protection visa proposals and the abolition of the 45 day  rule. 

 “The Coalition has repeatedly called on the Rudd Government to launch an urgent inquiry  into the relationship between its softened stance on border protection and the surge in  people smuggling activity in Australia.    

  

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  

 “Australia has one of the most generous programs of refugee and humanitarian settlement  in the world. However, those that are jumping the queue and buying their way into Australia  through people smugglers are preventing us from settling some of the world’s most  vulnerable refugees.  

 “The people in the African hell hole camps or on the borders of Bangladesh or Thailand will  never have the opportunity to earn the US $15,000 to pay these people smugglers.  

 “Surely the Labor Government should understand that with our limited resources for  resettlement in our country, those to be resettled need to be the refugees most in need,  most endangered and with the least prospects of ever being able to look after themselves in  their current circumstances,” Dr Stone said. 

 Ms Ley said that Labor’s bungled approach to border protection is stretching the Australian  Customs and Border Protection Service beyond capacity.  Labor has already slashed $58.1  million from Customs and axed 220 staff.   

 “Customs is forced to deploy a large proportion of its resources in this one pocket of ocean,  in order for Border Protection Command to monitor and manage unauthorised arrivals.   

 “Customs has many other responsibilities, including keeping protecting the Australian  community through the interception of illegal drugs and weapons along with using  sophisticated and resource intensive techniques to target high-risk aircraft, vessels, cargo,  postal items and travellers.” Ms Ley said.    

  

 Media enquiries:   

 Office of Dr Sharman Stone : Jo Shannon 0417 148 110 

 Office of Sussan Ley: Amelia McManus 0413591120 

 

