---
title: "Commitment to helping the forgotten refugees."
date: "2009-06-20"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211326555
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/78XT6%22
---

 Search this site  

    Go

 Home

 Biographical details 

 Media Centre 

 Contact details 

 Department 

 Parliamentary Secretary 

 Links 

 Commitment to helping the forgotten refugees 

 Australia's humanitarian commitment has extended its reach to  new parts of the world to target the ‘forgotten’ refugee populations,  the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans,  said today. 

 Speaking at a World Refugee Day event in Fremantle, Senator  Evans said Australia's 2008-09 humanitarian program had  focused on the resettlement of ethnic minorities in some of the  most desperate situations in the world. 

 ‘In the past year, we have welcomed more than 500 Bhutanese  people from refugee camps in Nepal,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘I have already stated my long-term commitment to this group and  we will continue to see Bhutanese arrivals throughout the coming  years.  

 ‘We have also welcomed the first Burmese Rohingya families who  have been living in desperate situations in Bangladesh and  continued the resettlement of Burmese people from camps on the  Thai Burma border and from other countries in the region. 

 ‘We have delivered on our commitment to resettle an extra 500  Iraqi people who had sought refuge in neighbouring countries in  the Middle East.’ 

 Senator Evans said Australia was one of the few countries that  had expanded its resettlement program despite the difficult  economic climate. 

 ‘Australians are recognised for their willingness to help others and  we should all feel proud of our contribution to providing a new life  for some of the world's most vulnerable refugees,’ Senator Evans  said. 

 ‘We will continue to consolidate our efforts in 2009-10. In last  month's Budget, the Australian Government increased its  humanitarian program to 13 750 places for 2009-10, an increase  of 250 places. 

 ‘Our humanitarian response is not just about resettlement - it is  about providing lasting solutions for huge numbers of people. It is  also about contributing to international efforts to make many  people's lives more secure. 

 ‘Sometimes nothing can be done; people have no choice and we  have to step in - as has been the case this year in our decision to  resettle a very vulnerable group of Somalis who fled to Eritrea. We  are also helping Palestinians from Iraq who have fled to Syria.’ 

 The minister today released a new publication detailing Australia's  role as one of the world's top refugee resettlement countries.  

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Page 1 of 2 Commitment to helping the forgotten refugees

 22/06/2009 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/2009/ce09057.htm

 Home  Copyright & Disclaimer  Privacy  Department of Immigration and Citizenship   

 The new edition of Refugee and Humanitarian Issues: Australia's  Response includes information on Australia's Humanitarian  Program and recent initiatives developed to assist refugees. It also  contains personal stories from former refugees who have come to  Australia under the humanitarian program.  

 Refugee and Humanitarian Issues: Australia's Response will be  distributed to schools, libraries and community organisations with  an interest in Australia's efforts to assist in the protection of  refugees worldwide. An electronic version can be downloaded.  See: www.immi.gov.au/media/publications 

 ‘World Refugee Day is an opportunity for Australians to focus on  the good work we have done to assist people in need and also to  celebrate the incredible contributions refugees make to their new  communities,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘With its rich history and modern mixture of cultures and  nationalities, Fremantle is a wonderful place to celebrate World  Refugee Day and Australia's commitment to giving vulnerable  people new lives free from fear and persecution.’ 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09057.htm   Last update: 19 June 2009 at 19:24 AEST  

 Page 2 of 2 Commitment to helping the forgotten refugees

 22/06/2009 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/2009/ce09057.htm

