---
title: "$4.4 million for new shared facilities for South Australian schools."
date: "2009-11-12"
creators:
  - "Butler, Mark"
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331142
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LX6V6%22
---

 The Hon Julia Gillard MP 

 Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister 

 12 November, 2009  

 Joint Media Release 

 $4.4 million for new shared facilities for South Australian  schools 

 Joint Media Release with the Hon Mark Butler MP, Member for Port Adelaide 

 The Minister for Education, Julia Gillard, and the Federal Member for Port Adelaide, Mark  Butler today announced two projects in South Australia that will benefit from $4.4 million  under the second and final round of the Local Schools Working Together pilot program. 

 The $62.5 million Local Schools Working Together pilot program is an important part of the  Rudd Government’s Education Revolution.  

 The Local Schools Working Together pilot is helping government, Catholic and independent  schools in every State and Territory work together to develop shared facilities. 

 These shared facilities will open up great new opportunities to students who might otherwise  be denied access to the range of facilities and support enjoyed by students at other schools. 

 Round Two will provide $2.4 million to develop a Multicultural Youth Education and  Development Centre through a partnership involving Multicultural Youth South Australia,  the Adelaide Secondary School of English and the SA Department of Education and  Children’s Services. 

 The centre will include areas for information communications technology, case work, youth  interaction, skills development and administration, with a focus on developing skills for  refugee and migrant youth. A major aim of this project is to re-engage some of the most  disadvantaged members of the Australian community. 

 The second grant will provide $2 million for Westbourne Park Primary School, Cabra  Dominican College, Fijian School of Language and Culture Inc, City of Mitcham and  Westbourne Park Uniting Church Netball Club to build and operate the Westbourne Park  Sporting, Cultural and Community Centre. 

 The centre will include performing arts facilities and a shaded outdoor learning area. These  facilities have not previously been available to the partnering schools and their communities.  It is expected that the activities in the centre will form an integral part of the partnering  schools’ curricular. 

 Twenty-six projects approved under the two funding rounds will benefit metropolitan,  regional and rural communities across Australia. 

 Partnerships may also extend to third parties such as local councils or businesses where  projects feature a broader community benefit. 

 The Local Schools Working Together pilot program is a new approach to addressing the  needs of our schools and their local community that broadens the benefit of government  expenditure on capital infrastructure. 

 For details of the successful projects and information on the program visit:  http://www.deewr.gov.au/Schooling/Pages/LocalSchoolsWorkingTogether.aspx 

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au  

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

 

