---
title: "Sri Lankan boat arrivals returned."
date: "2009-11-15"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331220
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/928V6%22
---

 Sri Lankan boat arrivals returned 

 Sunday, 15 November 2009 

 More than two thirds of a group of 50 Sri Lankans who arrived by  boat in April have now been returned to Sri Lanka after they were  determined not be refugees. 

 A group of six men who had been involved in protest action while  in detention were removed from Christmas Island on Saturday and  arrived safely in Colombo that night. 

 They join 30 others from the same boat who returned to Sri Lanka  voluntarily after their claims for protection were thoroughly  assessed and it was found they had not raised any issues which  might engage Australia's obligations under the United Nations  Refugees' Convention. 

 Twelve others have been granted protection visas and settled on  the mainland while two are in the final stages of their processing  on Christmas Island. 

 The 50 men were from a boat which was intercepted by  Australia's Border Protection Command 65 nautical miles north-east of Thursday Island on April 2.  

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris  Evans, said the Rudd Government's position on asylum seekers is  clear.  

 'People who are owed Australia's protection under our  international obligations will be granted that protection,' Senator  Evans said.  

 'All irregular maritime arrivals found not to be owed protection and  with no other basis to remain in Australia will be removed.' 

 The handling of the group demonstrates the Australian  Government's commitment to dealing with irregular maritime  arrivals in a timely and effective manner. 

 'Irregular maritime arrivals are initially interviewed to assess,  among other things, their reasons for travel to Australia,' Senator  Evans said. 

 'Someone who is seeking better economic opportunities does not  meet the criteria for a protection visa.' 

 So far this year, 119 people who arrived by boat have been  returned home. 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Page 1 of 2 Sri Lankan boat arrivals returned

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09102.htm   Last update: 16 November 2009 at 13:25 AEST  

 Page 2 of 2 Sri Lankan boat arrivals returned

