---
title: "Kevin Rudd's secret Christmas present to people smugglers."
date: "2009-12-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332823
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SPJV6%22
---

     Wed, 23rd December 2009  

 KEVIN RUDD'S SECRET CHRISTMAS PRESENT TO PEOPLE SMUGGLERS 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The decision by the Rudd Government to transfer people from Christmas Island to the mainland under the cover 

 of Christmas will send the wrong message to people smugglers and compromise yet again the strong border 

 protection regime Labor inherited from the Coalition Government.  

 “Christmas Island is full because of the failed policies of the Rudd Government. Rather than seek to maintain the 

 integrity of our offshore processing regime, the Rudd Government has chosen the soft option and begun 

 transferring detainees whose asylum claims have not been determined, to the mainland,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “The is the best Christmas present people smugglers have had since the election of the Rudd Government in 

 2007 and opens up some murky legal territory for those whose claims are ultimately rejected,” he said.  

 “People smugglers can now say to asylum seekers that they can transport them all the way to the Australian 

 mainland with a transit stop on Christmas Island, when the Australian Government will take over the rest of the 

 voyage.  

 “What is worse is the underhanded and sneaky way they have sought to introduce this major change under the 

 cover of Christmas and pretend it is business as usual.  

 “Under the Coalition Government, transfers of detainees to the mainland occurred under strict conditions and for 

 temporary purposes only, such as medical emergencies. These transfers were also made possible by our 

 changes to the Migration Act that quarantined the legal status of the detainees during their time on the mainland.  

 “The Rudd Government has made no such changes to the Act to put the legal questions beyond doubt for these 

 transfers and is basically taking a punt.  

 “The transfers being carried out by the Rudd Government are permanent and are for no other reason than that 

 Christmas Island is full.  

 “The notion of ‘priority processing’ is just more spin from the Rudd Government trying to sweep away offshore 

 processing under the cover of Christmas.  

 “The Coalition accepted more than 100,000 refugees and we reduced the number of illegal arrivals by boat to 

 zero. We introduced the offshore processing policy as the centrepiece of our strong border protection regime.  

 “Unlike the Rudd government we remain totally committed to offshore processing and believe the Government 

 should be taking the hard decision to identify alternative offshore processing options, as the Coalition did when in 

 Government.  

 “This is Labor’s watch. It is up to Labor to take the hard decisions to protect the integrity of our borders.  

 “Instead Labor have rolled over again, just as they did on their special deal for the Oceanic Viking and their 

 numerous other changes to the regime they inherited from the Coalition.  

 “After describing it as a white elephant in Opposition, Labor have now turned Christmas Island into a tent city 

 through their failed policies. Under this latest change, Christmas Island will soon become a transit lounge used by 

 people smugglers to get their passengers to the mainland,” Mr Morrison said.    

