---
title: "Greens commend Senate on abolishing detention debts."
date: "2009-09-08"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329340
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6OMU6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Greens commend Senate on abolishing detention  debts  Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Tuesday 8th September 2009, 3:21pm 

 in Human Rights & Justice Detention Centres Immigration Refugees   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young says the Greens are very glad that immigration detention debts were finally 

 abolished by the Senate today, following years of campaigning by the crossbench party. 

 The Migration Amendment (Abolishing Detention Debt) Bill 2009 was passed by the Senate 34-30, following its 

 passing by the House of Representatives in June. Liberal Senator Judith Troeth crossed the floor to vote for the 

 bill. 

 “The Greens have long waited for this day, when the cruel policy of imposing debts upon those held in 

 immigration detention would be finally abolished,” said Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson for 

 Immigration and Human Rights. 

 “Detention debts have been a flagrant form of adding insult to injury for those who come to Australia seeking our 

 assistance and protection, serving as a constant reminder of traumatic experiences even once a person has been 

 released from detention. 

 “No other country in the world charges innocent people for their incarceration, nor is it something that we impose 

 on even the most serious offenders in our correctional services institutions. 

 “Quite apart from being a blight on Australia’s human rights record, it has been far from an economical debt 

 recovery regime, at an average of only four per cent of the debt accrued being collected. 

 “Nor have detention debts worked as a deterrent to people seeking asylum in Australia. 

 “Detention debts were a cruel and ineffective policy, and the passing of this legislation is a very good thing.” 

 Senator Hanson-Young congratulated Senator Troeth for crossing the floor to vote with the Greens and the 

 Government in support of the bill. 

 “Senator Troeth’s actions this afternoon were honest and in the spirit of justice and fairness,” she said. 

 “I hope that some of her fellow members of the Liberal Party reflect on some of their misguided and offensive 

 comments made during this debate.” 

 Senator Hanson-Young said the Greens look forward to working with Immigration and Citizenship Minister Chris 

 Evans to further improve Australia’s immigration policies. 

 “The Greens, through the work of former Senator Kerry Nettle and the Leader of the Greens, Senator Bob Brown, 

 have for years been at the forefront of calls to abolish detention debts - which were introduced by a Labor 

 Government in 1992,” she said. 

 “We will continue to work constructively with the Government towards a more humane approach to the way 

 Australia treats some of the world’s most vulnerable people.” 

 Page 1 of 1 Greens commend Senate on abolishing detention debts | Sarah Hanson-Young

 9/09/2009 http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/greens-commend-s...

