---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 30 September 2009: visit to Robern Menz factory outlet; government expenditure leading to higher interest rates and higher taxes; \nunauthorised boat arrivals; emissions trading; executive remuneration."
date: "2009-09-30"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329674
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MCTU6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 Wed, 30th September 2009    

 TURNBULL DOORSTOP - VISIT TO ROBERN MENZ FACTORY OUTLET,  GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE LEADING TO HIGHER INTEREST RATES  AND HIGHER TAXES.... 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 Subjects: Visit to Robern Menz factory outlet; government expenditure leading to higher interest rates and higher 

 taxes; unauthorised boat arrivals; emissions trading; executive remuneration.  

 E&OE  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Christopher and I have had a great visit here with Richard, Phil and Grantley Sims, third and fourth generation 

 confectioners here in South Australia. This is a wonderful firm, Robern Menz, and producers of course of 

 Fruchocs, this is the home of Fruchocs, and we have seen them being sold and seen them being made. It is a 

 great opportunity to see a great South Australian business. It is also a time to reflect on the importance of 

 businesses like this to the Australian economy. The prosperity of Australia is based on the energy and the 

 enterprise and the hard work of men and women such as we have here at Robern Menz. And governments that 

 run up large levels of debt put heavy burdens on businesses like this, heavy burdens of higher interest rates and 

 higher taxes in the future.  

 Now we saw the final Budget outcome yesterday, and it was very instructive because it confirmed what we have 

 known for some time, which is that last year’s deficit was almost entirely the consequence of additional spending. 

 Revenue declined very slightly. Expenditure, that is government expenditure, borrowed money of course, 

 expanded or increased very substantially. And so that was basically the reason why we had that big deficit last 

 year. Revenues down one point six percent, expenditure up fourteen percent.  

 Now there is another matter I want to speak about at the outset too. It is a matter of growing and very, very real 

 concern to all Australians. We have now had the third boat arrival of unauthorised arrivals, illegal immigrants if 

 you like, in three days. Since August last year when the Rudd Government started to soften and change the 

 border protection arrangements which had served us so well, we have had over 1800 unauthorised arrivals, and 

 they are coming at an accelerating pace. Now the Government tries to pretend there is no problem. They say, oh, 

 this is a global problem, there is nothing we can do about it. Well Australians know that we had virtually stopped 

 unauthorised arrivals for some years, for many years in fact, because of a combination of policies that worked. 

 The Rudd Government said those policies had no impact on the number of arrivals and they changed them. Well 

 the arrivals are going through the roof.  

 Now what Mr Rudd has got to do is recognise that there is a problem, recognise that his border protection 

 policies have failed, and what he must do is have urgently an independent inquiry which can have the benefit of 

 the expert intelligence advice so that all Australians can get an understanding of what has gone wrong, and what 

 measures are needed to fix it. Over to you.  

 QUESTION:  

 What’s your reaction to the Productivity Commission’s take on the executive pay issue?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 I have not had a chance to read it all, but as you know I have strongly supported shareholders having more say in 

 setting executive pay. So based on what I have seen in the press, there are some solid principles there. It does 

 not seem to go, it does not appear to go as far as the recommendations I have made. But when I have had a 

 closer look at it, when I have read it, I will have something more to say about it.  

 QUESTION:  

 Are you confident of support from your party for ETS amendments that you are going to put forward?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well we will… Yes. The answer is yes, and we will bring the amendments to the party room shortly, when we get 

 back to Canberra, and then we will sit down with the Government and we will negotiate with the Government, and 

 depending on the extent to which they accept those amendments, and other political developments both in 

 Australia and in particular internationally at the time, we will then consider whether we support the legislation or 

 not.  

 QUESTION:  

 Do you expect that to be finalised in Shadow Cabinet today? Do you expect a final position to be nutted out?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Look, we have dealt with the issues in principle already. We set out those nine points of principle in July. We 

 have been consulting very intently and intensively with business right around Australia. The businesses whose 

 interests and whose industries are most at risk, and whose employees are most at risk, are saying to us in the 

 Opposition, we want you to engage with the Government and take a constructive approach. They want us to seek 

 to protect them. The only way you can protect those industries is to engage with the Government and seek to 

 amend the legislation, and that is what we are seeking to do. So we are getting their feedback. We had a very 

 good meeting here in Adelaide, for example, with Santos, which obviously has a great deal at stake in having a 

 well-designed emissions trading scheme. So that is the approach we are taking. It is a constructive and it is a 

 responsible one, and hopefully it will have the result of having a better-designed emissions trading scheme.  

 But, you know, I just have to say, underlying all of this, the great tragedy of this debate at the moment is that 

 Kevin Rudd is forcing the final vote on the emission trading scheme prior to the Copenhagen meeting. Now the 

 Copenhagen meeting as you know is in December. The vote in the Senate will be at the end of November. If we 

 waited until Parliament came back in February, sixty days delay, we would be fully informed, we would know 

 exactly what had been or had not been decided in Copenhagen. So the sensible thing for Mr Rudd to do, the 

 responsible thing to do, is to postpone the final vote. Of course we should be discussing the detail and the design 

 and negotiating. I am not suggesting we should be doing nothing until February, but the final vote and the final 

 refinements to the design of the emissions trading scheme should not be done until after Copenhagen. But so far 

 Mr Rudd seems deaf to that argument, notwithstanding that it is so much common sense.  

 QUESTION:  

 Are you surprised some of your backbenchers are perhaps trying to rewrite history, questioning whether the 

 Coalition even had an ETS policy heading into the last election?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well, you know, party room meetings can be long, and sometimes people can doze off or step out of the room, 

 but I am afraid to say there is no doubt, as you know, that we had a very - it was on the front page just about 

 every other day - we had a very public inquiry into the design of an emissions trading scheme, headed by Peter 

 Shergold. I think that was announced at the end of 2006. It reported in 2007. The report was adopted by the 

 Prime Minister and the Cabinet and that was government policy, and then we started to legislate for it, and of 

 course that legislation was taken to and approved by the party room. So anyone who has missed all that was 

 obviously focusing on much more important issues, or at least things they thought were more important.  

 QUESTION:  

 Have you lost control of your party over the ETS?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 No, of course not. No.  

 QUESTION:  

 But how confident are you that you are going to get amendments to put to the Government given the splits in the 

 Coalition.  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Look, I am very confident that the party room will support us taking a constructive approach. Can I say that those 

 people who say the Coalition should not engage with the Government at all really are speaking for nobody but 

 themselves. There is not one industry organisation - not one - not one business that will be affected by the ETS 

 that is not saying to us, we want you to get in there and fight for our jobs, fight for our industry, and to say that we 

 should step back and say, we are not going to have anything to do with it, we are not going to be part of the 

 solution, we are not going to engage in a constructive way, people who say that are really saying that the 

 Opposition should walk off the field, and that is not a responsible thing to do.  

 QUESTION:  

 Is that a message to backbenchers like, a pointed message to backbenchers like Cory Bernardi, who today put 

 out an email saying nothing Australia does to reduce carbon emissions will affect the climate at all and will just 

 stifle prosperity? I mean those views are still there.  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well look I will let Senator Bernardi speak for himself. But he has got particular and well-known views on climate 

 change. As I recall it, Senator Bernardi does not think Australia should do anything about it. Now that has never 

 been the policy of the Coalition. It was not our policy in government and it certainly is not our policy now.  

 QUESTION:  

 Has your authority to negotiate with the Government on an ETS been undermined by…  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 No… people can make statements to the press, and we can have journalists, you know, ringing up backbenchers 

 and purporting to do surveys - who knows how accurate they are? The party room will decide. The party room 

 will decide whether to support the leadership on taking amendments to discuss with the Government or not, and 

 that is the critical thing.  

 And I have to say, if we were not take a constructive approach to this we would be flying in the face of and 

 abandoning thousands of Australians whose jobs are at risk. Farmers, people working in manufacturing industry, 

 people working in the coal industry, people working in gas, in aluminium. We would be abandoning them all, 

 every one of them we would be leaving behind to make some political point.  

 Now I am committed to being a constructive Opposition, taking on the Government where we should, holding 

 them to account, but I am not going to walk away from thousands of Australians’ jobs. I am not going to sit back 

 and just let Kevin Rudd have his scheme go through on whatever terms he likes. That would be the consequence 

 of us just voting it down, because he would have a double dissolution election. We all know that. Of course he 

 would have a double dissolution election, and if he wins it he will get the bill in the form he wants to get it.  

 Now we can, we in the Opposition can deny him the right to take a concluded, a legislated statute to 

 Copenhagen, if we vote against it. Or, if he chooses to agree to amendments that meet our requirements, then 

 he can get a bill that can be a law, made a law by a vote of Parliament, to take to Copenhagen. So that is what 

 we are endeavouring to do. We are endeavouring to protect thousands of jobs.  

 And I just ask you this: if we were to vote it down twice, let’s say we just voted it down twice without even trying to 

 change it, let’s say there was an election held and Mr Rudd were to win, and he came back and naturally passed 

 his bill through the joint sitting, what would we say to the workers in the aluminium industry, in the coal industry, 

 in the gas industry? What would we say to the farmers who will be losing their jobs when they say to us, what did 

 you do? Did you try to make it better? Did you stand up for us? Did you really try to protect regional Australia? 

 Because if we were to do that, we would not have any answer to give them.  

 Now I am determined to protect the environment, I am determined to protect the environment in a way that does 

 not damage the Australian economy and in a way that protects thousands of jobs. That is what we are seeking to 

 do. We are taking a constructive approach to this to preserve thousands of jobs.  

 QUESTION:  

 How is your relationship with the National Party on this?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Cordial. Our relationship with the Nationals is always cordial. We don’t always agree but we are always 

 agreeable.  

 QUESTION:  

 Just on execs’ salaries, do you think they should be capped?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 No. I haven’t read the Productivity Commission report, so I don’t want to, you know, comment on something that I 

 have just read reports of. But no, I don’t think salaries should be capped. I think it is very much a matter for 

 shareholders. But the proposal I have made, which I understand the Productivity Commissioner has not agreed 

 with, but the proposal I made some time ago was that senior executives’ salaries should be subject to a 

 shareholder vote.  

 QUESTION:  

 Geoffrey Cousins has had another spray at you recently. Any comments on that?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 No, no, no, I just hope it made him feel better. OK?  

 Thanks a lot.   

