---
title: "New pathway needed for asylum seekers."
date: "2009-04-14"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324235
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1V9T6%22
---

 Tuesday 14 April 2009   

 New pathway needed for asylum seekers   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young says Australia must determine a more  workable and humane pathway to process asylum seekers’ claims.   

 Senator Hanson-Young’s call came as Foreign Minister Stephen Smith, Immigration  Minister Chris Evans and Home Affairs Minister Bob Debus travelled to Indonesia  today for the Bali Process ministerial meeting, which will address people smuggling.   

 “Australia must work with others in our region to determine a more workable,  humane and responsible process for accepting refugees,” said Senator Hanson-Young.   

 “Not all asylum seekers are able to access offshore avenues for lodging claims for  asylum, such as via United Nations verification of refugee status.   

 “This has led to a two-class system of asylum seekers in Australia.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said the language being employed by both the Opposition  and the Government on the issue of asylum seekers was bordering on  fearmongering.   

 “Asylum seekers arrive in Australia seeking refuge on planes as well as boats,” she  said.   

 “Yet those who arrive by boat become pawns in political spin around border security.   

 “This morning Minister Smith stated that the Government’s focus is on ensuring that  ‘unauthorised arrivals’ do not ‘touch the Australian mainland’.    

 “This focus will not solve the problem of desperate people arriving in boats to seek  our assistance and protection.   

 “Rather, it harks back to the fear-driven agenda of the Howard regime where asylum  seekers, including children, were detained indefinitely in remote locations behind  razorwire.”   

 Senator Hanson-Young said the Greens wanted to see the Government give thought  to a new system for asylum seekers to apply to Australia for assistance.   

 “These people, who are among the world’s most vulnerable citizens, need a better  pathway to have their claims heard by Australia,” she said.   

 “People are risking their lives to get to Australia by boat, only to be subject to the  punitive mandatory detention system on an island thousands of kilometres from the  mainland.   

 “This must not be the only way these people can seek refuge.”   

 Media contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760   

