---
title: "Minister O'Connor: who are you kidding?"
date: "2009-09-30"
creators:
  - "Ley, Sussan"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329673
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JCTU6%22
---

 

 

 Wed, 30th September 2009    

 MINISTER O'CONNOR - WHO ARE YOU KIDDING? 

 The Hon Sussan Ley MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Another unauthorised boat arrived last night carrying 43 asylum seekers - bringing a total of 38 boats since Labor 

 weakened our border protection system. Over 1803 unauthorised arrivals have now been taken to Christmas 

 Island since August 2008.  

 “Minister for Home Affairs Brendan O’Connor is not being straightforward with the Australian people,” Shadow 

 Minister for Justice and Customs Sussan Ley said today.  

 “This Rudd Labor Government receives ample intelligence about unauthorised boat arrivals even before they 

 leave, which is why they are able to intercept them further and further away from the mainland. But this does 

 absolutely nothing to stop the boats,” Ms Ley said.  

 “Labor’s softened asylum seeker policy is a shining beacon for those in the people smuggling industry. Every 

 time a boat arrives, people are risking their lives at sea.”  

 Customs Border Protection officers spotted the distressed vessel 290 nautical miles north of the Cocos-Keeling 

 Islands in the Indian Ocean.  

 “Border Protection Command is already stretched beyond capacity and the Christmas Island detention centre is 

 struggling to accommodate this many unauthorised arrivals.”  

 “The Rudd Labor Government needs to make public the information it has about people smugglers in South-East 

 Asia - it cannot continue to deceive the Australian public.  

 “It is clear that Labor’s border protection policy has failed dismally - the Coalition has called several times for an 

 urgent inquiry into their border protection policies. If Minister O’Connor is so confident the policy is working - 

 what is he afraid of?” Ms Ley said.    

