---
title: "Senator Evans to attend Somali festivities in Melbourne."
date: "2009-09-21"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211537052
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7BVU6%22
---

 

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Senator Evans to attend Somali festivities in Melbourne 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, will join  Melbourne Somali community leaders today to celebrate the festival of Eid ul Fitr. 

 Senator Evans will also meet Somali business people in the Heidelberg Mall while  attending celebrations for the end of the Ramadan, which marks the end of the  Muslim month of fasting. 

 Senator Evans acknowledged that Ramadan was a time for spiritual renewal,  community togetherness and charity to those in need. 

 The Somali Australian Council of Victoria and the City of Banyule are hosting the  festival in Heidelberg Mall. 

 Heidelberg West, in Melbourne's north-east, is home to almost 300 Somali  Australians, which makes Somalia the leading non-English speaking country of birth  locally. 

 'Somali Australians are eager to become Australian citizens. At the 2006 Census, the  estimated rate of citizenship for the Somalia-born in Australia was 90.6 per cent,  compared with 75.6 per cent for all overseas-born people,' Senator Evans said. 

 According to ABS statistics there are nearly 5000 people of Somali background living  in Australia. The Somali community started arriving in Australia during the early  1990s and the majority (about 80 per cent) of Somalis in Australia arrived under the  Refugee and Special Humanitarian Program. 

 'Like all humanitarian entrants, Somalis are provided with assistance to help them  settle and integrate as quickly as possible,' Senator Evans said. 

 'The Australian Government also supports Somali and other African community  organisations through the Diverse Australia Program. 

 'This is a community-based initiative that seeks to strengthen community relations  through a range of funding and information strategies.' 

 In 2008-09 the Australian Government provided $209 000, under the Diverse  Australia and the National Action Plan to Build on Social Cohesion, Harmony and  Security, for 10 projects for community relations activities involving members of the  Somali community. 

 Senator Evans said, as a nation, Australia has derived significant social, economic  and cultural prosperity from its diversity. 

 'As one of the largest and most established African communities in Victoria, the  Somali community has made an invaluable contribution to the business, political and  cultural life of our nation,' Senator Evans said. 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09090.htm   Last update: 21 September 2009 at 15:20 AEST  

  

