---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 23 October 2009: border protection; Kevin Rudd's policies in chaos; Australia's population."
date: "2009-10-23"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "STER Population - Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330497
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FL1V6%22
---

 Fri, 23rd October 2009  

 TURNBULL DOORSTOP - BORDER PROTECTION, KEVIN RUDD’S POLICIES  IN CHAOS, AUSTRALIA’S POPULATION 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 E&OE  

 QUESTION:  

 I’ll just start out by asking you about some comments made by you yesterday, some… comments by Wilson 

 Tuckey and David Johnston on asylum seekers. Julie Bishop has defended those comments this morning. Is 

 there a bit of a difference of opinion within the party on that?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Look, our position on asylum seekers is very clear. We make no criticism of asylum seekers at all. Obviously 

 when people come to Australia, particularly if large numbers of them come without identity papers, there needs to 

 be very rigorous security and health checks and that applies regardless of the government. Of course we have 

 very rigorous security and health checks when people come to Australia with identification papers. So security 

 and health checks are a very important part of it but I will not have a part of or be a party to criticism of asylum 

 seekers at large.  

 QUESTION:  

 But it would appear at the moment as though there might be some differences with your deputy on this subject 

 matter.  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Not at all.  

 QUESTION:  

 Okay. The Australian is reporting that Kevin Rudd’s strategy on asylum seekers could cost $50 million. Wouldn’t 

 it be better to put that $50 million into better detention centres and facilities?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Mr Rudd’s asylum seeker policy or his border protection policy is in complete and utter chaos. The object of his 

 policy is to prevent people smuggling, stop it, stamp it out and ensure that there are no unauthorised maritime 

 arrivals of asylum seekers into Australia. We have a very generous humanitarian program. We have one now. 

 We had one when we were in office. We expanded it when we were in office and that is how refugees should 

 come to Australia. That should be the goal of government policy. So his own policy goal is not being met. His 

 policy has failed. It is in complete chaos.  

 Now we see press reports of one sort or another about what his policy might be. The person who should be 

 telling us what his immigration, border protection policy is is Mr Rudd and he is not able to do so because he 

 does not have one. His policy is in chaos, and so that is why he is reverting to character attacks, personal abuse 

 and hysterical language.  

 Let us have a calm and measured debate about this. We have a policy that has failed and that is why I have said 

 there should be - there should have been six months ago - an independent inquiry to examine the 

 consequences of the changes to the policy that Mr Rudd had and what changes can be made to seek to achieve 

 those two goals. And I just repeat, the two goals of every Australian government should be firstly to stamp out 

 people smuggling and ensure that as far as practical there are no unauthorised maritime arrivals of asylum 

 seekers and, on the other hand, to respond generously and humanely to the needs of refugees in accordance 

 with the United Nations Convention on Refugees.  

 QUESTION:  

 Okay, and just on another issue, Kevin Rudd was ecstatic yesterday about Australia’s population growth, one of 

 the only developed countries with a growing population. But on the other hand Ken Henry says it’s a very big 

 problem that the population is growing too fast. What’s your view on that?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well it is certainly good that we don’t have a declining population in the way some European countries do or 

 indeed the way Japan does, for example, where a larger and larger percentage of the population is in the older 

 age brackets because ultimately that can become unsustainable. So it is good that we have a strong population 

 with a relatively high birth rate, relative to other developed countries. So that is all good.  

 Having said that, if you are going to have a significantly larger population, you have to be able to provide 

 services, accommodation, infrastructure in a sustainable way and Mr Rudd has manifestly failed to do that. The 

 way he has let down Australia in terms of his bungling of our national water policy is a case in point.  

 When we were in government, we took the revolutionary step of having the federal government, the national 

 government take over all interstate water. That was a revolutionary change. It was something that had been 

 proposed in the 1890s but parochialism had won the day. So that was a big change. We set $10 billion aside to 

 replumb rural Australia so that we could produce more food and fibre with less water.  

 Mr Rudd has not invested in replumbing rural Australia. What he has done is instead spend some money on 

 buying back water rights in a way that has been shown to be quite inefficient and ineffective and, as a result, we 

 are not in rural Australia using water more wisely or more effectively than we were before. We left him with the 

 tools, the legislative tools, and with the cash to do the job and he has not used them.  

 QUESTION:  

 What about the eastern seaboard? How badly is that stacked with the population?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well clearly our cities are getting bigger and they will become more densely settled but the reality is that in order 

 to cope with this population, we need better urban planning and a much greater investment in public transport 

 infrastructure in our cities. Now that of course has historically been the responsibility of state governments and 

 they have manifestly failed, as indeed they have with water planning as well. Mr Rudd said there was going to be 

 a new era of federal-state cooperation but we have not seen any benefits from it and so what he has to do is live 

 up to his rhetoric.  

 What about hospitals? He said he was going to fix up the public hospitals by the middle of this year, by 30 June 

 or take them over. He has done neither. So whether it is transport, whether it is water, whether it is hospitals, 

 whether it is education, you need genuine investment and coordination and long term planning. So it is fine for 

 him to say he welcomes a big population but unless he is prepared to do the hard yards and make the 

 investments, the effective investments in infrastructure that we need, then that population will not be sustainable. 

  

