---
title: "People smugglers must be stopped."
date: "2009-04-02"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211323974
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DCPT6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Thursday 2 April 2009 

 

 

 People smugglers must be stopped 

 

 A BOATLOAD of 50 suspected asylum seekers has been intercepted by Customs after their  vessel ran aground in the Torres Strait.   

 Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship said it is clear the people  smugglers have judged their smaller boat loads of clients to be successfully landed, so a pattern  seems to now be establishing of larger boat loads of people heading on down to Australia.  This is  the second boatload of more than 50 in the last three weeks.   

 “Caring Australians are deeply concerned that the people smugglers are back in business,” Dr  Stone said.    

 “This is a global criminal network which takes cash up front and exploits the poorest of  Indonesian boat crew to make the run to Australia. They have no concern for protecting human  life.”   

 “The continued squeeze of Immigration Department resources both on and off shore and the  diminishing of Boarder Security Resources are all a very deep concern as Australia re-emerges as  a people smuggler preferred destination.”   

 Dr Stone called on the government to very urgently increase its efforts to work with Indonesia in  combating people smuggling.   

 “I am also most concerned that our processing of our record intake of refugees and humanitarian  settlers is not slowed by Department of Immigration staff cut backs.   

 “Frustrations lead some families to risk everything and sell up their worldly possessions to try the  people smuggler pipeline to another place.”   

 “Lets hope this latest boatload can be safely and swiftly processed, but it would be very  unfortunate if yet another successful ruin to Australia encourages more to risk their lives at the  hands of criminals,” Dr Stone said.   

 Media enquiries: Jo Shannon 0417 148 110 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

