---
title: "Child care support for children with high care needs."
date: "2009-01-13"
creators:
  - "Mckew, Maxine"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211321843
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WT3U6%22
---

 

 

 The Hon Maxine McKew MP 

 13 January, 2009  

 Media release 

 Child care support for children with high care needs 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Early Childhood Education, Maxine McKew, today announced  that KU Children’s Services has been awarded the national contract to administer the  Inclusion Support Subsidy program. 

 The Inclusion Support Subsidy is a contribution paid to eligible child care services to build  their capacity to accommodate children with a diagnosed disability, children undergoing an  assessment for a disability and refugees. The Australian Government has allocated $52  million per year for the Inclusion Support Subsidy.  

 “The Inclusion Support Subsidy plays a critical role in supporting child care providers to  deliver quality services for children with ongoing high support needs. I know that many child  care providers are passionate about this aspect of their service and I commend them for their  commitment to these children and their families,” Ms McKew said. 

 KU Children’s Services is a long established not for profit child care provider delivering  services in over 150 early childhood centres throughout Australia. 

 “KU Children’s Services will operate as the single national Inclusion Support Subsidy  program provider. This change is expected to deliver increased consistency, efficiency and  flexibility within the program,” Ms McKew said.  

 The Australian Government places a high priority on improving the early childhood  education opportunities for children with ongoing high support needs. The Inclusion Support  Subsidy is available to a wide range of child care services including both private and  community centre based Long Day Care, Outside School Hours Care including Vacation  Care, Family Day Care, Occasional Care, and In Home Care as well as other flexible and  innovative services, such as mobile child care services. 

 For further information on the Inclusion Support Subsidy, visit:  www.deewr.gov.au/ChildCareInclusionandPSP  

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au 

 

