---
title: "Rudd presiding over record numbers of unauthorised arrivals."
date: "2009-09-23"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329388
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0JRU6%22
---

 

 

 Wed, 23rd September 2009    

 RUDD PRESIDING OVER RECORD NUMBERS OF UNAUTHORISED  ARRIVALS 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Rudd Government has lost control of Australia’s refugee intake. With the interception today by Border 

 Protection of the 7th boat in 12 days with more than 90 people on board, Australia is likely to experience its 

 largest annual number of unauthorised arrivals on record.  

 The tragedy of this situation is that the Rudd Government’s soft approach on unauthorised arrivals is only 

 encouraging people smugglers to ply their evil trade. The voyage is dangerous and many asylum seekers have 

 died or risk death.  

 Prime Minister Rudd must urgently intervene and demand that his ministers sit down with the Federal Police and 

 analyse the reasons behind this biggest surge of unauthorised arrivals in 7 years.  

 Prime Minister Rudd has said, “People smugglers are engaged in the world's most evil trade and they should all 

 rot in jail, because they represent the absolute scum of the earth”.  

 He must now take control of this crisis and insist his ministers begin to respond and perform.  

 On the eve of his election in November 23, 2007 Kevin Rudd, then Opposition Leader, promised he would turn 

 back any seaworthy, unauthorised boats and ensure detention was a deterrent.  

 This is another broken promise. There is no sign of any such commitment to strong border protection in this 

 Government. Prime Minister Rudd and his Ministers have comprehensively failed to deliver a series of incentives 

 to deter this huge surge in back door entries.  

 Too many lives are at risk, the integrity of our border security has been seriously compromised. There is no way 

 a country like Australia should stand by and watch this escalation in smuggling of humans in unseaworthy boats 

 while doing no more than adding extra beds to an overcrowded Christmas Island.  

 The Coalition has been calling for an independent inquiry for many months, but this call had been ignored. When 

 the numbers of interceptions of asylum seekers made by Indonesian officials is taken into account, it is clear that 

 thousands continue to queue in Indonesia.  

 We call on Prime Minister Rudd to urgently intervene and require his ministers to take this problem seriously and 

 put the smugglers out of business.    

