---
title: "Labor is struggling to control our borders."
date: "2009-09-15"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "Office of CASH, SEN MICHAELIA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536782
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R69X6%22
---

 

 Senator Michaelia Cash  Senator for Western Australia   

 Media Release 

 44 Outram Street    Parliament House Canberra 

 WEST PERTH WA 6005   CANBERRA ACT 2600  

 Phone: (08) 9221 8955  Ph: (02) 6277 3387 

 

 Labor is struggling to control our borders   

 15 September 2009 

 Since Labor softened its immigration and border protection policies the subsequent surge of  illegal boat arrivals, in particular to Western Australia, has become an ever increasing problem for  the Government.   

  “Labor is struggling to control our borders as a direct consequence of its weakened and  ineffectual border protection policies” Senator for Western Australia, Michaelia Cash said in a  speech to the Senate today.   

 “Evidence shows that Rudd Labor’s soft border protection laws have given the green light to  people smugglers, with 31 boats and 1456 new asylum seekers entering Australia illegally since  2008.   

 “Under the Howard Government, people smugglers were sent a clear message that our doors  were closed to unlawful entry into Australia, and this was reflected in the decrease in the number  of illegal arrivals on our shores.   

 “Since the Rudd Government put out the welcome mat to people smugglers, after coming into  Government, we have seen more boats arrive illegally in Australia than 2003-2007 combined.   

 “The Howard Government, unlike the Rudd Labor Government, understood that the most  fundamental responsibility of a Federal Government is to ensure the security of the nation and its  people.   

 “Notwithstanding its tough and resilient border protection policy the Coalition has always been  committed to an orderly and humanely managed immigration and refugee program.   

 “The only consequence of Labor’s watering down of border protection policies is that the people  smugglers are back in business enticing people to pay huge sums of money to jump the queue,  and forcing people waiting in genuine refugee camps around the world to wait even longer to start  a new life in Australia” said Senator Cash.   

 “How many more people will be exploited by the people smugglers before the Rudd Government  admits its policy has failed?   

 “It’s time for the Rudd Government to urgently launch an inquiry into the relationship between its  softening of border protection and the surge in people smuggling in Australia” Senator Cash said.   

 Media contact:   Senator Michaelia Cash     0431  990  752  

