---
title: "Inquiry needed into people smuggling surge."
date: "2009-04-28"
creators:
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324659
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AUET6%22
---

 Tue, 28th April 2009   INQUIRY NEEDED INTO PEOPLE SMUGGLING SURGE 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP   Leader of the Opposition 

 The Federal Opposition is calling for an urgent and independent inquiry into the  relationship between the Rudd Government’s softened stance on border protection  and the surge in people smuggling into Australia.  

 People smuggling is dangerous and inhumane. The Coalition believes that  everything must be done to stop this trade.  

 The Coalition is deeply concerned about the welfare of asylum seekers lured into  attempting dangerous voyages by unscrupulous people smugglers. We are also  deeply concerned about the safety of Australian defence and customs personnel  charged with patrolling our northern waters and making the interceptions.  

 With new boats arriving every week, reports of more unauthorised boat arrivals on  their way and thousands more assembling in Indonesia, we believe the situation is  critical and demands urgent action.  

 The Coalition has repeatedly warned the Government that softening its stance on  border protection in August last year would risk compromising the security of our  borders and the integrity of our generous but strictly controlled refugee and  humanitarian settler program. We have also warned that it could put more lives at  risk by leading to an increase in people smuggling activity.  

 We are not alone with our concerns. In December last year, the International  Organisation for Migration’s chief-of-mission in Indonesia, Steve Cook, said that  people smugglers had taken note of Australian Government Policy changes and are  ‘testing the envelope’. It has been widely reported that the Australian Federal Police  (AFP) warned the Government that its softening of border protection laws would  encourage people smugglers. The Indonesian Ambassador to Australia, Mr  Joelianto, said that people smugglers are using the changes in policy as a marketing  tool. Now, asylum seekers in Indonesia have confirmed that they plan to travel to  Australia by boat because they have been encouraged by Mr Rudd’s changes to  border protection policies.  

 The facts speak for themselves. 15 boats with 541 arrivals since the Rudd  Government softened Australia’s stance on border protection in August last year. Mr  Rudd’s border protection policies have clearly failed.  

 The Coalition calls on the Prime Minister to immediately launch an inquiry into  Australia’s border security. The inquiry should be independent and headed up by  someone with extensive experience in policy implementation, intelligence and  national security. The report should be made public.  

 In particular, the inquiry should:  

 Consider all intelligence reports and advice from the AFP or any government  agency, which assesses the impact of the Government's changes to the border  protection regime.  

 Assess the impact of Rudd Government’s policy changes to our border security and  advise on what adjustments are needed to ensure the current surge of people  smuggling does not continue.  

 Evaluate the impact of severe cuts to immigration, customs and border security  resources to the border security regime.  

 Assess whether current levels of cooperation with relevant countries, in particular  Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, are adequate and advise  on what more could be done. 

 Finally, I again stress that I am willing and able to meet with the Prime Minister to  discuss a united approach to this situation, just as I have offered to work with him on  an appropriate economic stimulus and on tackling the jobless crisis.  

 A united and strong message to the region will be the best way to deter the evil trade  of people across Australia's borders.   

