---
title: "Minister opens new migrant resource centre in Clarkson."
date: "2009-06-12"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211326266
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UPUT6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Minister Opens New Migrant Resource Centre in  Clarkson 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, today officially opened  the new Metropolitan Migrant Resource Centre (MMRC) in Clarkson. 

 Senator Evans said the centre will provide a range of services to assist recently arrived  migrants and refugees in Perth's northern suburbs. The new Clarkson centre builds on the  work done by the MMRC in Mirrabooka. 

 'The MMRC has made a real difference to the lives of many new migrants and refugees by  helping them to settle and acquire the crucial skills and knowledge about life in Australia,'  Senator Evans said. 

 'Their programs help new West Australians make the cultural transition and become self  reliant so they can make a valuable contribution to our society and the economy.' 

 The MMRC receives funding from the Australian Government through the Integrated  Humanitarian Settlement Strategy and the Settlement Grants Program. Funding through the  Settlement Grants Program is to assist refugees, family sponsored migrants and the  dependants of skilled migrants in rural and regional areas with low levels of English. 

 For 2009-10, the MMRC will receive an additional $268 200 in funding under the Settlement  Grants Program. 

 The funding will specifically assist women of Middle Eastern descent learn about Australian  government, community and social services and help men from local Sudanese communities  access social services and gain family, life and relationship skills.  

 'It is heartening to see that many people who most need support will get the best available  service when they resettle in Western Australia,' Senator Evans said. 

 'Australia is a multicultural nation that has been enriched by the cultures and traditions of  migrants from more than 200 countries. 

 'About 45 per cent of our population of 21 million was either born overseas or has at least one  parent who was born overseas which means that nearly half of all Australians are either  migrants or children of migrants. 

 'I commend the MMRC for its contribution to the positive and successful settlement of  people who are new to our nation and congratulate the centre for its commitment to service  provision in Perth's northern suburbs.' 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09050.htm   Last update: 12 June 2009 at 12:31 AEST  

  

