---
title: "Rudd softens border protection by slashing 700 jobs from Immigration Department."
date: "2009-05-01"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324742
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3CHT6%22
---

 Fri, 1st May 2009   RUDD SOFTENS BORDER PROTECTION BY SLASHING 700 JOBS FROM  IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP   Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Rudd Labor Government has failed to reverse its softened border protection,  making it unlikely that there will be any change to the flood of unlawful arrivals now  coming almost daily.  

 700 more jobs are expected to be slashed from the Immigration Department in this  month's federal budget, taking the numbers of staff lost since 2007 to nearly 1,000.  As well, another $50 million is to be wiped off their budget.  

 Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship said, “The cuts  will make it even more difficult for the Department to properly manage the nation’s  Migration Program and to deal with the huge influx in unlawful arrivals, prompted by  the Rudd Labor Government’s weakened policy.  

 “Quite clearly the Rudd Labor Government has failed to grasp the devastating  impacts of their weakened policies and mixed messages and the importance of  strong border protection and orderly migration.”  

 The Coalition has been calling for an independent inquiry into the impacts of the  softened policies, the reduced capacity and bungled strategies of the Rudd  government.  

 “It is now reported that some five to seven thousand Pakistanis and Afghanis are on  the move to Indonesia to take advantage of the easy new back door entry created by  the softened policies of the Labor Government,” Dr Stone said.  

 “Labor has also put Australia’s own Refugee and Humanitarian Settler Program in  jeopardy by squeezing resources to the point where the work of selecting and  resettling the most disadvantaged is being overwhelmed by the work of processing  the surging numbers of those with the cash and contacts to come through the back  door,” Dr Stone said.  

 “Labor’s previous job cuts have taken visa processing staff out of key immigration  posts at Beirut, Dubai, Taipei, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Shanghai, Suva, Bangkok,  Beijing, Athens, London and Berlin.  

 “As the queues grow longer the frustration builds and gives further impetus to people  smugglers and unlawful boat arrivals.”  

 Dr Sharman Stone said, “I urge the Rudd Labor Government to immediately review  the level of resources needed to commit to the critical work of maintaining border  security, working more intensively with Indonesia and Malaysia to plug the people  smuggling pipeline, in the interest of strengthening the now seriously weakened  border security, in order to restore control over Australia’s migration program”.   

