---
title: "40th smuggler boat reaches Australian waters."
date: "2009-10-09"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329991
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/7TWU6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP   

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

   Friday October 9 2009 

 40th Smuggler boat reaches Australian waters   

 With yet another smuggler boat guided to Christmas Island the chaos in Australia’s Immigration  management continues.    

 Over 1928 asylum seekers have now arrived on Christmas Island since Labor unravelled strong  border protection measures in September 2008.  This government has in effect out-sourced the  selection of its refugee intake to international criminals whose criteria begins and ends with who has  the cash to pay.   

 There are so many victims when it comes to people smuggling. The impoverished Indonesian crew  may not be aware they are facing up to a 20 year maximum sentence when charged with people  smuggling. Australian officials may be risking their lives when they are intercepting the boats and the  asylum seekers put their life on the line when the unseaworthy vessels don’t make it.   

 The Rudd Labor Government continues to deny the pull factors it created that commenced this  surge of smuggling 14 months ago. The detention centres in Indonesia, many of them subsidised by  Australian funds, continue to fill to near capacity.   

 There has to be an urgent change in the Federal Government response to this border security and  immigration intake crisis.   

 The Coalition continues to urge the Government to undertake an independent inquiry into the  factors that have brought the stream of unauthorised arrivals down south.    

 Simply referring to the international war zones and global troubles is not sufficient to convince  anyone why there were no boats following the Coalition’s strong border protection strategies  introduced in late 1999-2000.   

 The Rudd Government policy has to be more then guiding boats to Christmas Island and providing  ever more officials and accommodation.   

  The Government must urgently act to ensure that the control is once again in the hands of the  Government in selecting who comes for permanent settlement as a refugee in Australia.    

 Outsourcing to the smugglers is no way for any country to respond to the needs of those who are  most desperate and who can never afford to pay the cash or have to contacts to use the smuggler.   

 Media enquiries - Andrew Cox 0427 460 063 

 MEDIA RELEASE  

