---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 10 November 2009: Kevin Rudd's broken promise to cut back on consultants; Labor's reckless spending; Kevin Rudd's failed border protection policies; climate change; Bradfield by-election."
date: "2009-11-10"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331066
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q76V6%22
---

     Tue, 10th November 2009  

 

 TURNBULL JOINT DOORSTOP WITH PAUL FLETCHER - KEVIN RUDD’S  BROKEN PROMISE TO CUT BACK ON CONSULTANTS, LABOR’S RECKLESS  SPENDING.... 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 Subjects: Kevin Rudd’s broken promise to cut back on consultants; Labor’s reckless spending; Kevin Rudd’s 

 failed border protection policies; climate change; Bradfield by-election.  

 E&OE  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well today we are reminded yet again of how Labor is a government of spin not of substance - one policy failure 

 after another. Lindsay Tanner and Kevin Rudd promised they would cut back in spending on consultants. We 

 saw today they have spent $450 million on consultants in the last year. Not a decrease, not a cut, an increase of 

 six percent year on year. More Labor waste, more reckless spending, more pressure on interest rates, more 

 pressure for higher taxes. That is Labor economic model - a diabolical cocktail of reckless spending and 

 borrowing.  

 And of course in terms of the refugee issue, we see the people smugglers calling the shots. Kevin Rudd has 

 outsourced our humanitarian immigration programme to the people smugglers. He recklessly unpicked the policy 

 fabric of the previous government, said it would make no difference to the level of arrivals which had been 

 reduced to little or nothing, and now we have had over twenty-two hundred unauthorised arrivals and nearly fifty 

 boats since August last year when he recklessly unpicked the policies that had worked. This is a colossal policy 

 failure of the Rudd Government, and yet again an example of where he is long on spin but cannot deliver in 

 substance.  

 QUESTION:  

 Mr Turnbull on Four Corners last night Nick Minchin basically came across as a climate change sceptic and said 

 the rest of the party room was a climate change sceptic. What’s your reaction to that?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well I am focused on the good faith negotiations we are having with the Government. We are engaged in those 

 good faith negotiations to consider the amendments that we put up to the Rudd Government’s emissions trading 

 scheme. Our amendments will save thousands and thousands of Australian jobs and deliver a better 

 environmental outcome. So I am focused on that and I am not going to run a commentary on those negotiations. 

 When they are complete we will consider the outcome in the Shadow Cabinet and then in the party room.  

 QUESTION:  

 Are you worried about Nick Minchin?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 I am focused on those negotiations.  

 QUESTION:  

 Mr Fletcher what’s your stance on climate change?  

 PAUL FLETCHER:  

 Well I fully support the leader of the party Malcolm Turnbull and the parliamentary party, and I’m delighted that 

 Malcolm Turnbull has come into the electorate of Bradfield again today as we campaign to win the Bradfield by-election on the 5th of December. The Liberal Party is standing and this is a choice for the people of Bradfield to 

 choose a candidate who can be part of the process of getting Australia back on track and getting a government 

 led by Malcolm Turnbull elected at the next election. And I’m very much looking forward to playing my part in that 

 after, we hope, the right result on the 5th of December.  

 QUESTION:  

 What do you say to Liberal parliamentarians who are publicly airing their views and their scepticism of climate 

 change?  

 PAUL FLETCHER:  

 Look, what I say is I’m focused on winning the by-election on the 5th of December, and I am delighted that 

 Malcolm Turnbull has come into the electorate of Bradfield today to assist me in campaigning. So we’ve just been 

 talking with a range of small business owners in the mall here in Chatswood and in the Westfield here in 

 Chatswood, having very important discussions about how they’re finding business, because in the Liberal Party 

 we’re strongly committed to small business and supporting small business and that’s an important theme of our 

 campaign here in Bradfield for the by-election on the 5th of December.  

 QUESTION:  

 Mr Turnbull, is climate change man-made?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Sorry?  

 QUESTION:  

 Is climate change man-made?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 The overwhelming consensus of the scientific community is that we are going through a period of global warming 

 caused by humans, principally by the burning of fossil fuels and releasing of greenhouse gases into the 

 atmosphere at higher rates and of course by deforestation. They are the main contributors. And I accept that 

 conclusion and I think it is prudent to do so and that is why governments all around the world, without any 

 exception as far as I’m aware, are taking action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We certainly did that when 

 we were in government and we were very successful in doing so.  

 I might remind you that Australian is one of very few countries that will actually meet its Kyoto target and that was 

 due in large measure to the efforts of the previous government.  

 QUESTION:  

 [Inaudible] doesn’t seem to believe it is man-made?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Look I’m not going to run a commentary on other people’s opinions. You have asked me for my view. People can 

 have whatever views they like. The question is what action do you take. And the reality is that leaders of 

 governments, both of the left and the right, have regarded it as prudent to take effective action to reduce 

 greenhouse gas emissions. And that goes whether you’re talking about Tony Blair or Margaret Thatcher in the 

 United Kingdom or whether you’re talking about George Bush, who did take effective action to reduce 

 greenhouse gas emissions in America, or indeed Barack Obama; whether you’re talking about Nicolas Sarkozy in 

 France or David Cameron, the Conservative Opposition Leader in the UK. So there is a broad consensus around 

 the world for taking action and we are certainly part of that.  

 QUESTION:  

 Mr Fletcher, you said you support Mr Turnbull’s stance on climate change, that climate change is manmade. Do 

 you believe that?  

 PAUL FLETCHER:  

 I believe that the people of Bradfield expect the Liberal Party to take a responsible course of action in engaging, 

 as we are doing, and they also expect a serious and well considered campaign in Bradfield across a range of 

 issues. And there is a significant range of issues in this by-election including concern about Labor’s 

 overdevelopment, concern about changes to superannuation - there’s a whole range of issues. And the people 

 of Bradfield look to the Liberal Party to represent them across the broad range of issues, standing up for the 

 interests of the people of Bradfield.    

