---
title: "Government conspiracy of silence."
date: "2009-07-13"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211327342
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DW4U6%22
---

 

 

 Mon, 13th July 2009    

 

 GOVERNMENT CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 “Another boatload of73 asylum seekers comes amid revelations that the Government  was made aware that there would be a surge in boat arrivals in October 2008.  

 “This revelation comes in spite of refusals by the Minister for Immigration Senator  Chris Evans that such advice had been received. In an answer to a question without  notice from me in December 2008 the Prime Minister claimed that no such surge  was likely.  

 “In spite of this advice, the government did nothing for seven months except continue  to unravel the Coalition’s strong border protection measures. For example,  abolishing Temporary Protection Visas, weakening the detention regime, the  planned introduction of a new complementary protection visa and abolishing the 45-day rule.  

 “We now have our 24th boat and 1155 arrivals since the government unwound these  measures in August 2008.  

 “This failure to respond to warnings about the coming surge, and the conspiracy of  silence from both the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and the Minister for  Home Affairs gives no confidence or comfort that the Government is in control of our  border protection and asylum policies. They are either involved in a cover up or are  incompetent.  

 “Indonesian Ambassador Primo Alui Joelianto has warned the Australian  Government that it is their pull factors, resulting from weakened polices, which is  increasing the activities of the people smugglers. However the Government  continues to unwind Australia’s border protection and asylum policies.  

 “In the face of these recent developments, the government’s continued claims that  push factors alone are responsible for this surge merely underlines their  incompetence and they should initiate an inquiry immediately.”    

