---
title: "Government denies special deal with Oceanic Viking asylum seekers."
date: "2009-11-18"
creators:
  - "Scullion, Nigel"
  - "Country Liberal Party (NT)"
source: "Office of SCULLION, SEN NIGEL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331369
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ZG8V6%22
---

 Government denies special deal with Oceanic Viking asylum seekers   18-November-2009 

 Minister for Immigration Chris Evans today denied that asylum seekers aboard the Oceanic Viking are receiving  special treatment, despite the group being promised assistance and processing outcomes not available to any  other asylum seeker.   

 Senator Scullion said the level of spin and denial the Federal Government had resorted to in order to protect its  image was appalling.   

 “The Government wrote to the asylum seekers onboard the Oceanic Viking setting out special  provisions including guaranteed processing within four weeks, and guaranteed resettlement,” Senator Scullion  said.   

 “If no other asylum seeker in Indonesia or anywhere else in the world is receiving this treatment, how can it be  construed as anything other than a special circumstance, as Minister for Foreign Affairs Stephen Smith admitted  today?   

 “The people on the Oceanic Viking were offered this deal to get them out of sight and out of mind as quickly as  possible. The Government is neither tough nor compassionate in its treatment of people smugglers and asylum  seekers.   

 “How many refugees in camps around the world have to wait patiently not for four weeks, but years, for  resettlement under the UNHCR program?   

 “Kevin Rudd’s ‘patient’ approach has resulted in a $1 million bill for Australian taxpayers, and the  diversion of the Southern Ocean’s key patrol vessel in preventing illegal fishing in Australian waters.   

 “It has strained our relationship with Indonesia and sent completely the wrong message to people smugglers.   

 “With yesterday’s arrival of the third people smuggler boat in three days, the Prime Minister must admit that 51  boats in a matter of months equal 51 policy failures.” 

 Source:  Senator Nigel Scullion 

 

