---
title: "When is an offer not an offer? Apparently when Rudd says so."
date: "2009-11-19"
creators:
  - "Scullion, Nigel"
  - "Country Liberal Party (NT)"
source: "Office of SCULLION, SEN NIGEL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331722
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/S3AV6%22
---

 When is an Offer Not an Offer? - Apparently When Rudd says so.   19-November-2009 

 Why on earth is it so difficult for the Labor government to admit that they resolved the standoff on the Oceanic  Viking by negotiating a special deal with those on board? Asks Senator Scullion today.   

 “The deal made to the 78 asylum seekers to get them off the Oceanic Viking is only applicable to these  individuals.   “No one else has received a guarantee of 12 weeks from lodgement to resettlement. No one else will receive  daily visits from Australian officials and no one else will receive personal assistance from Australian officials to  assist with the UNHCR processing.   

 “Despite this offer being made only to the 78 people on the Oceanic Viking, and delivered to them on government  letterhead with the heading; “Message to the 78 passengers on the Oceanic Viking”, the government still tries to  convince everyone that there was no special deal.   

 Who do they think they are kidding, said Senator Scullion.   

 “In a desperate attempt to ‘spin’ their way out of the hole they have dug for themselves Senator Feeney today  tried to argue that a deal was negotiated with the Indonesians over processing and not with the 78, therefore no  special deal existed.   

 “We were patient, and we reached an accommodation—not with the occupants of that vessel but with the  Indonesian government.” Handsard 18 Nov 2008   

 “What a pathetic argument from a desperate government, said Senator Scullion.   

 “The existence of the special deal is very clear and why the government is determined to deny this is beyond  comprehension.   

 “One must ask, why is the Prime Minister unwilling or incapable of unwinding the ‘spin’ used to protect him and  his government over the denial of what is, in fact, a special offer?   

 “Why won’t the Prime Minister accept that he made a mistake in denying its existence in the first place and come  clean over the offer”, said Senator Scullion    

 Source:  Senator Nigel Scullion 

 

