---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 9 November 2009: grocery prices."
date: "2009-11-09"
creators:
  - "Emerson, Craig"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS, INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS AND THE SERVICE ECONOMY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331003
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/APBV6%22
---

 Ministers for Innovation, Industry,  Science and Research 

 GROCERY PRICES DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  

 SUBJECTS: Grocery Prices 

 EMERSON: Australian consumers will be rightly concerned about reports in the newspaper of grocery prices rising  rapidly over the last 10 years in Australia compared with those in other developed countries. The Rudd Government, in  the less than two years that it's been in office, has moved to introduce more competition into grocery retailing. We are  determined to apply the competition blowtorch to grocery retailing. Competition is good for consumers, more  competition is better.  

 If I could just quickly take you through the measures that we've introduced, we have  opened the door to foreign investment in grocery retailing, and we've introduced stronger  predatory pricing rules so the major supermarkets can't easily drive out rivals and then 

 put their prices up later. We've introduced unit pricing which allows shoppers to stop and  compare and get better value for money and we've removed 80 per cent of the restrictive  leases that have prevented supermarket rivals setting up in major shopping centres  against Coles and Woolworths. And right now we're working with the state and territory  governments on their planning and zoning laws.  

 We're determined to remove the impediments to rivals to Coles and Woolworths being  able to set up in competition with Coles and Woolworths and offer value for money to  consumers. So you can see in a short period, less than two years, the Rudd Government  has adopted and implemented a range of measures designed to apply the competition  blowtorch to grocery retailing in this country. In the 10 previous years under the  Coalition Government nothing was done and right now there's absolutely no information  on what a Coalition Government, if it were to win an election, would do in relation to  grocery retailing. We are moving strongly to ensure that there is competition: that we  remove those impediments to competition in grocery retailing so that consumers do have  more choice and can get better value for money.  

 QUESTION: Isn't it the case though, it was GroceryWatch that was your key election  promise, giving consumers power, crumbled because of the power of the duopoly?  

 EMERSON: That's incorrect. I did not proceed with GroceryChoice because, if we had,  the information that would have been available to consumers would not have been timely  and would not have been reliable. Simply putting grocery price information on a website  of itself, while it informs consumers, does not in fact introduce more competition and  more competition is the key to supporting consumers in getting better value for money. 

 Innovation Minister > The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP   

 

 Transcript   

 The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP   

 09 Nov 2009 

 Page 1 of 4 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 QUESTION: But wouldn't having it on a website that's easily accessible, even if it's not  necessarily exactly timely, but it would keep pressure on Coles and Woolies to stay  competitive with each other and keep prices down along with other independent  retailers?  

 EMERSON: Competition is far more effective in keeping pressure on supermarket  prices. Of course there are on websites now for Coles and Woolworths and other stores,  if they want, if people want to shop online, then they can access that information. But of  itself, putting prices on the internet on a website, while giving consumers more  information, doesn't of itself provide more competition in grocery retailing, and it is  competition that offers the best value for money for consumers by applying the  competition blowtorch. That's how we'll get better choice and better value for money for  consumers. This Government, the Rudd Government, is taking on hard reforms that were  shirked by the previous Government. We are doing the hard policy work of introducing  more competition by tearing down the barriers to entry by rivals to Coles and  Woolworths into grocery retailing.  

 QUESTION: Will you put up a website at some stage?  

 EMERSON: We already had put up a website, as you know, through the ACCC. The  judgment was made that it was not satisfactory so we're not going back to the ACCC to  do that again. What we are doing is working hard to introduce more competition into the  grocery retailing sector, competition is good for consumers, more competition is better.  

 QUESTION: The Retailers' Association says the price rises are more to do with drought,  transport costs, things like that. Others say it's more to do with the duopoly. Which do  you think is the…  

 EMERSON: There's a range of considerations and forces that go into grocery retail  prices and retail price rises. This is a report on retail price rises for groceries over 10  years and over a 10 year period there will be different influences. But there's no doubt  that competition is good for consumers, more competition is better. That's why the Rudd  Government is absolutely committed to introducing more competition into grocery  retailing and tearing down those barriers to entry, so that you don't just have a choice  between Coles and Woolworths but there are other rivals who can offer supermarket  value for money such as Aldi, Foodworks, Franklins and Costco and a whole range of  other entrants - IGA stores, IGA super stores. That's what we want to see in this country:  real competition, and the only way that you can see that is by tearing down the barriers to  entry by those rivals, whether they be Australian supermarkets or foreign supermarkets.  By applying the competition blowtorch, that's how we get value for money.  

 QUESTION: In your view, do these figures stack up?  

 EMERSON: Look, I'm not going to dissect the figures because there is a range of  different influences over a decade that have had a bearing on grocery retailing prices.  Drought has been an influence but there's no doubt that more competition in grocery  retailing is better for consumers.  

 QUESTION: What does it say about Australia's position compared to the rest of the 

 Page 2 of 4 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 world?  

 EMERSON: Well, there's plenty of evidence to suggest that we have a more  concentrated grocery retailing market in Australia than in other countries. The way to  deal with that is to encourage more competition by tearing down the barriers to entry, by  applying the competition blowtorch to grocery retailing in Australia and through the suite  of five measures I've talked about today. That's what the Rudd Government is doing. In  the less than two years that we've been in power, we have been applying that competition  blowtorch. This report covers 10 years, including eight years of the previous Government  that sat on its hands, watched supermarket prices going up and didn't do anything about  introducing more competition into grocery retailing in Australia. And it still has no  policy, no policy whatsoever about increasing competition in grocery retailing.  

 QUESTION: You say you're not going to dissect those figures but is the Government in  a position to recognise that figures that are published in the report are, in fact, accurate?  

 EMERSON: Well, I think if you ask Australian consumers they will say that grocery  retail prices have been rising and are too high. And so we could spend the next six month  till the cows come home arguing about the figures but there's no argument by this  Government with Australian consumers that they want value for money in grocery retail  prices. We think that's right and the best way of delivering that value for money is by  introducing more competition by applying the competition blowtorch to Coles and  Woolworths and anyone else who is involved in grocery retailing in this country.  

 QUESTION: On a different note, the Newspoll today showing that the public suggests  that the Rudd Government hasn't handled the boat people situation well at all. What's the  Government's response to that?  

 EMERSON: Well, polls come and go and what we are doing, what Kevin Rudd is  doing, is governing in the national interest, whether it be on economic policy, whether it  be on climate change, whether it be on border protection. That's what we're doing,  governing in the national interest. Polls do come and polls do go, but we're not trying to  win a popularity award through these opinion polls. What we're doing is governing in the  national interest. That has been Kevin Rudd's pledge since before he became Prime  Minister; he's followed through on that pledge to govern in the national interest. Polls  will come, polls will go, but he will not be deterred from governing in the national  interest.  

 QUESTION: But that doesn't seem to answer anything to do with the fact that the  national interest suggests that he's not handling it at all and that the Government is not  handling boat people.  

 EMERSON: Well, we are making our judgment in terms of the issue of asylum-seekers  and that is to have a tough but humane approach to the asylum-seeker issue, tough on  people-smugglers, humane in relation to people who are dislocated from their home  countries, who flee to other countries as genuine refugees. And the fact is, in the few  years, in the last year or so, there's been a big increase in asylum-seeker numbers right  around the world: 30,000 in Italy in the same period of the Rudd Government; 70,000 or  80,000 in countries like Canada and other countries of Europe. So this is not an issue 

 Page 3 of 4 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

 that's isolated to Australia but Kevin Rudd is determined and will continue to govern in  the national interest whether it be on the issue of economic policy, of climate change or  border protection.  

 QUESTION: Doesn't this poll just suggest that people think he's having a bet each way?  You're actually alienating both sides of the argument by not taking a consistent…  

 EMERSON: Well, there's no substitute for governing in the national interest. That's  what Kevin Rudd is doing. He's not trying to win a popularity poll. What he's trying to do  is govern in the best interests of Australia. That's what we're doing and that's what we'll  continue to do. Okay, thank you very much.  

 

 

 

 

  z Privacy  

  z Copyright  

  z Disclaimer  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  Page 4 of 4 Minister - Innovation, Industry, Science and Research

