---
title: "30th boat arrival: people smuggling rolls on unchecked."
date: "2009-09-12"
creators:
  - "Stone, Dr Sharman"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536703
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/76OU6%22
---

 

 

 Sat, 12th September 2009    

 30TH BOAT ARRIVAL: PEOPLE SMUGGLING ROLLS ON UNCHECKED 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 A boat carrying 87 asylum seekers, intercepted today near Ashmore Reef, will be taken to Christmas Island 

 where the detention centre is already at bursting point, Dr Sharman Stone, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, said today.  

 This brings the number of asylum seekers to 1388, on 30 boats, since August last year when the Rudd 

 Government began unravelling its immigration policy opening the back door for people smugglers.  

 “On top of this latest arrival, Indonesian officials yesterday intercepted a boat carrying 56 asylum seekers on their 

 way to Australia.  

 “Clearly the Rudd Government has lost the battle to people smugglers.  

 “For the sake of those risking their lives and to better protect Australia’s orderly immigration program we must 

 have a detailed analysis of what has gone wrong with Labor’s strategy.  

 “Again, I call for an urgent inquiry into the relationship between the Rudd Government’s softened stance on 

 border protection and the surge in people smuggling in Australia.”  

 “We are still being kept in the dark with what really happened with the tragic explosion of the boat called SIEV 36.  

 “As well, two weeks ago the Government admitted it has been forced to ship in portables to the Christmas Island 

 detention centre in a desperate and panicked measure to provide more beds for the exploding population of 

 unauthorised arrivals.  

 “With this new boat arrival the Minister will be forced to bring in more portables,” Dr Stone said.   

