---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 8 November 2009: border protection."
date: "2009-11-08"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330983
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XA5V6%22
---

 

 

     Sun, 8th November 2009  

 

 JULIE BISHOP DOORSTOP - BORDER PROTECTION 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  

 Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  

 Deputy Leader of the Opposition 

 E&OE  

 JULIE BISHOP It is now three weeks since the 78 Sri Lankan asylum seekers were taken aboard the Australian 

 Customs vessel Oceanic Viking. At the time Mr Rudd said the issue would be resolved quickly. Three weeks on it 

 is apparent that the Labor Government has no solution. Mr Rudd has refused to take responsibility; he has 

 refused to admit that he got it wrong when he softened Australia’s border protection laws. He must take 

 responsibility. As each day passes, it is apparent that Mr Rudd is out of his depth when it comes to border 

 security.  

 When we were in Government, the Coalition managed to stop the boats. From 2002 until 2008 there was an 

 average of three boats a year, in some years there were no boats. Since Mr Rudd took the decision to soften 

 Australia’s border protection laws in August 2008 there has been a huge surge of boats through the people 

 smuggling trade. Forty-seven boats in just over 12 months. Mr Rudd must take responsibility.  

 Now he’s blamed everyone and everything, including blaming unrest in other countries. This morning the Sri 

 Lankan High Commissioner exposed Mr Rudd’s excuses and contradicted the very excuse that Mr Rudd has 

 been using. It is time for the Government to admit that its softening of the border protection laws has led to this 

 increase in people smuggling.  

 JOURNALIST What do you think of Barnaby Joyce’s idea to turn the Oceanic Viking around and deliver the 

 asylum seekers back to Sri Lanka?  

 JULIE BISHOP I think Barnaby’s comments reflect the frustration felt by the Australian community that the 

 Government has no answers and refuses to accept responsibly for its deliberate decision to soften Australia’s 

 border protection laws. Now I don’t have access to Australian Federal Police reports or security and intelligence 

 reports, I don’t have access to information about the status of the asylum seekers, nor the details of the 

 arrangements that Mr Rudd said that he had in Indonesia. We would need that information, and if the 

 Government is prepared to share it with us then we would be prepared to comment.  

 JOURNALIST So do you think it could be a good solution to maybe ask Sri Lanka to take these people back?  

 JULIE BISHOP I would encourage the Government to have high level discussions with the Sri Lankan 

 Government; quite frankly they should have been doing that weeks ago. The Sri Lankan High Commissioner 

 contradicted Mr Rudd this morning who has been using the excuse of unrest in Sri Lanka. But he exposed that 

 excuse and so it is time for Mr Rudd to admit that he softened Australia’s border protection laws which made 

 Australia a soft target for people smugglers.  

 JOURNALIST Would it be a breach of our humanitarian obligations to send these people back to Sri Lanka?  

 JULIE BISHOP Well that is a matter for the Government to determine when it discusses this issue, as I assume it 

 will, with the Sri Lankan Government. I’m not aware of the security reports, or the intelligence reports they have 

 but surely the Government was considering all these options when Mr Rudd said he had a solution to the 

 problem three weeks ago. He hasn’t been honest with the Australian people, he hasn’t told the Australian people 

 the details of his discussions with the Indonesian Government, and he hasn’t said what contingency plans were 

 to be put in place should a consequence occur, such as the asylum seekers refusing to get off the Australian 

 Customs vessel.  

 JOURNALIST You say that he should have solved this problem a while ago, do you have any suggestions for 

 him apart from admitting that he’s wrong?  

 JULIE BISHOP Well that would be a good start. Mr Rudd is refusing to admit that what he has done, that he has 

 deliberately chosen to weaken Australia’s border protection laws, he refuses to admit that has had any impact on 

 the massive surge in people smuggling that we’ve seen.  

 Now the figures speak for themselves. In the years 2002 to 2008 there was an average of three boats a year, in 

 some years no boats. Since August 2008 there have been 47 boats and yet Mr Rudd wants the Australian people 

 to believe that his softening of the border protection laws had nothing to do with it. Now that’s a nonsense and the 

 Australia people can see through that.  

 JOURNALIST In regard to the Oceanic Viking though, what’s the solution there?  

 JULIE BISHOP Obviously the Government should be pursuing a whole range of solutions. I would be pleased to 

 have access to the security briefings, the intelligence briefings, the Australian Federal Police, the Customs 

 briefings. If the Government were prepared to share that information with us, with the Australian people, then it 

 might be evident what solutions could be implemented.  

 JOURNALIST Should Stephen Smith be offering something to Sri Lanka to stop the flow of asylum seekers to 

 Australia?  

 JULIE BISHOP Stephen Smith should be having discussions with the Sri Lankan Government. Its obvious those 

 discussions should have been held weeks ago.  

 Today marks the third week that the asylum seekers have been on bord an Australian Customs vessel, the 

 Oceanic Viking. Now for three weeks this ship has been in Indonesian waters. For three weeks the Governments 

 been assuring the Australian people, the Indonesian Government and the asylum seekers that they have a 

 solution. It is apparent that as each day goes by, Mr Rudd is out of his depth on border protection.  

 JOURNALIST How concerning are the Sri Lankan High Commissioner’s comments about the Sri Lankan people 

 using the war as an excuse to get to Australia and that they are really economic refugees?  

 JULIE BISHOP It is concerning because Mr Rudd has been blaming unrest in Sri Lanka for the surge in boat 

 arrivals from Sri Lanka. But the Sri Lankan High Commissioner today has exposed that excuse and has indicated 

 that many of these people have in fact been living elsewhere for many years, so it is not connected to the unrest 

 in Sri Lanka.  

 Now Mr Rudd needs to address that comment from the Sri Lankan High Commissioner immediately. He has 

 been exposed, he has been contradicted, he ought to come clean with the Australian people and state what the 

 true postilion is. After all Mr Rudd has access to the security reports, the intelligence reports. He has access to an 

 Australian Federal Police report that was finished in March of this year that said if Australia softened its border 

 protection policies there would be a surge in the people smuggling trade. Now that has occurred. He should be 

 honest with the Australian people and it is quite clear he is out of his depth on border protection.  

 JOURNALIST A Greens official in New Zealand has been lobbying for New Zealand to take some of the asylum 

 seekers on the Oceanic Viking off Australia’s hands, should Australia be perhaps negotiating with some of these 

 other countries to see if they could maybe help out in the situation?  

 JULIE BISHOP Well I would be interested to hear if that is what the Government is proposing to do. If the 

 Government is proposing to negotiate with other countries, then what does that say about the Government’s 

 hypocritical stand on the so called Pacific Solution? When the Howard Government negotiated with the 

 Governments of Naru, with Papua New Guinea, the Labor Party were up in arms, they were bordering on 

 hysteria about the Pacific Solution. If it is a fact that the Australian Government is seeking to negotiate with other 

 countries then it just exposes the Labor Party as a bunch of hypocrites.  

 JOURNALIST Should it negotiate with other countries, is that an option?  

 JULIE BISHOP Well I would like to know whether the Government has a solution involving the Indonesian 

 Government. Three weeks ago Mr Rudd said that this matter will be resolved quickly. He’s been saying that 

 every day for three weeks, and the Australian people deserve to know whether he has an agreement with the 

 Indonesian Government, whether he has a solution with Indonesia, or whether he’s just been talking.  

 JOURNALIST Just on another matter, are you aware of this video email about Alex Hawke that compares him to 

 a Nazi being circulated amongst Liberal staffers?  

 JULIE BISHOP No that’s certainly nothing I am aware of, so sorry I cannot comment.    

