---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Murray Bridge: 14 October 2009: health and hospitals reform; rural doctor incentive payments; GP Superclinics; AMA report; asylum seekers; rural hospitals."
date: "2009-10-14"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "health and hospitals reform"
  - "rural doctor incentive payments"
  - "GP Superclinics"
  - "AMA report"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "rural hospitals."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330148
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ITXU6%22
---

 You are here: Home > Media Centre > Interview 

 14 October 2009  

 Transcript of doorstop  

 Murray Bridge  

 Subject(s): Health and Hospitals reform; Rural Doctor incentive payments; GP Superclinics; 

 AMA report; Asylum seekers; Rural Hospitals  

 PM: First of all, it's good to be back in South Australia, good to be here again at Murray Bridge. 

 So I'm told it's the first time an Australian Prime Minister has visited Murray Bridge. At least, 

 that's what the Mayor told me earlier today. 

 The reason we are is to continue our consultations nationwide on future directions in health and 

 hospitals reform. This is fundamentally important for the nation, not just to tinker at the edges 

 but to look at what reforms we need for the next quarter of a century. In fact, so far we've had 

 too much tinkering at the edges, to many bandages applied, too many band-aids applied. What 

 we need for the nation is root and branch reform. 

 That's why the Government commissioned the National Health Reform Commission report, and 

 what we've been doing is road-testing its 123 recommendations around the nation. This is the 

 15th direct consultation around Australia that I've been engaged in myself, and Warren, the 

 Minister, together with Nicola, the Health Minister, together with other Ministerial colleagues, 

 have conducted between a total of 58 consultations around the country. 

 We're road-testing these recommendations with various health communities with different 

 challenges around Australia, and of course when we come to a community like that of Murray 

 Bridge, we are confronting the particular challenges of delivery of services to rural communities. 

 The Rural Doctors Association have assisted us in these deliberations today, and plainly there 

 are challenges to make sure that you've got a proper supply of medical staff and other health 

 professionals coming to rural centres, rural and regional Australia as well. 

 That's one of the reasons why the Government has been forthright in its reforms through the 

 rural and remote workforce package which was announced in this year's Budget which  significantly increases the incentives available to GPs to relocate from metropolitan Australia to 

 

 Interview 

 Page 1 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

 rural Australia, and depending on the degree of remoteness, so do the incentive packages vary. 

 So as a consequence of changes to the system, there is in the past, under the Howard 

 Government, what GPs were entitled to by way of relocation was a $5,000 payment after six 

 years of continuous service in a rural area. What we have brought about is a radical change to 

 that which provides a $15,000 one-off relocation incentive and then subsequent to that annual 

 incentive payments for retention ranging from $2,500 for one year up to $12,000 after five 

 years and continuing into the future. 

 That represents, for someone out there in the field an incentive package worth somewhere  north of $30,000, and potentially up to $50,000. We're determined to make a difference with 

 this new set of incentive arrangements so that young medical graduates coming through 

 metropolitan training have a real financial incentive to serve in rural areas as well. 

 However, that's just one part of reform for long-term health delivery in rural and regional 

 Australia. Today, together with the health professionals here at the Bridge Clinic we've been 

 talking about other support mechanisms which have been put to us a necessary for the future, 

 including helping with the expansion of primary health care capital facilities as well. As you 

 know, the Government's rolling out GP superclinics across the country and one of the 

 discussions we've had today is how do we tailor a program like that to the expansion of existing 

 GP superclinic-type facilities which already exist in rural and regional areas in particular. 

 The last thing I'd say about that is this new system that we have brought in now makes 40 

 different rural communities around South Australia eligible for this range of incentive payments 

 that we have brought in. We are determined to improve the delivery of health and hospital care 

 for rural and regional Australia. This is one practical step in that direction. 

 The last thing I'd say before taking your questions is the AMA has put out its report card on 

 public hospitals across Australia, and its report card on the state of public hospitals is almost 

 universally bleak. Can I say this about the AMA's report - I basically agree with them. There is a 

 real problem out there, and therefore the Australian Government, rather than simply pushing 

 this problem under the carpet, believes it's time we had a fully fledged national debate about 

 how fix the system for the long term. 

 You can't do that by cutting here and cutting there or putting a band-aid here or putting a 

 band-aid there - it is root-and-branch reform that is necessary. So therefore what this 

 Government's determined to do is provide national leadership to bring focus to the long-term 

 reforms that are necessary for our health and hospital system for the next quarter of a century. 

 Then - then - we will start to see a turnaround in the system because what we are dealing with 

 now is the record of a decade of plus neglect, of the Australian dis-investing in the nation's 

 public hospital system. We've turned that around with the Australian health care agreement of 

 the end of 2008. That deals with the current five years, but beyond that there is a long-term 

 reform program which is necessary. Health and hospitals, the delivery of health services to the 

 Australian community, is one of the fundamental responsibilities of Government. 

 Over to you, folks. 

 Page 2 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what went wrong, then, with the $600 million boost to elective 

 surgery (inaudible) 

 PM: Well, that investment has provided for 41,000 elective surgeries which would otherwise not 

 have occurred. We have said consistently that that, of itself, is not going to reduce waiting lists 

 for elective surgeries. Do you know why? As soon as you move through the list of those 

 currently registered on elective surgery waiting lists others who had not put their names onto 

 the waiting list rapidly emerge onto it for the first time. 

 So this has been, for us, simply an interim measure - we've always said that, an interim  measure - to assist state and territory governments on the way through, but if you were to say 

 to those 41,000 Australians that have been the direct beneficiaries of those elective surgery 

 procedures around the country, that is better than nothing, that is an improvement on what 

 was, but it doesn't deal with the long-term, structural problem which underpins elective surgery 

 waiting lists nation-wide. 

 The other thing I'd say is this: until you fix primary health care, until you've fixed aged care, 

 and you've fixed the other pressures which are bearing down the system you are constantly 

 going to have a problem with bed blocking within the system, and as a result you're constantly 

 going to have surgical beds which are occupied by folk preventing those in need of elective 

 surgery to obtain the surgery they need. 

 Furthermore, long-term, you'll see in the Health Reform Commission's report specific 

 recommendations which go to the separation of elective surgery from emergency surgery in the 

 way in which hospitals conduct their business in the future, and that's one of the 

 recommendations we've been road testing with hospitals around the country. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you going to penalise the states for not meeting these 

 targets? 

 PM: Well, we have a hardline approach to improving the health and hospital system nationwide. 

 If you look at the detail of the statement we made at the end of 2008 when we negotiated a 50 

 percent increase in the Australian Healthcare Agreement with the states and territories, we at 

 that time insisted on a range of performance benchmarks being met. This data is now being 

 collected and will be published over a period of time. 

 We intend to hold the states and territories accountable against that data. That's why we're in 

 the reform business. This is tough, and remember we are also dealing with a history of the 

 previous Australian Government pulling a billion dollars out of the Australian public hospital 

 system. We are re-investing back into a hospital system, but one which has suffered from a 

 decade plus of neglect. 

 JOURNALIST: Should there be a single funding source for hospitals? 

 PM: One of the things we're obviously road-testing with the states and territories is how we 

 structure roles and responsibilities for the future, funding responsibilities being one, and how 

 that's delivered, and the actual delivery of services on the other, and how that is done. That's 

 why we're seeking views from the various health regions and hospitals that we've spoken to so 

 Page 3 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

 far. There are a range of different views. We haven't reached a landing point ourselves on that 

 yet and won't do so for some time. 

 JOURNALIST: The AMA (inaudible) benchmarks which encourage hospitals to hide the people 

 who are waiting for elective surgery by not putting them on the official waiting list. How do you 

 respond? 

 PM: Well, we will take a very dim view indeed of any attempt by any state government, 

 whatever their political persuasion, of somehow being cute with critical data on emergency 

 surgery or on elective surgery or on emergency department presentations. We want real data.  We want to know the absolute facts of what's happening out there. 

 We want to know what's working and what's not and how you can fix that. We're in the long-term reform business, but to inform that you need to have absolute confidence in the data. 

 That's why we agreed on those performance benchmarks in the Australian Healthcare 

 Agreement of December 2008. We intend to collect that data and to analyse it, and we'll take a 

 very dim view indeed of any data that is cooked by anybody. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's news today that Defence and Immigration are in talks 

 about possibly re-opening Baxter to house potential asylum seekers. Can you please clarify 

 your view on whether Baxter should be re-opened? 

 PM: I've already answered that in a radio interview this morning, that we have no such plan. 

 JOURNALIST: Will there be any consideration of bringing anyone on to mainland Australia? 

 PM: The Government's current operation is to use Christmas Island. That's what it's there for. It 

 has a large detention facility. And that's where the processing occurs. The Minister has already 

 indicated that he has contingency plans for the expansion of the operation on Christmas Island, 

 and beyond that, the Minister has already indicated also, further contingency arrangements in 

 terms of facilities in and around Darwin. This is a challenge which all countries around the 

 region are dealing with. Huge push factors coming out of political instability in Afghanistan. A 

 civil war in Sri Lanka. Other instabilities across the Middle East. Countries around the world are 

 dealing with the same challenge. Our job, and I make no apology for it, is to take a hard-line 

 approach in dealing with the challenge of illegal immigration. That's why we've deployed our 

 naval assets, our customs assets, and our other resources into the region, in partnership with 

 the Indonesians and others, to deal with the challenge for us all. 

 JOURNALIST: What happens when Christmas Island fills up? You're putting tents and other 

 accommodation there. What happens when you- 

 PM: I am absolutely confident that the Minister has in hand a range of contingency planning to 

 deal with challenges across the region. Let me just go to, also, the successes which have been 

 delivered by the Minister and his agency, and others so far in dealing with this challenge. There 

 have been 81 successful interruptions or disruptions of illegal immigration movements to 

 Australia. 

 There have been already, I think, some 44 charges or prosecutions. We are currently working 

 Page 4 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

 on a range of others with the Indonesian and other authorities. This is what our men and 

 women in uniform, out there on the high seas, out there in this difficult zone are doing at 

 present. This is a challenge facing all of us. And it's going to be tough into the future. I accept 

 that. Other Governments are finding this challenge tough as well. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you give Indonesia access to satellite imagery and surveillance to help 

 them play a part in this? 

 PM: How we engage diplomatically with the Indonesians is a matter for the Indonesian 

 Government and ourselves using confidential diplomatic communications. On the questions of  security intelligence and information, the longstanding convention of Australian Governments is 

 that we do not comment, and I don't intend to change that practice. 

 JOURNALIST: In dealing with Indonesia and boatpeople being turned around and sent back, 

 your pledge has to been to treat them with dignity, care and fairness in the name of humanity. 

 Number one, is that treating them with care? And number two, is that your idea of your own 

 Pacific solution? 

 PM: I make no apology whatsoever for adopting a hardline approach when it comes to illegal 

 immigration activity, and I make no apology whatsoever having a hardline and humane 

 approach to dealing with asylum seekers. That's the balance the Australian community expects 

 of us. You see, when it comes to dealing with this challenge, this is not a unique problem for 

 this Government. 

 We've had vessels arriving in Australia with asylum seekers on for each year for the last 20 

 years. In the period of the Howard Government, there were nearly 250 vessels that arrived 

 here in Australia, carrying nearly 15,000 asylum seekers. And I'm advised that some 90% of 

 those ended up settling in Australia. 

 Let's just put all of this into some historical context. In the period this Government's been in, 

 we've had something like, I think, 38 vessels arrive, probably with about 1800 people. It's a 

 challenge. But it's consistent with the challenges we've faced in the past as well. We make no 

 apology for hardline measures in dealing with the challenge of illegal immigration. No apologies 

 whatsoever in dealing with, also, the vermin who are people smugglers. 

 We will take the harshest and hardest measures possible in dealing with that. And on top of 

 that, ensuring that when we are processing asylum seekers, we do so humanely. If they are not 

 bona fide asylum seekers, then we send them back. And guess what? We've already started 

 sending some back, including to Sri Lanka. 

 I notice there's some criticism also on this question from Mr Turnbull and the Liberal party 

 today. Well, can I just say this- Mr Turnbull's recommended course of action to deal with illegal 

 immigration is to hold an inquiry. Can I say that if you're dealing with the challenge of illegal 

 immigration, holding an inquiry doesn't help one bit. What is required is action. 

 Action of the type that we are taking out there in the zone at present. Secondly, it's very easy 

 for someone like Mr Turnbull and the Liberals to shout from the sidelines, rather than coming 

 up with practical courses of action as we have done in dealing with the problem at hand. The 

 Page 5 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

 third thing is this- ask yourself this question- what is the unified position of the Liberal party on 

 illegal immigration, on the future of TPVs, on the future of the Pacific solution? Mr Turnbull's 

 Liberal party on this, as on other things, is split right down the middle. And frankly, I do not 

 know where they stand on this. 

 Given that, when the Government abolished TPVs, the Liberal party did not oppose that in the 

 Senate. When the Government abolished the Pacific solution, the now Shadow Immigration 

 Minister fully supported the Government's action. This is a Government- this is a political party- 

 the liberal party, which is playing politics with this. 

 JOURNALIST: With the change in international circumstances as you've described in the past 18 

 months, does that not require perhaps a rethink and change of policy? 

 PM: Well, we believe we've got the balance right in a hardline approach to illegal immigration, 

 and treating the people who we are required to process in a humane fashion. You can do this if 

 you intelligently deploy the assets of your Government. As I said, this is not a problem which is 

 unique to this Government. Previous Australian Governments have had to deal with this. 

 Governments around the world are now dealing with the same sort of challenge, including in 

 Malaysia and Indonesia, and those in Europe, particularly coming out of the political instability 

 recently in Sri Lanka. We are deploying not just more Naval and Customs assets into the area 

 than the previous Government did, but on top of that, courtesy of the last budget, an additional 

 $625 million investment in additional security cooperation, in additional Police cooperation, in 

 additional intelligence cooperation with our friends and partners in the region to make a 

 difference. 

 We believe this is the right balance, and we will always, always, continue to fine-tune our 

 response based on new and emerging challenges. That's what all Governments do around the 

 world. We believe we've got the balance right. And I've got to zip because I'm due in Adelaide. 

 JOURNALIST: We have- some local media- would like to ask a couple of questions on the rural 

 health issue. 

 PM: If you've got one question on that- I'm sorry, I should've asked you that. 

 JOURNALIST: Yes, yes. 

 PM: Can I get set one question for you please, locally, then I've got to zip. 

 JOURNALIST: We're just wondering if the Federal Government takes over the health system, 

 how you plan to help the smaller rural hospitals that are faltering at the moment. They have a 

 lack of doctors. Money's not always the issue. Are they going to become viable under your 

 takeover, or will they become glorified aged care facilities? 

 PM: Look, can I just say this to you- the single biggest change when it comes to rural doctors 

 and the incentives which apply to them have been taken by this Government in the package of 

 measures I referred to about 10 or 15 minutes ago. In the past, if you wanted to be a GP 

 relocating from metropolitan Adelaide to communities like this, at best you could hope for after 

 Page 6 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

 6 years continued service is an additional $5,000. 

 JOURNALIST: These are communities that- 

 PM: Can I just finish my answer to your question? And secondly, what we have now done is 

 create a series of incentive payments, which as I said aggregate up to $30,000, as much as 

 $50,000 over a period of time, to encourage GPs to come here, and to stay here. Furthermore, 

 can I say in response to the last part of your question, the more remote you are from the 

 capital city, the greater the set of incentives we offer. We are acutely mindful of small rural 

 health practices and services which need extra support in terms of people coming there and  staying there. 

 That's why we are here today speaking with the rural doctors and rural health association 

 because this set of reforms is important. As I said in meeting with the community here at 

 Murray Bridge earlier today, as Prime Minister of Australia I am responsible for the entire health 

 system. That means big cities, small country towns. It means indigenous communities. It 

 means the spectrum of services in between. And rural Australia is just as important as the rest 

 of Australia. And having said that, I've got to zip. 

 

 

 Page 7 of 7 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

 15/10/2009 http://www.pm.gov.au/node/6249

