---
title: "Speech to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE): Regional Outlook Conference, Darwin."
date: "2009-11-04"
creators:
  - "Gray, Gary"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR WESTERN AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
  - "North Australia"
  - "Regional development"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330860
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/EC4V6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP   

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

   Wednesday 21 October 2009 

 

 Another boat, another policy failure  

 

 With yet another boat intercepted this afternoon Prime Minister Rudd must concede that  Australia’s orderly immigration program is in complete disarray.   

 People smugglers are determining who comes into Australia and their criteria for client  selection is simply, “who can pay”.   

 This is the 42nd boat since the Rudd Government began softening border protection in  August 2008. Over 2000 people have now been guided to Christmas Island.   

 The most recent boat, carrying 22 asylum seekers and two crew members, was intercepted  just north of Ashmore Reef this afternoon.   

 At the same time, we are told Mr Rudd has directed his officials to develop a new people  smuggler strategy. This is to consist of the Indonesian Government being paid more to  intercept the boats on Australia’s behalf and then to hold the asylum seekers in their  detention centres.   

 While regional engagement with Indonesia is essential, Mr Rudd cannot expect the  Indonesians to do Australia’s heavy lifting. He must acknowledge his softening of  immigration policy has caused this resurgence in people smuggling.    

 With hundreds of millions of dollars being earned through smuggling human beings into  Australian waters, it is clear that just trying to put a plug in the pipe in Indonesia will not  work.   

 The boat arrival this afternoon is proof of the fact that our border protection is now  compromised. Mr Rudd must take direct and decisive action to stop this deadly trade.   

 

 

 Media enquiries - Andrew Cox 0427 460 063 

 MEDIA RELEASE  

