---
title: "Sailors' lives at risk put at by Labor's failed border protection policy."
date: "2009-10-21"
creators:
  - "Johnston, David"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330395
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DB1V6%22
---

 Wed, 21st October 2009   SAILORS' LIVES AT RISK PUT AT BY LABOR'S FAILED BORDER PROTECTION  POLICY 

 Senator the Hon David Johnston   Shadow Minister for Defence 

 The lives of Australian naval personnel are being put unnecessarily at risk because of the  Rudd Government’s soft approach to illegal arrivals in Australian waters.  

 In Senate Estimates today Shadow Defence Minister Senator David Johnston asked after the  four ADF personnel that were injured during the explosion on SIEV 36 in April this year.  The Northern Territory Police have since found that petrol was doused on the deck of the  boat and deliberately set alight by one of the asylum seekers when being towed near Ashmore  Reef, killing five.  

 The Chief of Navy Russ Crane today confirmed four ADF personnel received injuries and  two were yet to return to active duty, nearly six months after the incident.  

 Senator Johnston said nine ADF personnel were onboard the SIEV 36 when it exploded and  it was lucky more weren’t injured or killed. The rescue and recovery involved personnel from  the Navy, Air Force, Customs and Border Protection resources.  

 “The bravery and professionalism shown by our men and women during this tragic incident is  unquestionable but I am concerned this kind of incident will happen again and Australian  lives will be lost,” Senator Johnston said.  

 Senator Johnston said the incident showed desperate people who paid criminal syndicates  large sums of money to arrive illegally in Australia were willing to do anything to ensure they  reached their goal and this was putting both them and ADF personnel at an unnecessary risk.  

 “Since the Rudd Government has gone soft on border protection more and more people are  trying their luck and it’s the people on the front line who have to deal with the  consequences,” Senator Johnston said.   

