---
title: "Australia strengthens cooperation with Indonesia on border security."
date: "2009-03-03"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211323073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AK4U6%22
---

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Australia strengthens cooperation with Indonesia on border  security 

 Tuesday, 3 March 2009 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, will meet his  Indonesian counterpart, the Minister for Law and Human Rights, Mr Andi Mattalatta  in Jakarta today to discuss migration matters and ongoing cooperation between the  two countries. 

 On his third visit to Indonesia since becoming Immigration Minister, Senator Evans  said a strong relationship between Australia and Indonesia was crucial for the  effective management of irregular migration in the region.  

 Senator Evans said Australia, Indonesia and key organisations like the UNHCR and  International Organization for Migration were working together to deal with issues in  the region involving displaced people, asylum seekers and people smugglers. 

 The Australian Government has recently announced an additional $2 million in  funding for UNHCR operations in Indonesia this year alone. The funding will provide  immediate support to help stabilise displaced populations and reduce opportunities  for people smugglers to prey upon the vulnerability of these people. 

 ‘The UNHCR plays a crucial role in dealing with the situation of asylum seekers in  the region and addressing protection issues,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘This new funding will assist the UNHCR’s operations in Indonesia including  supporting effective asylum seeker processing in Indonesia and reducing the  potential for groups to be exploited by people smugglers.’ 

 Senator Evans will meet Mr Andi Mattalatta and ministers from other countries in the  region for the Bali Process ministerial meeting, to be held in Bali in April, to work  towards strengthening borders against people smuggling, terrorism and other forms  of transnational crime. 

 ‘The global plight of refugees and displaced persons cannot be approached as one  or another country’s domestic problem only,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘Australia will continue to work with Indonesia and other countries in the region to  improve border security and migration management, and at the same time ensure  appropriate support for displaced populations and resolution of protracted  humanitarian situations. 

 ‘We are committed to encouraging effective regional dialogue among source, host  and destination countries to find practical ways to provide assistance and protection  to vulnerable people and reduce the potential for exploitation by people smugglers.’  

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09023.htm   Last update: 03 March 2009 at 08:30 AEST  

 

