---
title: "Greens welcome Govt response to boat tragedy."
date: "2009-11-02"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330785
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/F24V6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Greens Welcome Govt Response to Boat Tragedy   Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Monday 2nd November 2009, 5:28pm 

 in Human Rights & Justice Detention Centres Immigration Refugees   

 The Greens have expressed grave concern about the plight of those on board the ship which has sunk in the 

 Indian Ocean, and have called on the Federal Government to bring any survivors to Australia.  

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights has welcomed the Federal 

 G



 overnment's swift response to the potential tragedy unfolding near the Cocos Islands, with more than half o f the 

 passengers on the boat still believed to be in the water after the boat capsized. 

 "The Greens are greatly concerned about the news of the boat which has sunk in waters near the Cocos Islands,'' 

 Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "Like all Australians, our thoughts and prayers are with the people from the boat, and those on vessels and planes 

 desperately trying to find survivors. 

 "We hope that as many people as possible can be found safely. 

 "We believe that all survivors should be brought to Australia for treatment, and if there are any asylum seekers 

 among this group, they should have their claims processed here.'' 

 Meanwhile the 78 asylum seekers on board the Oceanic Viking still remain in limbo, as concern grows for the 

 health and well-being of all on board, including the five women and five children on the ship. 

 "The Oceanic Viking saga has dragged on into a third week - it's time for Kevin Rudd to end this impasse and 

 bring the boat home,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "The Indonesian solution has failed - it's time for an Australian solution that is practical, long-term and humane. 

 There is nothing humane about holding vulnerable people, children and families on board a boat for weeks on end 

 with their lives in limbo''. 

 The Federal Government should take note of the growing public concern about this issue, and the Greens 

 welcome the campaign by Australia's unions to push for a more humane approach towards vulnerable people 

 seeking protection. 

 "We have been saying all along that the Government needs to take a more compassionate approach rather than 

 engaging in a contest with the Opposition over who can use the toughest rhetoric ,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "It is good to see groups like the unions joining in the growing chorus to send a message to the Government that 

 we need to meet our international obligations and provide better treatment for asylum seekers.'' 

 

 

 

 Page 1 of 1 Greens Welcome Govt Response to Boat Tragedy | Sarah Hanson-Young

 4/11/2009 http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/greens-welcome-go...

