---
title: "Australia's borders: open all hours."
date: "2009-10-14"
creators:
  - "Ley, Sussan"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330181
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VLXU6%22
---

 

 

 Wed, 14th October 2009    

 AUSTRALIA'S BORDERS: OPEN ALL HOURS 

 The Hon Sussan Ley MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 “The Rudd Labor Government is responsible for the weakening of Australia’s borders,” Shadow Minister for 

 Justice and Customs Sussan Ley said today.  

 “Since Labor’s election in November 2007, almost 2,000 people have attempted to illegally enter Australia as a 

 consequence of softened border security laws.  

 “Since Labor softened policy on border protection in August 2008, over 41 boats carrying illegal immigrants have 

 attempted to arrive in Australia, only to be intercepted by Border Protection Command,” Ms Ley said.  

 “Since Labor’s election in November 2007, Australia’s airports have become less safe as a consequence of 

 reduced interest from Labor Ministers.  

 “Since Labor’s election in November 2007, Australia’s ports have been exploited by organised criminal 

 syndicates due to Government inaction on border security,” Ms Ley said.  

 “Labor was elected to govern. They should start governing in Australia’s national interest and toughen up our 

 borders to protect Australians.  

 “The Coalition had a policy which stopped the boats. The policy worked,” Ms Ley said.  

 “Labor prefers to take the passive approach to protecting our borders. Despite having the smartest intelligence 

 networks and efficient interceptions, it simply makes no difference to the surge of unauthorised boat arrivals,” Ms 

 Ley said.  

 “Labor has weakened Australia’s borders and the boats have started arriving again. Their policy is failing.  

 “Australians expect their government to govern. It’s time for Mr Rudd to reinstate the Coalition’s successful 

 border protection policies to stop the boats and restore integrity of Australia’s borders,” Ms Ley said.    

