---
title: "Asylum seeker transfers will embolden people smugglers."
date: "2009-12-15"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332576
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OLHV6%22
---

     Tue, 15th December 2009  

 ASYLUM SEEKER TRANSFERS WILL EMBOLDEN PEOPLE SMUGGLERS 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison has today reasserted the Coalition’s warning to 

 the Government to protect the last shred of integrity of the strong border protection regime they inherited from the 

 Coalition and not transfer detainees from Christmas Island on mass to the mainland.  

 Yesterday the Government confirmed they were considering a mass transfer of detainees to Christmas Island as 

 a result of the overcrowding caused by their failed border protection policies.  

 “The transfer of asylum seekers from an overcrowded tent-city on Christmas Island to mainland Australia will 

 represent the final nail in the coffin of the Rudd Government’s failed border protection policies. Above all, it will 

 send an unambiguous message to people smugglers trading in human misery that Australia is an even softer 

 touch,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “Minister Evans can’t bluff his way out of the implications of transferring asylum seekers to the mainland. Moving 

 hundreds of people to the mainland because Christmas Island is full is sending the wrong message to people 

 smugglers and has the potential to open a legal can of worms,” he said.  

 “The Minister’s assurances about the impact of transferring detainees on their legal status are at best ambiguous 

 and at worst would undermine the whole point of the Coalition Government’s offshore processing solution.  

 “We are not talking about a transfer of a few detainees to the mainland for health reasons or other temporary 

 purposes as provided for by the Coalition under the Migration Act. We are talking about a permanent mass 

 movement of detainees from Christmas Island to the mainland because it is full.  

 “What is not ambiguous is the message this decision will send to people smugglers, who would now be able to 

 hold out the prospect of delivering their desperate clients all the way to the Australian mainland.  

 “The excision zone established by the Howard Government protected Australia from having our processes 

 abused by those who sought to gain an unfair advantage over other legitimate asylum seekers, in equally and 

 even more desperate situations around the world. The Minister cannot spin these problems away.  

 “The Australian Government should be doing everything they can to ensure people smugglers have the worst 

 possible product to sell. The reality is that under the Rudd Government, whether it is their roll back of the Howard 

 Government’s strong border protection regime, Kevin Rudd’s special deal on the Oceanic Viking, or now 

 transferring detainees on mass to the mainland, it is the people smugglers who are determining who comes to 

 our country and the circumstances in which they come.  

 “The transfer of detainees to the mainland for onshore processing would represent another major victory for the 

 people smugglers who have already illegally sent 62 boats and more than 2,700 people to our waters since Labor 

 took the decision to roll back Australia’s border protection regime.  

 “Australia runs a generous refugee programme. It is something we should all feel very proud of. It is imperative 

 that it remains a fair system. Our system must seek to help those most in need, as opposed to those most able to 

 take advantage. That’s what a fair go is all about.  

 “The Coalition in Government saw the arrivals come to a halt. Now the surge of arrivals is Labor’s doing, it’s 

 Labor’s responsibility and it’s for Labor to fix,” Mr Morrison said.   

