---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 15 April 2009: Bali Process meeting; new funding for Rohingyas; situation in Thailand; people smuggling cooperation and extraditions."
date: "2009-04-15"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324306
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XNST6%22
---

 

  1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP 

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE:   15 April 2009 

 TITLE:  The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Stephen Smith, doorstop  interview: Bali Process meeting; new funding for Rohingyas; situation in  Thailand; people smuggling cooperation and extraditions.   

 QUESTION: What can you tell us about what the government of Burma is prepared to do to  ease the plight of the Rohingya and prevent more of these thousands of people coming over  the border?   

 SMITH: I have just come from a breakfast meeting which is the first engagement of the Bali  Ministerial Process. A number of countries were represented - including of course Indonesia,  Myanmar,  Thailand,  Bangladesh  -  countries  interested  in  both  the  cause  and  the  solution  to   the Rohingya problem.     

 I’ve  announced  a  further  contribution  from  Australia  of  an  additional  just  over  $3  million,   $3.2  million,  for  the  Rohingya  people  in  Burma,  additional  money  for  the  World  Food   Program,  to  CARE  Australia  and  to  the  UNDP  to  assist.  This  brings  to  some  $8  million   Australia has contributed for this problem over the last twelve months or so, including over $4  million to the UNHCR.     

 It was a very good discussion over breakfast. The theme was whether it is Rohingyas, whether  it  is  other  people  movements,  these  are  not  issues  that  one  country  can  solve  or  address  by   itself, and so there needs to be a regional cooperation.    

 And it is quite clear that one of the good things coming out of the meeting is that countries are  prepared to sit down and talk with each other and together to address these problems.     

 The meeting also had High Commissioner Guterres, the United Nations High Commissioner  for  Refugees  and  also  Ambassador  Swing,  the  Director-General  of  the  International   Organization for Migration, so I was pleased with the discussion and that will now lead into  the formal ministerial Bali Process.    

 QUESTION: So what did the Burmese actually say they were prepared to do?   

 SMITH:  The  representative  from Burma  indicated  they  were  prepared  to  sit  down  and  talk  with  Indonesia  about  the  Rohingya people who we currently find  some  300  to  400  in  Aceh  

 

  2

 Province to sit down and go through with Indonesia and the UNHCR verification processes  for refugee status and the like. So it’s a good sign that countries are prepared to sit down and  go through these issues together. They can’t be solved by one country alone.    

 QUESTION: Are they acknowledging that the Rohingya are actually citizens of Myanmar?   

 SMITH: Well, you need to speak to the Myanmar representative about that matter.    

 QUESTION: Is Australia prepared to help Indonesia with those 300 to 400?   

 SMITH: We cooperate very closely with Indonesia on all of these matters.  Our contribution  so far to addressing the Rohingya issue has been effectively through the UNHCR, with as I  say, over the last 12 month period, a $4 million contribution to the UNHCR for processing.   That includes processing not just in Bangladesh but also in  Indonesia and to a lesser extent in  Malaysia.    

 More generally, can I just make a couple of other remarks. Can I firstly welcome the scaling  down  of  protest  action  in  Bangkok.   It  is  quite  clear  that  circumstances  today  are  much   improved on the last couple of days.  We continue to advise Australians to exercise great care  if they are in Bangkok.  But we welcome very much what is clearly the de-escalation of the  difficulties so far as protest action in Bangkok is concerned.     

 Can  I  also  just  express  my  ongoing  concern  about  developments  in  Fiji.   We  condemn   absolutely  the  deportation  of  journalists,  including  Australian  journalist  Sean  Dorney.  And   I’ve  also  seen  as  yet  unconfirmed  reports  about  the  arrest  of  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve   Bank.  If that is the case this would be again a most unwelcome development.  

 

 QUESTION: Just really quickly, when the Prime Minister was here at the end of last year,  there was a lot of talk about the fact the Indonesians had indicated they were prepared to pass  legislation  enabling  the  criminal  prosecution  of  people  smugglers.  That  legislation  hasn’t   happened and isn’t going to happen in the life of this Indonesian Government.   

 SMITH:  We  are  very  pleased  with  the  close  working  relationship  between  Australia  and   Indonesia  on  all  of  these  matters  including  the  proposed  legislation  so  far  as  the   criminalisation of people smuggling is concerned.    

 It  has  actually  been  one  of  the  good  things  about  the  Bali  Process  itself  that  through  the   efforts  of  the  Bali  Process  over  the  last  half  dozen  years,  effectively  model  legislation  has   been developed to enable a range of countries to pick up the issue so far as there own criminal  justice system is concerned.   

 QUESTION: Had you hoped that it could be passed in the life of this government?   

 SMITH:  Well  you  see  it  is  something  that  is  a  matter  for  Indonesia’s  legislative  and   parliamentary processes but the Indonesian Government remains committed to it. So we are  very  pleased  about  that  ongoing  development.   We  are  very  pleased  with  the  very  close   relationship we have with Indonesia on these matters.  

 

  3

 

 QUESTION: Are you pleased about the move to extradite this people smuggler that is under  way this week?    

 SMITH:  Well  we  have  a  very  good  relationship  with  Indonesia.   Our  officials  work  very   closely on extradition matters.  There are a range of extradition matters before Indonesia and  Australia,  but  other  than  to  say  I  welcome  very  much  the  provisional  arrest,  it  would  be   inappropriate  for  me  to  say  more.   It  now  requires  formal  extradition  procedures,  but  we   welcome  very  much  the  provisional  arrest.   That  particular  individual  is  wanted  for  people   smuggling charges in Australia.  It will now move to the formal extradition process.   

 [Ends]   

 

 

