---
title: "Address to ALP National Conference, Sydney."
date: "2009-07-30"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Party platforms"
  - "Party conferences, National"
  - "ALP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211327817
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NA9U6%22
---

 

 

 ADDRESS TO ALP NATIONAL CONFERENCE   SYDNEY CONVENTION CENTRE   30 JULY 2009  

 

 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY    

 Two years ago, I stood before you as Labor leader and said that Australia  stood at the crossroads.    

 That Australia faced a choice between the past and the future.    

 Two years later, we gather here as a Federal Labor Government because  Australia chose the future.    

 Throughout our history, we have always been the party of the future.    

 Always prepared to look beyond the horizon.    

 Always prepared to be bold and to imagine what Australia could be at its  absolute best.    

 Always prepared to paint a broad and inclusive canvas on what our  possibilities as a nation might be - rather than simply being content with  the way things were.    

 Because ours is a message of hope; our opponents a message of fear.   And as we all know, fear so often is a more potent emotion than hope.    

 Ours has been a mission to build up, rather than to tear down.    

 Ours has been a mission to include, rather than to exclude.    

 Ours has always been a message of fairness for all, rather than privilege  for some.    

 Ours has been a message aimed at the better angels of our human  nature, rather than the worst.    

 These, in all fundamental respects, continue as the dividing lines of our  national political life - as real today as they were 100 years ago.    

 For more than one hundred years of our national political history, our  challenge has been to obtain political office to translate these great values  into policies that change the lives of working people.    

 And as you as delegates know, this is no easy task.    

 Conference after conference, we have assembled to pass resolution after  resolution:  ·         on reconciliation with Aboriginal people; 

 ·         on Australia’s refusal to ratify the Kyoto Protocol;  ·         on the obscenity of the industrial relations regime from the  waterfront dispute through to WorkChoices;  ·         on the obscenity of the treatment of refugees under the Pacific  Solution; and on Australia’s involvement in the Iraq War.    

 These resolutions represented the consistency of our purpose and the  conviction of our resolve.    

 They reflected the heart and the soul of so much of our party and our  movement.    

 They reflected the most deeply held beliefs and aspirations of each and  every one of you as delegates to this, our party’s, conference.    

 They embodied what you, as the party of true believers, held to be  positions of fundamental principle.    

 Yet, at the same time, year after year, conference after conference, our  resolutions progressively became essays in political futility and  frustration.    

 But in 2007, after twelve long years, our party and our movement  prevailed.    

 We prevailed because of the consistency of our purpose.    

 We prevailed because of the essential decency of our message.    

 We prevailed because of the discipline of our politics.    

 And the result: in less than eighteen months in office:  ·         an Australian Labor Government apologised to the stolen  generations;  ·         an Australian Labor Government ratified Kyoto; an Australian  Labor Government threw out WorkChoices once and for all;  ·         an Australian Labor Government abolished the Pacific Solution; and 

 ·         an Australian Labor Government withdrew our remaining combat  forces from Iraq.    

 All made possible through the party of true believers.    

 Keeping the faith - as you have done.    

 Fighting the fight - as you have done.    

 Securing political victory - as you have done.    

 Because you, the women and men of our branches and our unions, have  never lost sight of the light on the hill - and for this, as your leader, and  from the bottom of my heart, I thank you.    

 I have said before, we are a party both proud of our history and confident  of our future.    

 Throughout our history, we have been driven by two great overriding  purposes: the first, a fair go for working families; the second, nation-building for Australia’s future.    

 These traditions are writ large across our history.    

 It was Andrew Fisher who, one hundred years ago, delivered the age  pension, workers’ compensation and industrial arbitration.    

 And it was Fisher as nation-builder who gave us a national bank, a  national currency, a national coat-of-arms, a trans-continental railroad  across the mighty Nullarbor, a national capital, and our own navy under  our own national command.    

 A generation later, it was Curtin and Chifley who delivered social security  for the unemployed, the pharmaceutical benefits scheme for subsidised  medicine, the post-war immigration scheme that built the fabric of  modern multicultural Australia.    

 And it was Curtin and Chifley as nation-builders who began the great  Snowy hydro scheme, founded a national university for the nation’s  capital and forged Australia’s independent standing in the councils of the  world.    

 And so too with Whitlam, with Hawke and with Keating: opening our  universities to all on the basis of merit, rather than to the few on the  basis of privilege, the establishment of universal health care for all on the  basis of need, rather than just some on the basis of those who could pay, 

 together with universal superannuation for working families to underpin a  decent retirement for all, not just for some.    

 And as nation-builders, these living greats of our party gave us national  investment in infrastructure for our cities, the internationalisation of our  economy and the revitalisation of our industry.    

 Delegates, this is the tradition of which we are so proud.    

 And this is the tradition which now shapes the future we would craft for  Australia.    

 A fair go for working families.    

 Nation-building for Australia’s future.    

 Neither - neither - being possible without the active agency of  government.    

 It has often been Labor’s lot to form government at times of national  adversity.    

 And so too has it been with this Government.    

 The global financial crisis, which began in August 2007, has given rise to  the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century.    

 In 2009, the global economy is projected to shrink for the first time since  the war.    

 What began as a global financial crisis, has become a global economic  crisis, which has in turn become a global employment crisis.    

 This crisis has been caused by a combination of unrestrained greed,  unlimited credit and unregulated markets - all cornerstones of an  ideology of free-market fundamentalism promulgated by the political right  over the last decade and more.    

 Of course, the free-market fundamentalists accept no ideological  responsibility for what has occurred.    

 Instead, governments of the responsible centre have had to step in to  clean up the wreckage.    

 In Australia, we have taken strong, early and decisive action to cushion  our economy from the worst impact of the global recession.    

 We have done so without apology.    

 We have done so without reservation.    

 We have done so with absolute conviction.    

 And that conviction proceeds from one fundamental premise: the  paramount importance of jobs. Jobs are not about abstract principles of  economics; jobs are about working families, the ability to make ends  meet and about fundamental human dignity.    

 Our strategy has been straightforward: nation-building for recovery.    

 Supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today while investing  in the infrastructure our nation needs for tomorrow.    

 Our strategy combines the two great traditions of our movement: fairness  for working families and nation-building for the future.    

 The Government has acted to guarantee every working Australian’s bank  deposit - to stabilise the financial system.    

 The Government has acted to treble the first home owners boost - to help  young Australians buy their first home.    

 The Government has acted to treble the tax break for business to invest  in plant and equipment - to keep the economy going.    

 The Government has acted with a three stage economic stimulus strategy  - to fill the gap left by a private sector in retreat.    

 The first stage - direct cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans,  farmers in hardship and working families - to support the 1.5 million  Australians working in retail.    

 The second stage - medium term infrastructure including the biggest  school modernisation program in Australia’s history, the single biggest  investment in social housing in Australia’s history, and the biggest  investment in energy efficiency measures for all Australian homes.    

 And the third stage - long term infrastructure investments in rail, road,  port, universities, TAFEs, hospitals and medical research facilities, urban  water projects, clean energy and a national high-speed broadband  network.    

 Seventy per cent of our total stimulus strategy is directed to  infrastructure investment. 

 

 And the result: as of today, Australia has the fastest growth, the second  lowest unemployment, and the lowest debt and deficit of any of the Major  Advanced Economies. And while every Major Advanced Economy is in  recession, Australia so far is not.    

 These results are not a random event. They are, in large part, the direct  product of government policy intervention.    

 Notwithstanding what we have done, the road to recovery will be long,  hard and uneven - with many twists and turns.    

 Unemployment will continue to rise for some time to come.    

 That’s why the second arm for our strategy for dealing with the global  economic recession is aimed explicitly at supporting those who cannot  find work.    

 Our nation-building for recovery plan this year will support more than  200,000 people in work who would otherwise lose their jobs.    

 And the same for the year after.    

 But the tragic reality is that many Australians could still lose their jobs.    

 Our responsibility is not to repeat the mistakes of earlier recessions but  instead to intervene early so that those directly affected are provided new  skills for when the economy recovers. 

 

 Our Jobs and Training Compact includes a Compact with Local  Communities - with local employment coordinators being appointed to  twenty regions across our country where unemployment is rising most  rapidly.    

 The second part of our Jobs Compact is our Compact with Australians who  have been retrenched through no fault of their own.    

 Under this plan, the Government is guaranteeing training, supported by  our productivity places program, so that during a period of extended  unemployment, these retrenched Australians can pick up new skills to use  as the economy recovers.    

 Finally, our Compact with Young Australians, where our policy is simple:  young Australians under the age of 25 will be required to be earning or  learning - either in full time employment or in full time education or  training.    

 No ifs, no buts, no maybes.     

 Delegates, the Government I lead will not stand idly by while thousands  of young Australians have their hopes crushed by a global recession not  of their own making. 

 

 That’s why we are determined to act.    

 Between June 2008 and June 2009, the number of unemployed 15 to 24  year olds has increased by 60,000 to 255,000 - an increase of 30 per  cent.     

 This rise is primarily the result of school leavers being unable to find  work.    

 Today I announce a further measure to assist young Australians during  this difficult time in our economy.    

 The Government will now create 50,000 new green jobs, traineeships and  apprenticeships aimed chiefly at helping young Australians to obtain new  skills during the downturn - new skills which will be become highly  applicable in the low carbon economy of the future. 

 

 The climate change sceptics constantly scare-monger about the possible  loss of jobs through the transition to a lower carbon economy.    

 But they constantly fail to talk about the new clean energy jobs of the  future which will arise from the introduction of the Carbon Pollution  Reduction Scheme, the renewable energy target and energy efficiency  measures in the future.    

 Specifically, these fifty thousand positions will be made up of:  ·         4000 disadvantaged job seekers participating in the current  insulation program;  ·         6000 local green jobs through the jobs fund;  ·         10,000 places in a new National Green Jobs Corps;  ·         30,000 trainees and apprentices in priority sectors of the building 

 and construction sectors and other trades, where places will concentrate  across the range of “green skills” competencies that will be needed in the  future. These will be achieved through a new National Green Skills  Agreement and will start building a new skill base in existing industries  and cutting-edge industries, and create jobs and opportunities for  generations to come.    

 The practical job-ready skills included in this training will include:  ·         Training electricians in the installation of solar energy; 

 ·         Training plumbers in the installation of water-recycling, plumbing  systems; and  ·         Training workers in the booming home insulation industry and the  retro-fitting of buildings to reduce energy consumption    

 Taken together, our Nation-Building for Recovery plan and our Jobs  Compact with Australia are designed to help working families see their  way through the global economic crisis - rather than allow free market  forces to throw them to the wolves.    

 Young peoples’ lives who would otherwise be left with little hope.    

 Young people like 18- year old Matthew Jenkins.  Matthew finished school at the end of last year.  He tried his heart out with local companies to try and find an  apprenticeship but there wasn’t much around. 

 

 Then he saw a piece on the TV news one night about my visit to a  company called CO-WYN Builders - a family company based in  Bankstown, founded in 1954, and run by Kevin and Mark Cohen.    

 Kev said on the TV news that because of the government’s stimulus  strategy, he was looking to hire.    

 Matthew then set about hunting Kev down.    

 But he had no idea of the name of the company- nor how he could find it.    

 Nonetheless he grabbed the yellow pages, made a stack of random calls  and hunted them down.    

 Kev was so impressed with Matthew’s attitude that he started work on 1  July as an apprentice carpenter.    

 I’m told he absolutely loves it. TAFE every Monday. Different jobs on site  with Kev’s company. And if all goes well, Matthew Jenkins becomes a fully  qualified carpenter in just under 4 years.    

 Our charge as a government is to make thousands of these possibilities  available for the young Matthew Jenkins of Australia.    

 This approach is part and parcel of the responsible, conservative  economic management of the government which I lead.    

 Conservative economic management which expands the role of  government when the private economy is in retreat - and gradually  reduces it as the private economy recovers. 

 

 Conservative economic management which will return the Budget as the  economy recover and increase Australia’s international competitiveness.    

 It is the right strategy for the economy; it is the right strategy for working  families; and it is the right strategy for nation-building for the future - the  skills and the infrastructure that we will need to lift our global  competitiveness once we are through the crisis.    

 It is also a strategy which only an Australian Labor Government can  deliver because we believe unapologetically in the role of government.    

 Our opponents do not. They believe instead in the magic of the  marketplace.    

 They believe that markets are self-correcting.    

 They refuse to accept the reality of comprehensive market failure.    

 As others have written, could it be that the reason that it is called the  invisible hand is because it is often not there?    

 Delegates, notwithstanding these great global challenges, the  Government has got on with the business of laying the foundations of our  long-term reform agenda for the nation - building a stronger Australia, a  fairer Australia and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the  long-term future.    

 We have done so in a manner consistent with our pre-election  commitments to the Australian people.    

 We are also doing so by harnessing our long-term reform agenda for the  nation with the short-term measures being implemented under the  nation-building for recovery plan.    

 This is where nation-building for recovery becomes nation-building for the  future.    

 Prior to the election, the Government committed to a new productivity  agenda for the economy by investing in an education revolution.    

 This Government’s education revolution is well and truly underway.    

 We are implementing our commitment to universal early childhood  education by 2013.    

 We are implementing our commitment to have 790,000 computers  installed in schools by 2011 so that years 9 to 12 students have a 1:1  student to computer ratio by 2011.    

 We are implementing a $2.5 billion roll out of state-of-the-art trades  training centres to support all of Australia’s secondary schools.    

 We are implementing a $15 billion school building program for all of  Australia’s primary and secondary schools, including state-of-the-art  libraries, language centres and science centres. 

 

 The Government is doubling the investment in Australian schools to  achieve our national target of lifting year 12 or equivalent attainment  from 75 per cent to 90 per cent by 2015.    

 We are investing in 712,000 productivity training places to help realise  our goal of halving the proportion of 20 to 64 year olds without at least  Certificate III level qualifications.    

 And we’re undertaking the biggest long-term investment in higher  education and research in Australia’s history, including an additional  50,000 students attending university by 2013.    

 This, delegates, is an education revolution.    

 A revolution that, combined with our nation-building infrastructure  investment, will drive long-term productivity growth.    

 We also committed to the Australian people that we would build a fairer  Australia.    

 That is why the Government abolished WorkChoices and replaced it with  the Fair Work Act to build a fair and balanced industrial relations system  for all Australians.    

 That is why we have introduced the single largest reform to the aged  pension.    

 That is why we are introducing Australia’s first national paid parental  leave scheme.    

 That is why we have committed $1.2 billion to a new national  homelessness strategy - to halve the rate of homelessness by 2020.    

 And that is why we have made a national apology to indigenous  Australians - backed by a $4.6 billion investment in a national strategy to 

 close the gap in standards in health, housing, employment, education and  life expectancy.    

 The Government is also honouring its commitments to the Australian  people on climate change, water, health and hospital reform - embracing  many of the great challenges of the future.    

 Conservative governments of the status quo simply hope that these  problems will one day go away.    

 The truth is they won’t.    

 That is why reformist governments of our tradition believe in tackling  these challenges head on.    

 That is why we have honoured our commitment to ratify Kyoto, to  introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme; to introduce a renewable  energy target of 20 per cent of total electricity generation by 2020; a new 

 $4.5 billion clean energy initiative, including ground-breaking clean coal  technologies and a $1.6 billion investment in what will become the single  largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.    

 That’s also why the Government is embracing the challenge of long-term  health and hospital reform.  Phase one of this reform was the  Government’s $64 billion Australian Health Care Agreement last  November - a 50 per cent increase over the previous Agreement and  including, for the first time, direct Australian Government investment in  hospital emergency departments and elective surgery waiting lists.     

 Phase two goes to the long-term reform of the system over the next  twenty years.  The Government commissioned an independent health  reform commission to provide recommendations for long-term reform to  produce the best system possible in preventative health care, primary  health care, our hospitals, our outpatient services, in dental health,  mental health and aged care; and with least cost to the taxpayer and  individual Australians.    

 This blueprint for reform is the largest reform agenda to the health and  hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.    

 Delegates, as you can see, this Government has no intention of simply  being in government for the sake of being there.    

 As both a party and a Government of reform, we should be clear-cut  about our vision for the nation for the decade ahead.    

 An economy which is among the most globally competitive. 

 

 An economy turbo-charged by 21st century infrastructure - fully wired and  fully connected, from every part of our vast continent to every part of our  vast planet.    

 An economy with a workforce which is the best educated, best skilled,  best trained of any workforce in the world.    

 A country which prides itself as being the most Asia-literate country in the  collective West.    

 A country which has become a decisive part of the global climate change  solution - not just an irritating part of the climate change problem.    

 A country where we, in fact, halve homelessness.    

 Where we, in fact, close the gap with our indigenous brothers and sisters.    

 A country where we don’t allow the fair go to slide out the back door.    

 A country where we can hold our head up high in the councils of the world  with an independent voice making a difference in our region and in the  world. 

 

 This, delegates, is the kind of Australia we can build together.    

 Delegates, this is the 45th national conference of the Australian Labor  Party.    

 You may be surprised to know that only fourteen of those conferences  have been held while we have been in government. Thirty-one when we  have not.    

 Of the forty-two House of Representatives elections held since 1901, we  have one thirteen and fallen short in twenty-nine.    

 And of the 108 years of our federated history, Labor has only been in  government for 35 of those years - just on a third.    

 These figures should be the cause for sober reflection for us all.    

 Our resolve from this conference should be to apply every effort, every  energy and every discipline to build a long term reformist government for  the long-term future.    

 That is the resolve of the team that I now lead in government.    

 I say to you with great pride that they are a first-class team, made up of  absolutely first-class ministers, including a first-class Deputy Prime  Minister in Julia Gillard.    

 A woman of extraordinary strength, extraordinary energy and  extraordinary conviction.    

 Delegates, this Labor Government has embarked on the road to reform.    

 Just as the nation, when confronted with Australia at the crossroads at  the last election, voted to take the road to the future.    

 The nation took the right road.    

 Too many opportunities have been squandered in the past.    

 We can squander them no longer.    

 I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia’s long-term future.    

 The threats are real, the challenges are great but so too are the  opportunities extraordinary.    

 As a party, as a government and as a nation, let us seize those  opportunities together - because, as a nation, we are all in this together.    

 Mr President, I formally move Chapter One: “Governing for Australia’s  long-term future”.   

