---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 16 November 2009: Kevin Rudd's failed border protection policies; Emissions Trading Scheme."
date: "2009-11-16"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331285
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X18V6%22
---

 

 

 

 Mon, 16th November 2009   TURNBULL DOORSTOP - KEVIN RUDD’S FAILED BORDER PROTECTION  POLICIES, EMISSIONS TRADING SCHEME 

 The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP   Leader of the Opposition 

 E&OE  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well another day, another boat, another policy failure. Since Kevin Rudd recklessly  unpicked the Coalition’s border protection policies we have had 50 people smugglers’  boats and over 2,300 unauthorised arrivals. This is a colossal policy failure.  Everybody recognises it as a policy failure except for the man who is responsible for  it, the Prime Minister.  

 He has got to come into the Parliament today and explain what special deals he has  offered to the asylum seekers on the Oceanic Viking. He said there are no special  deals and yet we have seen the written offer, we have heard from Indonesian officials  that the people on that vessel have been offered a fast track access to Australia, much  faster than they would have been promised or entitled to if they had arrived at  Christmas Island itself.  

 Kevin Rudd has got to come clean on his policy failure. He has got to `fess up to his  mistakes and he has got to tell the Australian people what he is going to do to make  our borders secure.  

 QUESTION:  

 The offer from the Government to exclude agriculture from the emissions trading  scheme, will you be recommending to the party room they should support it and, if  not, what exactly more do you want?  

 MALCOLM TURNBULL:  

 Well look I am not going to run a commentary on the negotiations. They have been  proceeding in good faith. As you know, we have a list of amendments. The exclusion  of agricultural emissions and the recognition of agricultural offsets was a clear  element in that package of amendments, but we will reach the end of the negotiations  shortly and then we will have a package that we can then consider our response to.  

 Okay. Thanks a lot.   

