---
title: "Mr Rudd's dithering does not address the pull factors."
date: "2009-11-11"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331119
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/TJ6V6%22
---

     Wed, 11th November 2009  

 

 MR RUDD'S DITHERING DOES NOT ADDRESS THE PULL FACTORS 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 We have now progressed from posters and puppets* to a Memorandum of Understanding between Sri Lanka and 

 Australia as the Rudd Government struggles for a solution to stop the people smuggling surge into Australia.  

 The signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between Australia and Sri Lanka is a positive step, but it fails to 

 address the key issue of the Rudd Government’s decision to weaken Australia’s border protection laws which 

 have seen 48 boats deliver over 2100 people since August 2008.  

 Direct engagement with the Sri Lankan Government is essential and should have been done months ago, and we 

 support efforts to more effectively investigate and prosecute people smugglers across the regions.  

 However, another public relations campaign in Sri Lanka will not change the Rudd Government’s softening of 

 Australia’s border protection and immigration policies which put the people smugglers back in business 15 

 months ago.  

 Mr Rudd and Foreign Minister Stephen Smith must accept responsibility for weakening Australia’s border 

 protection laws.  

 People smugglers are further emboldened by the Rudd Government’s recent announcements about doubling the 

 capacity on Christmas Island and Mr Rudd’s ongoing failure to resolve the crisis involving the 78 Sri Lankan 

 asylum seekers refusing to disembark from the Oceanic Viking.  

 Mr Rudd states endlessly that he has “infinite patience”, but it is clear he has not got a clue.  

 Quite simply, Mr Rudd has lost control of our borders and has put our immigration controls into the hands of 

 people smugglers.  

 *“Posters and puppets” refers to the Rudd Government hiring Saatchi and Saatchi to run a PR campaign in Sri 

 Lanka. Reports indicated a part of the strategy they are using is to put on puppet shows in villages to warn 

 people about the dangers of people smuggling.   

