---
title: "Where are the guarantees, Mr Rudd?"
date: "2009-10-22"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211330439
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BO1V6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Where Are the Guarantees, Mr Rudd?   Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Thursday 22nd October 2009, 1:55pm 

 in Human Rights & Justice Detention Centres Immigration Refugees   

 The Australian public needs to hear from Prime Minister Kevin Rudd what guarantees he has secured from 

 Indonesia about treatment of asylum seekers under new co-operative arrangements with Australia, according to 

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.  

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, says that there is a disturbing 

 lack of detail about what is going to happen to asylum seekers who are taken to Indonesia. 

 "Mr Rudd has been keen to talk about our brave new world of co-operation with Indonesia, but his emphasis has 

 only been on intelligence-sharing, and assistance with training and equipment between our neighbouring 

 countries,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "The focus, clearly, is on how best to track down and stop asylum seekers on leaky boats from getting to 

 Australia, but there doesn't seem to be much interest in w hat happens to them once they've been palmed off to 

 Indonesia. 

 "What guarantees does Mr Rudd have from Indonesia - who are not signatories to the UN Refugee Convention - 

 that asylum seekers, particularly children, will be treated appropriately and not placed in arbitrary detention 

 indefinitely?'' 

 The price for Australia's financial and other aid should be a commitment from Indonesia to sign up to the 

 convention, and a guarantee that they will act to protect rather than punish these vulnerable people. 

 The Greens are concerned that much of the language used in debate on asylum seekers this week has been 

 unacceptable, none more so than Wilson Tuckey's vile comments about terrorists today. 

 "While we join the Prime Minister's call for Mr Tuckey to be disendorsed, Mr Rudd cannot escape the fact that he 

 must share some of the blame for the increasingly toxic atmosphere of this debate,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "He is not responsible for what comes out of Coalition MPs mouths, but his wrong and inflammatory description of 

 asylum



  seekers as illegals has not helped. 

 "If our leaders cannot stop aiming slurs at vulnerable asylum seekers, what hope is there of having a sensible and 

 res



 pectful discussion on this vital issue?'' 

 Page 1 of 1 Where Are the Guarantees, Mr Rudd? | Sarah Hanson-Young

