---
title: "1 week, 4 boats, 174 unauthorised arrivals."
date: "2009-12-11"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332501
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UWGV6%22
---

     Fri, 11th December 2009  

 1 WEEK, 4 BOATS, 174 UNAUTHORISED ARRIVALS 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Another week under Rudd’s failed border protection regime and another 174 unauthorised arrivals have pushed 

 Christmas Island’s detention centre to its breaking point, Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs Michael 

 Keenan said today.  

 “In the last 7 days, 4 boats carrying 174 asylum seekers have been intercepted in Australian waters,” said Mr 

 Keenan.  

 “That’s more than half the total number of unauthorised arrivals in the 5 years before the Rudd Labor 

 Government was elected.”  

 Locals on Christmas Island have said the island’s infrastructure isn’t coping, with reports of tents being used to 

 accommodate the surge in arrivals.  

 The latest unauthorised vessel arrived in the vicinity of Flying Fish Cove yesterday afternoon. Initial indications 

 suggest there are 63 passengers on board the vessel. The group will now be taken to Christmas Island for 

 processing.  

 “This is now the 62nd boat to arrive since Labor softened our border protection system in August last year, 

 bringing the number of arrivals in that period to over 2700,” Mr Keenan said.  

 “Labor has failed to protect our borders - this is evident by the surge we have witnessed in this week alone.  

 “Other areas of Customs are being placed under greater strain as resources are being concentrated up north, 

 leaving our southern waters vulnerable to illegal foreign fishing.  

 “Labor’s failure to protect Australia’s borders and maintain an orderly immigration process is fast becoming a 

 crisis.”    

