---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Launceston:1 October 2009: condolences to Blacker family; opening $10 million Maritime Research Facility; Sumatra; Samoa; climate change.\n"
date: "2009-10-01"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
  - "condolences to Blacker family"
  - "opening $10 million Maritime Research Facility"
  - "Sumatra"
  - "Samoa"
  - "climate change.\n"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211329715
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6ZTU6%22
---

 The Hon Julia Gillard MP 

 Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister 

 1 October, 2009  

 Transcript 

 Press Conference - Launceston 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  1130AM THURSDAY  1 OCTOBER 2009  LAUNCESTON  

 ISSUES:  Condolences to Blacker family; Opening $10 million Maritime Research  Facility; Sumatra; Samoa; climate change 

 JULIA GILLARD:  It’s a great pleasure to be here in Tasmania today. I’m joined by my  parliamentary colleagues Jodie Campbell, the Member for Bass and Senator Helen Polley.  

 I’ve had the opportunity this morning to travel to Longford. Can I start by giving the  condolences of the Australian Government and of Jodie and Helen and myself personally, to  the Blacker family. Obviously, there has been tragic news with the loss of Maree in the  Samoan tsunami. Her family today would be coping with that news as is the Longford  community. Our hearts go out to those who have been affected by this tragedy. They of  course would be concerned about the circumstances of John, who has been hospitalised in  Samoa. We obviously want to see him back home soon. So if I can formally give the  condolences of the Australian Government to the family and friends of the Blacker family at  the loss of Maree. 

 Can I say on a happier note, that it’s a great pleasure to be here at the Australian Maritime  College to launch this cavitation research laboratory. The Federal Government provided a  $10 million investment into this laboratory which is going to be at the cutting end of world  research.  

 This Maritime College is a precious asset for Tasmania. It’s a precious asset for the nation.  It’s ranked in the top ten like facilities in the world. It’s something that we’re very proud of.  But to enhance its reputation globally we need to keep investing in world class infrastructure  and the infrastructure I’ve opened today is truly world class. We are very much welcoming of  being able to be here for this opening and welcoming of the new research that this  infrastructure will make possible, research that is so important to an island nation that needs  maritime capacity for our defence and national security. 

 I’ve also had the opportunity already today to travel to two local schools. I’ve been at Cressy  District High School with Dick Adams. I’ve been here locally at Norwood Primary School 

 with Jodie Campbell and with Helen. It’s been great to meet so many school children today,  to see how excited school communities are with the Building the Education Revolution  works. We very much wanted, during these difficult days of the global recession, to support  local jobs by building the infrastructure in schools that’s going to matter for tomorrow and  it’s been great to be able to travel to some schools today and see it all happening. 

 JOURNALIST: What’s your reaction to news now of an earthquake in Indonesia where  there’s possible up to 1000 people in Sumatra have died? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Once again, this is dreadful news. There are early reports available of  the damage in Indonesia. We, as yet, haven’t received any advice about Australians being  affected but our Embassy in Jakarta and obviously the resources of our Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade are there to assist Australians who may be affected. We are  awaiting better reports, more detailed reports, of the damage and destruction but it does seem  that there has been substantial loss of life and substantial damage, so our condolences do go  to the Indonesian community as they deal with this natural disaster. 

 We understand that there may be family and friends of Australians who are travelling in  Indonesia who are concerned. Our advice to them in the first instance would be to try  contacting their loved ones overseas. If they try and get in contact and find that they can’t do  that then there is a dedicated hotline through our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to  assist Australian family and friends who are worried about people travelling in Indonesia  given this news. 

 JOURNALIST: How quickly can we get the victims from Samoa back into Australia, what  are officials doing right now? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We’ve already had a plane leave this country with relief workers and  medical workers to assist the Samoan community as it deals with this crisis and obviously to  assist Australians who have been caught up in this crisis as well. That plane left at 2am this  morning so it has been put together and put in the air urgently to get there to work with the  Samoan community and to assist victims.  

 On the Indonesian earthquake obviously reports are still at this stage very sketchy. We are  concerned about what we’ve heard about the scale of the damage and the loss of life and we  will get better information during the course of the day. 

 JOURNALIST: Has the Indonesian Government requested any assistance from the  Australian Government? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We are very continuously in contact with the Indonesian Government.  They’re a near and very important neighbour, a country with whom we’ve got a close and  longstanding friendship so we will be standing by to assist the Indonesian Government  should it request assistance. Obviously this is a nation, and I made this point yesterday about  the Samoan tragedy and didn’t realise that I would have to make it again today so quickly,  that we’d see such another catastrophic event in our region, but this is a country that prides  itself rightly on lending a helping hand to our regional neighbours when they need it. So we’ll  bring that spirit to bear for any help that Indonesia needs and obviously help is on its way to  Samoa. 

 JOURNALIST: Just onto the ETS, apparently Malcolm Turnbull’s leadership is on the line,  he says he is going to assert his authority with the backbench. Do you think that’s a  promising sign for your government? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I think what would be a promising sign is if Malcolm Turnbull and the  Liberal Party delivered through their party room amendments that they actually want to see to  our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We have our legislation there, we’re dealing with  the challenge of climate change. This nation under Mr Howard and Mr Turnbull and the  Liberal Party had been in climate change denial and scepticism for more than a decade.  We’re determined to act.  

 We’ve asked Mr Turnbull to do one thing and that’s to unite his political party behind  amendments that he can then talk to the Government about. We’re still waiting for him to do  that. 

 JOURNALIST: Is his leadership on the line, do you think, on this issue? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Well look, all of that’s a matter for the Liberal Party. What we’re trying  to do is act in the national interest and acting in the national interest requires us to deal with  the challenge of climate change. That’s why we want to have the Carbon Pollution Reduction  Scheme passed through the Federal Parliament and the Liberal Party, as yet, hasn’t been able  to produce amendments that have a consensus of opinion within the Liberal Party behind  them. So we continue to lose time as the Liberal Party deals with its divisions. Our call to  Malcolm Turnbull is for Malcolm Turnbull to unite his party and to get a united position to  the Government for us to consider. 

 JOURNALIST: If he can’t do that should he quit though, if he can’t get his party to take a  position? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Well that’s all a matter for Mr Turnbull. What concerns us is acting in  the national interests and that requires us to deal with the Carbon Pollution Reduction  Scheme legislation on the timetable that we’ve outlined. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you be expecting to bring people like Mr Blacker home, the  Australian Government? 

 JULIA GILLARD: All those arrangements are obviously being worked through and dealt  with. They’ll be dealt with by people on the ground in Samoa and also by our Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade. But we would be working with the Blacker family, obviously  we’d be working with medical professionals to get advice about when is the appropriate time  to move Mr Blacker.  

 We understand obviously, that Australians in these circumstances would want to get back  home but we have to take advice from medical professionals about when is the best time and  the safest time for people to engage in that transit. 

 JOURNALIST: Just onto this facility, so what will this mean for the Australian Navy, how  important is it and how can we move forward? 

 JULIA GILLARD: This is very important to our Navy. We, as a Government, through our  Defence White Paper, have said that we need to deal with the maritime challenges this nation  faces in the 21st century and that requires investments in submarines, it requires investments  in frigates, in patrol boats. We want to make sure that we are making those investments into  the best and smartest technology and to do that we need to have the research capability to test  the technology and that’s what this investment at the Maritime College is giving us. 

 JOURNALIST: There’s apparently been a boat load of asylum seekers found on the coast of  Western Australia, when will the Government be forced to house asylum seekers on the  mainland? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The Christmas Island facility still has capacity. We are obviously  housing asylum seekers at Christmas Island and it still has further capacity. The point I would  make here is we are investing more than $600 million over the next six years in dealing with  border protection and asylum seeker issues.  

 We of course ended the failed so called Pacific Solution of the former government. We want  to keep our borders secure, we want to deal with questions involving asylum seekers and we  are using the Christmas Island facility.  

 If people are found not to be genuine refugees then our aim is to quickly return them to their  home countries. We want to have quick processing and that’s what will happen on Christmas  Island. 

 JOURNALIST: I’ve got just one more question, apparently you’ve released a survey this  morning about primary school principals. How accurate is that survey? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The Primary Principals Association has released a survey so it’s not a  Government survey; it’s a survey of the Australian Primary Principals Association. A survey  of its members about their views of Building the Education Revolution. That survey says that  principals are grabbing this opportunity with both hands to modernise their school facilities.  

 There’s been a lot of publicity about Building the Education Revolution. I think it’s great that  the voice of Australian primary principals is now being heard loud and clear and that voice is  saying to us that they want this investment in Australian schools, that they understand the  difference it will make for teaching and learning for the long-term and I think that they are  rightly, pretty upset to see that some in public life and Federal parliament, including leading  members of the Liberal Party, have described expenditure on primary schools as a waste. 

 Thank you. 

 ENDS 

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au  

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

 

