---
title: "TPVs must remain buried relic of cruel Howard regime."
date: "2009-04-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324433
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MJBT6%22
---

 Monday 20 April 2009   

 TPVs must remain buried relic of cruel Howard  regime   

 The Greens have urged the Federal Government to reject outright the Opposition’s  call to reinstate the much-criticised Temporary Protection Visas.   

 Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull told ABC radio this morning that the  reintroduction of Temporary Protection Visas “should be high on the agenda”,  following the arrival of boats carrying asylum seekers in Australian waters last week. 

 

 “Temporary Protection Visas should remain buried as a cruel relic of the former  Howard regime,” said Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.   

 “Australia was then the only country in the world to have this kind of visa, which was  actually in contravention of our international legal obligations to refugees.   

 “Temporary Protection Visas left genuine refugees living in limbo and fear, while  attempting to build a new life after fleeing torture and persecution.   

 “The restrictions on family reunion breached the human rights of children.   

 “The Greens have always opposed TPVs, as have respected humanitarian  organisations such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the Refugee  Council of Australia.   

 “Even the Liberals under John Howard recognised that the TPV policy had to go and  spoke about moving away from it, before the Rudd Government did away with it  altogether.    

 “Why would we want to return to such an inhumane approach, which simply  condemned the world’s most vulnerable people to an uncertain future, compounding  their trauma and suffering?   

 “The Government must reject Mr Turnbull’s call for TPVs to be reintroduced, just as  former immigration minister Philip Ruddock originally rejected the idea as ‘highly  unconscionable’ when it was suggested by Pauline Hanson back in 1998.   

 “The Greens also reiterate the call for all asylum seekers on any future boats to be  brought to the Australian mainland for claims to be processed and checks to be  carried out.”   

 

 Media contact: Gemma Clark on 0427 604 760     

