---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Bali: 15 April,2009: Bali Process Ministerial Meeting; humanitarian assistance for Rohingya people in Burma; people smuggling co-operation."
date: "2009-04-15"
creators:
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Bali Process Ministerial Meeting"
  - "humanitarian assistance for Rohingya people in Burma"
  - "people smuggling co-operation."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211324301
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SIAT6%22
---

 

  1

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP 

 

 TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE 

 DATE:   15 April, 2009 - Bali 

 TITLE:  Joint Press Conference with Indonesian Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr  Hassan Wirajuda - Bali Process Ministerial Meeting, humanitarian assistance for  Rohingya people in Burma, people smuggling co-operation 

 

 WIRAJUDA:  Colleagues,  members  of  the  mass  media,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  we   have  just  concluded  the  Third  Bali  Regional  Ministerial  Conference  on  People  Smuggling,   Trafficking  in  Persons  and  Related  Transnational  Crimes.   My  colleague  Foreign  Minister   Stephen  Smith  and  I  had  the  honour  to  co-chair  the  Conference  that  was  attended  by  33   participating countries of the Bali Process, observer countries, and regional and international  organisations  among  them,  the  ASEAN  Secretary  General,  the  High  Commissioner  of   Refugees and Director-General of the International Organization for Migration.     

 The  Conference  was  graced  by  the  attendance  of  17  Ministers  and  11  ministerial-level   officials  in  addition  to  the  Secretary  General  or  heads  of  various  regional  and  international   organisations.   A  total  of  197  participants  attended  the  Conference.  This  attests  to  the   importance  that  the  region  attaches  to  this  vital  issue.   We  have  been  very  pleased  by  the   contribution made by all the participants during our two-day deliberations.  Yesterday was at  the senior officials level and today, the Ministerial-level meeting.  The meeting clearly shows  the urgency with which the region is addressing this issue of illegal people movement.   

 This Conference proves that what Indonesia and Australia jointly sponsored by organising the  1st and 2nd Bali Regional Conference that the process is (inaudible) and that is why, in the  context of the recent surge of irregular movements of peoples to our region and following our  consultations, it was agreed to have the Bali Process  revived.  The  fact  that  the  Conference   was well attended is a reflection of the sense of urgency of the problems we are facing.   

 At  the  end  of  this  Conference  we  adopted  the  Co-Chairs  Joint  Statement  which  reflects  the   extent of our discussions, the agreements that we reached, and the steps to be taken from now  and in the future.    

 I now invite my colleague Foreign Minister Stephen Smith to present his remarks.   

 SMITH: Well thank you very much Hassan.  Firstly, can I say that how pleased I have been  to  have  been  able  to  co-chair  together  with  Hassan  Wirajuda,  the  Foreign  Minister  of  the   Republic of Indonesia, the Third Ministerial Conference of the Bali Regional Process. This is 

 

  2

 the first ministerial meeting that we have had since 2003. It is very timely and I think it is true  to say that Hassan and I are both very pleased with the outcome.   

 The strength of the Bali Process is that it sees countries in our region dealing with the difficult  issues of people smuggling, people trafficking and  illegal  human  movement  as  a  region.  So   many  of  the  issues  we  face  today,  many  of  the  international  community’s  challenges,  are   challenges  where  it  is  often  futile to  act  alone, whether  it’s  people  movement,  transnational   crime,  climate  change,  or  the  global  financial  crisis.   The  lesson  of  very  many  of  these   problems  is  the  need  to  act  together,  regionally  and  multilaterally.  So  we  have  been  very   pleased with the meeting, very pleased with the outcome.    

 The  historic strength  of the  Bali  Process,  in  addition to causing nations in our region to act  together, has always been that it is a source of practical, operational cooperation.  And these  messages have been enlivened and enhanced. The best way of defeating the people smugglers  is by cooperation not just nation to nation, government to government, but operationally. The  sharing  of  information,  whether  that  is  border  security  information,  whether  its  customs,   whether  it  is  defence  force,  whether  it  is  intelligence,  whether  it  is  disruption  activity.    Sharing the information and having confidence in each other’s processes is very important.     

 Hassan indicated that the Co-Chairs’  Statement would also point to the  future.  We  are  very   pleased that the conference has agreed to the establishment of the so called Ad-Hoc Group.   This will enable the Bali Process at times of crisis or emergency or urgency, at the request of  an  affected  country,  either  a  source  country,  a  transit  country  or  a  destination  country,  to   trigger the Ad-Hoc Group process to enable urgent attention by the Bali Process.  And this is  a good thing.   

 In  addition to  the formal  proceedings  of the Conference there have of course been informal  meetings  or  gatherings  of  ministers  and  heads  of  delegations  and  also  very  many  bilateral   meetings.  These all add to the cooperation which is required to meet the challenges that we  face.    

 A lot has changed since 2003 when the Ministers last met at the Bali Conference. The push  factors have abated in some areas but increased in others. Abated, for example, in Iraq, but  increased in Afghanistan, in the Afghanistan/Pakistan border area, and also in Sri Lanka.  We  also  know  that  the  people  smugglers  themselves  are  much  more  adept  and  have  better   resources,  access  to  better  financing,  better  equipment  and  have  become  much  better  at   avoiding detection and disruption.  So the challenge for greater cooperation is also there.    

 And of course Hassan, it has been my great pleasure as Foreign Minister of Australia, to again  be working closely with you.    

 One of the good things from Australia’s point of view about the Bali Process is that Australia  and Indonesia are the co-chairs. We are part of the steering group.  It is another reflection of  the strength of the bilateral relationship between Australia and Indonesia.  Thanks Hassan.   

 QUESTION:  My  colleague  on  my  right  here  is  a  Myanmar  national  working  for  BBC   London.   So  from  his  story  I  just  start  to  understand  how  complicated  is  this  Rohingya  

 

  3

 boatpeople. So how does this Conference address this problem and what is the solution for the  future?   

 WIRAJUDA:  Irregular  movements  of  the  Rohingya  people  through  our  regions  are  part  of   the  overall  problems  that  the  region  is  facing.  Meaning  that,  in  addition  to  Rohingyas,  we   have also irregular movements of Tamils, people from Afghanistan, but also smaller a number 

 from  Iran  and  Iraq.   In  addition,  at  least  in  Indonesia,  we  have  a  case  of  some  60  Chinese   nationals who are victims of smuggling of peoples and trafficking in persons. In other words,  the  problem  of  Rohingya  is  only  one  of  the  many  problems  that  countries  in  the  region  are   facing.  And like any other cases of irregular movement, certainly the patterns for solutions  more  or  less  remain  the  same,  namely  that  the  solution  must  be  comprehensive,  involving   countries  of  origin,  in  this  case  Myanmar  and  Bangladesh,  but  countries  of  transits  such  as   Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia.  Malaysia being in this case also a country of destination.    

 Comprehensive in the sense that not only that we have - we countries in the region - have to  deal with the phenomena of irregular peoples’ presence in our territories, but also in the case  of  standard  processes  for  those  who  opted  for  voluntary  repatriation,  which  is  certainly   something  that  is  true  regional  cooperation,  with  the  support  of  international  organisations   such as UNHCR and IOM who will repatriate them to their countries of origin.  But to those  who  have  strong  reason  to  be  categorised  as  refugees  of  course,  UNHCR,  as  the  competent   agency will process them for resettlement to the third countries.     

 But  of  course  knowing  that  many  of  them  are  victims  through  the  crimes  of  people   smuggling,  humanitarian  assistance  should  be  given,  should  be  extended  to  them.   That  is   what  Indonesia  has  been  doing.  But  nonetheless  as  part  of  the  comprehensive  approach  to  

 solve  these  problems  we  discussed  how  to  address  the  root  causes.  In  particular,  on  how  to   improve the socio-economic conditions in their country of origins.  I should mention that my  colleague Foreign Minister Stephen Smith has this morning announced that Australia would  contribute  some  $3  million.   As  co-chair,  I  do  appreciate  Australia’s  contribution.   But  I   believe  also  UNHCR,  UNESCAP  and  many  other  countries  are  willing  to  address  the  root   causes.     

 That is also more or less the case of other groups, depending on the nature of the problems,  the  push  factors  that  force  them  to  leave  their  countries.   For  example,  certainly  on   Afghanistan,  at  this  regional  meeting  you  cannot  do  much  on  how  to  solve  the  military   conflict in Afghanistan which is beyond the mandate of the Bali Process.   

 SMITH: I might just add to that.  In the course of the day we had informal discussions about  the  Rohingya  issue  with representatives  from Australia, Indonesia, the  United  Nations  High   Commissioner  for  Refugees,  the  International  Organization  for  Migration,  and  the  relevant   countries  -  source  countries,   transit  countries  and  destination  countries,  Myanmar,   Bangladesh, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia.  And I think the first point to make is that those  discussions were very good discussions.  There is a view that this is a problem which impacts  on  more  than  one  country,  or  more  than  one  nation.   Secondly,  there  is  a  very  clear   willingness on the part of participants to either agree to try and deal with them as a region, or  a  commitment  to  deal  with  the  matter  bilaterally,  including  not  just  with  the  other  nation  

 

  4

 states  affected  but  also  with,  for  example,  the  UNHCR  or  International  Organization  for   Migration.     

 Other nation states also take the view that this is a regional problem and as members of the  region,  if  we  can  assist  we  should.   So  in  Australia’s  case,  whilst  we  are  not  impacted   adversely  by  the  movement  of  the  Rohingyas,  we  do  understand  this  is  a  difficulty  for  our   colleagues,  which  is  why  today  I  have  announced  Australia  will  contribute  a  further  $3   million for the Rohingya people in Myanmar delivered through international NGOs and UN  agencies  to  assist  their  circumstances.   This  follows  on  over  the  last  12  months  or  so   contributions that Australia has made of about $8 million, including $4 million to the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist in the processing of Rohingyas in transit or  destination countries.  So it’s a contribution that we make because we hope it will assist and  part of that contribution we hope will get to, what Foreign Minister Wirajuda has described  as, the root cause.     

 There is always a root cause which is a push factor which causes people to be displaced or to  move.  Often that can be economic circumstances, often it can be security circumstances.  So I  was encouraged I would have to say by the discussions that were held.  And whilst of course  it is a matter for Myanmar to speak for itself, there is a very clear indication on the part of 

 Myanmar  that  it  was  willing  to  sit  down  with  transit  or  destination  countries,  Indonesia,   Thailand, Malaysia and Bangladesh, and also willing to sit down with the UNHCR to seek to  try and help resolve some of these issues.   

 So  whilst  it’s  a  difficult  problem  and  there  have  been  criticisms  in  the  past,  I  was  frankly   encouraged  by  the  approach  of  the  regional  colleagues  and  their  commitment  to  sit  down   either bilaterally or regionally or with the relevant international organisations, the IOM or the  UNHCR, to seek to address the issues.    

 QUESTION:  There  are  reports  coming  in  just  now  of  a  boat  that  was  found  off  Ashmore   Reef this afternoon with up to 50 people on it.  Is that evidence of a continuing inability of  both of these Governments to deal with this serious problem? And Minister Wirajuda, when  do  you  expect  to  see  the  legislation  that  was  promised  by  President  Yudhoyono  last  year   making people smuggling a criminal offence?   

 SMITH:   I’ll  go  first.   Can  I  firstly  say,  my  colleague  Bob  Debus,  the  Minister  for  Home   Affairs is about to make an announcement on the detail of that arrival.  So I won’t go to the  detail  of  it.  In  accordance  with  our  practice,  I  will  leave  that  to  him  as  the  responsible   Minister.  But  in  the  very  near  future  he  is  proposing  to  make  an  announcement  about  the   detail of that.   

 Suffice  for  me  to  say  that  over  the  last  12  month  period,  from  Australia’s  perspective,  we   have  seen  about  a  dozen  boat  arrivals  carrying  some  400  unlawful  arrivals.   Both  in  the   current international context and in historical context, this might be regarded as a modest or a  small amount because, for example, in 2002-2003, the arrivals were not in the 400s, but in the  4 or 6,000s.     

 

  5

 Currently, internationally, for example, our colleagues in Italy deal with 30,000 arrivals on an  annual basis. Having said that, let me make this point.  The arrivals which have occurred in  the last 12 months have made it very clear to Australia that this problem is ongoing. It is a  problem which the Government is very seriously addressing.  It is one of the reasons why we  were very keen, together with Indonesia, to see the calling of the Bali Ministerial Conference.   It’s  why  not  only  are  our  border  protection  assets,  both  naval  and  air,  consistent  with  what   they were under the previous Government, they have also been enhanced.  It also does reflect  our  very  keen  and  acute  appreciation  of  the  additional  push  factors  that  we  now  see,   particularly from Afghanistan, from Sri Lanka and potentially from the Afghanistan/Pakistan  border area.     

 And part of our border protection is aimed at seeking to ensure that boats don’t actually arrive  at  the  mainland.  The  bulk  of  boats  of  the  12  that  I  have  referred  to  have  either  been   intercepted on the high seas at or near Ashmore Reef generally or Christmas Island.  When  they  are  intercepted  on  the  high  seas  they  are  taken  to  Christmas  Island  for  processing  in  a   way  which  under  Australian  migration  laws  is  different  than  if  they  had  arrived  at  the   mainland.     

 So far as your second question, which is more directed to Minister Wirajuda than me, about  legislation  to  enter  into  domestic  law  criminal  offences  against  people  trafficking  or  people   smuggling.   One  of  the  good  things  which  has  come  out  of  the  Bali  Process  has  been  that,   since the formation of the process, somewhere up to 20 odd countries have either introduced  legislation or are contemplating legislation to do precisely that.  In Indonesia’s case, we work  very, very closely with Indonesia to seek to deal with this matter bilaterally and regionally.   And  Indonesia  has  made  it  clear  that  it  is  in  the  process  of  contemplating  and  pursuing   legislation in this area.  And we welcome that.     

 But we welcome very much the fact that we have very close cooperation with Indonesia not  just  in  terms  of  information  sharing  or  best  practice,  but  also  importantly  in  the  disruption   activities that we engage in. And that is a very important part of our efforts to combat people  smuggling and unlawful human trafficking of movement towards Australia.     

 WIRAJUDA: Earlier this year, on behalf of the Indonesian Government, I appeared before  our  Parliament  in  the  process  of  ratification  of  two  international  instruments.   Namely  the   Conventions  in  Transnational  Crimes  and  ratification  of  the  Conventions  on  People   Smuggling. (Inaudible)...through the amendments of our criminal law,  people smuggling is  already criminalised.  In fact, in many cases in our courts, people smuggling and trafficking in  persons are already part of our criminal systems that have been used by our courts to punish  the perpetrators of these heinous crimes. On the ratification itself, which is meant to reinforce  our  norms  with  regard  to  people  smuggling,  transnational  crimes  as  our  Parliament  has   (inaudible) earlier this year, we hope that the final process will be completed very soon.   

 QUESTION:  Question  for  both  Ministers.  Are  you  confident  that  by  next  winter  when  the   annual sailing season for the Rohingya, by the time next winter comes, has the Bali Process  done enough to stop the next wave of Rohingya?   

 

  6

 SMITH: I think the highest I would put it is that the Ministerial meeting that we have had has  focussed the minds of the source, transit and receiving countries very acutely on that problem.   It has also been raised as a regional problem in which other regional countries and partners  either  need  to  be  or  are  interested  in.   It  is  an  acute  problem.   And  I  don’t  think  anyone  is  

 under any illusion that this is a problem which can be solved overnight or in one season.    

 WIRAJUDA:  This  Conference,  we  have  agreed  to  task  the  Ad-Hoc  Group  to  meet  -   involving countries of origin, transit and destination - so it would be more focussed to address  cases  like  the  irregular  movement  of  the  Rohingya  people.  Of  course  we  cannot  be  certain   when  we  will  be  able  to  resolve  the  case.   But  if  past  experience  can  be  a  good  lesson,   recalling  that  from  the  2003  Bali  Regional  Ministerial  Conference,  we  (inaudible)  stop  the  

 inflows  of  irregular  migrants,  we  were  able  to  send  those  irregular  migrants  back  to  their   country  of  origins.   For  example,  I  was  in  Bali  here  meeting  with  the  Foreign  Minister  of   Australia, but also with the Minister of Justice of Afghanistan.  We agreed to resolve the case 

 of  300  Afghans  who  are  here  in  the  country  of  transit,  in  Indonesia,  working  closely  with   IOM (inaudible) and we were successful in that. So, in other words, we have every reason to  be confident that we will be able to (inaudible).   

 QUESTION:  Is Indonesia prepared to, as a destination country, to trigger the so-called ad-hoc working group on the Rohingya issue?   

 WIRAJUDA:  Actually  Indonesia  is  a  country  of  transit  in  this  regard.   From  our  initial   verification process, we learned that those almost 400 Rohingyas who landed on our shores  that are in the province of Aceh their intention is to go to Malaysia. Certainly we will invite  Malaysia,  in  addition  to  Thailand,  Myanmar  and  Bangladesh  to  join  the  Ad-Hoc  Group  to   discuss  the  specific  issue.   As  for  different  cases,  that  will  have  a  different  composition  of   membership of the Ad-Hoc Group.  But it is meant to focus on specific cases.    

 QUESTION:  You identified the importance of addressing root causes in countries of origin.   What is the root cause of why the Rohingya are fleeing Myanmar?   

 WIRAJUDA:  It is a combination of causes.  We learned from our discussions at the informal  meeting this morning that the socio-economic conditions were the prime cause or reason for  the Rohingya people, or to use Myanmar’s terms, the Bengalese.  And of course the Myanmar  representative  denied  that  they  left  the  country  because  of  the  humanitarian,  rather  human   rights violations. So a mix of causes.     

 The  easiest  one  to  (inaudible)  if  Myanmar’s  Government  is  willing  to  cooperate  with  the   international  community  is  to address  the  socio-economic  conditions  as  the  prime  cause  for   the Rohingya people to leave.  I believe there is a lot of goodwill on the part of the countries  in the region, in fact, the international community and international organisations such as the  UNHCR  and  IOM  to  work  together.   So,  there  is  every  indication  that  the  Myanmar   Government seem to be open and willing to work with the international community.    

 SMITH:  I  would  agree  with  Foreign  Minister  Wirajuda’s  comment  that  there  is  a   combination  of  causes  -  socio-economic  and  humanitarian  circumstances.   Our  analysis  is   reflected by contributions that we have made, including the ones that I have announced today.  

 

  7

 I  also  met  today  bilaterally  with  the  Vice  Minister for Home Affairs and Police Chief from  Myanmar. That, in the recent period, is frankly unusual for Australia. Our approach has been,  given Australia’s commitment to democracy, the rule of law and human rights in Myanmar, to  meet with Myanmar counterparts in the margins of ASEAN or in the margins of the United  Nations.    

 I was very happy to meet with the Vice Minister and Police Chief today in the context of the  Bali  Process because  I  regard  this  as  a  very  important  regional  process.   And  secondly,  it’s   quite  clear  that  the  Rohingyas  problem  is  a  problem  for  the  region.   Australia  has  its  own   difficulty in terms of human smuggling and we look to our colleagues in the region to assist  and  we  feel  an  obligation  to  assist  even  though  the  problem  itself  does  not  directly  impact   adversely on Australia.   

 There  is  also  within  the  Australian  community  a  keen  interest  in  the  state  of  affairs  in   Myanmar, including in northern Rakhine State.     

 QUESTION: (in Indonesian)   

 WIRAJUDA: (in Indonesian)   

 SMITH: Let me just make a comment which I think goes some way to responding.  One of  the points I made earlier was that one of the changes that we have confronted in recent times  has  been  the  greater  sophistication  of  the  people  smugglers,  greater  resources,  different  and   better techniques.  And this has been difficult for our operational agencies to confront.  It’s  quite  clear  that  underneath  that  is  a  greater  access  to  funds  and  financing,  a  greater,  if  you   like, internationalisation or globalisation of the people smuggling gangs.  And this is clearly  one  of  the  reasons  why  it  has  become  more  difficult  to  confront  because  the  resources,  the   techniques and the sophistication of evasion of disruption techniques is much better from their  perspective and much more difficult from our perspective than it was say in 2002-2003 when  we last met at the Ministerial Conference.  Thank you.   

 QUESTION:  My  question  is  to  Minister  Stephen  Smith.   You  announced  today  the   humanitarian aid, $3.2 million, to the Rohingya people.  But the Myanmar government never  recognised the Rohingya.  How do you make sure that your aid money actually reaches the  people that you intended?  The other thing is that one of the (inaudible).  Has it come up in  your meetings with the Myanmar representative about that recognition issue and what kind of  answer did you get?   

 SMITH:  Well in terms of the meeting I had with the Vice Minister and Police Chief, I think  it is true to say that Australia put to Myanmar all of the human rights, democratic and rule of  law issues that we have in the past.  I think it is true to say that the response I got from the  police  chief  was  along  the  lines  you  have  described,  which  is  the  traditional  approach  of   Myanmar: to not accept the notion of citizenship.    

 In  terms  of  the  delivery  of  our  humanitarian  assistance  to  the  Rohingya  people,  we  deliver   that  through  international  or  national  NGOs,  or  in  Australia’s  case,  for  example,  through   CARE Australia which has delivery mechanisms on the ground, or through the World Food 

 

  8

 Program,  again,  which  has  delivery  mechanisms  on  the  ground  or  through  UN  agencies,   including  in  a  different  context  the  UNHCR  for  assessment  purposes.  Working  through  the   international  NGOs  and  international  agencies,  maximises  the  prospects  and  our  confidence   that the aid is delivered to the people who are most in need of it.   

 Ends   

 

 

