---
title: "Another boat will increase pressure on Christmas Island."
date: "2009-11-23"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211331822
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5IAV6%22
---

 Mon, 23rd November 2009    

 ANOTHER BOAT WILL INCREASE PRESSURE ON CHRISTMAS ISLAND 

 The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 With another boat arriving this afternoon the overcrowding and tension on Christmas Island is set to increase.  

 Since the Rudd Labor Government began weakening Australia’s border security in August last year, 54 boats 

 carrying 2400 people have been taken to Christmas Island to be processed.  

 The latest boat arrived this afternoon 100 nautical miles north west of Derby, Western Australia. The boat was 

 carrying 56 people and two crew.  

 With a riot over the weekend at the Christmas Island Detention Centre where detainees are being forced to live in 

 extremely cramped and tense conditions, now is the time for Prime Minister Rudd to acknowledge his role in 

 opening the floodgates for this flotilla of smuggler boats making their way to the new life their clients anticipate in 

 Australia.  

 There is now a huge diversion of resources and effort to intercepting the people smugglers and processing their 

 clients.  

 Meanwhile Prime Minister Rudd is begging Australia’s regional neighbours to intercept boats on Australia’s behalf 

 and to offer resettlement for some of those now in detention in Indonesia, where they intercepted on Australia’s 

 behalf.  

 Australia’s orderly immigration reputation and program is now in tatters. The Australian Government has lost 

 control of who comes into this country and instead is captured by the actions of criminal syndicates who continue 

 to make millions at the expense of those who wait patiently in war zones and refugee camps elsewhere in the 

 world.    

