---
title: "Labor in denial as another boat arrives."
date: "2009-12-16"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332624
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/OXHV6%22
---

 Wed, 16th December 2009  

 LABOR IN DENIAL AS ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVES 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison, said today the Rudd Labor Government is in a 

 complete state of denial about their failed border protection regime, as yet another boat has illegally arrived off 

 Ashmore Islands, carrying 51 passengers who will now join the crowds on Christmas Island.  

 “This is the 63rd boat that has arrived since Labor started dismantling the strong border protection regime they 

 inherited from the Coalition Government and is the sixth arrival in just twelve days,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “Despite boats arriving at will, Labor is failing to get the message about the signal they are sending to people 

 smugglers,” he said.  

 “Labor continues to look the other way and blame everyone but themselves.  

 “Until Labor acknowledges they are the source of the problem through their abandonment of the Coalition 

 Government’s strong border protection regime, then people smugglers will continue to take advantage of this 

 situation, putting people’s lives at risk.  

 Mr Morrison said today’s news of another suspected illegal vessel took the number of boat arrivals to 63 since Mr 

 Rudd and Immigration Minister Chris Evans softened border protection policy in August 2008, placing the lives of 

 2,795 people directly at risk.  

 “People smugglers have seen the opening in Australia and are going for it,” he said.  

 “Every arrival signals another failure of the Rudd Government’s policies, actions and most of all denial. As long 

 as they refuse to admit their failings and fix the problem they have created, our borders will remain compromised 

 by Labor’s weakness.  

 “Instead, Labor is keeping the welcome mat out and dusted off for people smugglers,” Mr Morrison said.    

