---
title: "Christmas Island announcement a cynical measure."
date: "2009-12-02"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332161
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9ADV6%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP   

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

   Wednesday 2 December 2009 

 Christmas Island announcement a cynical measure 

 In a cynical attempt to avoid the public finding out, Immigration Minister Chris Evans  yesterday had his department issue a statement about the increases in accommodation at  the Christmas Island detention facilities.  

 On the day that Australia’s media was totally focussed on other matters, the Department of  Immigration and Citizenship announced the number of beds on Christmas Island would be  increased to 1600 by mid December, with additional demountables increasing the centre’s  capacity to over 2000 by March.  

 Asylum seekers will be sleeping in tents, portables and dongas once earmarked for  homeless Indigenous Australians. The facility is almost at bursting point right now with  nearly 1200 asylum seekers waiting to be processed and riots and unrest attributed to the  overcrowding.  

 The message for the people smugglers will continue to be that Australia’s back door is wide  open and the Government will keep stacking in the beds. More beds will not stop the  dangerous and criminal activities of the people smugglers. Mr Rudd must change his policies  to remove the pull factors. 

 Since the Rudd Government began unravelling immigration and border protection policies in  August 2008, 57 boats carrying more than 2500 people have been intercepted and taken to  Christmas Island. 

 Unfortunately, as long as Mr Rudd continues to unravel Australia’s strong border protection  the surge in people smuggling will continue. Too much money is to be made out of the  business of selling passage on leaky wooden boats with a guarantee of permanent residence  in Australia.   

 The Government must reintroduce measures and messages that make it clear people  smugglers will not be tolerated as the de facto selectors of Australia’s newest residents.    

 

 Media enquiries - Andrew Cox 0427 460 063 

 MEDIA RELEASE  

