---
title: "Greens call for immigration Minister's courage to run words into action."
date: "2009-01-13"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211321811
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/78JS6%22
---

 Tuesday 13 January 2009   

 Greens call for Immigration Minister’s courage to turn  words   into action   

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has again called on Immigration Minister  Chris Evans to urgently implement its ‘new directions’ for Australia’s immigration  detention system into legislation, following reports that people are still being detained 

 for prolonged and indefinite periods of time.    

 The Australian Human Rights Commission's annual report on immigration detention  has found that asylum seekers, including children, continue to be held indefinitely,  despite assurances by the Rudd Government that detention is only being used as a  last resort, and for the shortest possible time.     

  “It is not good enough that six months after the announcement to change the  immigration detention policy, we are still awaiting legislative action,” said Senator  Hanson-Young.   

 “We want Minister Evans to have the courage to bring about an end to the archaic  immigration policy of the Howard and Ruddock era, and introduce a more humane  approach to those seeking our assistance.   

 “We need an end to mandatory detention, and we must ensure that no child is held  in any detention facility.   

  “Detention facilities on Christmas Island must be closed.  Offshore processing of  claims entrenches an out-of-sight of-of-mind approach to asylum seekers, and the  psychological and physical effects of remote high-security detention are well known. 

 

 Senator Hanson-Young has again called on the Government to bring all current  detainees on Christmas Island to the mainland for processing, and implement a less  draconian approach to immigration policy.    

 In particular, the Greens want the Immigration Minister to ensure that any detention  decision is subjected to prompt independent review, making detention the exception  rather than the rule.   

 “The lack of available merits and judicial review for people detained in immigration  detention has resulted in people being held wrongfully, unlawfully and for a period of  years on the basis of contested departmental decisions,” she said.   

 “The Minister’s good intentions alone are not adequate to protect human rights and  justice.  We need to see the courage to change to the law.   

 

 Media contact: Emily Johnson on 0427 604 760   

