---
title: "Australia to assist African Union."
date: "2009-12-10"
creators:
  - "Kelly, Mike"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - DEFENCE SUPPORT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332462
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/MFNV6%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 THE HON. DR MIKE KELLY MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Support 

 www.defence.gov.au 

 

 

 Thursday, 10 December 2009  096/2009

 

 AUSTRALIA TO ASSIST AFRICAN UNION   

 Australia’s commitment to effective international peacekeeping is being  demonstrated again this week in a workshop to assist the African Union in  developing draft guidelines for the protection of civilians in armed conflict.    

 The Asia Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence (the Centre) is hosting an  expert Working Group in Queanbeyan, NSW, comprising representatives from  the African Union, the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping  Operations (DPKO), the United Nations Office for the Coordination of  Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR), the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),  lawyers and academics, together with members of the Australian Defence  Force, the Australian Federal Police and the Commonwealth Attorney  General's Department.   

 The draft guidelines being developed in Queanbeyan this week will form the  basis for a high level Symposium on the Protection of Civilians in Conflict  Zones to be co-hosted by the African Union Peace and Security Commission 

 and the Centre in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in March 2010.  The draft guidelines  are intended to assist the African Union, the United Nations and international  actors with practical measures to improve the delivery of protection to civilians  under peacekeeping mandates.  

 

 The Hon. Dr Mike Kelly AM MP, Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Support,  shared his personal experiences in peace operations with the Working Group  on Thursday, 10 December 2009.     

 "The Security Council has been mandating operations to protect civilians in  conflict zones for more than a decade and protection of civilians remains a  critical consideration in the Middle East, Africa and in places such as Timor-Leste where Australia continues to support governments recovering from  conflict,” Dr Mike Kelly said. 

 

 “Peace operations and peacekeeping are critical to international peace and  security.  We recognise the need to protect women and children, the aged,  internally displaced persons, refugees and other vulnerable groups in 

 communities affected by violence.   

 “By hosting and providing expertise to the Working Group, the Asia Pacific  Civil-Military Centre of Excellence is able to directly assist the African Union to  draft guidelines for African integrated missions consistent with international  humanitarian law.”   

 The Centre, an initiative of the Australian Government, supports the  development of national civil-military capabilities to prevent, prepare for, and  respond more effectively to conflicts and disasters overseas through effective  civilian, military and police interaction.  The Centre’s support to the African  Union is part of the Government’s commitment to enhancing peace, security 

 and development in Africa.       

 Media Note:  Executive Director of the Asia Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence,  Michael G. Smith, is available for interview.   

 

 Media contacts:   Mark Sjolander (Dr Mike Kelly): 02 6277 4840 or 0407 102 220  Michael G. Smith   0439 490 297 

 Barbara Butler   02 6160 2219 

 Defence Media Liaison:  02 6127 1999 or 0408 498 664   

