---
title: "Time to increase humanitarian intake, not cut it back."
date: "2010-04-06"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336702
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LZCW6%22
---

  Time To Increase Humanitarian Intake, Not Cut It Back  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

  

  Time To Increase Humanitarian Intake, Not Cut It Back 

  

  

  The Australian Greens have called on the Federal Government to commit to an increase of Australia's  humanitarian intake in immigration in the face of the Opposition's anti-asylum-seeker rhetoric,  according to Green Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

  Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, said it was clear  that the Opposition either was being ignorant or wilfully misleading about the motivations of  asylum-seekers in Australia. 

  "The Opposition's talk about focusing immigration policy on skills and productivity is a polite way of  saying that it wants Australia to ignore vulnerable asylum-seekers,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

  "This backward-looking view is reinforced by Tony Abbott's line that people seeking asylum here are  really only motivated by envy for the Australian lifestyle. 

  "Mr Abbott must either be very misinformed to make such generalisations, or else he is deliberately  trivialising the trauma suffered by families who risk everything in the hope of a new life. 

  "It's time for our leaders to be straight with the Australian public and tell them there is nothing to  fear from and nothing to hate about people fleeing oppression.'' 

  The Greens support an increase to Australia's humanitarian intake along with increased efforts to  fulfil our obligations as a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention. The Greens have also called for a  national inquiry into Australia's population. 

  The Greens believe there is room to reduce the overall migration intake through cuts†to skilled and  business migration. 

  "We welcome the major parties' interest in a discussion on population, but blaming refugees for  perceived population problems is disingenuous and does no one any good,'' Senator Hanson-Young  said. 

  "The question for the Prime Minister is does he let the Opposition's dog-whistle politics on  asylum-seekers go unchallenged, or does he show some leadership and re-commit Australia to  increasing its efforts to deal fairly and humanely with the ongoing problem of people movement? 

  "For the sake of a reasonable discussion on immigration, for the sake of Australia's reputation  internationally, but most of all for the sake of vulnerable asylum-seekers, we hope Mr Rudd does the  right thing and gives the public a rare dose of reality on this issue.''   

  

  Page 1 of 2 

  [6 April 2010]

  Time To Increase Humanitarian Intake, Not Cut It Back  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

  Human Rights & Justice  Detention Centres  Immigration  Refugees 

   Source URL:  

  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/time-increase-humanitarian-in  take-not-cut-it-back   

  Page 2 of 2

