---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Reid, ACT: 7 March 2010: asylum seekers; health reform; Robertson pre-selection."
date: "2010-03-07"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "health reform"
  - "Robertson pre-selection."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335185
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WG3W6%22
---

 

 Prime Minister   Transcript of doorstop interview   Reid, ACT    

 7 March 2010    

 Subject(s): Asylum seekers; Health reform; Robertson pre-selection  

 JOURNALIST: Two boats overnight, President Yudhoyono's coming this week, what will  you be saying to him about people smuggling and do they need to shoulder more of their  fair share of the load? 

 PM: As for the last many, many years under the Howard Government and ourselves,  regional responses to the challenge of people smuggling are the only ones that work  over time. The cooperation we have from Indonesia, from Malaysia and from other  regional countries is really important. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, with regard to the health reform, you've made clear that you  want to get the blue print out about structure and then later other things will come, um,  and you said that you don't release those other things first 'cause you don't want to  waste money, you want the structure to be right, (inaudible) expect the Premiers to  accept your proposals, why don't you just tell them what these other things are? You  don't have to give them any money, so they can understand the whole deal. 

 PM: Well I think if you look carefully at the speech I gave at the National Press Club it  actually ran though the other areas where we have further statements to make. In terms  of hospitals, of beds, of doctors, nurses, aged care, dental health, mental health let me  just say this; we now have a once in a generation opportunity to get hospital reform  right. Doctors want reform of our hospitals to happen, nurses want it to happen, working  families who can't find a place for elective surgery want it to happen. It's time to get on  with it. We've got about a month or six weeks to reach agreement on this and I would  urge all parties to get behind this reform for the future. 

 JOURNALIST: What is your chance of holding Robertson now that Belinda Neal's been  dumped and how pleased were you to see her go? 

 PM: First of all, the preselectors have had their say. Belinda of course has worked hard  as a local Member but Debbie O'Neill is going to be a great candidate for us and the  Central Coast in what will be a very tight contest and having said all that folks, we're  heading home. 

 [ENDS]    

 

