---
title: "Latest illegal boat arrival shows people smugglers are still in charge."
date: "2010-03-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335303
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CO4W6%22
---

     Wed, 10th March 2010  

 LATEST ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVAL SHOWS PEOPLE SMUGGLERS ARE STILL  IN CHARGE 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Today’s interception of the 21st boat to illegally arrive in Australia in 2010 sends a message to the Rudd 

 Government that people smugglers are still firmly in charge, despite his agreement with Indonesia, according to 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and 

 Border Protection, Michael Keenan.  

 “The real test of any agreement with Indonesia on people smuggling is whether it stops the boats. On the same 

 day Kevin Rudd signs a new agreement on people smuggling, another boat arrives,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “The magnetic impact of Labor’s immigration and border protection laws for illegal arrivals is clearly as strong as 

 ever,” he said.  

 “Indonesia has always been a willing and cooperative partner in combating people smuggling and illegal arrivals 

 to Australia. The commitment of the Indonesian President to introduce criminal laws for people smugglers is a 

 welcome development.  

 “The Coalition in Government worked with Indonesia and stopped the boats. As Tony Abbott said today, ‘we did 

 before and can do it again’.  

 “Mr Rudd should be responding in kind by reversing the policies he has introduced that have led to 89 boats and 

 almost 4100 people illegally arriving in Australia since he rolled back the Coalition’s strong border protection and 

 immigration laws.  

 “Instead of dealing with the failure of his domestic policies that have weakened our borders, the Rudd 

 Government is implementing plans to begin transferring detainees from Christmas Island to Darwin, before their 

 asylum claims have been assessed, thereby ending universal off shore processing.  

 “The Coalition believes further transfers are imminent and will only serve to further soften our borders and 

 encourage people smuggling activity, as their clients can now get all the way to the mainland, courtesy of the 

 Rudd Government,” Mr Morrison said.  

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest interception is a timely reminder that people smuggling is out of control under the 

 Labor Government, as Rudd today worked at a diplomatic resolution to the crisis.  

 “Kevin Rudd doesn’t seem to have the ability to distinguish between ongoing discussion of a problem and 

 actually getting something done.  

 “Today’s interception has highlighted the crippled condition of Australia’s border protection, and the rate at which 

 boats are arriving as Rudd looks overseas to solve the problem instead of acknowledging his government’s policy 

 failures which have caused the problem in the first place.  

 “The Coalition supports a working relationship with Indonesia in resolving the influx of unauthorised arrivals, 

 however Rudd must fix his own Government’s broken policy first,” he said.    

