---
title: "Storm strikes Rudd Labor."
date: "2010-04-23"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337522
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WVSW6%22
---

 Storm strikes Rudd Labor 23rd April, 2010

 If Rudd Labor was a rugby league team, it would be stripped of the last election.

 If a rugby league team had rorted so much from taxpayers and caused such hardship to individuals and businesses, it would be forced to pay the money back.

 Yet, the Rudd Federal Government still expects the Australians to trust it with their money and their future after the most dreadful political mismanagement this country has ever seen.

 “The disastrous roof insulation scheme is reason enough to strip the Rudd Government of all of its points, now and into the future,” said Nationals Leader Warren Truss.

 “Four young men are dead, more than 120 houses have burnt down, more than 1,000 others are still electrified and tens of thousands more are at risk. On top, perhaps $1.5 billion in taxpayer’s money has been squandered.

 “But the incredible waste, mismanagement and broken promises do not end there. Yesterday, Labor broke another solemn promise, this time to build 260 childcare centres after claiming there was a shortage of long day-care places. It has managed to build only two centres and now says there is no shortage, which comes as news to parents everywhere.

 “Perhaps weakest of all, the Prime Minister, who used to say ‘the buck stops with me’, was missing in action yesterday. Under the cover of the breaking Melbourne Storm salary cap scandal, Mr Rudd trotted out two junior ministers to break the bad news while he hid in his bunker.

 “Labor is trying desperately to shore up the tatters of its border security credentials by buying new and bigger Customs boats to bring illegal boat arrivals into port.

 “How is it going to pay for these breaches of its salary cap? According to reports today, it will do so by cutting health spending on medicines by $2 billion. This comes after it falsely accused the former Coalition government of cutting $1 billion from health.

 “Meanwhile, the Government’s proposed health reform is a shambles. Victoria wants 84 local health networks out of 90 predicted for the whole country. Bureaucracy continues to run rampant.

 “And then there is the big daddy of them all, the waste and mismanagement of

 the Government’s school halls program. Billions have already been lost, and today we see stories of how public school principals trying to do the right thing and reduce costs on overpriced buildings have been told they will personally bear costs if something went wrong.

 “The Storm players may not have known about their club’s overspending and mismanagement. But Labor ministers were warned, repeatedly.

 “The Prime Minister and his team of show ponies have breached the faith of the Australian people. They do not deserve another premiership, let alone the one they have now,” Mr Truss said.

