---
title: "Julia Gillard hypocritical on boat deaths."
date: "2010-07-06"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341179
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/DU8X6%22
---

  

  

 Julia Gillard hypocritical on boat deaths   06-July-2010  Source: Warren Truss, MP -  

 

 Today Julia Gillard has stated that the Coalition’s policy to turn back the boats was  one of “leaving children to drown”.   

 Yet last October when I raised the very serious point that at least 25 people had died  on the high seas trying to get to Australia since Labor weakened its border policies,  Ms Gillard was singing a rather different tune.   

 Last October 18, Ms Gillard told the Nine Network’s Sunday program that I had  made “one of the most irresponsible and dangerous statements I think I’ve ever  heard in Australian politics” and I should apologise for the “ridiculous and vile slur”  that Labor’s policy had in some way caused those deaths.   

 Tragically that loss of life among asylum seekers heading to Australia by boat has  reportedly risen to more than 150 as Labor’s patchwork policy has failed - and will  continue to fail - to deter people smuggling.    

 The world is watching the different border protection approaches outlined today, and  will see the Coalition’s clear plan to stop the boats and the Gillard Government’s  repainting of the “welcome” sign.   

 People smugglers would not be deterred by Labor’s patchwork policy, and people  will still risk their lives on the high seas until the Coalition is returned to power.   

 Look to the record. In government, the Coalition found a problem and created a  solution. In government, Labor found a solution and created a problem.   

 In government, the Coalition’s strong but fair measures slowed the number of boat  arrivals to a trickle. Since Labor came to power and introduced a system drawn up  by Julia Gillard, the number of boat arrivals has hit 143.   

 It is now obvious that border protection needs significant strengthening to get our 

 borders under control. Labor has had three or four shots at this and failed every time.   

 Our policy involves offshore processing, temporary protection visas and  preparedness to turn back the boats where the circumstances allow.   

 A Coalition Government will make a presumption against granting refugee status to  any applicant believed to have deliberately discarded identity documentation prior to  presenting themselves to Australian authorities. All those who fail the test of  legitimacy must be returned home.   

 The Coalition will provide a home for genuine refugees through a generous  resettlement program. We will give preference to those who apply offshore from  camps, rather than those who jump the queue and arrive by boats or other means.   

 Like so many other Labor programs, the cost of dealing with thousands and  thousands of boat arrivals is out of control, blowing out by at least $1 billion. In  government, the Coalition will again act to clean up Labor’s mess, Mr Truss said. 

  

