---
title: "Funding boost for newly arrived migrants and refugees in the Northern Territory."
date: "2010-02-15"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Martin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334266
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/AB0W6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services 

 Funding boost for newly arrived migrants and  refugees in the Northern Territory  An Alice Springs youth arts organisation will receive $50 000 in funding under the  Rudd Government’s Diverse Australia Program, the Parliamentary Secretary for  Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie Ferguson, announced today in  the lead up to Harmony Day on March 21. 

 InCite Youth Arts is a non-for profit community arts organisation that’s committed to  providing quality Youth Arts for children and young people in Central Australia. 

 ‘The youth culture project will involve Indigenous and non-Indigenous youth in  hip  hop, music, video and art. Sharing this creative journey is a great chance for young  people of the Alice to build common ground,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 The project will have a focus on cross-cultural engagement and will help to bring out  the hidden talents and capabilities of participants. 

 ‘The positive environment these activities will provide will help them to develop  confidence and connect with the wider Alice Spring’s community,’ Member for  Lingiari, Warren Snowdon said. 

 ‘The Rudd Government recognises the importance of supporting our young people  and helping them to realise their full potential.’ 

 Mr Ferguson said the Diverse Australia Program aimed to promote respect, fairness  and a sense of belonging for everyone in all Australian communities.  

 ‘The program provides funding, education and information to help organisations that  wish to create a spirit of inclusiveness and to ensure all Australians are treated fairly  regardless of their background and circumstances.’ 

 Full details of the successful 2009 Diverse Australia Program community grants  projects and Harmony Day events can be found on the Diverse Australia Program  website.  See: www.harmony.gov.au 

 Media contact:  Carla Wilshire 0432 755 935  Alice Plate 0400 045 999 

