---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 26 January 2010: immigration detention; Indian students and Cuban refugees."
date: "2010-02-26"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "immigration detention"
  - "Indian students and Cuban refugees."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334809
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FSEW6%22
---

  

 Senator Chris Evans   

 Australia Day, immigration detention, Indian students and Cuban  refugees (doorstop interview, Canberra, 26 January 2010) 

 Tuesday 26 January 2010 

 Doorstop interview, Canberra 

 CHRIS EVANS: Well thanks very much. It's a day for Australia and it's a great day  for new citizens. We had 2600 citizens welcomed to Australia today in the northern  suburbs of Perth, the biggest ceremony ever. It's a great credit to the councils, but  also just a great celebration of people becoming citizens and committing to Australia.  More than four million have committed to Australia since we introduced the  citizenship back in 1949. They bring their own cultures, their own language, and their  own contributions, and become part of a new Australia story. And as I say, I think  really special to do it on Australia Day, and to do it with so many people around them  who are also celebrating their welcome to Australia, so a very important day and  welcome to all the new citizens. 

 QUESTION: In your speech to the ten people just then, do you address the people of  Indian origin directly - you said that the attacks, you know, weren't - it's not how  people are here in Australia, but we've had another attack overnight and some  arrests. Is it a concern? 

 CHRIS EVANS: Well look there's obviously concern and the government treats it  very seriously. There are some idiots out there who perpetrated terrible attacks on  some Indian students. We condemn that absolutely, and we want to see it stopped  and we're doing everything in our power to see it stopped. But what I wanted to do  today is to reinforce to the Indian people who have become Australian citizens or  those who are here temporarily as students, that they're welcome in Australia, their  contribution is welcome, they're respected, they ought to feel safe here, and that the  rest of the Australian community condemns these terrible attacks and condemns the  idiots who perpetrate them. There's no place for that in Australian society, and it was  really pleasing today to welcome another 147 Indians at this ceremony to become  Australian citizens. They join hundreds of others who have made a huge contribution  to Australia, and we'll continue to welcome Indians, their skills and their contributions  to Australia. 

 QUESTION: Minister, why is it that such a large proportion of these citizens reside in  WA? 

 CHRIS EVANS: Well WA's obviously the most attractive state to come to in  Australia. I can say that as a Western Australian senator. But we've had a long  tradition of welcoming new residents to Western Australia. I think the fact that the  Western Australian economy has been leading Australia and shown the healthiest  growth in recent times makes it attractive. We're seeing people come from all over  the world. Today we saw people from Africa, South America, Asia, and a large  number of British. Western Australia's always had a large number of British settlers  here, and that's continuing, but we get a good mix of people from all over the world  and their contributions enrich us, and we continue to welcome people from all over  the world. 

 QUESTION: Senator, what about the comments from the Australian of the Year  overnight that immigration detention centres are packed with mental illness? 

 CHRIS EVANS: Well I think the first thing I'd like to say is I think the professor's  clarified his comments, but what is the case is that this government remains  committed to mandatory detention while people do health, security and identity  checks. But what we have done is made a huge effort to improve the standard of  detention, to process people quickly, and to have their claims assessed quickly. If  they're found to be refugees they're welcome. If they're found not to be refugees,  they're returned to the country of origin and … 

 QUESTION: So Christmas Island won't be closed down? 

 CHRIS EVANS: Christmas Island will not be closed down. We think mandatory  detention is an important part of border security. You get someone arrive without a  passport, you want to assess who they are, whether they have any health concerns,  and whether they have any security concerns. That's just good public policy. That will  continue. His criticisms were very much of the former government's policies of  indefinite detention for people who are left to rot for long periods without access to  proper appeal processes or knowing where the future lay. That's where they had  serious mental health issues develop. We think we process people fairly, but  certainly that mandatory detention element will continue under the Rudd-Labor  Government. We think it's important and we think it's - some of the Australian public  expect to happen when people arrive in an unauthorised manner. 

 QUESTION: He did clarify his comments, but in clarifying them, he didn't refer to  indefinite detention, he did refer to mandatory detention, especially people who were  coming from war zones who are already traumatised and this just adds to their  trauma … 

 MALE SPEAKER: … being tortured. 

 CHRIS EVANS: Yeah, well I think the key difference is that, first of all, mandatory  detention's not indefinite. Under this government we process people quickly. They  get an outcome. If they're found to be refugees they're given a Visa, if they're found  not to be refugees, they're returned. But we also provide good support mechanisms,  torture and trauma counselling and place people in appropriate detention. So  mandatory detention is not going to be abolished [indistinct] committed to mandatory  detention. But the major development of mental health in detention - and there's 

 been a number of academic studies now which we sponsored - have established  clearly that it is the indefinite and long-term nature of detention that has caused  mental health problems. And one of the reasons it's been proven to be more  dangerous, if you like, than prison sentences, is that people don't know when they're  going to get out. They've got no idea of how long they were to be kept there. That  was the system under the Howard government. We've vastly improved the detention  facilities, the support that they get, and the processing times. And so I think we've  got the balance right. Mandatory detention for health identity and security checks,  but quick processing and treating people humanely. And I think I'm happy that we've  got the balance right, and the reforms we've made will see much better health  outcomes for the detainees. 

 QUESTION: How full is the Christmas Island detention centre at the moment? 

 CHRIS EVANS: Sorry, I didn't hear the question. 

 MALE SPEAKER: How full… 

 QUESTION: How full is Christmas Island? 

 CHRIS EVANS: There's sufficient capacity to deal with more arrivals. We put some  extra capacity in already and we're increasing the capacity to around 2200. More  accommodation's coming online currently, so we have capacity to deal with arrivals.  We're doing our best to obviously limit the arrivals and prevent people taking these  dangerous journeys, but we do have ongoing extra capacity at Christmas Island. 

 QUESTION: Do you think those cramped conditions could contribute to people's  deteriorated mental state? 

 CHRIS EVANS: When I was on the island last Friday, they're not cramped  conditions. We're managing well. We've had to put in some temporary  accommodation while the more permanent accommodation comes on stream. But  some of it came on stream in the last week or so, more will come on in the next few  weeks. People are being looked after appropriately. They are detained, but they are  supported and we have no concerns about mental health. And I think most people  who visit the island accept the people are being treated appropriately, but they are  being detained until the appropriate checks are being made. 

 QUESTION: Senator, what about the growing trend of Australians of the Year to  speak out against Australian policy? 

 CHRIS EVANS: Well I'm not sure that they all speak out against government policy,  but I'm very comfortable with it. We just had today, sixteen and a half thousand  people take out citizenship and one of those rights of Australian citizenship is to  speak your mind, as long as you don't do it in a way that seeks to harm other people.  So free speech, strong opinions and public debate is one of the great things about  Australia. Certainly this government is not concerned about Australians of the Year  speaking out. In fact that's why we picked Australians of the Year, because they  have something to say and something to contribute. 

 QUESTION: [Inaudible question] 

 CHRIS EVANS: Look, the reports about that are clearly overstated. What I can say is  that the Australian Government has had a convers… has had a dialogue with the  American Government and they have been seeking, for some time now, to settle  both Cuban refugees and some Uighur people out of their system. As that's been  made public knowledge for some time now, those approaches were made a year or  two ago. They've continued to be part of the discussion, but there's no - there's been  no decision taken by the Australian Government to accept Cuban refugees to  Australia, but we are a good ally of the United States. We work with them closely,  and we will continue to cooperate with them. But I make the point that if we were to  take anyone, it would only be on the basis if they met our normal immigration and  security checks. 

 QUESTION: [Inaudible question]. 

 CHRIS EVANS: No, no decision's been taken. Clearly, the Americans are keen to  place some of these refugees of Cuban origin, but there's been no decision to take  them, but we have been having a dialogue with them about those things. And what  we've made very clear is that we'd only look to accept people if they'd had the  appropriate immigration and security checks and those conversations will continue. 

 QUESTION: [Inaudible question] 

 CHRIS EVANS: There's nothing, as far as I'm aware, that's imminent, but certainly  those conversations have been occurring. They've approached the government quite  a while ago and they've spoken to us about it again, obviously more recently. 

 QUESTION: Thank you. 

 CHRIS EVANS: All right, thanks guys. 

 

 See:  Index of speeches and transcripts 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/2010/ce100126.htm   Last update: 11 February 2010 at 15:12 AEST  

 

