---
title: "Securing Australian jobs in 2010 and into the future, Canberra."
date: "2010-02-17"
creators:
  - "Howes, Paul"
source: "AUSTRALIAN WORKERS' UNION"
subjects:
  - "Australian Manufacturing Workers Union"
  - "Employment participation"
  - "Financial crises"
  - "Foreign investment in Australia"
  - "Economic policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334373
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8Q4W6%22
---

 Paul Howes National Press Club Address 17 February 2010

 Speech by AWU National Secretary Paul Howes to the National Press Club on 17 February 2010

 KEN RANDALL: Ladies and gentlemen welcome to the National Press Club and today's National Australia Bank address.

 

 It's a great pleasure and it's very timely this week to welcome back the national secretary of the Australian Workers' Union - Paul Howes.

 There's no doubt that industrial relations issues have got firmly back on the political agenda this week for this  election year. It's just over two years ago that Paul Howes first made an appearance here. He was then 26  and most people were a bit stunned at the fact that somebody of that age had become national secretary of the AWU, which is Australia's oldest and most diverse union. He's now in his second term, so a lot of other  things have happened since then and he'll be talking about some of them today, including issues of foreign  investment and particularly job security on the basis of some research which has been commissioned by the union.

 Please welcome back Paul Howes.

 

 PAUL  HOWES:  Thank  you Ken.  It's great  to  be  back  at  the  club,  in  the  loop,  after  two years since  I  first  spoke  here.  And  I've  come  to  you  direct  from  a  meeting  of  ACTU  leaders  in  regional  Victoria,  where  we developed some good ideas for our campaign in 2010 and I also developed a cold, so you'll have to forgive  me for that.

 Two  years  ago  I  was  new  in  the  job.  Like  most  opinion  makers  here  I  could  not  have  predicted  what  was   coming for us economically just a few months later. Nor what you and others would be saying about it.

 Commentators globally were talking about the end of rogue capitalism, the end of corporate rorts, the end of banking and finance as we knew it, and the beginning of a new, reregulated age of Keynesian commonsense and the values of Main Street returning and the values of Wall Street receding.

 But now, 15 or 16 months later, the same commentators are much, much happier. They see an improved and hopeful, even familiar, situation with yesterday's villains calmly, capably steering us back to the old levels of  growth, productivity,  employment, house prices and rich rewards once more for CEOs without much structural change in the way things were and the way things are.

 Unemployment is down once more, as low as 5.3 per cent. Asian demand is up, economic recovery here in Australia  on  the  way,  things  are  already  booming.  Commodity  prices  are  going  up  for  raw  ingredients  like   coal,  iron-ore  and  bauxite  and  the  whole  future  pattern  will  be,  the  whole  future  road  will  be,  growth,  blip,   growth from 2008 to 2010.

 Happy ever after.

 Iron-ore spot price is up 15 per cent - 50 per cent since October. Most experts are now forecasting gains of 30 per cent to 40 per cent, sometimes 50 per cent, in contract prices. China is now a net importer of coal, since  local mining issues became - local mining became restricted by safety issues,safety issues at last, contract  issues, pollutions, cost issues. And the pace of recovery is speeding up in the region.

 Happy endings. Well done everyone.

 But before we get too excited by the good days and the better days ahead, and the journey that will lead us to the  broad  sunlit  uplands  of  the  always  lucky  economy  in  this  always  lucky  country,  what  Norman  Lindsay   called  "  The  land  where  the  beer  bottle  grows,"  it's  important  that  we  unpack,  we  deconstruct,  we  analyse   some part at least of the story so far and what the story lately has come to mean.

 Page 1 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 I would therefore today like to review some of the experience of the global financial crisis and how the AWU  responded,  and  what  we  think  we  should  be  up  to  as  a  country  and  an  economy  and  a  society  to  avoid  a   repetition of the tragedy and the farce of 2008 and 2009 and to see with clear unclouded eye - unideological  eyes, the shape of days ahead.

 This time last year we were in the middle of a great financial tornado unleashed by the collapse of Lehman  Brothers  and  the  debts  that  couldn't  be  paid  on  the  loans  that  shouldn't  have  been  made  on  houses  now   theoretically worthless in America, a  currency theoretically worthless in Iceland, and banks now crumbling in London and financial institutions still  teetering across the world.

 Export orders were down by 50 per cent and 60 per cent in the case of steel and aluminium. For the first time  in the history of this nation we could not sell our steel to anyone at any price anywhere in the world. Local  demand was crashing and a sharp fall in GDP went negative in the December quarter of 2008.

 As  the  events  subsequently  showed  the  last  quarter  of  2008  was  the  lowest  point  in  the  slowdown  of  the   domestic  economy,  but  it  could  have  much  worse.  It  was  the  greatest  challenge  facing  my  union  in  a   generation.

 But the Government moved quickly and it should be commended for moving so quickly to stimulate domestic  economic  activity  before  the  slowdown  swamped  our  shores,  like  the  slow-moving  tsunami  that  it  was.   Targeted  fiscal  policy  measures,  big  cuts  in  interest  rates  flowed  in  the  end  to  borrowers  and  consumers.   Buying and selling continued and jobs were sustained because the money was there.

 The  Australian  public  rightly  applauded  this  and  sighed  with  relief  because  the  Government  offered  hope.   There was a strong determined hand on the tiller and we rode out the storm. This was complemented in its  effect  by  unions  and  the workforce  and our  constructive  engagement  with employers  in  agreeing  to  reduce   work hours to save jobs.

 And although some jobs were lost the number was always less than forecast but the upshot, the shakedown,  the bottom line was very hard for some. Seventy-seven thousand jobs went in manufacturing and the knock-on  effect  of  that  will  be  felt  for  years  and  decades  ahead  as  the  factories  that  were  shut  will  never  be   reopened again.

 Today  however,  it  is  true  that  Australia  is  better  placed  some  most  countries  to  benefit  from  renewed   consumer confidence and China's need for what we can dig out and sell to them.

 Economic  activity  continues,  even  though  monetary  stimulus  of  the  months  of  the  crisis  is  slowly  being   withdrawn.  Borrowing  for  housing  has  rebounded  and  no  longer  wholly  dependent  on  first  home  buyers.   Business  is  planning  more  ventures  and  spending  more  money.  There's  a  high  current  account  deficit.  But   this is because of high and rising investment, not low and declining saving.

 And forecasts for economic growth have been revised up, substantially up, since the middle of 2009.

 But  higher  interest  rates  and  the  foreign  exchange  it  is  attracting  are  turbo  charging  the  Australian  dollar,   which is rising again as it was in 2007 and may soon reach parity with the US greenback. The higher interest  rates  that  we  are  now  enjoying  or  suffering  may  choke  recovery,  particularly  in  manufacturing,  agriculture,   tourism and education, and are raising concerns - rightful concerns - about the re-emergence of a two-track  economy.

 At the same time Australia's productivity performance has declined in the past decade and in most sectors. As  Wayne Swan said in the Intergenerational Report: our performance in this sector will have to improve if we  are to cope with an ageing population and fewer younger people proportionately in paid work.

 The  Government  wants,  and  rightly  wants,  our  productivity  levels  -  our  productivity  growth  up  from  1.4  per   cent  to  2  per  cent  over  the  next  four  decades.  Doing  so  by  2050  when  I  am  68  and  most  of  you  are   considerably older, and some will be six foot under, will make every Australian $16,000 better off in today's  value each year.

 There are things to note. The return of the resources boom and the return very soon of some of the stresses  of the years before the meltdown: skill shortages and infrastructure snarls and bottlenecks, for instance, will  be back with a vengeance.

 Faster population growth will add to the strain, I think, of the returned resources boom. Increased congestion,  demands on infrastructure, rising house prices, the plague of our time, the plague of my generation, will be -  soon need to be addressed and sorted out. Doing this well, in particular in civil works and public transport, will  be key union goals in 2010, building on what we've achieved in 2009.

 The  historic  alliance  forged  between  by  union  and  our  dreaded  old  enemy,  the  AMWU,  in  2009  helped   address  the  major  downturn  in  demand  for  manufacturing  exports  by  insisting  on  greater  content  in  local  

 Page 2 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 procurement opportunities. This was not the protectionist stance that some were calling it. It was a proactive  policy which did not contradict, did not undermine my own well known and my own well entrenched pro-free  trade position.

 We were assisted greatly here by the Government and by the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and  Research Kim Carr, and his support for our industries and my members is publicly acknowledged today.

 Addressing  major  procurement  opportunities,  maximising  local  content  and  procurement  opportunities  in   infrastructure provision are key goals that we'll continue to pursue into the future.

 Looking ahead, we do not see as our biggest problem sovereign risk default nor the worldwide downturn that  seemed for a while to be coming after us here too in Australia.

 It  won't  occur  here,  or  so  it  seems,  touch  wood  but  other  countries,  other  regions  may  not  be  as  lucky  as   money and investors go where they think the true safe havens are, the comfort zones, the oasis of tranquillity,  the breeding grounds of quiet prosperity.

 Their sad story will be like America's, more about debt servicing than debt repayment or even debt reduction.  The big challenge will be to have policy settings that ensure an entrenched recovery and therefore promote  positive growth rather than choking it off at its hour of birth.

 We need to see that debt servicing is sustainable in the longer term. The benefits flowing from investment,  from  jobs,  new  housing,  new  families,  new  infrastructure,  new  boom  towns,  new  mining  ventures,  are   generating  momentum  in  the  Australian  economy  and  thus  causing  the  sort  of  problems  we  experienced   before the present era.

 Skill  shortages  and  a  call  for  greater  skilled  migration,  the  need  for  more  local  processing  rather  than   processing  offshore  and  a  booming  exchange  rate  putting  pressure  on  the  competitiveness  of  local   manufacturing and the re-emergence once more of the two track economy.

 But just as the for lease signs start coming down in our mining towns and the stock market starts heading up  because of the new mining boom we should take stock of the experiences of the global financial crisis and  with  the  Government's  help,  hard  wire  into  our  policy  responses  this  time  around  and  I'll  explain  what  we   mean.

 Rather than simply going for broke because our resources and our mines are again in demand let's agree on  a clear strategy for the future development and our consequent future prosperity which smooths out some of  the boom bust pressures and maximises returns in the years, days and decades ahead.

 This  should  include  a  clear  strategy  on  the  role  and  nature  of  foreign  investment,  including  how  we  treat   sovereign wealth funds and how we treat the importance of jobs which add greater value locally and the role  and  type  of  skilled  migration  we  want  to  see.  And  how  we  maximise  migration  without  hurting  Australian   workers who are bringing home the bacon for the rest of us in this country.

 Let me emphasise that we are not opposed to migrants coming here or to guest workers coming here, any  more than we would be opposed to Haitian refugees coming here seeking work as the post war migrants did  who made up the bulk of my union's membership in the 1950s and 1960s but we need a fair and transparent  program based on our fair go traditions.

 A fair go for Australian workers and a fair go for foreign workers as well. We do not need to see again and  pray  God  we  never  see  again,  the  ugly  arrangements  of  the  Howard  years,  so  close  to  the  years  of   blackbirding a century past, of guest workers kept in filthy chook houses and paid wages as if they were the  slaves from the nineteenth century.

 We do not need to hear the stories again of those years, the rumours of those years, the stories that my union  officials heard first hand of criminal harassment, embezzlement of salaries and of casual rape. I believe we  need fewer criminals in our economy as a rule and no criminals in this part of the economy at all.

 The  AWU  and the  Government  are hand in  glove  on this  but  a lot  of  rogue,  agrarian  capitalists  have  gone   against us. Barnaby's friends are refusing to use the guest worker program and are getting shady local fellows  to press-gang workers into cheap service as the British Navy in the eighteenth century did, a practice that in  today's Australia should have stopped.

 A few generations back before most people in this room were born our employers were companies based on  a single town. Then employers started to spread their wings and prospered and invested and became state-wide companies and our union had to learn to deal with that.

 Later,  something  we've  been  used  to  for  years  now,  they  became  national  companies  and  our  union  to   survive  had  to  organise  nationally.  Now  my  generation  has  to  get  used  to  the  idea  of  dealing  with  global   employers and finding ways of organising globally.

 Page 3 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 Rupert Murdoch is probably the best illustration in one long lifetime of the way that employers grow. From an  Adelaide employer  he became  the dominant  national  employer and today he is almost the dominant global  employer in media, movies, newspapers, books and broadcast televisions. That kind of thing is happening too  in resources, manufacturing, construction and even the services sector, so we better get used to it.

 And,  yes,  sometimes  the  employer  will  be  head  office  in  China  and  we  better  get  used  to  that  too  and  the   AWU supports foreign investment in the Australian economy. Yes, we do but not on their terms.   

 We  think  that  sovereign  wealth  funds  should  be  looked  at  carefully  because  of  the  involvement  of  other   governments in our economy and other nations and other nations' national interests versus what we need to  see as our best interests and who benefits most in the long term, us or them.

 The value of this market is huge. China for example is estimated to have more than US$2 trillion in reserve  which is available for foreign investment. Some of that could be here. Some of that should be here but it has  to be watched. The Foreign Investment Review Board must ensure that our national interest is fully taken into  account when we look at applications for sovereign funds invested in Australia's key strategic resources. In  particular  in  commodity  assets  where  jobs  are  at  stake  and  jobs  are  at  risk  as  they  always  are  of  going   offshore after the money goes offshore the way that jobs do.

 Therefore instead of opposing investment by sovereign funds outright or dealing ad hoc with takeover bids as  they  occur  now  and  then,  the  AWU  wants  sovereign  wealth  funds  to  link  their  potential  investment  in  key   assets to a sovereign capital training scheme and a related Australian endowment fund.

 The  Australian  endowment  fund  would  allow  the  Australian  Government  to  recognise  and  benefit  from  the   investment under the scheme and build infrastructure, skills and industry policy around these investments and  savings without recourse to a higher resources rent tax.

 It will assist the Government to deal with the moral hazard of these investments.

 This  is  because  they  are  essentially  beyond  the  control  of  the  market  place.  It  is  difficult  to  know  and   impossible to control the behaviour of governments, other governments, foreign governments, regarding such  investments.

 But it does not mean that these investments should be banned and our investments therefore abroad are put  at  risk  of  being  banned  as  well  in  reprisal  by  more  vengeful  governments,  more  protectionist  governments,   more selfish governments than our own benevolent Government.

 But as in the insurance industry and elsewhere where there is imperfect information, arrangements need to  reflect the potential, rather than the actual risk of future behaviour.

 In insurance it is usually the size of premiums that go up well beyond the reasonable expectation of actual risk  but the actual level of risk is often unknown, that's life.

 For sovereign investments bi-lateral negotiations would and perhaps as a part of firm deliberations settle the  scale  and  scope  of  participation  in  the  sovereign  capital  training  scheme  and  related  investment  in  the   Australian  endowment  fund,  commensurate  with  the  strategic  nature  of  the  investment,  joint  venture   partnerships and local content.

 For  example,  investment  in  raw  and  bulk  commodities  such  as  our  iron  ore,  coal,  bauxite  and  natural  gas   resource  projects,  with  little  local  processing  would  command  a  higher  value  under  the  scheme  than  say   investing in an established manufacturing business or commencing one in processing these raw materials into  manufactured products.

 In this way we would be behaving responsibly, encouraging investment in valuating activities in Australia, in  participation with our local partners and local communities. The lower the investment opportunity for domestic  value are added under the scheme, the higher the level of contributions to the Australian endowment fund.

 Conversely  the  greater  level  of  processing  and  manufacture  undertaken  locally  under  the  scheme  with  the   assistance of sovereign capital investment, the lower the required contribution to the Australian endowment  fund. The proceeds from the endowment fund would not flow back to the Government as general revenue but  be re-invested in the productive capacity of the national economy.

 For  example,  in  infrastructure  investment  skills  training  overseen  by  a  cabinet  committee to this  end.  Other   countries may respond in turn with their own schemes which may not be such a bad thing.

 No bad thing either for the future regulation of the global sovereign wealth fund industry or the investments  which they ultimately undertake.

 Page 4 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 We need to have a debate on the merits of establishing a sovereign capital training scheme and an Australian  endowment fund and we should have that now in order to address the demand from sovereign wealth funds  aiming to invest in Australia's strategic assets.

 The  Global  Financial  Crisis  was  a  major  exercise  in  damage  control.  By  and  large,  Australian  industry  and   Australian workers cooperated in retaining rather than shredding jobs often at the expense of reduced shifts  and hours and switching from full time to part time work.

 However, that effort was worthwhile in ensuring that the unemployment rate did not escalate, not this time and  unlike  recoveries  from  previous  recessions,  the  employment  rate  across  the  world  seems  to  be  and  would   seem to already be responding strongly.

 In these circumstances, we have a useful interval, a small period of reflection to prepare for the future and to  look for instance at the treatment of worker's entitlements and the risk of loss in the event of future insolvency.  Currently, workers entitlements still remain unsecured in the list of creditors. As usual, workers are at the end  of the queue.

 The Corporations Act is behind the times and in its attitude, it pre-dates the Magna Carte and there appears  no  logical  reason  why  employees  should  not  precede  banks  and  other  financial  lenders  in  the  queue  for   repayment since they were the makers of the wealth in the first place, the wealth that was enjoyed for so long.  They built it. They dug it out. They did the whole work while the others merely shuffled paper.

 There  are  sound  economic  and  productivity  related  reasons  to  have  employees  as  secured  creditors.  It  is   something  that  our  union  has  believed  should  always  have  been  there  in  the  first  place.  Security  of   entitlements  will  be  an  ongoing  area  of  policy  focus  for  the  AWU  of  this  year.  It  will  be  one  of  our  major   priorities as we enter a number of enterprise bargaining negotiations with ferocity and a certain level of hope.

 But the big news that I propose to announce today is the findings of the latest AWU Auspoll job satisfaction  index. We released the first job satisfaction index report this time last year. Now we have gone back to it and  it will come out henceforth at the start of every parliamentary year so we can track changes in attitudes to jobs  and job security by Australia's working people across the years.

 The key point to note is that while today there is an increased confidence in our economy, this optimism has  not been yet translated into personal experience.

 As the effect of the government stimulus package has washed through Australia, there has been a sharp drop  amongst  working  people  concerned  that  the  economy  will  continue  to  deteriorate.  But  at  a  personal  level,   working people continue to worry about their own personal jobs.

 Our poll shows that working people are in fact more likely to report difficulties at work in the last six months  such  as  increased  workload  or  losing  their  job  than  they  did  this  time  last  year.  The  breakup  of  this  data   should be no great surprise. Those who earn more are less concerned about losing their job than those who  earn less.

 Older workers as a rule are actually reporting fewer difficulties in the workplace than younger workers. This of  course flips over when we look at future expectations - 51 per cent of 18 to 29 year olds are confident they  can  find  a  similar  job  with  equivalent  pay  and  benefits.  Only  35  percent  of  workers  aged   over  50  are  as   confident. But regional workers curiously are more optimistic in their expectations; 32 per cent of them feared  they might lose their jobs versus 38 per cent of metropolitan workers.

 More headlines of course, more headlines and rumours attended the sacking of metropolitan workers, auto  workers for instance and this might account for it.

 Forty-nine per cent of workers say that unions are the group most likely to act in their interest. Correct. These  results are consistent with last year's figures.

 Attitudes to employers remain cool. Correct. 67 per cent say employers are too concerned with profits. Who  would  have  thunk  that?  Only  28  per  cent  have  actually  been  consulted  about  their  employer  about  their   worker's future job security. Our poll shows us that the government's handling of the global financial crisis is 

 seen as truly positive.

 The  most  popular  government  policies  are  funding  for  infrastructure  projects,  81  per  cent  support  and  the   Australia-made campaign, 78 per cent support.

 A clear majority, 58 per cent and this is no surprise believe that workers need more protection of their pay and  conditions. Fifty per cent of workers believe that the Labor Party shares this view. By contrast, 57 per cent  believe that the Liberal Party supports less security, more exploitation and cruelty in the work place.

 They  are  of  course  are  right  and  I  suspect  that  that  number  would  have  increased  after  this  week's   shenanigans.

 Page 5 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 This means at a time when workers can still report some concern about job security, we can expect them to  warm  in  an  election  period  to  the  Labor  Party,  to  our  Labor  Party.  That  shows  that  they  share  their  views   rather than the WorkChoices mark 2 version of the Liberal Party. After all, our poll shows that working people,  amongst working people, Kevin Rudd far outclasses Tony Abbott by a whopping 44 per cent to 15 per cent as  the one who would do a better job of securing and enhancing better working conditions.

 So what do I take away from this important poll?

 That the Australian Worker's Union along with every other union must continue to go out and defend the jobs  of every working person in this country. That's what Australian working families expect of us and trust us to do  well. Unions like ours have always been the voice and protector of every working family suffering the impact  of, or the threat of losing their jobs and losing their homes.

 Our job is to stand up, stand strong together for the working community and that's why the AWU will continue  to  argue  that  the  government's  stimulus  program  has  been  a  winner  for  working  people  but  we  are  not   completely out of the woods yet.

 This government faced a terrible situation almost from the day it was elected because the crisis hit just after  the election.

 The  government  acted  smartly  and  saved  the  Australian  economy  from  total  collapse.  We've  now  come   through  the  very   dangerous  times  but  the  danger  has  not  entirely  abated.  A  disciplined  union  movement   burnt and scarred and made wise by the Howard years is ready to act in this important election year because  we know, we know that at night Tony Abbott dreams of returning to the WorkChoices era.

 Tony  Abbott  and  his  coalition  partners  returned  to  parliament  in  the  last  couple  of  weeks  and  immediately   demanded  an  end  to  the  government's  stimulus  package  in  addition  to  a  poorly  cloaked  campaign  to  bring   back WorkChoices but with a different name.

 He unleashed his storm trooper Erika Betz once again whipping up lies and fears and innuendo to create a  false picture suggesting widespread industrial unrest.

 

 Reading Liberal Party press releases, you could be forgiven for thinking that the economy is about to grind to  a halt due to the revolutionary masses of unionists about to storm the winter palace. The reality of course is  very different.

 Today's Australian union movement has demonstrated, demonstrated that during this economic crisis we can  work  together.  We  can  have  unprecedented  levels  of  cooperation  thinking  about  how  best  to  maximise  job   opportunities to keep our members, to keep Australian workers in work.

 We  have  worked  hard  to  guarantee  the  job  security  of  working  people  in  this  country.  Unions  in  2010  are   working now in ways never seen before. Unions in 2010 are growing and most importantly, unions in 2010 are  working  to  do  as  we  have  always  done,  to  advance  Australia.  To  build  a  stronger,  more  prosperous,  more   equal society which is in the benefit of all Australians  . 

 So if we can cut through the spin, stay disciplined as a labour movement, a fellowship of decent purpose, I  believe  that  we  will  come  through  2010  and  in  to  2011  with  a  stronger  Australia  able  to  build  a  better,  a   stronger economy, create more jobs and provide the type of job security working people look to unions and  union leadership and union solidarity and labour governments to deliver. Thank you.

 

 KEN RANDALL: Thank you very much Paul Howes. We have our usual period of questions from our media  members today. Starting with Stephanie Balogh.

 QUESTION: Mr Howes, hi, Stephanie Balogh from the Courier Mail. On the issue of job satisfaction, unions  helped  Kevin  Rudd  into  the  lodge  in  2007,  are  you  satisfied  that  he's  making  progress  and  meeting  all  his   election promises or would you mark his report card; must do better?

 PAUL HOWES: Thank you Stephanie. Well Kevin Rudd went to the election and said he was going to restore fairness  to  Australian  work  places.  In  July  last  year,  when  the  Fair  Work  Act  was  implemented,  we  had   fairness restored to Australian work places for the first time since 1996. Now you have the odd criticism here or there of the Fair Work Act. I'm a critic from time to time. But the reality is it's truly remarkable that with a  hostile senate, a hostile senate largely controlled by the Liberal Party and nut bags like Steve Fielding, that we  managed  to  get  a  sensible  piece  of  legislation  passed  that  restored  balance,  stored  equality  -  restored   equality and restored dignity to the Australian work places. Ensured that 2.3 million workers, who lost unfair  dismissal protection, got it back. Now what do we hear yesterday? Those 2.3 million workers, a quarter of the Australian work force, one in four people who go to work every day, are going to lose their unfair dismissal  protections under an Abbott/Barnaby Joyce government. And that truly scares me because I know we've got a

 Page 6 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 long way to go. There are issues I'm not happy about and there are issues the government can do better. But  on the  whole,  are  my  members  better  off  today  than  they were four years ago? Without  a  doubt,  without  a   doubt. And anyone who tells you different, is lying.

 KEN RANDALL: Thank you. The next question is from Danielle Cronin.

 QUESTION:  Danielle  Cronin  from  the  Canberra  Times  Mr  Howes.  Overnight,  US  President  Barack  Obama   announced the guarantee for the first nuclear power plant built in the US for 30 years. Is it time that Australia  embraced nuclear energy and do we risk becoming a economic back water if we don't move down that route?  Why or why not?

 PAUL  HOWES:  Well  that's  a  positive  announcement  in  the  US  and  it's  a  positive  for  the  three  and  a  half thousand workers, construction workers in the US who'll get jobs out of that construction program. Look, we  have  a  Prime  Minister  who  is  firmly  opposed  to  the  deployment  of  nuclear  power  in  Australia.  We  have  a   leader  of  the  Liberal  Party  who's  made  it  clear  that  they  will  not  be  taking  a  nuclear  power  stance  to  the election. We have the third party; the Greens, who are very clearly opposed to nuclear power. So I don't think  that this is going to be an issue in the election. My personal views are that it is - makes sense to investigate all  the options and opportunities that are available to us in an energy constrained, low-carbon future. Is nuclear  the answer? Maybe. But maybe not, as well. We have so much we can do with natural gas which has 60 per  cent  less  emissions  than  coal  fired  power  station.  The  development  of  carbon  capture  and  storage  is  so crucial to the future of my members in the steel and aluminium industries. And that's why we applauded the  government's announcement of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. Other countries around the  world will look at different options. The good news is with the recommencement of a nuclear power program in the United Sates is that we have another market, another export potential for our uranium reserves. Uranium  reserves  which  are progressing  quite  well  in Western Australia and  South  Australia.  Providing  the  jobs  that were lost out of the manufacturing sector in South Australia and that is a positive thing. But in terms of the  debate here, I really can't see it happening.

 KEN RANDALL: Thank you. The next question is from Amanda Hart.

 QUESTION:  Amanda  Hart  from  Ten  News.  I  -  obviously,  as  you  said,  with  the  Labor  Government  not,   predictably not going to establish a nuclear industry here, do you think it's political cowardice?

 PAUL HOWES: Well I just think it's a political reality. You know, as I said, there is no party going to this next election with a platform of looking at nuclear power. I have, in the past, argued in favour of a debate around  nuclear power and I think that a lot of people would like to have that debate. And we will have that debate in the future. We had that debate in 2007. And in that debate, the Australian electorate spoke very loudly and  clearly about their own personal views on nuclear power. But do I see energy security and nuclear power as the most important issue affecting my members or the Australian electorate at the moment? Absolutely not.  Absolutely not. What I see for my members is that for the first time in two years, we are facing the spectre of  industrial  relations  becoming  another  political  play  thing  of  the  coalition.  That  is  what  I'm  focussed  on  this year. That is what all Australian unions are focussed on this year. Because I thought coming out of 2007, IR  was off the table. That no-one would be stupid enough in the coalition to have another crack to bring back their  wet  dream.  But  who  would  have  predicted  Tony  Abbott  would  become  the  leader?  I  mean  you  can't blame  me  for  not,  for  not  -  thinking  that  the  coalition  was  smarter  than  electing  someone  like  Tony  as  the   leader of the Liberal Party. And lo and behold, we're back here again. Back here again dusting off the boxes, finding the your rights at work stickers. Having to defend which - a notion which I believe is as Australian as  the fair go. The notion of a protection from being unfairly dismissed at work. The notion that you have a safety net.  A  minimum  standards  conditions  that  employers  and  governments  cannot  rip  away  at.  And  that  is  the   issue that's focussed my attention this year because I tell you what, there's a couple of hundred votes in this  election.  And  it  only  takes  a  couple  of  hundred  people  to  be  enamoured  with  Tony's  budgie  smugglers  or Barnaby Joyce's lack of understanding of economics to change this election. To change the outcome. And for  the  union  movement  and  for  working  people  to  lose  this  election,  will  actually  be  an  endorsement.  An   endorsement of work choices and an endorsement of an unregulated labour competitive market like we have in the United Sates and other economies.

 KEN RANDALL: Steven Scott.

 QUESTION: Steven Scott from the Financial Review, Paul. You mentioned you'd just come from the ACTU's  campaign planning meeting. I was wondering whether you think there are any other areas other than IR that the ACTU should be campaigning on? Or is the coalition's new-found policy embrace of IR going to swamp  over other policy areas?

 PAUL HOWES: Well no union, no peak council, no individual union, no union leader is going to allow working people in this country to be placed in the situation which they were in in 2004. Unlike the 2004 election is that  for once we'll have an honest Liberal party policy. Because Tony wasn't disciplined enough at his first press conference  he  let  it  slip,  that  whilst  he  doesn't  like  the  name  WorkChoices,  he  loves  the  policy  and  he's   bringing it back. Now he's trying to wind back the clock at the moment, I mean I heard him, was it yesterday 

 Page 7 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 saying WorkChoices is dead - dead and buried. I kind of thought well, if I went out and bought a cat and called  it Rex and said it was a dog, it's still a cat. And WorkChoices you can call it whatever you want, you can call  his  Liberal  party  policy  about  unfair  dismissals,  about  award  safety  and  it's  about  protection,  whatever  you   want, it's still WorkChoices. And that is crucial for us, I mean at the end of the day, it is our jobs, as trades  unions,  to  ensure  that  our  members  can  go  to  work  and  have  fundamental  rights  protected  -  fundamental   rights protected. Freedom from unfair dismissal, knowledge that your safety net is not going to be ripped away  and what did we hear yesterday, 2.3 million workers unfair dismissals, gone, could be sacked on a whim. We  had  that  debate  in  2007  and  the  Australian  people  backed  Labor  and  backed  the  union  campaign  and  of   course unions are on a campaign with the same issues. We have always talked about other issues - we've  always talked about other issues, safety, we've always spoken about superannuation, we have always spoken  about the need for more family friendly workplaces and we will always continue to do that and we are clever  enough that we can do more than two things at once. But, at this election, my focus and the union movements  focus will be on ensuring that the Australian people aren't duped into a return of WorkChoices with a different  name.

 KEN RANDALL: A question from Sid Maher.

 QUESTION: Sid Maher from The Australian. Mr Howes, last September you expressed some concern about  workers being worse off as a result of award simplifications and you also accused the government of giving too much weight to the arguments of the employer groups. Given the recent examples we've seen of workers  being  worse  off,  is  that  still  your  view,  and  is,  as  Mr  Abbott  says,  that  a  broken  promise  from  the  Rudd Government?

 PAUL HOWES: Well Sid, if you remember correctly what I said, I was concerned about the government giving too much credence to some employer associations. There are some sensible employer associations that will  try and do the right thing for their business and for their workers, then you have the trots, the Australian Mines and Metals Association, the Minerals Council, the fringe elements who are out there trying to wind back the  clock  not  to  the  full  WorkChoices  but  back  to  a  -  before  the  harvester  decision,  you  know,  nuts,  mental.  In   terms of award modernisation this has been an incredibly time consuming and difficult process, why, because it is a difficult thing to do, to create a national award safety net, to create a national award system. Now when  Joe Hockey and John Howard started the award modernisation process, they also admitted that it was going to  be  a  complicated  system.  And  I  notice,  I  haven't  read  anywhere  in  any  paper  anyone  saying  that  this  is   actually a Joe Hockey initiative with Kevin Andrews. But it has taken a long period of time and unlike -unlike  Labor and unlike Julia Gillard, the coalition when they started this process did not provide any guarantees for working people. Now there have been some mistakes and there have been some problems with this process.  But  workers  who  are  left  worse off  because of the award  modernization  process  can  make  applications  for take  home  pay  orders.  There  are  solutions  to  these  problems.  There  is  a  tribunal  for  once  which  has  the   power to make decision to rectify these problems. Is it frustrating, yes. Is it time consuming, yes. Is it the right  thing to do for the Australian economy, absolutely. Is it the right thing to do for Australian workers, without a doubt. Because for the first time we will have an uncomplicated system which gives employers certainty about  what they are paying across the board, across the country and gives workers the guarantee they ain't being ripped off.

 KEN RANDALL: The next question is from Karl Elsener.

 QUESTION:  Karl  Elsener  Australia  Associated  Press  Mr  Howes.  Chevrons  announced  it  will  import  25,000   tonnes  of  steel  for  the  Gorgon  gas  project.  That's  going  to  cost  Australian  jobs  no  doubt,  2000  I  think  has   been  -  what's  been  suggested.  Is  this  a  policy  failing  on  the  part  of  the  Rudd  Government  and  perhaps  an example of what you're talking about today in terms of investment rules? Secondly, the ramp up in rhetoric in  criticism of Tony Abbott in recent weeks is that perhaps because you fear Tony Abbott's chances at the next  election or do you consider him more to be the Liberal version of a Mark Latham.

 PAUL HOWES:  If  you've  read  my  column  you  will  know  that  I've  already  said  that.  In  terms  of  the  Gorgon program,  that  is  a  very  disappointing  announcement  by  Chevron  -  a  very  disappointing  announcement  by   Chevron considering that Chevron a US company has come in here to exploit our resource, a resource that  belongs to all Australians, you think Chevron could do their bit to give back to Australian steel makers in the  steel towns of Newcastle, Port Kembla and Whyalla - very disappointing, very disappointing. Do I blame Kevin  Rudd, absolutely not. Do I blame Colin Barnett who went out publicly - publicly, the West Australian Premier  and  said  we  want  to  build  the  new  wave  of  infrastructure  programs  in  WA  with  Chinese  steel  and  wait,   Chinese  labour  .  Anyone  who  was  a  bit  of  a  conspiracy  theorist  would  think  he  would  be  the  Manchurian candidate,  where  are  his  loyalties,  Peking  or  Perth.  But  it  is  a  disappointing announcement  and  we  will  be   working closely with the government to make sure that these mistakes don't happen again. And the way we  will do that is through the Steel Industry Innovation Council and the Steel Supplier Advocate, two new policy announcements  by  the  government  last  year  which  have  just  been  set  up  and  are  just  getting  running.   Disappointing, yes but we are going to try and make sure that we don't repeat that into the future. In terms of  Tony Abbott, well the similarities between Abbott and Latham are remarkable, both shoot from the hip, both mad, both thinking that 'saying it how you see it' is in the best interests of how to run a country. You know it's 

 Page 8 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 always disappointing when Labor loses elections, but thank God we lost the 2004 election - thank God we lost  the 2004 election and saved this country from a Latham Prime Ministership. And it is in the Liberal party's best  interest and the coalition's best interest to make sure that they don't repeat that mistake this time. Can you  image it; how could - how could someone like Scott Morrison, how could someone like Joe Hockey, how could  someone like Christopher Pyne in any good conscience sit in an Abbott party room, sit in an Abbott cabinet  table as he starts dictating out social policies which were abolished by the Vatican in Vatican II. I mean this  guys bonkers and the reason why we need to talk about him is because frankly, a few of my friends that are  sitting here today have been giving him an easy time, the media love him, why not; he's entertaining, he's fun,  a  bit  mad,  but  good  copy  -  the  same  way  that  Latham  was  in  the  lead  up  to  the  2004  election.  And  it's  a   responsibility of trade unions to educate their members and to educate working people in this country about  what will happen if this guy, who might seem like a good bloke, pretty fit, knows how to swim, knows how to  wear a pair of budgie smugglers, gets into the Lodge and winds back the clock in so many ways that will rip  away at the equalities and the wins that we have won since the 2007 election.

 KEN RANDALL: Next question is from David Speers.

 QUESTION: David Speers from Sky News Paul, thank you for educating us today.

 PAUL HOWES: Any time David.

 QUESTION: You call for a clear strategy on the role and type of skilled migration we want to see, what is your  clear  strategy  for  the  role  and  type  of  skilled  migration;  do  you  have  any  problems  with  the  current  type  of   skilled migration? And on the population forecast of 36 million by 2050 Kevin Rudd says that's inevitable, do  you agree and are you comfortable with a population of that size?

 PAUL HOWES: Well my union which our union was formed before Australia was formed. We were formed in  1886 and we have always believed in a bigger Australia. Key policy planks of our union when we formed the  Labor party in 1891 was about building a bigger population base that is still our position. In terms of migration,  the  issues  about  skilled  migration are this,  if  there  is  a general labour shortage then we do not oppose the  importation of labour to plug that shortage because we see it as the long term interest of our members here to  have those projects finished. But if imported labour is being used as a tool to undermine Australian wages, to  create wage competition between foreign and domestic labour, then we see that as a truly negative thing. The  problem  with  the old  John  Howard  regime  is  that employers  could  pay  foreign labour  significantly  less  they   pay to domestic labour, therefore creating wage competition between Australian workers and foreign workers.  Now the simple solution to this is if you're an employer and you have genuinely tested the market and you  cannot get domestic labour to plug your gap then you have to pay that foreign worker exactly to the dollar to  the  cent  what  you'd  be  paying  an  Australian  worker.  It  should  not  be  cheaper  to  employ  foreign  labour  it   should be more expensive. It's a simple test. It's a simple test and if employers - if employers are honest - and  if employers are decent and are genuinely disconcerned[sic] about plugging the gaps that exist from time to  time then there should be no opposition - no opposition to that scheme because that in my view is the ultimate  safety net. That in my view is the  ultimate  test.  Unfortunately  time  and  time  and  time  again  we  see  some   unscrupulous employers not doing that and the experiences that my officials have gone through in exposing  racketeering  markets,  trading  markets  in  foreign  labour,  the  conditions  -  the  abhorrent  conditions  -  that  in   today's Australia we're seeing people being treated as demonstrates to me time and time again that I can't  trust employers to self-regulate on this. And there needs to be strong Government regulation of any scheme  and a strong guarantee that there is a genuine market testing.

 KEN RANDALL: A question from Misha Schubert?

 MISHA  SCHUBERT:  Misha  Schubert  from The  Age.  I  just  wanted  to  bring  you  back  to  the  issue  of  award modernization  and  ask  I  know  you  mounted  quite  a  strong  defence  that  it  was  the  right  thing  to  do  by  the   Labor  Government,  but  do you think  in  a  sense  that  they  have  flubbed the  politics  of  it  and in  having  case  studies  pop  up  around  the  country  with  individual  workers  who  argue  they've  been  left  worse  off  by  award modernisation, it's exposed Labor to a risk on one of its traditionally strongest campaigning issues?

 PAUL HOWES: Well I think, you know, the last couple of weeks when we've seen a few of these examples  trotted out that Eric Abetz has been borrowing from our rule book and what we did in the lead up to the 2007  election as a union movement. Now when you look at the cases here if you're talking about someone being  able to be legally employed for 1.5 hours do I oppose that? Absolutely. Do I support minimum engagement  levels  of  three  hours? Absolutely.  Why?  Well  because if  we  didn't  have these  guarantees  in place  you can have a scenario where an employer employs a workers for two hours - so you're off now, come back in an  hour and you'll start again. No paid lunch break. An employer can engage a worker for one and a half hours  when they've had to commute 45 minutes there and 45 minutes back. There are very strong logical reasons why  these  guarantees  are  put  in  place.  They're  put  in  place  for  the  protection  of  all  workers.  This  actually   makes sense. I'm disappointed that we haven't heard a strong defence of this and I would be defending this  because frankly a safety net, a minimum level, a clear level playing field across the board is good for business - good for business - and it's good for workers and it's good for fairness. Now award modernisation has been  a  problem,  but  if  you  went  out  to  the  street  today  and  if you  went  and  walked  around  the  leafy  streets  of 

 Page 9 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Press ...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 Canberra and asked those workers that you ran into is the biggest problem affecting you in your life, in your  workplace, in your world, award modernisation and I think most of them, unless they've avid readers of The  Australian  would  say  what  is  award  modernisation?  What  is  award  modernisation?  They  know  what  unfair   dismissals are - they know what unfair dismissals are - they know what a safety net is, but I think this is a  massive storm in a teacup that's been beaten up because essentially the Government's had few issues in this  front for the last two years and when you find one - and you might find the odd outspoken union leader for a  small union that will say a few outrageous comments and score a few cheap headlines - you can beat that up  into any story you want - the reality is of the impact on working people I think very little - very little.

 KEN RANDALL: Steve Lewis?

 QUESTION: Steve Lewis from News Limited papers including the mighty Hobart Mercury Mr Howes...

 PAUL HOWES: I know, I've seen you there.

 QUESTION: Thank you very much. Two quick questions if I may - I notice in your Auspoll that you didn't ask  voters why they had - why they've been turning off Kevin Rudd over the past couple of months as all the other  polls  have  suggested.  Do  you  think  it's  in  part  because  of  the  Government's  continued  support  for  an   emissions trading scheme? Is it time for the Government now to drop that emissions trading scheme which you've  been  quite  critical  of  in  the  past?  And  secondly,  in  terms  of  the  ACTU  campaign  that  you've  been   talking about and revving up today, you've just come from the two day love in, what sort of tactics, what sort of  campaign strategy are we likely to see?  Will  we  see  AWU  officials  going  into marginal seats as they did in  2007 to directly support the reelection of a Rudd Government?

 PAUL  HOWES:  I'll  take  the  second  half  of  your  question  first  Steve.  Well  since  1891  when  a  group  of  my members met underneath the tree in Barcaldine and made a decision to form a Labor Party our union and our  officials and our members have worked at every single election after, state, federal and local, to reelect Labor  Governments. If you look into my rulebook the first aim of my union is to establish a party to represent the interests of working people in the Parliament. So no great shock here, we will be endorsing the Labor Party in  the next election and yes we will be deploying resources to held Labor be re-elected.

 Why?  Because  we  know  it's  in the  interests  of  our  members and the interests of working people to have a  voice,  to  have  a  seat  at  the  table  and  to  have  a  party  that  acts  for  them  rather  than  against  them.  Now  in   terms of our polling, well Steve I have smart people that work for me that decide that these are the questions  that we ask those people and I trust their advice, but you're always welcome to ring up and let me know what  you  want.  Frankly  do  I  think  the  CPRS  has  been  given  a  good  whack  over  the  last  couple  of  months?  Of course, you know, I can read the papers. Now you say that I've been critical of the CPRS, well I was never  critical of a thing called the CPRS, I was critical of the White Paper and I was critical of the Green Paper. But  the legislation that went to the Parliament - the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme - is in the interests of my members in the steel and aluminium and emissions intensive trade exposed industries. We support it because  we believe that it's in the interest of our members to have their job secured through a smart sensible scheme that does the right thing by the economy and does the right thing by the environment. Do I think the ETS has  been  hard  to  sell?  Yes  because  it's  a  complex  policy.  It's  a  complex  bill,  it's  complex  legislation  and  the   reason why is it's a complex problem.You aren't going to fix climate change by planting a few trees and dolling  out some cash to farmers. I mean the Coalition seems to think any environmental problem, any major issue  affecting regional Australia, is solved by sending cheques to farmers.That's how you fix drought. That's how you fix water supply. Give a cocky a cheque, he'll cash it and everything will be fine. I mean this is a nonsense  policy.  The  reality  is  is  that  every  economist  out  there,  every  sensible  government,  anyone  who  knows anything about carbon pollution and also the way that markets work say that a market based solution is the  only  way  that  we'll  reduce  our  carbon  emissions.  That's  why  my  union  supports  the  final  version  -  the  final   version of the CPRS - and I think it's a difficult issue for the Government, but ultimately it's a difficult issue for the entire planet.

 KEN RANDALL: Final question today from Laurie Wilson.

 QUESTION:  Laurie  Wilson  from  APAC  Mr  Howes.  How  concerned  are  you  that  a  plain  speaking,  hip   shooting, budgie smuggling political leader whose side kick from St George who now seems to have achieved  such a status, made such an impact on the Australian psyche that even his critics like you refer to him by his  first name - how concerned are you - and you seem quite concerned given your comments today - that they  may just have a winning formula that appeals to the Australian electorate this year?

 PAUL HOWES: Oh I have no concern about Barnaby being promoted. I mean I think to be honest he should be Shadow Treasurer. Make him the leader. I want him there as long as possible, it's fantastic.He is the gift  that never stops giving. I mean, you know, he has made your job so much easier. He comes here, gives a  speech, all you have to do is cut and paste the copy. It doesn't have any analysis, it just demonstrates how mad this man is - mad. He's fantastic - I mean he's a great sport, you know, it almost - almost - makes me  want  to  be  a  politician  just  to  debate  him.  Not  quite,  but  almost.  Because  this  guy  -  this  guy  -  and  it  also  

 demonstrates  to  me  -  I  mean  the  great  thing  about  Barnaby  demonstrates  how  the  lack  of  seriousness in  

 Page 10 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Pres...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

 which Abbott takes his job. The fact that he would promote this man to be the Shadow Finance Minister, put  him up against one of Labor's most talented ministers, Lindsay Tanner, on the basis of he used to do a couple  of  farmers'  tax  returns  in  St  George  therefore  he  knows  the  way  the  global  economy  works  and  how  to   balance the budget speaks volumes about Peter Costello's claims that Abbott not only has no understanding  of the economy but he doesn't take it seriously either. Now I think Barnaby Joyce is a great gift to the Labor  Party. I think that he will certainly attract a good following of support in certain National Party constituencies,  but can I tell you the people that are voting for Barnaby, the people that love him at the moment, don't vote  Labor  anyway.But  the  people  that  may  be  the  soft  voters  in outer-metropolitan  Australia,  those  people  who   might be tempted to vote Liberal, I just hope - I hope - and I pray that the Coalition strategy is to send Barnaby  out into regional - outer-metropolitan seats across Australia because I know what will happen and we all know  what will happen when you see a goose like him go out there and try and sell that message. Thank you.

 

 

  2010 Australian Workers' Union

 

 All electoral matter is authorised by Paul Howes, National Secretary  Email: members@awu.net.au  Level 10, 377-383 Sussex Street, Sydney | NSW 2000  Members Hotline: 1300 885 653   

 Page 11 of 11 The Australian Workers Union: Paul Howes National Pres...

 11/03/2010 http://www.awu.net.au/959657_2.html?H|A|959657|

