---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 9 April 2010: UN people smuggleing comments; illegal boat arrivals; Rudd Government's election driven strategy."
date: "2010-04-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336837
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M7YW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 

 Transcript - Doorstop interview 

 Friday 9th April 2010 

 Subjects: UN people smuggling comments, illegal boat arrivals, Rudd Government’s election 

 driven strategy  

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: The reports from the United Nations in Indonesia this morning saying 

 basically that the problem of boat arrivals to Australia and the pipeline of people coming to 

 Australia has been completely out of control, is a problem that has been growing and won’t 

 go away, is a complete endorsement of the issue the Coalition has been raising now for 

 some time. There have been now 106 illegal boat arrivals on this government’s watch. There 

 have been 38 just this year. Boats have now been arriving at a rate of 3 per week as 

 opposed to 3 per year as it was under the Coalition.  

 

 The government’s response to that is a response for the election, it’s not a response to stop 

 the boats. This is a government that has been dragged kicking and screaming to say 

 something today but all they have done is try to put this situation into suspended animation. 

 What they haven’t done is put forward a plan to stop the boats. Even by their own admission 

 this is not a plan that will stop the boats. The government has said they are going to wait six 

 months and this issue will just somehow sit in abeyance for six months but what we know is 

 the boats will continue to come until this government faces up to the reality of the problems 

 of their own making, the failures of their own policies, the flawed nature of their own 

 decisions, which have led to this issue, which has led to this issue which the UN describes 

 as being out of control.  

 

 The Coalition has a permanent solution to this issue. We have a clear plan and a proven 

 record. These are things that will stop the boats as they did last time when we were in 

 government. This government is looking to stop a headline, not stop the boats.  

 

 QUESTION: How much of a backlog will it create, I mean their initial 90 day processed claim 

 is now six months, we are already seeing a backlog, how bad will it get?  

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well one of the areas in which the government has been in complete 

 denial is the situation on Christmas Island. Now they still maintain it isn’t full, it’s been full for 

 some time and now they are basically going to clog up the system even more as boat, after 

 boat, after boat arrives and clearly they will just spill onto the mainland as they already have 

 now. So we will have people transferred whose claims have not yet been assessed, now not 

 even started, moving around the country to various centres, particularly Darwin.  

 

 The other thing I would say is this. The government, Kevin Rudd in particular and Julia 

 Gillard, has been criticising the Opposition for holding them to account on their false claims 

 about push factors and the dangers of Temporary Protection Visas. Now their statements 

 today totally acknowledge that these criticisms and these clear positions we have been 

 taking have been spot on the money. This is a government that has acknowledged today 

 that someone’s refugee status is indeed temporary, they are going to sit and wait, in fact the 

 government had this advice, at least it was flagged, a month ago when the UNHCR said the 

 situation in Sri Lanka and Afghanistan was changing. So it simply prompts you to ask the 

 question why today when we have a Newspoll this weekend, an election now in six months, 

 given the duration of the suspension the government has announced today and I think 

 Australians have every right to be cynical and disappointed that the government has a 

 political plan but no plan to stop the boats.  

 

 QUESTION: If you were to go into government would you keep the tougher suspension 

 arrangements in place?  

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well we would review that at the time but it’s clear that the government 

 has set the time of the election and we will deal with the situation as we find it in the election. 

 But what we have made very clear is what we will do is reintroduce Temporary Protection 

 Visas, we would make sure that we had a universal process of offshore processing, we 

 would make sure that we would implement a policy to turn back boats where we were able to 

 do so and we would continue as we always did in government with our policies of 

 international co-operation and regional partnerships.  

 

 QUESTION: Is it clear that the government have run out of ideas and stop-gapping is all they 

 can come up with?  

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well this is a government that is in crisis and in denial at the one time 

 on the arrival of boats to Australia. Effectively what they have done here is take the wet 

 lettuce to people smugglers and this is the response of this government. This is not a plan, 

 this is not a plan to stop boats, this is not a plan to stop people smugglers in their tracks, the 

 people smugglers clearly have the ascendency over this government, they know Kevin Rudd 

 is a soft touch, they have known that since he has come to office, his policies, his decisions 

 have all confirmed that and as a result the boats have come, the price has dropped, there 

 are new people smuggling businesses and gangs now operating in the market in Indonesia 

 and this problem is going from bad to worse and today’s announcement is all about saving 

 Kevin Rudd from embarrassment, not stopping the boats.  

 

 QUESTION: The Australian Federal Police heading to Christmas Island are you concerned 

 it’s a stretch on police resources?  

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well I would say two things, firstly this isn’t the first time the Australian 

 Federal Police have been sent to Christmas Island in the precaution of further outbreaks of 

 violence at Christmas Island. When I was there in January there was a special deployment 

 of Federal Police on Christmas Island at that time following the riots of last year so already 

 we have seen additional cost and stretching of resources of the Federal Police to deal with 

 the crisis of the government’s own making on Christmas Island and we are now seeing it 

 again. The Minister today slipped up when he said this was a redeployment. It certainly is, 

 with people literally sitting around for 3 to 6 months while this government tries to think of 

 something to do to stop the boats, will only create further tensions on the Island and those 

 tensions will obviously spill over when people are moved to detention centres all around the 

 country.  

 

 QUESTION: [Inaudible]  

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don’t know what it’s costing the Australian Federal Police, the 

 government should answer that question, they should also answer the question, how much 

 is it costing in charters from Christmas Island to the mainland, with every flight that comes 

 bringing people to the mainland to various centres. There’s midnight flights we’ve already 

 seen, we’ll see more of them in the weeks and months ahead as this government continues 

 to scramble to pretend that this problem isn’t there and keep it out of view of the Australian 

 people. What we do know from the Senate Estimates is the cost of each additional arrival on 

 Christmas Island is $81,900 in immigration costs alone.  

 

 END 

  

