---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 15 July 2010: South Australian training package; asylum seekers; election commitments and Budget."
date: "2010-07-15"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
  - "South Australian training package"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "election commitments and Budget."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341589
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VUBX6%22
---

 The Hon Simon Crean MP 

 Minister for Education 

 Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion 

 

 15 July, 2010  

 Transcript 

 Doorstop Interview - Adelaide  

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  ADELAIDE 

 MAIN TOPICS: South Australian training package; asylum seekers; election  commitments and Budget 

 JOURNALIST: Just firstly how will this federal money help young into jobs? 

 SIMON CREAN: Because it’s identifying the job needs here in South Australia; it’s  building the skill base and it’s funding the facilities that enable people to learn quicker, more  intensively and get internationally traded qualifications. So the future for people in work is  increasingly skill based.  

 If what we’re doing is developing flexible ways in which we either build on existing skills or  start people from scratch, that’s an important assistance in terms of meeting the future  demands. But this is a huge investment in the infrastructure that will undertake the training. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on another issue; is the asylum seeker issue ‘killing’ the Government? 

 SIMON CREAN: No I don’t believe it is. 

 I think that this is a complex issue; the Prime Minister has laid down the foundations by  which we intend addressing the issue, it can only be done with proper regional cooperation,  consistency through the United Nations and that’s what we’re working on. The previous  government didn’t. We’re doing it. We’ve demonstrated how difficult it is but we’re  determined to conclude it. 

 JOURNALIST: But it is hurting the new Prime Minister isn’t it? 

 SIMON CREAN: I don’t believe it is.  

 I think it is a complex issue and whilst people who are concerned would wish the problem  will go away, it won’t.  

 I think what they expect of Government is a sensible appreciation of the problem and honesty  with the public around the facts and then a commitment to working towards the solution. 

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister’s just told the press club not to expect much in the way  of funding for anything, pretty much. I didn’t see the rest of her comments before I left but  that was definitely the start of it. 

 SIMON CREAN: No, what the Prime Minister has signalled today is that everything we go  into the election with will not add a dollar, not one dollar, to the Budget bottom line.  

 Our challenge to Tony Abbott is to make the same commitment.  

 The truth of it is we have laid down the foundations for important spending going into the  future but it’s all funded.  

 These initiatives today that I’ve announced are not new money.  

 They are money that the Government had identified in previous Budgets but was absolutely  committed to ensure that we got value for money. So what we’ve been doing is working in  partnership with business and with the universities here to ensure that we get the best value  for that spend . But this is an investment you’ve got to make right. It’s an investment in the  future of individuals and their chances in life, but it’s also an investment in the future of the  country that really needs these important skills developed. 

 JOURNALIST: Is funding for education and for skills training and so forth likely to  generally industry partnership —or not—  in the future? 

 SIMON CREAN: I think it’s always desirable that we get the proper connection between  where the jobs are, the demand if you like for jobs, and ensuring we’re trying to keep the  supply side of the equation up. So we need to talk with industry a lot about where they see the  future shortages because you can’t just turn training on overnight. This was the problem we  inherited from the previous Government; a failure to invest in these important areas and so  we’re trying to get the foundations laid that ensures that we don’t run into those sorts of  problems in the future, and talking with business about where they see the future is a  fundamental input to making the right decisions. 

 ENDS. 

 Media Contact: media@deewr.gov.au  

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

 

