---
title: "Kevin Rudd must apologise for border protection failures as another boat arrives."
date: "2010-03-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335003
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ES2W6%22
---

 Wed, 3rd March 2010  

 KEVIN RUDD MUST APOLOGISE FOR BORDER PROTECTION FAILURES AS  ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVES 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Joint Media Release.  

 Kevin Rudd must apologise for his border protection failures as another boat was intercepted near Ashmore 

 Islands earlier today, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for 

 Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 “While Kevin Rudd is busy apologising for his many failures and broken promises, he must not forget to apologise 

 for his failure to maintain the strong border protection regime he inherited from the Coalition,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “Before the last election Kevin Rudd was talking tough, promising he would turn back the boats. Yet on his watch, 

 not one boat has been turned back, while 86 have arrived, carrying almost 4000 people,” he said.  

 “The latest boat brings this year’s tally to 18 boats and more than 950 people. That’s as many boats and even 

 more people than arrived in the last six years of the Coalition Government.  

 “Under Labor we have gone from an average of three illegal boat arrivals per year to two boats every week!  

 “The arrival of yet another boat, as more tents go up on Christmas Island, is further proof of the Government’s 

 failure to honour their promise. For this Kevin Rudd must take responsibility and acknowledge his inability to 

 deliver,” Mr Morrison said.  

 Mr Keenan said Home Affairs Minister Brendan O’Connor’s failure to disclose the location of the latest 

 interception was the Government’s first admission that the boats are getting alarmingly close to Australian 

 shores.  

 “Minister O’Connor is finally showing signs of panic and coming to terms with the severity of this crisis by omitting 

 the exact location of this latest interception,” Mr Keenan said.  

 “Australia’s border protection is in disarray and not even the Minister responsible is willing to reveal how bad the 

 situation has become.  

 “I call on the Minister to reveal exactly how far from Australian shores this latest boat was intercepted and why he 

 failed to disclose this information to the Australian public,” Mr Keenan said. 

  

