---
title: "Minister Evans must answer 'go soft' on allegations on Refugee Review Tribunal."
date: "2010-05-12"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338518
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0CYW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 

 Minister Evans must answer 'go soft' allegations on refugee review tribunal 

 Friday 14th May 2010 

 Media reports of allegations that Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT) members are being 

 pressured to go soft to qualify for reappointment demand a full explanation from Minister 

 Evans, Federal Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 “The Rudd Government’s decision to appoint the head of the Refugee Council, John Gibson, 

 as part of a four member panel to review the reappointment of serving members of the RRT, 

 has raised serious questions in the media about potential conflicts of interest and suggestion 

 that RRT members have been urged to go soft to secure reappointment,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “These are serious matters that require the Minister to give a full explanation, including a 

 statement to the Parliament,” he said.  

 

 “To appoint the head of the Refugee Council to a panel which reviews the reappointment of 

 RRT members, who decide whether a decision to reject a person’s asylum claim is to be 

 upheld or overturned, presents a serious challenge. The Minister must explain how potential 

 conflicts of interest are being managed and provide an assurance that no pressure has been 

 placed on any serving member of the RRT that would compromise their independence in 

 making decisions.  

 

 “Specifically the Minister must explain the following:  

 

 1. whether the review panel were provided with statistics on the decisions made by RRT 

 members to affirm or reject refugee determination decisions,  

 2. whether any member of the panel raised the decision record of any serving RRT member 

 with that member as part of their review process,  

 3. what, if any, observations were made about the decision record of any individual RRT 

 member with that member and by which member of the review panel, and  

 4. whether any member of the review panel has been counselled about the inappropriate 

 use of serving RRT members’ decision record statistics in the interview process.  

 

 “The appointment of Mr Gibson to the review panel follows a $140,000 grant to the Council 

 in Tuesday night’s budget by the Rudd Government. The Refugee Council have been 

 outspoken advocates on policy issues impacting on asylum seekers and refugees and are 

 understandably sympathetic to seeing people’s asylum claims upheld.  

 

 “The four member panel to review RRT reappointments also includes the Principal Member 

 of the RRT and representatives of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship and the 

 Public Service Merit Commission.  

 

 “The Coalition understands panel members have had the opportunity to interview serving 

 members of the RRT as part of the process to consider whether they should be 

 recommended for re-appointment,” Mr Morrison said. 

  

