---
title: "Boat 111 arrives - Rudd's failures risking our immigration system."
date: "2010-04-16"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337161
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q5XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 BOAT 111 ARRIVES - RUDD’S FAILURES RISKING OUR  IMMIGRATION SYSTEM  

 Friday, 16 April 2010   

 Another illegal boat arrival, the 111th under Labor, is yet more evidence that Kevin Rudd  has lost control of our borders and is now risking the integrity of our immigration  program on the mainland, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael  Keenan said today.    

 “Today’s arrival comes as Minister Evans still remains tight lipped on whether  instructions were given to Immigration Department officials to soft peddle on visa  breaches, frauds and rorts,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “Once again the Minister for Immigration has gone missing on his watch. At a time when  Australians are looking for reassurances about the integrity of our borders and integrity  of our system on the mainland, he is nowhere to be found,” he said.    

 “The Immigration Department reportedly being told to ‘back off on all non essential visa  checking’ due to the overwhelming workload on illegal boat arrivals shows the extent our  immigration programme is failing under Labor.    

 “Five boats since the Rudd Government’s election fix confirm beyond a shadow of a  doubt that the people smugglers are still in charge, with boats coming at a rate of three  a week.    

 “Kevin Rudd’s election fix will only place further strain on our immigration system,  without solving the problem of illegal arrivals,” he said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “The arrival of another boat within a stones throw of Christmas Island  once again highlights the crumbling state of Australia’s border protection.    

 “Border Protection Command, like the Christmas Island Detention Centre, the Australian  Federal Police and the Department of Immigration, is over stretched,” he said.    

 “Another boat has cruised through the nets as BPC continues to struggle with the  mammoth task of controlling the fallout of the Rudd Labor Government’s policy failure on  border protection.    

 “Until the Government commits to taking real action, the boats will keep coming and our  border protection system will keep failing,” he said.  

 

