---
title: "Rudd sets new record with the arrival of 13th boat this month."
date: "2010-03-27"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336368
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/15XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 RUDD SETS NEW RECORD WITH THE ARRIVAL OF 13TH  BOAT THIS MONTH  

 Saturday, 27 March 2010   

 The arrival of the 13th boat this month earlier today, makes this the highest  number of boats to arrive in a single month since the Rudd Government was  elected, according to Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan.    

 “The Rudd Government continues to set a record pace for boat arrivals in 2010.  Yet the more boats that arrive, the greater Labor’s denial of the problem,” Mr  Morrison said.    

 “Already boats are arriving at the fastest rate on record in 2010, with more than  ten boats and 500 people turning up every month. At this rate we will see more  than 120 boats and 6,000 people arrive this year,” he said.    

 “Today we had a senior ASIO official confirm the pressure that illegal boat  arrivals were placing on the agency, demonstrating yet another consequence of  Labor’s decision to roll back the border protection regime.    

 “At the same time, the Rudd Government continues to transfer people to the  mainland from an overflowing Christmas Island, ending the Coalition’s policy of  universal off shore processing, while pretending it’s just business as usual.    

 “Under the Rudd Government, business as usual is almost three boats per week,  compared to just three boats per year under the Coalition.    

 “The Prime Minister dismissed the surge in illegal boat arrivals on his watch as a  non issue in Perth this week, highlighting just how out of touch he is with the  concerns of Australia on this issue. Mr Rudd’s refusal to debate Tony Abbott on  border protection demonstrates acute sensitivity to his government’s border  protection failures.    

 “Since the Rudd Government began rolling back the border protection regime  they inherited from the Coalition, 98 boats and 4460 people have arrived,” Mr  Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “The constant flood of boats is adding to the woes of an already  under resourced Border Protection Command.    

 “We’ve seen reports today that the influx of boats is causing problems for ASIO,  however we’ve known for some time that BPC has been under pressure from the  flood.    

 “The government needs to commit more resources to protecting our borders and  fix its broken border protection policy,” he said.  

