---
title: "Suspension of claims breaches international law, but does it breach Australia's discrimination laws as well?"
date: "2010-04-10"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336872
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/K0FW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens  Media Release 

 Suspension of Claims Breaches International Law, But Does  It Breach Australia's Discrimination Laws As Well? 

 Saturday 10th April 2010, 3:30pm 

 The Australian Greens have supported moves to investigate a legal challenge to the 

 Federal Government's suspension of Sri Lankan and Afghan asylum claims, 

 according to Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens Spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, 

 says it's already clear that the Government's suspension of processing Sri Lankan 

 and Afghan asylum claims is in breach of international law through the UN Refugee 

 Convention. 

 "The question now is whether this is also a breach of Australia's own Racial 

 Discrimination Act,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "For the Government to single out specific nationalities and exclude them from active 

 processing of asylum claims seems like clear discrimination, but we hope the legal 

 experts can give us an answer sooner, rather than later. 

 "In the meantime, we call on the Government to release its own legal advice on this 

 new policy. 

 "There are also grave concerns about what this policy will mean for the detention of 

 children. 

 "Why should children be detained just because they are Sri Lankan or Afghani?'' 

 The decision to suspend claims will inevitably lead to more men, women and 

 children being detained indefinitely. Given Christmas Island is already stretched past 

 capacity, the Greens believe conditions at the centre will deteriorate further as a 

 result of the suspension. 

 "The Commonwealth Ombudsman must conduct an urgent independent 

 investigation of the conditions on Christmas Island. After yesterday's announcement 

 we cannot trust the Federal Government to do the right thing. 

 "This election year backflip is not just Kevin Rudd breaking his promise of ending the 

 Howard policy of indefinite detention. 

 "By this decision, the Prime Minister is now clearly authorising the detention of 

 children.'' 

 

