---
title: "Another Parliament, another boat arrival"
date: "2010-09-29"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "MORRISON, Scott, MP"
  - "Refugee boat movements"
  - "KEENAN, Michael, MP"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344106
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/256056%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 Another Parliament, Another Boat Arrival  

 29/09/10  

 The arrival of the 97th boat this year, carrying 20 people, in the first sitting week of  the new Parliament will add to the ongoing crisis in the Government’s immigration  detention network, that is now accommodating a record population, at ever increasing  cost to the Australian taxpayer, Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population and  Shadow Minister for Immigration & Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs & Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.    

 “Every new illegal boat arrival continues to demonstrate Labor’s compounding policy  failures,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “In the Parliament today the Government refused to provide a timeline for their never  never solution in East Timor and refused to outline the cost of their broken promise to  expand the onshore detention network, with a further 1,000 beds,” he said.    

 “Based on Senate Estimates figures provided by the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship, this latest boat will cost taxpayers another $1.6 million.    

 “While the Prime Minister tried to cover over her pre-election deceit on expanding  onshore detention facilities by being tricky with the truth in question time today, the  illegal arrival of another  boat demonstrates again that Labor have no answers to their  policy failures, in East Timor or anywhere else.    

 “Labor’s discriminatory asylum freeze has compounded their border protection  failures, causing chaos in our detention network, increasingly characterised by riots,  breakouts and cost blowouts.     

 “The arrival of yet another boat carrying 20 people will add further stress and strain to  Labor’s detention mess,” Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “People smugglers are responding to Labor’s election win with new  found confidence and are showing no signs of slowing down under this new  Government.    

 “The people smugglers’ window of opportunity has been extended for another term of  parliament and they have wasted no time in taking advantage of what remains a weak  government. 

 “We are now facing a new tsunami of boats - bigger, fuller and more frequent under  this weak Government,” he said. 

