---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices, Perth: 3 July 2010: Minerals Resources Rent Tax, asylum seekers and Zentai extradition."
date: "2010-07-03"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE"
subjects:
  - "Minerals Resources Rent Tax"
  - "asylum seekers and Zentai extradition."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341073
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3DAX6%22
---

 Stephen Smith, MP  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade 

 Press Conference with Stephen Smith, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Chris Evans, Minister  for Immigration. 

 Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices, Perth 

 Saturday, 3 July 2010 

 Topics: Minerals Resources Rent Tax, asylum seekers and  Zentai extradition 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     Firstly, we very much welcome the decision yesterday announced by  the Government, so far as the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is concerned. We welcome it very  much. We believe it's a good decision for Western Australia, a good decision for the Western  Australian minerals and petroleum resources industries and a good decision for the people of  Western Australia. 

 We welcome very much that we now have certainty.  One of the adverse factors in recent  months has been the climate of uncertainty and we now welcome very much that there is  certainty.  So that the industry and the Government can move forward with confidence. 

 We particularly welcome the reduction in the rate from 40 per cent to 30 per cent. We  welcome the increase in the uplift factor and we welcome the certainty given to producers in  other commodities, with the restriction of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to iron ore, coal,  oil and petroleum. We also welcome very much that benefits will continue to flow to  Western Australia through the infrastructure proceeds. 

 I'll throw to Chris, who'll make some remarks on those benefits and other matters and then as  I say, we're happy to respond to your questions. 

 CHRIS EVANS:          Thanks Stephen. I think the point about certainty is very important. I  think there has been concern in the West Australian community. I think all West Australians  have accepted that the mining companies have a capacity to play - to pay more tax but the  debate around this matters, the argument about the detail, the threats to further production, I  think has caused West Australians to be concerned.  

 I think the announcement of the agreement now puts all that to bed, makes people confident  in Western Australia's future and confident that we will get a fair share of the resources, the  profits and the resources of Western Australia paid back to West Australians. So I think all 

 West Australians will be pleased that the matter's been settled, that West Australians will get  fair value for their resources, but that mining companies will be able to develop and proceed  with certainty. 

 I just want to also address the claims by Premier Barnett that somehow this tax will be  unconstitutional. All our advice is very strongly of the view that this is entirely  constitutional. It's an agreement made between us and the mining companies to bring forward  legislation. Mr Barnett's sniping from the sidelines, failing to be part of reaching a consensus  on this is not helpful. We believe the tax is constitutionally valid. We have an agreement with  the industry that will take us forward. And I encourage Mr Barnett to get on board and help  ensure West Australians get a fair share of their resources through this taxation regime. 

 I'd also like to just make the point that as a result of this arrangement now, we're able to  proceed with the planned reduction in company tax, obviously to not 29 per cent, as a result  of the changes, but also an increase in superannuation for all Australian workers. So we will  be able to move to 12 per cent superannuation guarantee so that all Australian workers will  benefit from this tax through improved superannuation, a better retirement and of course an  increase in our national savings. So there are real benefits, not only for those who work in the  mining industry and those who get business flowing off that but there's benefits for all  companies in Australia and benefits for all workers in Australia through the superannuation  increases. 

 So we think this is a very important breakthrough. It's important that we get the extra revenue  from the resources industry, that we see all Australians benefit from those taxes. And I think  all West Australians are very pleased to see settlement of these matters and seeing West  Australians get a fair share for what after all their resources. 

 Right. We're happy to respond to your questions. 

 QUESTION:    [Indistinct] small miners aren't so happy with the deal. Do you think they will  come around [indistinct]? 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     Well as the Prime Minister made clear yesterday, as did the Treasurer  and the Minister for Resources, Martin Ferguson, there is an ongoing process to look at some  of those issues. And we welcome very much the fact that that process is jointly chaired by  Don Argus and Martin Ferguson. There will still be some issues indicated by that joint  process that need to be addressed and considered in a calm way. But overall we've been  pleased with the response that we've seen. In general terms, the Chamber of Minerals and  Energy in Western Australia has welcomed this breakthrough. The Minerals Council of  Australia has applauded the breakthrough.  

 So whilst there will be some issues, which some miners in the iron ore and coal area want to  progress, the back has been broken of what has been a very difficult issue for both the  Government and the industry in Western Australia. 

 CHRIS EVANS:          Can I just make two points there? First of all, to add to what Stephen  said, the number of companies now affected by the tax is greatly reduced, down to about 350  estimated. So the number of companies caught in the net is much smaller. And the other  thing is the new tax won't come in until people have made $50 million worth of profit. So it's  a very high threshold. So when people talk about small miners they're talking about people  who have - who would have to have made more than $50 million in profit. So I think when  West Australian think of small miners they think of small miners and I think it's fair to say  that if you're making $50 million worth of profit, you're a decent sized operation. 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     To reinforce that point, of course in the small and medium sized, you  have a large number of gold mining companies and a large number of nickel companies,  substantial number of mineral sands companies, all of these companies, as Chris correctly  draws attention to, are now outside the net entirely and we welcome that very much. 

 QUESTION:    The debate was damaging to Labor, undeniably so. This change, this shift,  how will that improve Labor's prospects [indistinct]? 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     We think that the most important factor moving forward is now there  is certainty. So from a policy point of view, from an investment point of view, from the  industry's point of view, there's now a certain way forward? 

 From a political point of view the thing that Chris and I welcome most is the fact that the  noise has gone. One of the most damaging features from a political point of view in recent  times has been a lot of noise, not necessarily much light and a very strong representation to  me and to Chris and to others in the community that the Government had a responsibility to  stop the fight and to find and present a solution. And that's what we've done and as I say we  welcome that very much. 

 From a political point of view, given that this issue has now been agreed between the  Minerals Council and the Government there's now much more of an opportunity for the  community of Western Australia to reflect on the substance.  But also to look at other issues,  which from a political point of view we regard as very important. And in the run up to the  election we won't be viewed in isolation on this matter, there'll be a contrast between Julia  Gillard and Tony Abbott and a contrast between Labor and Liberal. 

 QUESTION:    So you're confident that the deal that's been sealed with the tax has increased  your support base in WA, which may have been taking a bit of a battering? 

 CHRIS EVANS:          Well I think the point Stephen was making is that there was a lot of  concern. A lot of Western Australians didn't understand the detail, but when they hear the  mining companies threatening to withdraw investment or expressing concern, that obviously  is concern to Western Australians. They know how important the mining industry is to WA,  whether directly or indirectly. So I think what people wanted was a settlement which allowed  them to be able to plan, to feel certain about the future of Western Australia and to be certain  that the mining boom will continue. 

 Our view was always that the miners could pay more tax. And as a result of this deal they  will be paying more tax and that revenue will be coming back to WA through the  Infrastructure Fund and through improved superannuation and cuts in the company tax rate. 

 So Western Australians will feel the benefit. But they were genuinely concerned at the  argument, at the fight that that was creating uncertainty. And while they may not have been  across the details, they didn't like that and that was clearly affecting the Government because  we were seen as being responsible for a lot of that argument that was occurring. 

 I think the settlement now will say - we'll see Western Australians saying well the mining  companies have copped paying more tax but they've got an arrangement which they think  they can live with, therefore we can all move on. The mining investments in WA, in  Australia will continue but we'll be getting a fairer share of the resources and I think people  generally will say that's a good deal. 

 QUESTION:    [indistinct] 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     As Chris has put it, I think there's a general sense of relief. It's not just  relief from candidates or members, there is a general sense of relief which I have picked up  in the last twenty four hours that the issues has effectively been resolved. That people did not  like the noise, did not like the fight and the resolution of the issue brings certainty.  It also  brings effective calm to the process, which enables people to proceed with certainty, to know  that minerals and petroleum resources investment will continue, that the benefits of that will  continue to flow to Western Australia.  

 There will be a greater share of tax revenue for Australians and Western Australians and,  under the infrastructure arrangements, a better flow of proceeds for infrastructure purposes in  Western Australia will also proceed, and all of these are welcome and good things.  

 From a political point of view, yes they add to the arguments that members and candidates on  Labor's side can argue.  But I think there's a general sense of relief that the issue has been  resolved to enable both the industry and the community to move on with certainty.  

 QUESTION:    Some would argue that Australia's reputation overseas has been damaged by  the tax as first proposed. Are you confident that that reputation, that we will be able to restore  that reputation now? 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     Firstly, I don't necessarily accept the notion that there was damage to  the reputation, or as some people in my view erroneously asserted, questions of sovereign  risk. There were lots of assertions and lots of arguments raised in a very robust debate over a  two month period. 

 What the international community will now see, whether it is the international investment  community or the international community generally, will be an agreement between the  Australian Government, an agreement between the Australian minerals and petroleum  resources industry for a certain future and an agreed taxation basis and arrangement.  

 Bear in mind we've had the petroleum resources rent tax for two and a half decades or more,  we've now got a minerals resources rent tax, which has been substantially modelled on those  arrangements.  We have the main peak group and the largest companies with an international  presence, the Minerals Council, Rio Tinto, BHP Billiton and Xstrata all saying this is an  agreement that we support.  This is an agreement which gives us certainty for the future and  with those companies saying that, not just in Australia but internationally.  Then the  international community and international investment community will proceed, as they  always have, in the knowledge that Australia is a very good place to invest, that our minerals  and petroleum resources industry is a very good industry to invest in, and that can continue to  proceed with certainty.  

 QUESTION:    Do you think that going back to the companies that were not consulted do  you think the mid-sized companies that make over $50 million a year should still have been  consulted before the deal was announced? 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     Well in these matters everyone wants to be in the room. The reality is  that the three companies whose representatives were in the room, BHP, Rio and Xstrata were  all board members of the Minerals Council of Australia, were effectively there with not just  the knowledge but the consent and the authority of the Minerals Council. The Minerals  Council is the peak body and organisation.  

 There will always be people outside the room who would prefer to be in it, but I think today,  twenty four hours on, the key thing is not so much to focus on what peoples' view may have  been of the process over the last eight weeks, but the outcome and the certainty that that  outcome provides.  

 CHRIS EVANS:          Of course we have got the consultative process going forward, chaired  by Don Argus and Martin Ferguson, where some of the concerns around the detail can be  addressed, so that's not a closed book.  

 If there are ongoing concerns, a number of matters have been referred to that group to work  through the finer details, the heads of agreement the major matters are al in place, but if there  are particular concerns they can still be addressed, but I think Stephen's point is the key  point. The main players were in the room when the final arrangements were struck, but there  had also been a lot of conversation and meetings in the lead up to that. I think people  understood their concerns, and as I say when you think about all the companies and  commodities that have been excluded, the $50 million threshold, there's a whole range of  things that look to address the concerns of some the smaller operators.  

 STEPHEN SMITH:     I think importantly, now that there's been a resolution, the community  will judge the Government on the outcome, not on the process.  And that outcome is one,  which, as we say, provides a great deal of certainty, has very many advantages over the  original proposal, including the reduction in the taxation rate, the increase in the uplift factor,  and the restriction of the tax for commodities, oil and gas.  Which in general terms has  previously been subject to the Petroleum Resources Rent Tax, and then iron ore and coal,  which of course are two of our most substantial commodity exports.  

 QUESTION:    There are reports that [indistinct] reaped from the tax plan that came out of  the concessions made this week. Is that the case? Is that [indistinct]? 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     Well, as the Treasurer said yesterday, there are a range of factors,  which either provided the prospect of additional available revenue or which reduced the  available revenue. The removal from the original proposal of compensation for losses  provided additional resources. The reduction of the rate from 40 per cent to 30 per cent  provided less resources, and it's also the case, I think, acknowledged both by the Treasurer,  the Minister for Minerals and Resources, and also the industry itself, that in the last week or  so, when negotiations became genuine good faith negotiations, there was a much greater  exchange between the Government and the industry over what both saw the potential revenue  implications into the future being.  

 So, I think there's a range of factors which go to that point. I think the key thing in the end is  we have a tax which the minerals resources industry says it can comfortably live with, a tax  which raises greater revenue for the people of Australia and Western Australia.  But where 

 everyone is saying this provides certainty and a way forward both for investment and future  jobs and ongoing activity.  And at the same time provides a greater revenue stream for  benefits to Australians, whether it's a reduction in the company tax rate, better arrangements 

 for superannuation, or in the case of Western Australia, a greater revenue stream for  infrastructure.  

 So there's a range of factors that go to how much revenue was available. The key thing is,  there's been a reduction in the revenue raised by the tax, but that's a reduction that the  Government can live with, and that has been as a result of good faith negotiations effectively  conducted over the last week.  

 QUESTION:    Leonora seems to be approaching capacity, Curtin as well, so where are  things in terms of capacity, and does that mean we have to start looking at getting another  centre in WA, perhaps Northern or...? 

 CHRIS EVANS:          Well the first thing to say is we have centres around Australia, not just  in Western Australia, not all the options are in Western Australia. Secondly, I was at Leonora  yesterday, spent the day at Leonora talking to the local community leaders and visiting the  detention facility. We've got about 157 people there currently. We've said the capacity is  around the 200 mark, we've got approximately 210, 220 beds available in different  configurations, but we've made it clear we'll only go to about 200. The local shire, the local  community are very comfortable with that.  

 It's actually going extremely well. The only criticism I got yesterday is that I hadn't allowed  the detainees more freedom to engage with the town. People are very welcoming there, they  want to get them into the library and engage with the community. So there's a very good feel  about the place, and the camp is being improved to provide better facilities for the children,  and the children will start school next term. About 50 of the kids will go to the local school  and they're putting in some extra classrooms, and the local principal is very positive and very  motivated. 

 So all that's going very well, but we are building capacity for single men at Curtin and we'll  be increasing that capacity, and obviously I made it clear that we're looking for more  permanent arrangements, particularly for families because we didn't have that sort of facility  and there's been discussion about Northern, but there's been a discussion about a number of  other sites and no decision has been made about that. 

 QUESTION:    About Charles Zentai, this Jewish human rights group, the Simon Wiesenthal  Centre, is calling on the Federal Government to repeal the decision to overturn the  extradition. Is that something you can comment on at all? 

 STEPHEN SMITH:     Well the decision was handed down yesterday. It's some 120, 130  page judgement so obviously that needs to be subject of careful assessment by the  Government's legal advisors, and then careful assessment by the Minister for Home Affairs. 

 He will make an announcement about an appeal, if any in due course.  

 It's not a decision that can be made in the immediate aftermath of a lengthy judgement by the  Court. There is a capacity for the Commonwealth to appeal, but serious and deliberative  consideration will be given to that and the Minister for Home Affairs will make an  announcement in due course.  

  

