---
title: "Lip sewing the inevitable consequence of Labor's failed policies"
date: "2010-11-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346348
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/379084%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 Lip sewing the inevitable consequence of  Labor’s failed policies   19/11/10  

 The fact that asylum seekers are once again sewing their lips together in our detention centres  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  Labor’s  failed  immigration  policies  and  rolling  detention   crisis, Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “This  latest  disturbing  event  is  a  further  symptom  of  an  immigration  detention  system  in   crisis,  which  the  Coalition  has  consistently  warned  would  become  a  reality  under  Labor’s   failed immigration and border protection policies,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Minister  Bowen  can  no  longer  pretend  that  he  is  presiding  over  anything  other  than  an   absolute mess of Labor’s own creation and he must immediately act to address this worsening  situation unfolding across the country,” he said. 

 “Chronic  overcrowding,  court  challenges,  unrest,  violence  and  gruesome  protests  are  the   inevitable consequence of Labor’s failure and these events are unfolding on an almost daily  basis. 

 “The Government cannot seek to diffuse the crisis by in any way conceding to these protests.  They  have  the  support  of  the  Coalition  to  take  whatever  appropriate  action  is  necessary  to   restore order in the network. 

 “However, the real challenge is not just to deal with the crisis in our detention network. The  challenge is to finally implement policies, proven by the Coalition in Government, to stop the  boats.  

 “When the Coalition was confronted by these challenges we took strong action to restore the  integrity  of  our  borders  and  our  immigration  programme.  Labor  has  been  warned  time  and   again  that  their  failure  to  take  action  on  illegal  boat  arrivals  would  inevitably  end  in  the   scenes we now see on Christmas Island and around the country. 

 “Labor  ignored  the  Coalition  warnings  on  border  protection,  even  describing  them  as   hysterical  and  racist.   They  must  now  confront  the  reality  of  their  failures,  climb  down  and   implement the policies we know to be effective. 

 “Julia Gillard’s never never solution in East Timor is no response. It is time to activate and  reinstate  the  strong  border  protection  regime  proposed  by  the  Coalition  that  this  Labor   Government abandoned.  

 “Labor has lost their way on border protection. As a result people smugglers are continuing to  find their way to Australia, with impunity,” Mr Morrison said. 

