---
title: "Budget 2010: Billions lost on Christmas Island black hole - Greens."
date: "2010-05-12"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338538
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1POW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young Australian Greens

 Billions Lost On Christmas Island Black Hole - Greens

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young

 Wednesday 12th May 2010, 10:18am

 The Rudd Government has the wrong priorities in this year's federal budget, cutting spending on key areas

 like the environment and water conservation, while still finding billions to prop up its failing immigration

 policy, according to the Australian Greens."

 Kevin Rudd seems more afraid of asylum seekers and refugees, than he does of climate change. With

 more than $2 billion being spent on border protection and Christmas Island alone, this is a Government that

 is failing to respond to the real challenges we face," Senator Hanson-Young, Greens Spokesperson on

 Immigration and Human Rights said.

 Under the budget, $1.2 billion will be directed to border security (including 8 new custom vessels) and

 $973.6 million for Christmas Island over four years.

 "The government has given even more money to the black hole that is Christmas Island - continuing to fund

 a regime that is not only inhumane, but ridiculously expensive.''

 "This money would be better spent moving asylum-seekers to the mainland where they can be processed

 quickly, fairly and transparently. Australia could be meeting its obligations under international law and

 saving hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars."

 "The Government likes to talk up its economic credibility and is tight-fisted when it comes to spending on

 areas that don't win a headline. Miraculously, it always seems to find the money when it wants to score

 cheap political points on refugees."

 "We believe that this is not just a poor choice of policy but that it is a waste of taxpayer's money."

 "Christmas Island has never been an appropriate place of detention. Now, on election eve, the government

 is throwing more money at the centre in a desperate attempt to paper over the cracks. The Australian

 people will see through this expensive spin."

 The Government will also spend $143.8 million this year alone, on additional immigration facilities and

 increased capacity to deal with the fall-out of their new suspension of claims policy.

