---
title: "Gillard must call a truce on asylum-seekers."
date: "2010-07-04"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341109
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NB8X6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens   

 

 Gillard must call a truce on asylum-seekers 

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Sunday 4th July 2010, 11:00am 

 The Australian Greens have urged Prime Minister Julia Gillard to call a truce on the issue of asylum-seekers ahead of the forthcoming Federal Election, according to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens Spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, says the Prime 

 Minister’s comments make it clear she is looking at a possible lurch to the right on policy, to neutralise the 

 Coalition. 

 

 “Julia Gillard has a choice, she could take on the misleading rhetoric and fearmongering of the Coalition on 

 asylum-seekers and refusing to raise the fevered level of debate for the coming campaign,’’ Senator 

 Hanson-Young said. 

 

 “It would be a welcome move from the Prime Minister if she called a truce on asylum, but sadly early 

 evidence suggests she is considering a shift to the right, using a "tougher" approach to the world’s most 

 vulnerable people. 

 

 “We are concerned about her comments that she is not PC and that all politically correct arguments on 

 asylum should be swept away. This reminds us of Kevin Rudd's old debating tactic of refusing to apologise 

 for acting tough on policy, when no such apology had been called for. 

 

 “Ms Gillard has a chance to show leadership on this issue. It would be extremely sad if she wasted her 

 political capital as a new leader by refusing to put the lie to public misconceptions about the extent of the 

 problem and the reality of Australia's obligations to act humanely towards asylum-seekers. 

 

 "If she chooses the easy path rather than the right path on policy, Australia will be the poorer for it.’’ 

 

 The Greens have consistently opposed moves to harden the line on asylum-seekers, whether it be the 

 Government’s suspension of processing of asylum claims from Sri Lankans and Afghanis, and the re-opening of desert prisons like Curtin, or the Coalition’s return to the policy failures of Temporary Protection 

 Visas and the Pacific Solution. 

 

 The Greens stand for a practical, long-term, humane approach, moving asylum-seekers to metropolitan 

 mainland centres to allow claims to be processed quickly and fairly. 

 

 "Being the Prime Minister is about more than just clearing the decks of any awkward issues, by simply 

 agreeing with the most extreme views to neutralise them,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 

 "The bottom line is that Australia's international obligations are not optional. We either abide by those 

 obligations or we reject them, and with them generations of proud Australian support for people fleeing 

 persecution. 

 

 "It's time for the Prime Minister to make up her mind. We hope for the sake of those fleeing persecution, or 

 Australia's international reputation, that a common-sense, compassionate view prevails.” 

  

