---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 8 July 2010: responding to June job figures."
date: "2010-07-08"
creators:
  - "Crean, Simon"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341309
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/CVBX6%22
---

 The Hon Simon Crean MP 

 Minister for Education 

 Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion 

 8 July, 2010  

 Transcript 

 Transcript of doorstop responding to June job figures 

 Main Topics: Monthly job figures, Australian economy, regional processing centre. 

 SIMON CREAN: I’m very please to be back in Geelong today with Jason Clare, Darren  Cheeseman and Richard Marles. We, of course, are attending a Jobs Expo which in essence is  a job supermarket, an approach that is designed to match better skills required with skills  available. We expect to place another thousand people in work as a result of this Expo and it  brings to 24 the number of jobs Expos that have been held and now almost 12,000 jobs  placed through these Expos. 

 So, they have a very important role to play and I’m pleased to announce today, because of the  success of these Expos, we are going to continue this program. This is a great way of getting  people back into work but getting the connect between what employers want and the  availability in the workforce. 

 As for the broader picture, there are very good news stories coming today in terms of the  labour market statistics. In the month of June, job growth was 45,000; 18,000 of them full-time jobs, 27,000 part-time jobs. The unemployment rate remains at 5.1 per cent with the  participation rate having increased. So, more people are entering the workforce as well as the  fact that the unemployment rate stays significantly lower than anywhere else in the world.  

 If we look over the 12 months, and bear in mind, this is 12 months in which the global  recession has affected economies in a huge way, we have seen jobs growth of 346,400 over  the last twelve months. This is a very great outcome for Australia; job growth of 2.9 per cent  coming out of the global financial crisis. Australia has recorded, over that time, the fastest job  growth of any advanced major economy and we are now, the equal, lowest unemployment  rate of any advanced major economy in the world. 

 We, as a government, have a commitment to ensuring people have job opportunity. It’s the  pathway to their economic security; it’s the pathway to ensuring that the cost-of-living  pressures don’t impact as much as they would otherwise. What we’ve got to do is to ensure  the continuation of job growth, to get the right balance between work and family life but,  most of all, to underpin the economic security of the nation that enables continued strength in  the job market.  

 Before I take questions I’ll just pass to Jason Clare, the Parliamentary Secretary for  Employment, who has been the initiator of these Jobs Expos to talk further about the Expos— the way in which they have produced important results, results that translate, in the local  sense, in a way that builds that picture that I’ve talked about in terms of national statistics.  Jason. 

 JASON CLARE: Well, thanks Simon. The most important thing that a federal government  can do is keep the economy strong and, if it wasn’t for the action that we took with the  economic stimulus, the Australia economy would have went into recession and hundreds of  thousands of people would have lost their jobs. The data out today is further proof of the  important action that we’ve taken. Forty-five thousand extra jobs created; unemployment in  Australia is now 5.1 per cent. In America, it’s almost 10 per cent. In Europe, it’s over  10 per cent. 

 Now, when we came to office almost three years ago, unemployment in Australia and  unemployment in America was both under 5 per cent. Now, in Australia, it’s just over  5 per cent; in America it’s almost double that. It shows the importance of the action that the  Australia Government took and the Keep Australia Working job expos are just a small part of  that. 

 There are still people that are doing it tough. There are still lots of people that are looking for  work and the evidence of that is here today - thousands of people looking for work. We’ve  held 24 Keep Australia Working Job Expos around Australia already, more than 2,000  employers have taken part and we’ve created more than 10,000 jobs but there’s still a lot of  people looking for work. This is a very successful project. We’ve had the National  Employment Service, the peak body for employment services in the country, say that it’s one  of the most successful things the Government has done to create jobs. One of their members  has said: ‘This expo was the single most effective event that I’ve experienced in my 20 years  in employments services and I’ve been involved in many different industry strategies and  events’. 

 So they’ve been very successful. It’s a simple idea; put local employers that have got jobs  and people that are looking for work together and you can create lots of jobs and, as Simon  said, it’s a job supermarket. So we’re going to do more and we’re going to keep doing these  Keep Australia Working Job Expos and extend it to the end of the year. 

 JOURNALIST: So unemployment is steady but that’s obviously with last month’s figures  advised, what’s driving the growth? 

 SIMON CREAN: Economic activity and the fact that the Government moved decisively and  effectively to ensure that - where the private sector was hesitant because of what was  happening in the global economy, the Government stepped in to fill the gap. That’s not to say  it remains in there filling the gap as we see private sector activity come back strongly then the  Government’s stimulus measures automatically withdrew. 

 But when you look at what we’ve done it isn’t just about keeping people in work. We have  invested heavily in the future drivers of the nation’s economic strength in our schools, in our  universities, in innovation. These are the things that lift productivity. These are the things that  make the country more competitive. These are the things that are going to set the nation up  for economic sustainability going forward. So the fact that the Government saw the need to  act quickly but also strategically is the reason we are experiencing this excellent job growth. 

 JOURNALIST: How do you think the Reserve Bank board will react to today’s figures? 

 SIMON CREAN: Well it’s a matter for the, the Reserve Bank has already acted by not  putting up interest rates just this week. The matter, what it does in the future is up to them,  but I think that we should welcome the fact that we have got strong job growth and it is in the  Reserve Bank’s charter to not just be concerned about inflation but to also be concerned  about employment opportunities. 

 JOURNALIST: Employment clearly going in the right direction, inflation is outside the  comfort zone. Are you concerned that we might have another interest rate rise? 

 SIMON CREAN: That’s a matter for the Reserve Bank but the inflation rate still remains  within the band. 

 JOURNALIST: Part-time jobs and full-time jobs, there’s still a lot more part-time jobs being  created than full-time jobs. Are you concerned about that imbalance? 

 SIMON CREAN: Well obviously the question of the balance is really a function of how  people choose to exercise their job choices. This is still very strong growth on full time  employment and if you look at the numbers of jobs over the 12-month period a significant  proportion of those are full-time jobs. 

 Not all people want to work full time. Some people choose to work part time but clearly this  is something that is going to be a continuing factor in the way the economy responds. Some  people are looking for, some jobs that employers are looking for, don’t require full time  commitment but very strong full-time participation in this. 

 JOURNALIST: But it’s not just a choice issue is it? I’m sure that of all those part time jobs  that are created a lot of those would have liked full-time jobs. 

 SIMON CREAN: Well that’s an interesting point. Some may but not all do and I haven’t  seen the latest break down of people’s preferences; would they like to work longer hours. But  I would have thought the fact that people are finding job activity is the key factor. Nowhere  else in the world is this strength of job growth happening. This is close to 3 per cent growth  in jobs over the last 12 months. This is 346,000 in total created. No other country is  experiencing that. 

 JOURNALIST: An OECD report yesterday said unemployment’s probably peaked in the  rich countries of the world. Are you concerned that Australia actually needs to play catch up,  that we need to play catch up for the rest of the developed world in terms …and are you  concerned about China? 

 SIMON CREAN: I’m not concerned about China one bit. China is a fundamental reason for  Australia’s economic success. It’s not just China though, it’s Asia as a whole. You look at the  economic growth in Asia, you look at Australia’s access too, it’s penetration of those  markets, the strength of its export growth, it is significantly in the Asian space. We took the  decision some 25 years ago to engage actively with Asia, to not just rely on our traditional  markets like the US and Europe, to understand where the dynamic was developing and you  only have to look at how strong the growth has been in Asia regardless of the global financial  crisis to understand the importance of that position. 

 So Australia has identified the right diversification for its trade and its economic activity and  it’s paying big dividends for us. 

 JOURNALIST: Yes, my question is there a question over the sustainability of China’s  economic situation. Are we vulnerable to China contracting? 

 SIMON CREAN: Well I think that when you look at our traditional markets of the US and  Europe, those that predominantly relied on those markets became very vulnerable. Australia,  as I say, didn’t just rely on them, it sought more diversified markets and it took away that  vulnerability. 

 Now of course if what you’re saying to me is everyone collapses, is that going to impact on  Australia? Of course it is but I have got no doubt, and never did have any doubt, about  China’s preparedness and ability to maintain strong economic growth. I can remember  12 months ago people were then questioning China’s ability to sustain economic growth.  They’ve been proven wrong and when you look at China and visit China and understand the  dynamism in terms of their economy all around the country to understand the way in which  their stimulus measures are really driving into different regions in different ways and the  huge demand for urbanisation in China then I am very confident about the importance of  China to our future and it sustaining strong levels of economic growth. 

 JOURNALIST: Former Trade Minister, will the Government use trade as a bargaining chip  with East Timor in its negotiations for an asylum centre? 

 SIMON CREAN: We never use trade to bargain. We negotiate trade agreements and trade  liberalisation because of the fundamental belief that trade is an economic multiplier and it’s  in every country’s interests to open their markets. 

 JOURNALIST: So can I ask you what should the Government be putting on the table in  terms of trying to arrange this processing centre to be established? 

 SIMON CREAN: Well the Prime Minister has indicated she’s spoken to the President. She  will be speaking to the Prime Minister but I think that we do have to understand the  significant importance of this initiative. East Timor is a signatory to the refugee treaty. It is  important if we’re to meet the challenge of the asylum seeker debate that we have to have  internationally recognised standards for processing and preparedness for a range of countries  to take a fair share of refugees.  

 We already take a good share. What we need is international consistency in the processing  operations. If we can get countries like East Timor which is a signatory to the treaty to be part  of that exercise that’s a very welcome development. 

 JOURNALIST: There’s questions today over whether the Prime Minister has gone too fast,  she’s jumped without looking. Is this plan sort of unravelling before it’s even off the drawing  block? 

 SIMON CREAN: I think it is a very significant development that she has spoken to the  President. She’s going to be speaking to the Prime Minister. The advice to us was that the  initiation for this had to be through the President. That’s what we’ve done. Let’s wait and see  how it develops rather than assume it’s going to unravel.  

 I think that the comments from the President have been very encouraging so let’s be positive  about this and understand the significance of it being able to take us forward. This is working  through the UN. This is not Australia putting up some unilateral decision. It’s understanding  that it’s a global problem, it’s got to have a global solution, the United Nations, the UNHCR,  the appropriate mechanisms to do it through. Let’s get some consistency in that approach. 

 Thank you. 

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au 

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

