---
title: "Boat surge continues while Rudd spins."
date: "2010-03-01"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334873
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BK1W6%22
---

 Mon, 1st March 2010  

 BOAT SURGE CONTINUES WHILE RUDD SPINS 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Joint Media Release.  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and 

 Border Protection, Michael Keenan said the latest illegal boat arrival, with 57 people on board, continues the 

 sustained surge under Labor which has been responsible for 17 boats arriving so far this year.  

 Mr Morrison said Kevin Rudd’s spin on the surge being caused by global push factors is further exposed by new 

 figures from the United Kingdom which show a fall in asylum applications.  

 “Once again the Rudd Government is blaming global push factors for this surge in illegal arrivals. However 

 figures released in the UK have exposed once again that Labor's excuses are just more spin,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “The number of asylum applications in the last quarter of 2009 in the UK fell by 30% to 4,765 compared with 

 6,775 in the last quarter in 2008. It was reported the figures included asylum seekers from Afghanistan, 

 Zimbabwe and Iran.  

 “For the full year the UK had a 6% decline in asylum applications during 2009, compared to a 30% increase for 

 Australia, based on UNHCR figures.  

 “The only reason we are facing this sustained surge is the Rudd Government and their failed immigration policies 

 which are acting as a magnet for people smugglers,” he said.  

 Mr Keenan said: “Each day the boats are arriving closer and closer to our shores while the Government 

 continues to deny there is a serious problem," said Mr Keenan.  

 “The Rudd spin machine has been hard at work as the Government continues to avoid scrutiny over the collapse 

 of Australia's border protection.  

 “This morning Minister O'Connor conveniently held a press conference an hour before releasing the information 

 regarding this latest arrival, despite the boat arriving last night.  

 “How much longer will the Government avoid scrutiny, and how much closer will they allow these boats to get 

 before they act?” Mr Keenan said.   

