---
title: "We thought we already voted Howard out, Prime Minister"
date: "2010-03-09"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335220
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/312502%22
---

 We Thought We Already Voted Howard Out, Prime Minister  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 

 We Thought We Already Voted Howard Out, Prime  Minister 

 

 

 The Federal Government's suspension of new asylum seeker claims from Sri Lankans and Afghans  shows the Prime Minister's "tough but humane'' approach is nothing more than a poll-driven return  to the worst excesses of the Howard era, according to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, says the  Government's decision to suspend processing for Sri Lankans for three months and Afghans for six  months is dangerously premature and shows a disregard for human rights. 

 "This announcement is Kevin Rudd chasing Tony Abbott down the electoral low road that John  Howard made infamous,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "It shows an utter lack of leadership - it's not what Malcolm Fraser would have done to those fleeing  Vietnam, and not what Bob Hawke did after Tienanmen Square. 

 "The suspension is another breach of Australia's obligations under the UN Refugee Convention,  following the Government's existing support for offshore processing at Christmas Island and the  excised Territories. 

 "This is effectively a return to the practice of indefinite detention, which plagued the Howard  Government. It is unacceptably cruel and anything but humane.'' 

 Immigration Minister Chris Evans today acknowledged that conditions in Afghanistan have meant  that up to now ethnic Hazaras have almost automatically qualified for asylum based on a  reasonable fear of retribution if they returned. 

 Senator Hanson-Young says the Greens now ask, what conditions have changed, when recently the  success rate of applications by Hazaras was still almost 100 per cent? 

 "The UNHCR has recently admitted that "there is a long way to go" in the humanitarian situation in  Sri Lanka, so why has the Government suddenly seen the need to sit on applications for three  months, with a six-month suspension in Afghanistan?'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "The answer is as simple as it is brutal - Kevin Rudd and his ministers are willing to ride roughshod  over the human rights of vulnerable men, women and children, just to try and ensure their  re-election.'' 

 

 Human Rights & Justice  Detention Centres 

 Page 1 of 2

 We Thought We Already Voted Howard Out, Prime Minister  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 Immigration  Refugees 

  Source URL:  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/we-thought-we-already-voted- howard-out-prime-minister   

 Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org) 

 Page 2 of 2

