---
title: "Courts ready for challenge as boat K113 arrives."
date: "2010-04-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337452
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/6BYW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 Courts ready for challenge as boat K113 arrives 

 Friday 23rd April 2010 

 The arrival of boat K113 last night near Ashmore Islands came as lawyers were reported to 

 be preparing to challenge Kevin Rudd’s botched asylum seeker policy in the courts, Shadow 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, 

 Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 

 “There is no room on Christmas Island for even the small number of passengers on board 

 the 113th boat to arrive since Kevin Rudd rolled back the Coalition’s border protection 

 policy,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 “Under Kevin Rudd’s policy, asylum seekers are being transferred to the mainland, not only 

 before their claims have been determined, but before they have even been assessed and 

 even when they have been rejected, to pursue their appeals,” he said. 

 

 “Kevin Rudd has abolished universal offshore processing and will now face challenges in the 

 courts over the mess he has created, with taxpayers to foot the bill. 

 

 “The Coalition has consistently warned that transferring people to the mainland would open 

 up a potentially murky legal ground, that Kevin Rudd and Minister Evans have refused to 

 acknowledge.  

 

 “Minister Evans took no action to mitigate against these risks. By contrast the Coalition made 

 sure that people transferred from Manus Island and Nauru could not have access to the 

 courts by introducing special legislation to quarantine their status. The Rudd Government 

 has left the door ajar.  

 

 “Several weeks ago two groups of failed asylum seekers were transferred in late night 

 mystery flights to Sydney. Kevin Rudd and Minister Evans said they were on their way 

 home. The truth is they were on their way to the mainland to pursue their appeals.  

 

 “Kevin Rudd and Minister Evans’ reckless statements have now opened the door for the 

 lawyers and courts to once again take control of our refugee policy,” he said. 

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest arrival is a timely reminder of the crisis Rudd Labor has created, 

 as reports today show the Government will spend $200 million in a vain attempt to tackle the 

 flood of boat arrivals. 

 

 “This is on top of all the extra resources already allocated, but money won’t fix this problem. 

 

 “It is not resources that are the issue, the issue is the lack of political will in Canberra that 

 extra money cannot fix. 

 

 “Until Kevin Rudd and Labor address their policies that encourage people smugglers to 

 target Australia, the boats will continue coming and our borders will remain porous,” he said.  

  

