---
title: "Migrant publication a bit hit."
date: "2010-02-24"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Martin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334676
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/8B0W6%22
---

 

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services 

 Migrant publication a big hit  24 February 2010 

 It may not be as famous as Twilight or the latest Dan Brown thriller, but a  Department of Immigration and Citizenship publication has itself proven a smash hit,  according to the Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services, Laurie Ferguson. 

 'The Beginning a Life in Australia booklets, which are published on the department's  website in English and 37 community languages, had some 840 000 hits in 2009,' Mr  Ferguson said.  

 'As a government, we do the best we can to provide new arrivals with the information  they need to participate in the community and this publication helps new migrants  with practical information as they settle in Australia.' 

 The booklets give people a grounding in what they can expect, and provides  information on things as crucial as employment, housing and education. 

 This is particularly useful for refugees, so it is translated into languages such as  Burmese, Nepali and Arabic as well as some less common languages such as  Swahili, Karen and Kirundi. 

 'The feedback we received indicates that this is well appreciated by newcomers,' Mr  Ferguson said. 

 The booklets complement a comprehensive range of settlement services provided by  the Australian Government. This includes intensive settlement assistance, English  language training, translating and interpreting services and community grants  programs. 

 'The Australian Government takes seriously its responsibility to offer effective  settlement support to the people who come to live in this country,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 The booklets also complement the 75-minute settlement information DVDs for newly  arrived refugees from African and Asian countries developed by the department,  Australia - a new home. 

 The Beginning a Life in Australia booklets are revised and published annually on the  department's website.  See: Beginning a Life in Australia 

 The next edition is expected to be released in April 2010. 

