---
title: "Moving asylum-seekers to the Mainland is the practical, long-term solution."
date: "2010-03-26"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336339
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YYAW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   

 Moving Asylum-Seekers to the Mainland is the  Practical, Long-Term Solution 

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Friday 26th March 2010, 3:08pm 

 in  

 • Human Rights & Justice 

 • Detention Centres 

 • Immigration 

 • Refugees 

 The Australian Greens have called for an end to fearmongering over boat arrivals and the movement of 

 asylum seekers to the mainland, according to Green Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, says the Federal 

 Government's decision to bring a number of asylum-seekers to the mainland is an inevitable result of the 

 overcrowding at Christmas Island. 

 "The Greens have always said Christmas Island was not an appropriate place to detain asylum-seekers,'' 

 Senator Hanson-Young said. "These concerns have only been heightened as numbers swelled in recent 

 months, forcing the government to pitch tents to cope with new arrivals. 

 "It's clear that the Christmas Island Solution is a failure, and the Government has to admit that. 

 "The best place to house asylum-seekers is not on a remote island in the Indian Ocean but on the 

 mainland, where they can be processed quickly, fairly and humanely. 

 "There is no crisis here, and the Prime Minister has a duty to maintain calm in the debate on asylum-seekers. Mr Rudd must come clean with the Australian public that bringing people to the mainland does not 

 mean a breach of national security or a policy catastrophe.'' 

 The Greens believe today's events make it even more urgent to have an independent review of conditions 

 and processing times on Christmas Island by the Commonwealth Ombudsman. 

 

 "It's time for somebody aside from the Minister to investigate this situation and to report back to Parliament 

 - not just to the Immigration Department,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "A response should be required from the Minister within 15 days, we can't afford to wait until after the 

 Federal Election to find out the real truth about conditions at Christmas Island. 

 "If the Government does not act to establish an independent inquiry, then I will move when Parliament 

 returns to extend the powers of the Ombudsman to guarantee this review is made public with a required 

 Government response.'' 

 

