---
title: "Illegal boat arrivals up 450% over summer."
date: "2010-01-04"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211332888
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NXXW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Media Release 

 

 Illegal boat arrivals up 450% over summer 

 Monday 4th January 2010 

 The number of illegal boat arrivals has increased by more than fourfold so far this summer 

 according to Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison, highlighting 

 the continuing failure of the Rudd Labor Government’s weak decisions and failed policies on 

 border protection.  

 Mr Morrison said “the illegal arrival of the second boat for 2010 within just 12 hours of the 

 last one, carrying 30 more passengers, is the fourteenth boat to arrive this summer. This 

 compares to just three boats for the same period last year. 

 “Last year only six boats risked the more dangerous summer months. This summer we are 

 already nearly double that number with almost two months still to go. 

 “It is clear that not even the monsoon can counteract the magnetic impact of the Rudd 

 Government's failed polices and weak decisions on border protection. 

 In total there were 178 people on board the boats that arrived illegally over last summer. 

 This summer there has already been 584 people arrive.  

 Mr Morrison said “of greater concern is the fact that at the end of last summer the detention 

 population on Christmas Island was just over 150 people. We have had that many people 

 arrive in just the last week, and boats are now arriving at will.  

 “With the Rudd Government refusing to consider off shore processing alternatives or any 

 changes to their failed policies, it is only a matter of time before the Government transfers 

 more people from Christmas island to the mainland for processing, totally undermining our 

 offshore processing regime. 

 “The Rudd Government cannot continue with their weak decisions and failed policies and 

 expect a different outcome.  

 “They can also not expect to gain the respect of our regional partners in combating the 

 people smuggling trade, when the Rudd Government’s policies are the reason the people 

 smugglers are able to offer such an attractive product.  

 “In 2010 Mr Rudd and Minister Evans must fix the border protection mess they have created, 

 Mr Morrison said. 

  

