---
title: "Six boats in six days while Labor talks about talks"
date: "2010-10-13"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344606
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/286515%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 Six boats in six days while Labor talks about talks  

 13/10/10  

 The arrival of the sixth illegal boat in six days shows that people smugglers know  their boom times will continue while the Gillard Government continues its all spin  and no substance approach to their immigration and border protection crisis, Shadow  Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today.   

 “Today’s arrival, the 106th this year and the 174th since Labor changed the  Coalition’s strong border protection regime, shows that as long as Labor keeps talking  rather than taking action, the boats will keep coming,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “After more than two months, Labor still do not have a proposal for one off-shore  processing centre in East Timor, let alone several in the region,” he said.  

 “By contrast, if the Coalition were in government Nauru would be open now. Instead  Labor are still only talking about their never never plans. While Labor keeps talking,  the boats keep coming.  

 “Labor need to stop talking about plans that are in the never never in East Timor and  take action to change their failed border protection policies, starting with picking up  the phone to Nauru and taking permanent protection visas off the table for illegal 

 arrivals.  

 “Labor persists with its East Timor asylum seeker processing idea while Nauru is  ready, willing and could be activated almost immediately.  

 “The problem is immediate; the Nauru facility is available immediately, but Labor  refuses to confront the immediate reality of the problem,” he said.  

 Mr Keenan said: “The Government continues to talk but refuses to act to do anything  to end this crisis. 

 “Boats are starting to arrive illegally at the rate of one a day and the costs of this  failure are being paid by the Australian taxpayer and our frontline Border Protection  Command personnel. 

 “The sheer volume of arrivals is stretching them to breaking point and exposing them  to risks that they should not be asked to face because of systemic policy failure in  Canberra. 

 “There is a solution to this crisis but Labor doesn't have the will to implement it and  continues to fiddle while Rome burns,” he said. 

  

