---
title: "Coalition needs to come clean on asylum seeker families and children in detention"
date: "2010-11-05"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/371731%22
---

 Chris Bowen, MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for McMahon 

 Coalition needs to come clean on asylum seeker families and children in detention 

 Friday, 5 November 2010 

 The Coalition needs to come clean on where they would accommodate asylum seeker families and  children. 

 Last night on Sky News' The Nation, Scott Morrison suggested that they should be placed in high-security detention centres  See: attachment from SKY News below. 

 As Mr Morrison well understands, Inverbrackie will be a low-security detention facility that will  provide suitable accommodation for families and children, up to 400 people in total. 

 Mr Morrison clearly signalled in his responses that the Government should be looking to locate  asylum seeker families and children in high security detention centres like Curtin, Scherger or the  Northern Immigration Detention Centre at Darwin. 

 This would be a return to the Howard Government policy of detaining asylum seeker children in  high-security detention centres, as occurred at Port Hedland or Curtin Immigration Detention  facilities in the earlier part of this decade. 

 Under the Howard Government, one child was held at the Port Hedland Immigration Detention  Centre for five years, five months, 20 days. 

 This is the legacy that even Prime Minister Howard walked away from in 2005, but Mr Morrison  would have the Coalition return to. 

 Only a few weeks ago Mr Morrison was trumpeting the Howard Government's record of moving  children from behind razor wire - even if it came after nine years in government - and yet now he  is suggesting that families and children should be placed back into high-security facilities. 

 The Leader of the Opposition needs to come clean on whether the Coalition's new position is to  put families and children back into high-security Immigration Detention Centres like Curtin,  Scherger or the NIDC at Darwin. 

 Mr Abbott's refusal to answer questions on whether or not families and children should be  accommodated at the likes of the Baxter detention centre indicates that a policy shift has  occurred. 

 It would also explain why the Shadow Immigration spokesman refuses to back the Government's  decision to accommodate vulnerable asylum seeker families and children in community-based  accommodation using powers that were established by the Howard Government in 2010. 

 Mr Morrison needs to put aside the three word slogans for just a moment and come up with a  concrete policy position on this issue. 

 Attachment 

 SKY News - The Nation- Thursday, 4 November 2010 

 Speers: One of the things that Tony Abbott said after the meeting that you held at Inverbrackie  was that this was an idyllic place, that it was sending a picture postcard to people smugglers while  rolling out the red carpet, sending the wrong message to people smugglers about how wonderful  conditions are if they get to Australia. Is the logical consequence of that then that asylum seekers  who do make it here should be placed in very uncomfortable conditions, in a hellhole to send the  right message to people smugglers? 

 Morrison: No, and that's not what Tony was saying. The facilities, whether they're at Curtin or  Christmas Island or Scherger or any of the other places that I've seen, the Northern Detention  Centre in Darwin or so on; the type of accommodation there I think is entirely appropriate, we  would have similar type of accommodation at Nauru. What struck me when I went to Inverbrackie  is these were very well-established homes. These were places that were built for defence force  families and were at a very high standard. 

 

 

 

