---
title: "Kevin Rudd's gold medal month of boats."
date: "2010-04-01"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336580
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/06XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 KEVIN RUDD’S GOLD MEDAL MONTH OF BOATS 

 

 Thursday, 1 April 2010    

 The arrival of boat 101 last night near Christmas Island will cost taxpayers more  than $5 million and rounds out a gold medal month for Kevin Rudd, with a  record 16 boats in March, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today.      

 “Australians are literally paying for Kevin Rudd’s failed immigration and border  protection policies and every day that bill keeps growing because the boats keep  arriving,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “The arrival of Kevin Rudd’s boat 101 rounds out a gold medal month on boat  arrivals for Kevin Rudd. It is the 33rd boat this year and the sixteenth this  month - an all time record for any one month. With 67 people on board, its  arrival at Christmas Island, will cost tax payers more than $5 million,” he said.    

 “Four boats have arrived in the last seven days alone, with 160 people on board.  With each additional person on Christmas Island costing almost $82,000, each  boat is an expensive failure.    

 “The budget has already blown out by $132 million and by the end of the  financial year the Coalition expects it could blow out by a further $250 million.    

 “Kevin Rudd has a crisis on his hands of his own making. Christmas Island is full,  detainees whose claims have been rejected are being transferred off Christmas  Island in the dead of night, people are escaping from detention centres, and the  boats just keep on coming.    

 “Kevin Rudd must end his border protection denial and dismissal of this issue  that is of major concern to all fair minded Australians. He must front up to the  problem instead trying to spin it away,” Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “This is the second time in a week where we’ve seen an  unauthorised vessel arrive at Christmas Island, completely undetected, and  reportedly call Australian authorities,” Mr Keenan said.    

 “This is further evidence that Border Protection Command is buckling under the  flood of arrivals caused by Kevin Rudd’s failed border protection policies.    

 “The resources of Border Protection Command  

 

