---
title: "The Immigration Museum: speech at the launch of the Australian Multicultural Advisory Council's Advice."
date: "2010-04-30"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337838
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X6MW6%22
---

 

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Launch of the Australian Multicultural Advisory Council's  Advice 

 Friday 30 April 2010 

 The Immigration Museum 

 Introduction 

 Firstly, I would like to formally acknowledge the traditional owners and custodians of  these lands and pay my respects to their elders, both past and present. 

 I am pleased to be here today to accept the Australian Multicultural Advisory  Council's People of Australia. 

 I would like to echo Laurie's sentiments and express my personal thanks to Andrew  and all the members of the council for their time, effort and insights. 

 I believe today marks a new chapter in the history of multicultural policy. Multicultural  policy must speak with a broad voice and should benefit us all. 

 This is a document about all Australians for all Australians. 

 The work of this council takes a practical approach. It is a statement for the 21st  century - it is concise and accessible and goes to who we are and what we value. 

 The themes of AMAC's policy and the substance of its recommendations sit across  multiple areas of government. 

 However, this statement is only the first step in a robust body of work that AMAC has  been asked to deliver to government. 

 To begin with, I am asking the council to work with my department and other  government agencies to translate the types of strategies outlined in this statement  into government policies. 

 Over the course of their second term, I have also asked AMAC to assist with the  development of a long-term strategy for increased settlement in rural and regional  locations and high employment areas. 

  

  We need to ensure that people settle in communities where they find a job rather  than settling in communities where they are destined to join a job queue. 

  People who come to Australia, be they refugees or migrants, want to integrate and to  contribute - government needs to work to identify those opportunities. 

  I have also asked the council to identify policy initiatives that work at the  neighbourhood level to strengthen local communities. 

  In every street in Australia - families should be able to depend on their neighbours,  have their children play in safety and know that a helping hand will be extended to  all. 

  Government needs to support the conditions that nurture trust, community good will  and participation. 

  Cultural diversity 

  'People of Australia' is a title that invites reflection. 

  For a large part, we are a nation comprised of people who have chosen to be  Australian. Forty-five per cent of all Australians were born overseas or have at least  one parent who was born overseas. 

  Whether this generation or five generations ago - our families committed to this  nation and its ideals. 

  We are a land of 22 million. We speak almost 400 languages and identify with more  than 270 ancestries. 

  Among the countries of the world we are unique in our breadth and balance of  cultures. 

  At the time of the last census, 8000 Australians identified their ancestry as Estonian;  over 100 000 as Croatian; 700 000 as Chinese and 89 as Berber. 

  We are a country formed by migrants. Since the end of the Second World War more  than 7 million immigrants have made Australia home - we have integrated them  quietly and without discord. 

  In a little more than a century we have moved from a series of agrarian colonial  outposts to a modern industrialised state. 

  From the snowy mountain hydroelectric project to the Sydney Harbour Bridge - we  have relied on the flow of labour from abroad to build this country. 

  As The People of Australia makes clear - we are not multicultural by accident but by  design and necessity. It was Australia that called for industrious families to help  bolster our workforce, farm our land, fill our factories and run our ports. 

  This is a statement that reminds us we are multicultural by fact and by intention. It is  the character of our composition - it is a product of the way we have built this nation. 

  Multicultural Policy 

  That we should have in place policies to promote our multicultural status seems  beyond question in this day and age. 

  Yet for the better part of the last century, the policy that underpinned migration and  settlement was assimilation. 

  A policy that asked that migrants should give more than their labour and their loyalty  - it obliged that they shed all vestiges of their past. 

  A White Australia Policy would ensure migrants looked the part and assimilation  would make them indistinguishable from the social norm.  

  By the mid sixties the contradictions and tensions of discriminatory strategies saw  these policies begin to unravel. 

  Historians will always argue cause and effect - was it the economic imperative to  broaden our source of labour or the changing social climate? 

  Whatever the trigger, policies that go against the core values of a democratic nation  are never sustainable. 

  It is telling that the end of the White Australia policy came shortly after the  referendum on constitutional reform for Indigenous Australians.  

  Once we began to dismantle those instruments of prejudice within our borders, the  will to discriminate beyond our shores also weakened. 

  A discriminatory migration program was no longer thought to be in the national  interest. 

  The last vestiges of the policy ended by the mid 1970s, but it took nearly two  decades to fully move beyond the philosophy of assimilation. 

  Al Grassby issued A multi-cultural society for the future in 1973; the landmark  Galbally report on migrant settlement was released in 1978 and the National Agenda  for a Multicultural Australia arrived in 1989. 

  Galbally and the National Agenda were revolutionary for their time (if a little dense). 

  Multicultural policy proclaimed that - within the confines of our law - it was  acceptable to maintain our cultural lineage and celebrate that which makes us  different.  

  It acknowledged that Australian concepts of equality and fairness would bridge  language and background - that access to services should be irrespective of country  of birth. 

  While individual departments may have varied in their delivery on this promise - the  ideals of Galbally are now cemented as an unquestionable part of the ethos of  Government - whether Liberal or Labor hold office. 

  That Australia was profoundly affected by these decisions is clear. From our  cosmopolitan cities to our country towns - we are, by and large, comfortable with our  diversity. 

  With the Galbally vision, we have settled millions of people from almost every corner  of the globe, and in doing so have maintained a socially cohesive society. 

  With few exceptions - we have not had the incidents or social unrest that have  characterised countries such as the United Kingdom or France. 

  We have built an infrastructure for settlement - including migrant resource centres,  multicultural youth organisations, AMEP centres, specialised counselling services  and orientation programs. 

  We have a Special Broadcasting Service and a telephone interpreting service - we  have culturally appropriate aged care facilities and community language schools. 

  The Australia of today is dotted with ethnic organisations and community groups that  support social connections and cultural retention. 

  From the African Women's Advocacy Unit to the Latvian dancing group - we are now  proud of the customs that make us unique. 

  A Multicultural Future 

  The Australian Multicultural Advisory Council's advice reinforces the principles of  previous statements but also declares fundamentally that a future multicultural policy  must speak to all Australians. It should reach them no matter where they live or  where they come from. 

  AMAC's policy 'encourages cultural diversity ... but only within the broader aim of  social harmony'. 

  It is not a policy that advocates for diversity as division - it is a policy that seeks to  define the values that unify us and the principles that bind us. 

  In the act of becoming Australians we ask that our newest citizens recite a pledge: 

  From this time forward ... I pledge my loyalty to Australia and its people... whose  democratic beliefs I share ... whose rights and liberties I respect ... and whose laws I  will uphold and obey. 

  These are more than words - there is a responsibility on new citizens to help us to  maintain these values. 

  The pledge emphasises that there are rights and obligations and these are  fundamental to living in this country. 

  Australia is an egalitarian society; it is a national trait. We are impressed by those  who seek to contribute and look to give back. 

  The future is about participation and inclusion. It is vested in policies and programs  that capture and harness that great-unsung asset - our diversity. 

  We are now in the midst of a population debate. Whether you argue that we should  maintain migration or reduce it, both sides agree that there will be migration and  Australia will continue to be a culturally diverse nation. 

  Australia's migration program remains a critical tool in meeting the economic and  demographic challenges that we face. 

  The Rudd Government's priority is a well-managed program attuned to the demands  of the Australian labour market. 

  But a well-managed program is about more than adjusting the numbers - it is about  successful settlement and the maintenance of social harmony - it requires a  multicultural policy for the future. 

  People who come to Australia - whether they come as economic migrants or  refugees - want an opportunity to contribute. 

  There is an onus on Government to ensure that our newest citizens are given the  chance to fully participate. 

  Our settlement services are world class - these services are the backbone of our  migration program. They are services that have seen the peaceful settlement of  millions and we must look to build on this success. 

  In partnership with the sector, the government is developing a new framework for  settlement services. 

  We need to consider and work with the strengths of new migrants and to build on the  skills they bring. 

  What we give in support and encouragement when migrants first arrive we get back  ten-fold over the course of a lifetime. 

  As a nation, we pride ourselves on giving everyone a fair go. By investing in the  decent and fair treatment of new arrivals to our shore, we are investing in the future  contribution these people and their children will make to our community. 

  Any future vision should ensure that we all have the opportunity to participate and  enjoy the benefits of a multicultural Australia. 

  A future multicultural Australia will capitalise on the productivity inherent in our  diversity. 

  A country literate in hundreds of languages and comfortable transitioning between  cultures is naturally better equipped to deal in a global market place. 

  By virtue of their composition, Australia's schools and universities will see culturally  competent and flexible students graduate with expertise beyond the content of their  curriculum. 

  Our multicultural policies should bring us forward in our thinking. It is difference that  sparks innovation - enlivens debate and fuels ideas. 

  Over the course of AMAC's next term, Laurie Ferguson and I will be looking to  AMAC for further advice on these themes of inclusion, participation and opportunity. 

  Once again, on behalf of the Australian Government, I am pleased to receive the  council's advice and recommendations. 

  Conclusion 

  If migration is about nation-building, multicultural policy should be about forging a  shared sense of nationhood. 

  We have created, from a great many cultures - a set of common values and a  commitment to a united future. 

  Multicultural policy continues to be instrumental to Australia's economic and social  prospects. 

  It is a policy that is about all Australians and it should seek to benefit us all. 

  Australia is its people - our ingenuity and industriousness are our national strength. 

  

  See:  Index of speeches and transcripts 

  URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/2010/ce100430.htm  

  Last update: 05 May 2010 at 16:04 AEST  

  • Home 

  • Copyright & Disclaimer  •  Privacy  

  • Department of Immigration and Citizenship 

