---
title: "Australia to celebrate Refugee Week."
date: "2010-06-18"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211340313
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1H2X6%22
---

  

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Australia to celebrate Refugee Week  Friday, 18 June 2010 

 Australians will celebrate the many significant contributions that refugees make to  our nation in Refugee Week 2010, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Senator Chris Evans, said today. 

 ‘Refugee Week starts officially on Sunday and finishes on June 26, with hundreds of  events planned across the nation to recognise the journey of refugees, who  overcome incredible hardships to start a new life in Australia free from fear and  persecution,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘All Australians should feel proud of our contributions to international refugee  protection. Helping refugees reflects an important value - compassion for those in  need. It is something that we do well and will continue to do well in the coming  years.’ 

 Freedom from Fear is this year's theme, which encapsulates how Australia's world-class humanitarian program helps thousands of people to escape turmoil and conflict  every year. 

 ‘Since the end of World War II, nearly 750 000 people have been welcomed by  Australia under our humanitarian program. In the 2010-11 program year, a further  13 750 people will come to call Australia home,’ Senator Evans said. 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Senator 

 Chris Evans celebrates Refugee Week 2010 with Nollamara Primary School students in the school's  Freedom garden. 

 ‘The Australian Government continues to be an international leader in providing  refuge for the world's most vulnerable people, with an ongoing focus on the key  regions of Africa, Asia and the Middle East. 

 ‘Vulnerable women will also be a priority again through our woman at risk program,  which the government increased to 12 per cent of the refugee component of the  program last year.’ 

 Refugee Week activities will be staged in each state and territory next week, with an  early celebration planned at an event at Nollamara Primary School in Perth today  attended by the minister. 

 Nollamara and Mirrabooka schools, which have many students with refugee  backgrounds, have used a collage of art materials to create a garden they have  named the ‘Nollamara Freedom Garden’. 

 The garden includes painted tiles reflecting refugee students’ memories, discoveries  and hopes, and a bench surrounded by native Australian trees symbolising serenity,  peace and tranquility. 

 With a contribution from the City of Stirling, a workshop was staged with the students  and an artist to create an art work for the garden. A prominent theme of this artwork  is the word ‘freedom’, written in many languages, which represents the students’  perception of Australia as their home. 

 ‘I would like to invite all Australians to seek out Refugee Week events in their local  community, particularly on World Refugee Day this Sunday,’ Senator Evans said. 

  

