---
title: "Mr Rudd all talk no action, as another illegal boat arrives at an overcrowded Christmas Island."
date: "2010-01-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211333022
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PXXW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Media Release 

 

 Mr Rudd all talk no action, as another illegal boat arrives at an overcrowded  Christmas Island 

 Saturday 9th January 2010 

 The illegal arrival of another boat last night north west of the Ashmore Islands  carrying 27 passengers and three crew brings the number of illegal boat arrivals to  73, carrying 3100 passengers, since Mr Rudd promised he would ‘turn back sea  worthy boats’ , prior to the last election, according to Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison.  

 Mr Morrison said “before the last election, Mr Rudd led Australians to believe that he  would be a safe pair of hands on border protection, as he echoed Mr Howard on  illegal boat arrivals at every opportunity, including the day before the election when  he promised he would ‘turn back seaworthy boats’. 

 “More than two years later, we have had 73 boats arrive carrying more than 3100  passengers. This includes 15 boats in just the last six weeks, during the dangerous  summer months, which represents a more than fivefold increase on the same period  last year” he said. 

 “According to the Department of Immigration’s monthly statistics, there were 1,287  people detained on Christmas Island at the beginning of December 2009. 1053 of  these detainees were located in the centre that the Government’s own reports show  has a ‘regular use capacity’ of just 400.  

 “On December 1, a statement by the Rudd Government said Christmas Island had a  reconfigured capacity of 1400, which would be boosted to 1600 by mid December.  This included demountable accommodation relocated from indigenous housing in  Alice Springs and tents. They stated that further increases in capacity would not be  completed until March 2010.  

 “Since the Government issued this release, more than 600 additional people in  fifteen boats have been brought to or are on their way to Christmas Island, including  those intercepted last night. 

 “Given the continuing unrest amongst the detainee population on the island,  including violent clashes following the special deal offered to the Oceanic Viking  passengers last year and further protests in the past week, it is time the Rudd  Government came clean on the status of facilities at Christmas Island. 

 “As a start they must reveal the over due statistics on current population of detainees  on Christmas Island, including those in community detention, other forms of  temporary detention and how many boats are moored in the harbour. 

 “I propose to visit Christmas Island at the earliest opportunity once the Government  agrees to my proposal and allows my use of commercial air services and  prescheduled departmental charters to minimise the cost to taxpayers, which were  denied to my predecessor in this role. 

 “The purpose of the visit will be to see first hand what is going on and how the local  community, immigration staff and defence personnel are coping with the influx of  arrivals. 

 “I am also naturally keen to see the conditions that detainees are living under. When  the Coalition Government built this facility, it was clear that 800 beds would be more  than enough under our polices. Labor agreed, even going so far to call Christmas  Island a white elephant. 

 “Under the Rudd Government’s policies, Christmas Island has become a tent city  and it’s only getting worse. 

 “It is not right that our officials and defence personnel should have to work overtime  and under such extreme pressure simply because of the policy failures and weak  decisions of the Rudd Government. 

 “The answer is to stop the boats. Something Mr Rudd was happy to talk about before  the election, but unable and unwilling to deliver in Government.  

 It’s just another example of what Australians all over the country are realising about  Mr Rudd - all talk, no action” Mr Morrison said. 

  

