---
title: "Let's work together to get children out of detention"
date: "2010-10-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344872
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/305125%22
---

 

 

 

 

 SARAH HANSON-YOUNG 

   LET'S WORK TOGETHER TO GET CHILDREN OUT OF DETENTION      18th October 2010 9:25 am 

 The Australian Greens are enthusiastic about the prospect of getting children out of  Immigration detention, but are waiting like all interested parties to see what the Government  has decided, according to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, says the reports about a  change in Government policy are welcome but that she is waiting to see the details of any  plan by Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen. 

 "While there has been no formal agreement, we have raised our concerns about the current  system with the minister. The reports in the media this weekend are encouraging, suggesting  that the minister is listening to the concerns of the community on children in detention,''  Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "We look forward to Mr Bowen clarifying the details of how any plan to get children out of  detention is going to work. 

 "We also look forward to constructive discussions with all sides of politics on how to put the  Greens plan into action.‘' 

 The Greens have announced a plan to deal with children and unaccompanied minors in  detention, through amendments to the Migration Act to exempt them from the mandatory  provisions of the act. 

 The plan also calls for an expansion of the Community Assistance Support program - which  provides asylum-seekers in the community with key services - with appropriate funding and  resources to cover all children and minors as well as their parents and caregivers. 

 "The Greens support any moves to remove children, unaccompanied minors, and families  from detention as a signal of a more humane approach to asylum-seekers,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "But we feel it is important that any changes to the system are not only humane, but are  practical and long-term - we don't want to see children and other vulnerable asylum-seekers  still having to rely on the whim of a supportive minister. 

 "That is why we want to amend the Migration Act, to legislate so Australia can move beyond  this damaging and inhumane policy of detaining children.'' 

