---
title: "Gillard Labor Government welcomes Malaysian laws to fight people smuggling."
date: "2010-08-04"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211342480
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GVKX6%22
---

 

 Gillard Labor Government welcomes Malaysian  laws to fight people smuggling  Brendan O'Connor,Chris Evans posted Wednesday, 4 August 2010  

 The Minister for Home Affairs Brendan O’Connor and the Minister for Immigration Senator Chris Evans 

 today welcomed the Malaysian Senate’s approval of new laws criminalising people smuggling. 

 

 “The criminalisation of people smuggling in Malaysia is a big step forward in tackling this cruel crime - 

 not just in Malaysia but across the region,” Mr O’Connor said. 

 

 “The Gillard Labor Government believes that a co-operative regional approach is needed to combat 

 people smuggling in the long term,” he said. 

 

 “We welcome these new laws, which will help Malaysia’s law enforcement agencies to build on the success 

 they’re already having in stopping people smugglers,” Mr O’Connor said. 

 

 Since early 2009, Malaysian law enforcement efforts have resulted in the disruption of more than 870 

 potential unauthorised arrivals. 

 

 Malaysia’s Anti-Trafficking in Persons (Amendment) Bill 2010 imposes: 

 

     * Up to 20 years jail for aggravated people smuggling offences involving factors such as inhumane 

 treatment of asylum seekers. 

     * Up to 15 years jail for people smuggling - knowingly organising or facilitating a person’s unlawful 

 entry into another country. 

     * Up to 15 years jail for making, giving, selling or possessing a fraudulent travel or identity document 

 for the purpose of people smuggling. 

 

 Senator Evans said people smuggling is a transnational crime that affects many countries throughout our 

 region. 

 

 “Several countries in the region are now moving to criminalise people smuggling and the Gillard Labor 

 Government applauds their leadership to stop this ruthless dealing in vulnerable lives,” Senator Evans 

 said. 

 

 The Indonesian Parliament is now considering an Immigration Bill. The Bill seeks to criminalise people 

 smuggling and impose heavy penalties for people smuggling-related offences. 

 

 “I’d like to thank the Malaysia-Australia Bilateral Technical Legal Working Group on People Smuggling and 

 Trafficking, which has played an important role in identifying ways to legislate effectively against people 

 smuggling,” Senator Evans said. 

 

 “If re-elected, the Gillard Government will continue to work cooperatively with nations across our region 

 to develop better laws to tackle people smuggling.”  

 Tags: asylum, Evans, Malaysia, O'Connor, people, seekers, smugglers, smuggling  

 

