---
title: "Trancript of interview with Marius Benson: ABC News Radio: 22 July 2010: [asylum seekers]."
date: "2010-07-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341906
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/38GX6%22
---

   

 

 Media Transcript 

   Thursday, 22 July 

 Scott Morrison MP  ABC News Radio 

 

 Benson: Is the heat going out of the asylum seeker issue? 

 Morrison: I think there’s no doubt that the arrival of two boats within 24 hours  shows that Labor’s policies continue to fail and if Julia Gillard wants  to go to the Australian people and say that she has a solution, then  she first has to admit that her policies are the problem.  You can’t  trust someone to fix a problem that they don’t believe exists.  As long  as Labor is in business, the people smugglers are business.  That’s  what the people smugglers know, because the boats continue to  arrive, under Labor. 

 Benson: But Julia Gillard does acknowledge there is a problem, although she  says the actual boat arrivals are a very small problem, the real  problem is the anxiety being felt generated by this issue.  Is that a fair  reading of it, that the actual problem for Australia is minor, it the  anxiety generated by it that’s the issue? 

 Morrison: The problem is that we’ve got boats arriving at an unprecedented rate  because of Labor failed policies.  And that undermines the fairness  and integrity of our immigration program.  Julia Gillard just wants to  strike a pose on border protection and asylum policy before this  election. She’s not serious, you know, she simply just wants to go out  there and try and impress people with some language.  What she  needs to do is send a message to people smugglers by changing her  policies.  She is not convicted about this, she is not serious about it,  she doesn’t think Labor’s the problem; and as long as she and Labor  are there, the people smugglers will continue to make hay. 

 Benson: Now just on that issue on the link between the boat arrivals and the  general immigration debate, there was some business people,  Michael Chaney, the chairman of the NAB, was one of them being  critical of what they called a paranoia being encouraged about boat 

   

 

 Media Transcript 

  

 arrivals which, they said was confusing the overall immigration  debate.  Do you think there is paranoia being generated on the issue? 

 Morrison: No, look, the issues are quite separate.  There are 13,750 people who  come under our refugee and humanitarian program.  That will be the  same under the Coalition and under the Government.  The issue  about border protection and the asylum seeker policy is the way in  which people come, the integrity of our immigration program, the  fairness of that program, where you’ve got people smugglers making  the decisions then people who are waiting with their applications in  refugee camps and in other places around the world are being denied  an opportunity because someone has taken that opportunity by  coming by boat.  This is about the integrity and fairness of our  immigration program.  It’s also about the fact that Labor’s policies  have encouraged 7,000 people to take this voyage, which is a risky  and dangerous voyage, and people lose their lives at sea. 

 Benson: What about the wider issue of Australia’s population which is being  much discussed in this election campaign, but there seems to be a  lack of definiteness about that discussion.  Both you and Julia Gillard  are not in favour of a big Australia, but neither the Coalition nor Labor  is prepared to nominate what sort of Australia we should be aiming  for, in terms of numbers. 

 Morrison: Well, I think that’s true about the Government, Marius, but it’s  certainly not true about the Coalition.  In April, we made it clear that  we would subject ourselves to a population growth cap set by the  independent Productivity Commission.  Julia Gillard said yesterday,  on Sydney radio, that she doesn’t think immigration has anything to  do with the population policy debate or agenda.  And again it exposes  this is just more hollow words from a hollow woman PM.  I mean,  again, she’s just trying to strike a pose on this issue before the  election to put one over on the Australian people.  I mean, she’s the  Madonna of population policy. 

   

 

 Media Transcript 

   Benson: But you’re not able to put a number on it yourself here without  waiting for the Productivity Commission to tell you what the numbers  should be. 

 Morrison: We will subject ourselves to a cap on population growth,  which is set  by an independent commission, as to what is a sustainable rate of  growth, and we believe immigration, the fact that it accounts for two-thirds of the increase in our population each year under this  government, is what needs to be addressed to ease the pressure of  population, particularly in our major cities and suburban areas.  Julia  Gillard doesn’t even think that’s the problem.  She thinks it’s got  nothing to do with it.  It’s like spaghetti without the sauce, Marius,  they are desperately not serious about doing something about this  issue.  She just wants to talk about it, and that’s Kevin Rudd all over  again. 

 Benson: Scott Morrison, thank you very much. 

 

 

 Media Contact: Julian Leembruggen, 0419 494 667 

