---
title: "$898,500 to enhance ACT settlement services."
date: "2010-06-07"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339921
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WAYW6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 $898 500 to enhance ACT settlement services  7 June 2010 

 A project which provides mentoring and small business development to newly  arrived refugees and migrants is just one excellent example of the important work  carried out by agencies funded under the settlement grants program, the  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie  Ferguson, said today. 

 As part of the $898 500 settlement grants program (SGP) funding allocated to the  ACT region, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will provide $55  000 to the Riverina Community College Limited in Wagga Wagga. 

 Former SGP clients who have acquired skills through previously funded program  projects will have an opportunity to participate as mentors for new clients through the  project delivered by the Riverina Community College.  This project will assist in  community capacity building, while enabling clients to gain skills in different  vocational areas. 

 'This project aims to give participants a sense of belonging, as well as the confidence  to assist their fellow community members to become self-reliant, independent and  active members of the broader community,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 'It also enhances the skills of former settlement grants clients, showcasing the  success of the previous project delivered by Riverina Community College.'  

 Such projects showcase successful outcomes under the program and how SGP  clients use their skills acquired under the program to assist others like themselves  and in their community. 

 During the 2010-11 financial year, DIAC's settlement grants program will provide  $898 500 towards seven projects which will help new arrivals to settle into the ACT  region. 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies, and community and welfare organisations.   

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting with their cultural transition into Australia,' Mr Ferguson  said. 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2010-11 funding round is available on  the DIAC website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in the ACT region,' Mr Ferguson said.  

