---
title: "Boat 110 sets new record of failure"
date: "2010-10-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345156
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/312492%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 Boat 110 sets new record of failure   25/10/10  

 The arrival of the 110th boat in 2010 has set a new record for the number of people to  arrive illegally by boat in Australia according to Shadow Minister for Productivity  and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan. 

 “A total of 5,523 people have arrived illegally by boat in Australia so far this year.  This is the highest level of failure by an Australian Government in a calender year on  record, surpassing 5516 in 2001, the year of the Tampa, when 43 boats arrived,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “Labor already holds the record for the most number of boats and people in a month  and in a financial year. They can now add calendar year to their litany of failures, and  have more than two months to add to their woeful tally. 

 “To paraphrase Julia Gillard, you could say: another Labor boat arrival record,  another record Labor policy failure. 

 “When it comes to failure on border protection and immigration, this Labor has no  peer.  

 “Labor must be held accountable for their historic level of failure, following their  decision to dismantle the strong border protection regime they inherited from the  Coalition Government, less than three years ago.  

 “Unlike Labor in Australia, the Canadian Government, who has experienced a  fraction of Labor's boat arrivals, have taken action and announced the introduction of  temporary visas, to take the lure of permanent residency out of the hands of people  smugglers. By contrast the Australian Government's only response has been to open  more detention facilities and peddle their unravelling East Timor regional processing  centre. 

 “When 5516 people turned up on 2001, the Coalition took real and decisive action. In  2002 the number of illegal boats and people arriving fell to zero.  

 Mr Keenan said: “Just months into the job and Prime Minister Julia Gillard has  already set a new gold standard on failing to protect our borders. 

 “At this rate the new facilities, including the one at Northam, will run out of space  before they’ve even opened.  

 “This Government needs to take real action to stop the boats; otherwise the current  rate of arrivals will continue to overwhelm our detention facilities,” he said. 

  

