---
title: "Only 50 beds left on Christmas Island as another boat arrives."
date: "2010-03-20"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336093
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/10YW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 

 Only 50 beds left on Christmas Island as another boat arrives 

 Saturday 20th March 2010 

 The illegal arrival of the 25th boat this year carrying 92 passengers will leave just over 50 

 beds on Christmas Island, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said 

 today. 

 

 “Reports today indicate there are just 150 beds left on Christmas Island. Earlier this week 

 there were also reports that two more large boats were on their way. While the Government 

 denied these stories, the first of these boats showed up last night carrying 92 passengers,” 

 Mr Morrison said. 

 

 “This latest arrival will leave just over 50 beds available on the island to cope with the 

 ongoing surge in illegal boat arrivals that has occurred under the Rudd Government’s failed 

 border protection policies,” he said. 

 

 “This is the second largest boat, in terms of passenger numbers, to arrive this year and the 

 indications are that further large boats are on their way. This will undoubtedly leave 

 Christmas Island swamped and the Rudd Government implementing their plan to end 

 universal off shore processing and start bringing people to the mainland in large numbers. 

 

 “The mass transit of people from Christmas Island to the mainland will soon begin and the 

 Government has already been preparing in secret, while trying to spin to the Australian 

 people that it is all just business as usual. 

 

 “The Rudd Government remains in border protection denial. Mr Rudd has become a border 

 protection sceptic, denying what is apparent to everyone, that his decision to roll back the 

 Coalition’s strong border protection regime has been a comprehensive failure. 

 

 “The Rudd Government’s soft policies and soft decisions, such as refusing to cancel the 

 visas for the saboteurs of SIEV 36 shows they are incapable of making tough decisions to 

 stop the boats and even stop those who try to blow up boats. 

 

 “Since Mr Rudd began his border protection rollback in August 2008, 93 boats have arrived, 

 carrying more than 4250 people. We have gone from three boats per year to more than 2 

 boats per week,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 Mr Keenan said: “Transferring asylum seekers to Darwin would be the final failure of the 

 Rudd Labor Government's border protection policies. 

 

 “More unauthorised arrivals will surely be sent straight to Darwin for processing which would 

 herald the end of Australia's border protection. 

 

 “Then we would wait and watch as Darwin's facilities reach capacity and the Government 

 turns to its next stop-gap solution to this crisis,” he said.  

 

