---
title: "Independent review of aid effectiveness"
date: "2010-11-16"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346127
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/556074%22
---

 The Hon Kevin Rudd MP   Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs Independent Review of Aid Effectiveness Media release

 16 November 2010

 Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd today announced the first independent review of Australia's aid and development program 

 since 1996. It will examine the effectiveness and efficiency of Australia's aid and guide the strategic direction of 

 Australia's aid program.

 To be undertaken over the next 5 months, the Independent Review of Aid Effectiveness is designed to maximise the 

 effectiveness of the aid program, as Australia increases its Official Development Assistance to 0.5 per cent of Gross 

 National Income by 2015-16.

 "The aim of Australia's aid program is to reduce poverty through improved medical care, education, economic 

 opportunities and governance," said Mr Rudd.

 "In doing so, the program also aims to enable communities to generate their own long-term sustainable economic 

 development, and increase stability within our region."

 The Review will be conducted by an external panel chaired by Mr Sandy Hollway AO and builds on a range of existing 

 measures to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the aid program.

 Mr Hollway is a former secretary of two Australian Government departments and CEO of the Sydney Organising 

 Committee for the Olympic Games, a Deputy Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet with 

 responsibility for foreign aid and other international matters.

 The panel will also include:

 Dr Stephen Howes

 Dr Howes is the Director, International and Development Economics, Crawford School of Economics and Government 

 at the ANU, and has previously worked as the Lead Economist for India for the World Bank and as Chief Economist at 

 AusAID;

 Ms Margaret Reid AO

 Ms Reid has extensive experience with Australian non-government organisations (NGOs) working in international aid 

 as the former President of the Executive Committee of the Australian Council for International Development. She is 

 also a former President of the Senate.

 Mr Bill Farmer AO

 Mr Farmer is a former senior diplomat. Mr Farmer was Head of Mission in the two largest recipients of Australian aid, 

 Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. Mr Farmer was also the Deputy Permanent Representative of Australia to the 

 United Nations;

 Mr John Denton

 Mr Denton is the CEO and Partner at Corrs Chambers Westgarth, is a Prime Ministerial appointee to the APEC 

 Business Advisory Council and a member of the Boards of the Business Council of Australia and the Commonwealth 

 Business Council. He is also Chairman of Australia for United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

 The panel will consult with key stakeholders, including non-government organisations, relevant Australian government 

 departments, partner governments in our region and bilateral and multilateral donors.

 "The recommendations that come out of this review will improve the structure and delivery of our aid as we work with 

 the international community to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)," said Mr Rudd.

 Page 1 of 2 Independent Review of Aid Effectiveness, media release, 16 November 2010, Australi...

 15/02/2011 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/releases/2010/kr_mr_101116.html

 The Terms of Reference and further details of the Review are available at www.ausaid.gov.au

 Media inquiries

 Minister's Office: (02) 6277 7500 ■

 Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555 ■

 AusAID Media: 0417 680 590 ■

 Page 2 of 2 Independent Review of Aid Effectiveness, media release, 16 November 2010, Australi...

 15/02/2011 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/releases/2010/kr_mr_101116.html

