---
title: "Christmas Island community have their say on boat arrival crisis."
date: "2010-04-27"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337646
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/V5XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Christmas Island community have their say on boat arrival crisis   

 Tuesday, 27 April 2010   

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan will  today travel to Christmas Island to assess the situation following the collapse of  Australia’s borders.   During the visit, Mr Keenan will meet with a range of community  representatives, including local businesses, the district school and the local  hospital.   Mr Keenan will also inspect the immigration Detention Centre and facilities and  receive briefings from the Department of Immigration, Customs and Border  Protection Service and the AFP.   “This timely visit will allow me to speak to the Christmas Island community  about how the recent surge in boat arrivals has affected their lives,” said Mr  Keenan.   “It will also be an opportunity to assess the conditions at the detention centre  following the flood of unauthorised arrivals, and how the Government has  mismanaged the influx.”   Mr Keenan said the recent arrival of two boats in two days highlighted the  crumbling condition of Australia’s border protection system.   “Even as I’m leaving for Christmas Island, I’m told another boat has arrived -  the staff at Christmas Island will surely be operating above and beyond the call  of duty.    

 “Like Customs, the Navy and the Australian Federal Police, they are at the front  line dealing with the consequences of the policy mistakes Kevin Rudd and Labor  have made in Canberra,” he said.    

 Christmas Island, one of Australia’s external territories, is located in the Indian  Ocean on the rim of South East Asia, approximately 360km south of Java and  2,650km from Perth.  

 

