---
title: "Border Protection Command intecepts vessel."
date: "2010-04-16"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337146
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JGNW6%22
---

  

 BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS  VESSEL   

 (16 April 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel. 

 HMAS Ararat, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the  vessel north east of Christmas Island on the morning of 16 April 2010.  

 Initial indications suggest 82 passengers are on board the vessel. 

 The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks and their reasons for travel will be established. 

 While their nationality is yet to be confirmed, if these asylum seekers are making claims in  relation to Sri Lanka or Afghanistan these will not be considered for at least three or six  months respectively, under a processing suspension introduced by the Government on 9 April  2010.   

 This suspension was introduced because of the evolving circumstances in these two  countries.  The Australian Government believes that asylum seekers should only be granted  the right to live in Australia if they are genuinely in need of protection.  

 People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue. 

 As a direct result of these strong working relationships, since September 2008, there have  been in Indonesia: 135 identified disruptions; 3, 602 foreign nationals detained by Indonesian  authorities; and 62 arrests of facilitators/organisers 

 The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders.  Today’s successful interception by Border Protection Command, coupled with  changes to the immigration processing system, continues to demonstrate this commitment  and the effectiveness of the proactive response program in place. 

  Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275  6793    

 ----------------------------- 

 To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au 

