---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: St Paul's college, Gillies Plains: 20 January 2010: Education Revolution; My School website; Peter Cosgrove's comments; republic; Oceanic Viking; AEU threatening to boycott NAPLAN tests; Computers in Schools; Christopher Pyne; Education Tax Refund."
date: "2010-01-20"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
  - "Education Revolution"
  - "My School website"
  - "Peter Cosgrove's comments"
  - "republic"
  - "Oceanic Viking"
  - "AEU threatening to boycott NAPLAN tests"
  - "Computers in Schools"
  - "Christopher Pyne"
  - "Education Tax Refund."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211333306
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GKQV6%22
---

 The Hon Julia Gillard MP 

 Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister 

 20 January, 2010  

 Transcript 

 Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, discusses the  Education Revolution; My School website; Peter  Cosgrove’s comments; Republic; Oceanic Viking; AEU  threatening to boycott NAPLAN tests; Computers in  Schools; Christopher Pyne; Education Tax Refund. 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  10AM WEDNESDAY  20 JANUARY 2010  ST PAUL’S COLLEGE  GILLIES PLAINS 

 ISSUES: Education Revolution; My School website; Peter Cosgrove’s comments; Republic;  Oceanic Viking; AEU threatening to boycott NAPLAN tests; Computers in Schools;  Christopher Pyne; Education Tax Refund.  

 JULIA GILLARD:  It’s a very great pleasure to be here in my hometown of Adelaide in the  federal electorate of Sturt and at St Paul’s College.  

 This is a school that is being transformed by our Education Revolution. A school that is  seeing new facilities for primary school aged students through Building the Education  Revolution and our plans for Primary Schools for the 21st Century, a school that’s being  transformed through a new $4 million Trades Training Centre to give the boys who study  here the opportunity to try a construction trade to see if that’s what they want to do with the  rest of their lives. 

 A school that’s being transformed with a new Science Centre to encourage the students here  to develop a love and a passion for science, for physics and chemistry and obviously that can  be linked to a career at university but it can also be linked to the work they will be doing in  the Trades Training Centre.  

 A school being transformed by new technology with computers now available for the  students here, and a school that’s been able to use our National School Pride money to  renovate its sporting facilities. 

 This is the Education Revolution in progress. Of course part of the Education Revolution is  our new transparency measures, making sure we know what is happening in every school  around the country, that we are shining a light on excellence and best practice so that it can  be shared, and we’re shining a light on those schools who need the benefit of our new  resources and new reforms to make a difference to drive up the standard of education in those  schools. 

 And this comes with our new resources, above and beyond all of the things we’ve seen  today.  We are making resources available; resources available in literacy and numeracy,  resources available to improve teacher quality, resources available to bring the best teachers  to the classrooms that need them the most, and resources to assist those schools that work in  disadvantaged communities. 

 As I stand here in the electorate of the Coalition’s education spokesperson, Mr Pyne, I do  need to say it’s a pity that lifting education standards for every child in every school isn’t a  shared national agenda. If we look at this school and the programs we’ve seen today, every  one of them has been opposed by Mr Pyne.  

 He has opposed Building the Education Revolution, he has opposed and said he would bring  to an end our computers in schools program, he has described school transparency as useless,  the new My School website as useless. This is on top of a track record in office where the  Coalition government, Mr Abbott and Mr Pyne watched education standards in this country  decline, watched us fall against the standards of the world and did nothing about it. 

 As a Government we are committed to making sure we improve education for every child in  every school and we’re committed to ensuring we deliver our transparency measures on the  28th of January and then national testing measures again in May this year because that is vital  to ensuring that we are improving standards for every child in every school. 

 JOURNALIST: Minister, on that issue, will you dock teachers pay and impose other  penalties if teachers do go ahead and boycott the national tests? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I am not going to rule anything in or anything out at this stage, but I am  going to be crystal clear on this - we will deliver national testing. We will deliver it because  to fail to do so would be bad for students, bad for parents and bad for the future of education  in this country.  

 Students need to know how they are progressing in their learning compared with students  around the country. Parents are hungry for this information. They want to have the report  cards that show how their child is progressing against the standards right around the country  and as a nation we need to know, school by school, how schools are performing.  

 The My School website, which Mr Pyne dismisses as useless, will give parents and this  nation more information than they have ever had before about the performance of Australian  schools and that information will work with our new reforms and new resources in our  Education Revolution to lift standards. Something of course, Mr Pyne must be opposed to  because he has opposed every part of the new resources and new reforms. 

 JOURNALIST: So a warning to teachers that they could have their pay docked, could be  fined? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I’m not ruling anything in or anything out but I am saying very clearly:  what’s in the interests of the nation, what’s in the interests of Australian parents, what’s in the  interest of Australian school children is for this national testing to go ahead. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you not foresee the prospect of people seeing their child’s school rated  lowly and quickly taking them out and putting them somewhere that’s rated highly and you  might have a bottleneck of applications then? 

 JULIA GILLARD: Parents make choices about school. There will be parents who have  made choices in the lead up to this school year about which school they want to put their  child in. When parents are making a choice I want them to have the benefit of good quality  information, accurate information about schools and the My School website will do that. 

 JOURNALIST: Some parents won’t have a choice though. 

 JULIA GILLARD: Yes and I was just about to address that. And of course there are parents  who have their parents in school, who want their child to stay in that school, who have no  choice but to have their child stay in that school and what this My School website is going to  do for those parents is it’s going to give them more information than they’ve ever had before  about the performance of their school, and they should be then going to the school and having  conversations with their child’s teacher and the school principal, and those conversations can  raise the things that are shown on the My School website. They can congratulate the school  principal if the school comes up well in reading and writing, if it’s showing a problem in  maths they can have a conversation with the school principal about what the school is going  to do to address that. 

 This is about getting more information to parents, empowering them in those conversations  so they can be there with more knowledge as a partner in their child’s education. 

 JOURNALIST: How much consultation was done with parents? We’ve spoken to a lot and  they seem to think that it’s just going to benefit the higher socioeconomic schools and  disadvantage some of the lesser advantaged schools. 

 JULIA GILLARD: I can’t see how anyone could come to that conclusion and I’ll address  that in a second. 

 But we have of course surveyed parents’ attitudes and it is absolutely clear that parents want  more information about how schools are going. Parents want to know how their child’s going  in school, they want to know how their child’s school is going compared with other schools.  

 And this website, the My School website, will compare their child’s school with schools  serving similar student populations around the country and will therefore enable them to  come to conclusions about what needs to be done to improve their child’s school. 

 On the question of schools which are disadvantaged, let me say this - demography is not  destiny. Kids from the poorest households can get a great education and I expect the My  School website will identify some schools in the most disadvantaged communities in this  country who are beating the odds and giving those kids a great education and that’ll be  fantastic. 

 I also expect that this website will show that there are schools that need more support, more  reforms and resources to make a difference and that’s why we’ve almost doubled the  investment in school education by the national government.  

 And can I also say this: the worst thing in the world would be for a child to be in an  underperforming school, not getting a good education and for no one to ever know about it.  

 I understand that a parent might be concerned about their school’s results as they’re shown by  the My School website but the worst thing, the very worst thing, would be for your child to  be in a school that’s not performing well and for you to never know about it and for no one to  ever act to make a difference to it. We’re going to know and we’re going to act. 

 JOURNALIST: In an Australia Day address, former chief Peter Cosgrove has urged  Australians to confront the dark pockets of racism within our country in relation to the attacks  on Indian students. Do you think Australians are in denial about our racist tendencies? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I’ve seen reports of Peter Cosgrove’s speech and I’ve seen in those  reports that he has said Australians are a caring and compassionate people and I agree with  that. I agree with Peter Cosgrove’s statements that we are a caring and compassionate people. 

 He has also made the observation that in every society around the world, there are some  individuals who hold unacceptable views. Racism in all its forms is unacceptable and wrong  and any violent actions against any other individual are unacceptable and wrong. 

 JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to meet with the AEU regarding the ultimatum, I guess,  yesterday? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I’ve met with the AEU in the past and we’ve had full and frank  discussions. We’ve had full and frank discussions about the My School website and I’ve  made it very clear to the AEU that the Government is determined that these school  transparency measures will go ahead. 

 So the matters raised by the AEU yesterday are not new matters. They are matters that they  have raised with me personally and directly in the past and that I’ve already discussed with  them. 

 JOURNALIST: So was it a bit of a stunt by them yesterday? 

 JULIA GILLARD: I’ll allow the AEU to speak to its own motivations. I do note today that  some of the spokespeople on behalf of the AEU are saying that they’re not opposed to  national testing. Well if they’re not opposed to national testing, then they shouldn’t be  boycotting, ensuring national testing goes ahead. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, is the Government considering a referendum on the  republic? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The Prime Minister has made it very clear that whilst he believes one  day in the future this country will be a republic, that there are no present plans to have a  referendum.  

 We are focused on the challenges that confront this nation immediately, and let me tell you  there’s no bigger challenge than making sure we are lifting educational standards right  around the country. 

 JOURNALIST: So that’s a yes? A fresh consideration? 

 JULIA GILLARD: No, that’s an endorsement word by word of what the Prime Minister has  said and what the Prime Minister has said is that there are no plans, that the referendum on  the republic is something that will happen at some point in the future, but our action now, our  focus now, is on delivering things that make a difference for Australian families and there’s  no bigger thing to make a difference than what we’re talking about today - improving the  quality of school education, improving schools like this one where students in the coming  week or so will be back, learning, making a big difference for their own future and making a  big difference for the nation’s future.  

 If we want to be a strong, fair and productive nation in the future the quality of what is  happening in classrooms today is pivotal to that. 

 JOURNALIST: The last of the refugees from the Oceanic Viking are leaving Indonesia  today. The Government must be relieved the saga is finally coming to an end? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We of course, as a Government, have been dealing with the same set of  issues that have confronted governments in the past. They confronted the Howard  Government, the Keating Government, the Hawke Government, the Fraser Government, the  Whitlam Government - that is when there are problems around the world including civil wars  and their aftermath people do move. 

 We want to make sure that we protect our borders, we manage our immigration, we deal with  asylum seeker claims quickly and expeditiously. If people are genuine refugees then we treat  them with compassion, if they’re not genuine refugees then they are returned home. 

 JOURNALIST: On the NAPLAN issue, what’s the next step to resolving it with the union? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We’ll be pressing ahead. So on the 28th of January, the My School  website will go live and you will be able to see, every Australian will be able to see, results  for the 9500 schools around the country - government schools, independent schools, Catholic  schools, all schools - more information than they’ve ever had before about Australian  education and the performance of schools. And we’re determined to deliver the national  testing in May which will then be used to build on the My School website. 

 JOURNALIST: So the union has to back down? 

 JULIA GILLARD: We’re determined. We’re going ahead. 

 JOURNALIST: Christopher Pyne tried to make an issue out of two schools in Adelaide  basically charging people for the use of Digital Education Revolution computers outside of  school hours. Do you believe that’s in the spirit of the program? 

 JULIA GILLARD: It’s like Mr Pyne to raise an issue but not be frank about his policy  intentions. Let me be clear about Mr Pyne’s policy intentions because he let the cat out of the 

 bag on radio yesterday. If My Pyne was Education Minister in this country, he would bring to  an end the investment in computers in schools. 

 Now Mr Pyne has clearly never picked up the Budget papers and somehow he’s never  bothered to study expenditure on education in this country. If he’d done that he would know  we have funded this as an ongoing program over the Government’s Budget and forward  estimates. He wants to bring that to an end. 

 Our policy here is to get computers into schools. And when we came to Government and we  surveyed what was happening in schools, there were some schools with no computers for  senior secondary students. There were some schools with ratios of 1 to 8. Well, we have  acted to bring those ratios up to 1 to 2 and then we will drive forward to bring those ratios to  1 to 1. 

 We have already funded 290,000 computers, 180,000 of which have been delivered, and all  that would be put at risk by Mr Pyne. 

 JOURNALIST: Is it a bit cute, though, to ask them to voluntarily pay to take the computers  home and have access at home? 

 JULIA GILLARD: The computers in schools program is just that - a program to supply  computers to schools. We of course have got other programs to support parents who may  want to purchase a computer or laptop for their child. That program is in the form of our  Education Tax Refund where parents who, as of today, would be out there preparing their  kids for school, getting back to school costs as a result, spending money. I would urge them  to keep those receipts and at tax time they are able to get a tax rebate because they’ve spent  that money, including expenditure on things like laptops and computers for home. 

 So the Education Tax Refund is an important initiative to help parents with those back to  school costs. 

 Thank you. 

 

 ENDS. 

 Media Contact: 

 media@deewr.gov.au  

 Non-media queries: 1300 363 079 

 

