---
title: "Labor ignores the elephant in the room on people smuggling."
date: "2010-02-24"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334688
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/PLZV6%22
---

 Wed, 24th February 2010  

 LABOR IGNORES THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM ON PEOPLE SMUGGLING 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Labor’s announcements on people smuggling fail to address the core reason for the success of the people 

 smuggling trade, Labor’s own soft immigration policies, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott 

 Morrison said today.  

 “Labor’s announcement is too little too late. While the measures are supported, they fail to address the real cause 

 of the problem, Labor’s dismantling of the strong border protection regime they inherited from the Coalition,” Mr 

 Morrison said.  

 “The Rudd Government must end their denial and address the pull factors they have created by their weak 

 policies and broken promises, that have provided such an attractive product for people smugglers to sell,” he 

 said.  

 “Under Labor’s policies, 82 boats have illegally arrived with 3,726 people on board. Christmas Island is full to 

 overflowing and Labor remains in denial about the true cause of the problem. Only after more than two years do 

 they come forward with this proposal.  

 “Labor’s policies are the reason the people smugglers have such a strong product to sell.  

 “There is no shortage of poor fisherman in Indonesia who can be duped by people smugglers into carrying their 

 human cargo to Australia. The crews on the boats are patsies for the people smugglers, they have become the 

 smugglers’ mules.  

 “The smugglers are no more concerned about the welfare of the crew than they are for any of the passengers on 

 board their boats. The crews will probably never hear of these new sanctions.  

 “It is not uncommon for the real smugglers to either never step foot on the boat or be well clear of it by the time 

 they rendezvous with Australian authorities.  

 “What is needed is for the government to demonstrate some genuine resolve to stop the boats.  

 “This is a government that would rather fake it than make it when it comes to border protection, and their actions 

 speak louder than their words.  

 “In 2010 we have already had 14 boats arrive illegally, carrying more than 750 people. This represents two boats 

 per week, compared to three boats per year under the last six years of the Coalition,” Mr Morrison said.  

 This is a government that:   - Gave permanent visas to all surviving passengers from SIEV 36, despite the fact there was an ongoing  investigation, with potential criminal charges for the loss of 5 lives as well as endangering defence force  personnel, regarding the explosion on that vessel.  

 - Did a special deal with the Indonesian Government and the 78 Tamils on board the Oceanic Viking that resulted 

 in four refugees, who had been given an adverse security finding, being brought to Australia in an unprecedented 

 manner, as a direct consequence of that deal.  

 - Promised the Australian people before the last election they would turn back the boats, and has abandoned that 

 promise in government.  

 - Seriously thought that handing out volleyball nets to fishing villages in Sri Lanka was a frontline measure to 

 combat people smuggling.   

