---
title: "Third biggest illegal boat under Labor takes 2010 arrivals above 6,000 people"
date: "2010-11-17"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346173
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/369276%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 

 Third biggest illegal boat under Labor  takes 2010 arrivals above 6,000 people   17/11/10  

 Today’s arrival of the third largest boat under Labor, carrying 118 people, means over  6,000 people have now arrived illegally by boat so far this year, Shadow Minister for  Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 “So far this year 6,096 people have arrived on 121 boats and a new annual record is  being set on an almost daily basis. People smugglers are upping the ante and  cramming more people onto leaky boats on a more regular basis under Julia Gillard 

 and Minister Bowen,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Today’s arrival is the largest boat since February 1 this year, which was the ninth  boat of 2010, carrying 175 passengers and crew. 

 “Since August 2008, a total 189 boats carrying 9,131 people have arrived. 

 “Since Julia Gillard said the government had ‘lost its way’ in June, there have been 49  boats with 2,579 people on board.  

 “People smugglers are making hay while the Gillard sun of failed policy continues to  shine, with impunity. 

 “The growing consequences of Labor’s failed border protection policies are leading to  disastrous outcomes for refugees and other humanitarian cases languishing in offshore  camps and other dangerous places around the world. 

 “Applications for entry under Australia’s offshore Special Humanitarian Program  (SHP) have become second class applications, often not being processed and rejected  because all places are being taken by illegal boat arrivals who have been given  permanent protection visas and their families who then follow. 

 “This is why the Coalition has introduced a Notice of Motion to the Parliament calling  for priority processing of visas for highly vulnerable offshore applicants, in particular  women at risk. 

 “The Coalition has been a passionate supporter of the refugee and humanitarian  program over decades and believes that those who are in extreme situations around  the world should not have to wait any longer because people smugglers are dictating  who gets a visa under Labor’s failed immigration and border protection policies,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Today’s big arrival is a clear indication people smugglers are  paying close attention to the border chaos Julia Gillard and her Ministers have  created.  

 “With Border Protection Command truly stretched beyond capacity, the boats are able  to make it closer to Australian territory without being detected.  This is a dangerous  practice as most unauthorised boats are over-crowded and are often unseaworthy. 

 “Unfortunately there is no end in sight to the tsunami of boat arrivals while Labor  refuse to take any action and bury their heads in the sand,” he said. 

  

