---
title: "2010: The year of the people smuggler as another boat arrives."
date: "2010-02-22"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334589
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/U4ZV6%22
---

 Mon, 22nd February 2010  

 2010: THE YEAR OF THE PEOPLE SMUGGLER AS ANOTHER BOAT  ARRIVES 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Joint Media Release.  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and 

 Border Protection, Michael Keenan said the interception of the latest illegal boat, carrying 10 passengers and 3 

 crew, continues this year’s trend of two boats arriving a week.  

 Mr Morrison and Mr Keenan said: “Fourteen boats have now arrived this year carrying more than 700 

 passengers.  

 “2010 is proving to be another boom year for people smugglers under the Rudd Government's failed border 

 protection regime.  

 “The Rudd Government continues to defy reality by failing to admit their changes to the Coalition’s strong border 

 regime are to blame.”  

 Mr Morrison said: “Australians are sick of Kevin Rudd’s excuses and spin on illegal boat arrivals. They know Mr 

 Rudd’s failure to act to stop this farce is proving over and over that he cannot make tough decisions and cannot 

 keep his promises.  

 “Kevin Rudd is all talk no action on illegal boat arrivals.”  

 Mr Keenan said: “Despite this latest arrival, Minister O'Connor is refusing to accept that Australia's Border 

 Protection is no longer effective.  

 "Minister O'Connor is walking in the footsteps of his Labor colleague Peter Garrett and putting Australian lives at 

 risk, by failing to secure Australia's borders.  

 "How many boats need to arrive before the Minister will accept responsibility for his massive failures, reverse his 

 Government's soft policy on border protection and restore security to our borders?" he said.    

