---
title: "K127 arrives: Evans needs to come clean on transfers."
date: "2010-05-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339048
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VJRW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 K127 arrives: Evans needs to come clean on transfers 18/05/10

 Minister Evans must explain how many asylum seekers will be transferred off Christmas Island and where they will be transferred to, in order to make way for yet more illegal boats arrivals, including the 47 aboard boat K127, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The arrival of boat K127 will add further strain to the Christmas Island Detention Centre and Minister Evans needs to come clean on how many asylum seekers he will have to transfer from the island to the mainland to accommodate those on board K127 and K126, both of which will arrive on the Island within days,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Recent updated figures showed that while Christmas Island would now house 2,500 detainees, it would have exceeded capacity with the arrival of boat K127, unless people have been transferred off the island,” he said.

 “Minister Evans needs to tell Australians how many people will need to be transferred off Christmas Island to accommodate the latest arrivals, how many will be sent to motels and how many to detention centres, and how much those transfers will cost,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “The Rudd Labor Government has abandoned its responsibility to front up for the bad news as another illegal boat arrival is announced by the bureaucracy, rather than the responsible Minister.

 “The Government has clearly buckled under the mounting pressure over the last week, and decided to cut and run, rather than face more bad news about the failure of their border protection policy.

 “Kevin Rudd is just as famous for fronting up for good news as he is for avoiding the bad.

 “This pattern of behaviour is obviously filtering through to Labor Ministers as the Customs and Border Protection Service is forced to make the announcement of the latest illegal arrival rather than the usual practice of a Minister taking responsibility.

 “If the Minister responsible is indisposed, or in this case overseas, then an acting Minister needs to take responsibility. Immigration Minister Chris Evans actually held a press conference this morning but the spin obsessed Labor machine failed to announce this latest arrival - which had landed 24 hours before - until after the Minister finished.

 “Instead of taking action to stop the boats and fixing their broken policy, this Government has opted to serve up departmental officers to accept responsibility for a crisis Rudd Labor has created all on its own.

 “Following yesterday’s arrival carrying 92 passengers which has exhausted Customs and Border Protection’s resources, the Government must reveal how these latest arrivals will be transported to Christmas Island.

 “The Government has already revealed navy vessels and one customs vessel will be required to transport the 92 unauthorised arrivals intercepted yesterday, which begs the question - how will these latest arrivals be transported?

 “This information is usually shared with the Australian people but Rudd Labor refused to disclose this in their latest announcement,” he said.

