---
title: "Time to show compassion for asylum-seekers"
date: "2010-10-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344985
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/312509%22
---

 Time To Show Compassion For Asylum-Seekers  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au) 

 

 Time To Show Compassion For Asylum-Seekers 

 

 

 The Australian Greens have welcomed the Federal Government's decision to release children and  families to the community, but are concerned about the Government's move to expand Australia's  immigration detention facilities, according to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, says it is unfortunate that the  Government's lack of consultation has understandably caused frustration in the community. 

 "There is no need, however, for hysteria or attempts to demonise these vulnerable asylum-seekers  who will be housed in the Adelaide Hills,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "Overwhelmingly, the people who seek our protection are found to be refugees with a genuine fear  of persecution. They have often suffered torture and trauma, and in many cases they are  vulnerable children who have seen things no child should ever have to witness. 

 "People in the community have every right to ask questions on how the new centre will work, and  the Federal Government has a duty to give clear answers to those questions. 

 "But the people who will be housed at Inverbrackie deserve to be treated humanely. These are  families with children, they are human beings, and there is no need to be fearful of them. 

 "The Adelaide community has a proud history in showing the way to the rest of the country on how  to welcome asylum-seekers and refugees and show them compassion. We hope that the reaction to  this new group of vulnerable people will be no different.'' 

 The Greens believe that children, unaccompanied minors and families should be housed in the  community rather than in detention. 

 "The last thing we want is for these children and families to be detained for months and months - that's not going to be helpful for anyone, regardless of how their claims are resolved,'' Senator  Hanson-Young said. 

 

 Children  Detention Centres  Immigration  Refugees 

  Source URL:  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/time-show-compassion-asylum  -seekers   

 Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org) 

 Page 1 of 1

