---
title: "Curtin to hold suspended asylum seekers."
date: "2010-04-18"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337191
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QYGW6%22
---

  

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Curtin to hold suspended asylum seekers  Sunday, 18 April 2010 

 The government announced today that the RAAF Base Curtin facility will be used to  accommodate asylum seekers who are subject to the current suspension. 

 Work will commence immediately to have the Curtin facility readied as an  immigration detention centre. The facility is located 40 kilometres south-east of  Derby in Western Australia. 

 'The Curtin facility will be used to accommodate single males who are subject to the  government's decision to suspend the processing of asylum applications from Sri  Lankans and Afghans,' Senator Evans said. 

 'I expect the centre to be operational following completion of the initial upgrade. 

 'It makes sense for the government to manage this group of asylum seekers in one  secure location and the facility is well placed to provide this accommodation.' 

 Senator Evans said the first group of asylum seekers subject to the suspension  would be moved to the Curtin facility when it was operational. 

 'Upon arrival at Christmas Island, people subject to the suspension will be informed  about the government's policy,' Senator Evans said. 

 'These people will receive appropriate health, identity and security checks at  Christmas Island and when deemed fit for travel they will transferred to the Curtin  facility for the duration of the processing suspension. 

 'I have instructed my department to ensure that appropriate support services are  available to all those who are subject to the suspension. We will not leave people  isolated and we will invest in upgrading the facilities so they are suitable for this  group.' 

 Senator Evans also announced measures to ease congestion at the Christmas  Island immigration facilities. 

 'In the coming weeks we expect to transfer more people from Christmas Island to  alternative immigration facilities,' Senator Evans said. 

 'The transfer of irregular maritime arrivals does not change their legal status or give  them access to onshore processing arrangements or legal avenues of appeal. 

 'Charter flights will begin to move single men, all of whom are currently in the final  stages of a positive pathway, to the Northern Immigration Detention Centre in  Darwin. 

 'The Northern Immigration Detention Centre is a purpose-built, secure immigration  detention centre established by the Howard government in 2001 as a contingency  facility for a surge in boat arrivals.' 

 The government has consistently stated that the Northern Immigration Detention  Centre would be used as a contingency facility if that was required. 

 A group of unaccompanied minors will also be transferred to the Port Augusta  immigration facility. 

 'The relocation of unaccompanied minors is routine and reflects our commitment to  ensuring that children and, where possible, their accompanying family members, will  not be detained in Immigration detention centres,' Senator Evans said. 

 'These arrangements reflect the government's prudent and responsible approach to  managing irregular maritime arrivals.' 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2010/ce10030.htm   Last update: 19 April 2010 at 16:55 AEST  

  

