---
title: "Release of Humanitarian Settlement Services request for tender."
date: "2010-03-17"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335914
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/9REW6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 Release of Humanitarian Settlement Services request for tender 

 17 March 2010 

 The Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie  Ferguson, today announced the release of the request for tender for the new  Humanitarian Settlement Services (HSS) program. 

 ‘A new flexible, client-centred approach will be the focus of Australian settlement  services,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 ‘The HSS program has been shaped by feedback from the extensive consultations I  undertook with community and industry groups between June and August 2009. 

 ‘Refugees and other humanitarian clients settle more quickly and adjust to the  changes in their lives if assistance is focused on individual needs and provided at an  early stage. 

 ‘The HSS program provides the skills and knowledge for people to begin their new  lives in Australia and to build their ability to participate in Australia’s economic and  social life. 

 It will deliver four key services—case management, accommodation, local area  coordination and an optional volunteer program—through a coordinated case  management model.’ 

 Key features include the introduction of a comprehensive cultural orientation  program with emphasis on competency-based learning and a number of strategies to  address the particular needs of young people. 

 The Department of Health and Ageing (DoHA) has agreed in principle to the transfer  of the short-term torture and trauma counselling services currently provided under  the Integrated Humanitarian Settlement Strategy (IHSS). Subject to a final decision  by the government, the transfer is expected to occur in the 2011-12 program year. In  the interim, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship will undertake a separate  process to the HSS tender to enable services to continue until transferred to DoHA. 

 ‘It is difficult to overstate the importance accommodation plays in the successful  settlement of refugees and other humanitarian arrivals,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 The HSS program will allow separate requests for tenders for accommodation  services and is seeking innovation from the housing sector to provide these services  - particularly for single people, young people and groups who require additional  support. 

 The HSS program replaces the existing IHSS. The request for tender is available on  the AusTender website. Enquiries on the tender should be directed to the nominated  departmental contact officer. More information is available at AusTender website.  See: www.tenders.gov.au 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /parlsec/media/media-releases/2010/lf10016.htm   Last update: 17 March 2010 at 17:23 AEST  

  

