---
title: "Suspected irregular entry vessel boarded."
date: "2010-02-01"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211333626
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4MXV6%22
---

  

 SUSPECTED IRREGULAR ENTRY VESSEL BOARDED 

 1 February 2010 

 Border Protection Command has this evening boarded a suspected irregular entry vessel in  the vicinity of Christmas Island. 

 HMAS Larrakia, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, boarded the  vessel at approximately 7:25pm (AEDST) tonight.  

 Initial indications suggest there are 181 passengers and four crew on board the vessel.  

 Australia is proactively working with our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the  Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime,  to address this most serious issue.  

 People smuggling is a global and regional problem. According to the UNHCR 2008 Global  Trends report, there were 42 million forcibly displaced persons worldwide at the end of 2008,  including 15.2 million refugees. 

 The Australian Government has committed more than $654 million to implementing a  comprehensive people smuggling strategy to combat this issue. The Government has  expanded its presence in the region with the Australian Federal Police (AFP), Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) and  the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service recently setting up or expanding  liaison posts devoted to deterring irregular migration. 

 Agencies are working closely with their counterparts in country exchanging and gathering  information, and strengthening our regional capacity to mitigate irregular migration to  Australia. Our strengthened offshore approach is working. Since September 2008, there have  been 94 disruptions of people smuggling ventures in Indonesia, and the arrest of 40 people  smuggling organisers.  

 Those on board the vessel will be taken ashore at Christmas Island where they will undergo  security, identity and health checks; as well their reasons for travel will be established. 

 Contact:   Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or   Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793 

  

