---
title: "Abbott and Rudd obsessed with Howard's refugee policies."
date: "2010-05-27"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339470
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2IUW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens   

 

 Abbott and Rudd obsessed with Howard's refugee  policies  

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Thursday 27th May 2010, 3:14pm 

 

 Tony Abbott's new refugee policies will do nothing to deter asylum-seekers from coming to Australia and 

 will instead further punish vulnerable people, according to the Australian Greens. 

 "Tony Abbott certainly wouldn't be putting his pledge to keep the boats away in writing - because it's not 

 true. Despite lots of bluster, all Mr Abbott will achieve with these new policies is to compound the suffering 

 of desperate people and put the lives of women and children at further risk," said the Greens' Immigration 

 Spokesperson, Senator Hanson-Young 

 "The only way to reduce the numbers of asylum-seekers is to address the root causes of conflict and 

 misery abroad. As tough as Mr Abbott's talk is, he's no match for the Taliban. As long as there are people 

 being persecuted and tortured, there will always be people fleeing their home countries for protection. Any 

 of us in that situation would do the same to protect our own families." 

 "By announcing a return to overseas processing, Tony Abbott is recycling the discredited policies of John 

 Howard." 

 "It seems both Mr Abbott and Mr Rudd are obsessed with John Howard and his cruel policies; from desert 

 prisons, to Temporary Protection Visas and the Pacific Solution. The Australian people have moved on, 

 they want political leaders to start coming up with new policy solutions, not rehashing the harmful debates 

 of the past." 

 "Mr Rudd and Mr Abbott are engaging in a race to the bottom on this issue and using vulnerable people as 

 political footballs. We need humane, practical and long term solutions - with an end to indefinite detention 

 and remote island processing. Unfortunately, the Greens remain the lone voice of compassion in the 

 Parliament on this issue," Senator Hanson-Young concluded. 

