---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Parliament House: 9 April 2010: suspension on processing of all new applications from asylum seekers from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan."
date: "2010-04-09"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Smith, Stephen"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336809
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/0U1X6%22
---

  

 Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 [Transcript of Joint Press Conference with Minister for Foreign Affairs Stephen Smith,   and Minister for Home Affairs, Brendan O’Connor] 

 Suspension on processing of all new applications from asylum  seekers from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan 

 Friday 9 April 2010 

 Parliament House, Canberra 

 CHRIS EVANS: Good morning, everyone. Thanks for coming. 

 Look, today I want to announce that the Government is implementing an immediate  suspension on the processing of all new applications from asylum-seekers from Sri  Lanka and Afghanistan. The decision has been made in the light of the changing  circumstances in both Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. Evolving country information from  Sri Lanka and Afghanistan is likely to have a significant effect on the outcome of  assessments as to whether asylum-seekers have a well  ï¿½Å founded fear of  persecution within the meaning of the Refugees Convention. 

  The likelihood of people being refused visas and being returned safely to their  homelands will increase. 

  The Foreign Minister, Mr Smith, will shortly provide additional details on the changing  circumstances in these countries. 

  The suspension is effective immediately and will apply to asylum-seekers from Sri  Lanka and Afghanistan. 

  The Government will review the situation in Sri Lanka after a period of three months  and in Afghanistan after a period of six months. 

  The Government has decided to continue processing claims from those asylum-seekers who are already on Christmas Island or who are on en route to Christmas  Island, having been intercepted and detained by the Royal Australian Navy. 

  All irregular maritime arrivals will continue to be taken to Christmas Island. All people  on Christmas Island, including those subject to the suspension, will continue to be  treated fairly and humanely. 

  New asylum claims, claims from Sri Lankan and Afghan nationals, will not be  processed during the suspension period. However, appropriate health, identity and  security checks will be conducted. 

  The Government accepts that the facilities at Christmas Island are stretched  because of the recent increase in boat arrivals but we have taken prudent steps to  increase accommodation on the island and within a matter of weeks, in fact a matter  of days, we'll get the first of further additional capacity. 

  As I've said several times in recent months, if Christmas Island is no longer able to  accommodate arrivals, the northern detention facility in Darwin is available for use  and will be used. 

  It's a purpose-built, secure immigration detention centre with capacity to  accommodate up to 546 people. 

  We have taken a consistently hard line approach to people smugglers and people  smuggling and today's announcements will further strengthen the integrity of  Australia's immigration system. 

  I'm not going to speculate today on the impact these announcements may have on  boat arrivals. What I will say is that today's announcements make it clear to all that  the changing circumstances in both these countries will make it more likely that visa  applications will be refused. 

  What is important to the Government and the Australian people is that we rigorously  assess refugee claims to ensure we continue to provide protection to those in need  in accordance with our international obligations. And we will continue to treat people  humanely and ensure that those who are refused visas are returned safely to their  homelands. 

  The Home Affairs Minister, Mr O'Connor, will also outline new measures to combat  the financing of people smuggling from within Australia. 

  The changes we are announcing today send a strong message to people smugglers  that they cannot guarantee a visa outcome for their clients and a message to those  seeking to employ people smugglers that they may find themselves found not to be  refugees and returned to their country of origin. 

  The Rudd Government will continue to protect those in need but we will not hesitate  to act decisively against those who attempt to profit from the process. 

  I'd like to hand over to Mr Smith to make an opening statement as well. 

  STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks very much, Chris. As the Minister has outlined, the basis  of the Government's decision for the suspension of processing for new asylum-seekers from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan is changing and evolving country  circumstances in both of those countries. 

  The press release and the briefing materials that you have been provided with go  into some of that detail. 

  Let me make some remarks. Firstly, so far as Sri Lanka is concerned, as we speak  we are witnessing in Sri Lanka for the first time in two decades a parliamentary  election following on recently from the presidential election. 

  Sri Lanka is clearly a country in transition and that evolution is the basis of the  Government's decision to suspend processing so far as new asylum-seekers from  Sri Lanka is concerned. 

  The fact that we have an evolving situation in Sri Lanka was reinforced and  underlined yesterday by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  representative in Australia who made the point that the UNHCR is also reviewing its  country circumstances so far as Sri Lanka is concerned. And our consideration of the  evolving circumstances in Sri Lanka, bolstered by the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees' comparable review of circumstances, forms the basis of  our decision in that respect. 

  The suspension so far as Sri Lanka is concerned is for three months because we  hope that country circumstances would have clarified over that period, and that  explains or underlines the review timetable so far the Sri Lankan suspension is  concerned. 

  So far as Afghanistan is concerned, circumstances and conditions, particularly for  minority groups, including and in particular Afghan Hazaras, are also changing. 

  There was a time indeed, until quite recently, there was a time when if you were an  Afghan Hazara then you almost automatically fell within the provisions of the  Refugee Convention, suffering from a well-founded fear of persecution. 

  With the fall of the Taliban, with better security in parts of Afghanistan, with  constitutional and legal change and reform, it is clearly the case that whilst it is off a  low base, and while there are still very difficult circumstances for Hazaras - and I  underline that, there are still very difficult circumstances for Hazaras - in our view,  again reflected by the United Nations High Commissioner Refugees' own review  processes, it is not now automatically the case that just because you are an Hazara  Afghan, that you automatically fall within the provisions of the Convention. 

  That now requires much more detailed country and individual circumstances  consideration. 

  It is clearly the case that circumstances in Afghanistan will take a longer period to  clarify, to crystallise, and that is the basis of the Government's decision to suspend,  so far as new asylum-seekers from Afghanistan are concerned, for a six-month  period. 

  The consideration that the Government has effected and the decisions that we've  announced today have been taken very carefully, very thoughtfully, and very  methodically. And we have always had uppermost in our minds the need to ensure 

  that we continue to discharge our obligation at international law and to discharge our  obligation under the Refugee Convention and to absolutely respect the provisions of  the Convention. 

  The fact that part of our consideration is the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees' own review of country circumstances bolsters us in our very firm view and  conviction that we continue to conduct ourselves absolutely in accordance with the  Refugee Convention. 

  Can I just make one other point? We know, and both the Minister for Immigration  and I have said this repeatedly over the last couple of years, that we are suffering  from very significant push factors. The fact that we are concentrating on Sri Lanka, a  country which has recently emerged from two decades of conflict, and Afghanistan,  still very hard-pressed so far as conflict and security is concerned, underlines those  push factors. 

  And we've also made the point that the only effective way of trying to deal with these  matters is to deal with them regionally and internationally. 

  In our case that is through the Bali Process which Australia and Indonesia co-chair. 

  At about this time last year, for the first time in a number of years, Australia and  Indonesia convened a ministerial level meeting of the Bali Process. 

  That saw some 40 countries and nearly 10 international institutions join in that  ministerial level meeting of the Bali Process.  

  I've recently had conversations with my Indonesian counterpart, Foreign Minister  Natalegawa, and we both agreed, in principle, that we should convene in the course  of this year a further ministerial level meeting of the Bali Process to reinforce our own  efforts, but also the regional community's efforts in this area. 

  We're dealing here with source countries, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, with transit  countries, Pakistan, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and also destination countries,  including Australia. 

  It is often missed or under-appreciated that Afghanistan, for example, and Pakistan -  and we know we have very serious difficulties so far as people movements are  concerned as a result of conflict and circumstances in the Afghanistan-Pakistan  border area - Afghanistan and Pakistan are both members or parties to the Bali  Process. 

  In the last few days this week, a high-level delegation, led by the National Security  Adviser, joined by the Ambassador for People Smuggling, has visited Pakistan and  Afghanistan to further pursue and to further consolidate the very good agency-to-agency relationships that we have with Pakistan and with Afghanistan, so far as  people smuggling, people movement and displaced people are concerned. 

  And so, our regional and international engagement continues to be a most important  feature of the work that we do to manage this very difficult problem for Australia, 

  which is a problem we share with very many countries in our region and throughout  the world. 

  I'll hand over to Brendan O'Connor, the Home Affairs Minister, and then we're happy  to respond to your questions. 

  BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thank you very much, Stephen. 

  The Government is determined to disrupt and deter people smuggling operations.  Following the money trail is critical to detecting and disrupting crime groups,  including those involved in people smuggling. 

  Stronger regulation is needed to ensure more reliable financial intelligence. So we  need to ensure we change AUSTRAC's rules - that is the Australian Transaction  Reports and Analysis Centre's rules - to ensure that remittance dealers who pose a  significant money-laundering or terrorism financing risk can be deregistered. 

  The Government also proposes a more comprehensive regulatory regime for  remittance dealers to be implemented following consultation with the financial  services sector. 

  The Government will establish a criminal intelligence fusion centre within the  Australian Crime Commission. The new centre will ensure that financial intelligence  and other criminal intelligence can come together in real time. Agencies will include  the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Taxation Office, Centrelink and others,  and will be collocated so that: what one agency knows - all agencies know. 

  These initiatives will build upon the legislative changes in the Anti-People Smuggling  and Other Measures Bill introduced into the Parliament by the Attorney some time  ago. 

  Under this legislation, those who are found to provide material support to people  smuggling will be subject to 10 years imprisonment or fines of up to $110,000. 

  I urge the Opposition to pass this bill as soon as the Senate resumes in May. 

  Once this bill is enacted, those in Australia who provide material support to people  smugglers will be detected, will be arrested and will be jailed. 

  Finally, just before this press conference started, I distributed a media release  regarding an interception that occurred in the early hours of this morning. 

  Defence will provide an operational brief on the circumstances of this matter later  this afternoon. 

  I'd just like to take this opportunity to commend all those involved in the safe rescue  of these irregular maritime arrivals. This event is a timely reminder of the perils of  people smuggling and underlines the importance of today's initiatives. 

  Thank you. 

  QUESTION: Minister, is it your expectation that this will stem the flow of boats for the  medium term? 

  CHRIS EVANS: No. Look, I don't think it will have an immediate effect on boats. I  think we still expect boats to arrive. We're hopeful that, over time, this will have an  impact on people smuggling operations. But what we do do, I think, by this  announcement is send a very clear message that people smugglers cannot  guarantee people a visa, and they cannot, therefore, sell the sort of product that  they've been selling. 

  It's a very clear message too to those who are seeking to employ people smugglers  that processing of their claims will be suspended, and there's an increasing  expectation from the Australian Government that the number of people found to be  refugees from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan will decrease. 

  We've already got evidence, since the new country information has come in, of  decreasing approval rates. And so, the message is the circumstances in Australia  have changed and that, increasingly, persons from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan are  being refused asylum in this country. 

  But obviously, the longer term impact and the longer term trend in those asylum  claims will develop over time. 

  QUESTION: The way that Australia determines its refugees, it does follow quite  closely the UNHCR guidelines. Aren't you pre-judging the review of those UNHCR  guidelines for a political fix? And secondly, can you confirm that you are sending  scores of AFP police officers to Christmas Island as we speak, and that they will be  followed with riot gear later on? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Look, as Mr Smith made clear, the UNHCR have stated publicly that  they are reviewing their guidance for Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. And, in particular,  there is a review going on of Sri Lankan conditions, both by the UNHCR and other  countries.  

  A number of countries have already suspended processing of claims from Sri Lanka.  Based on that review, and the country information we've been getting and reporting  from posts, we've decided to suspend processing. 

  People aren't being denied their right to seek asylum, but it's been suspended so  that we can assess that developing information. And it is our belief that if conditions  continue to improve, the numbers of persons who will be returned, because they  have not been found to need our protection will increase. 

  If circumstances in the country improve, therefore, people will be able to be returned  safely, and that's the number one priority of the UNHCR and others, that the first  option is to allow people to be returned to their homes in safety and dignity. The  pause allows us to monitor those developments. 

  QUESTION: But sent back without processing? 

  CHRIS EVANS: No. 

  QUESTION: Is that what the suspension means? 

  CHRIS EVANS: No. But what I'm saying is that over the period of the suspension, if  conditions improve, we'd expect to see the rates of asylum claims proven to be  successful diminish. And what I've said, in our experience in recent times, we've  been applying the country information in recent weeks that we've received. Our  experience has been the success rate on claims has been falling. Now, that's in the  first assessment. It's not review. I don't want to over-claim on those matters, but the  advice from my department is that we're seeing an increasing trend in refusals of  both Sri Lankan Tamils and the largest proportion of Afghan asylum-seekers here,  Hazaras. And we have new country information, as Mr Smith explained, about  Hazara conditions. It is quite different to what was available in the past. 

  So those sources are being applied now, but based on that information, we're  suspending new arrivals' assessment for the period of the suspension. 

  QUESTION: Can you tell us about the Federal Police. 

  CHRIS EVANS: I'll let the Minister for Home Affairs respond to the AFP questions.  It's his responsibility. 

  BRENDAN O'CONNOR: In relation to the Australian Federal Police, they are  responsible for community policing on external territories, including Christmas Island. 

  The AFP has deployed some officers. We will not be discussing the numbers of  officers deployed. They have the responsibility of ensuring the security of all of those  on the island, and their decisions, of course, are consistent with those objective. I am  confident that the Australian Federal Police has done the right thing in that regard. 

  QUESTION: But clearly, their deployment is because you expect there to be some  unrest as a result of this policy. 

  BRENDAN O'CONNOR: As I've made clear, the Australian Federal Police has the  responsibility of making decisions about the security of the island. They determine  these matters and I'm confident they've made the right decision. 

  CHRIS EVANS: Could I just, in answer to that, could I just make the point that the  effect of the suspension does not apply to those already in detention. To those  persons in detention on Christmas Island will continue to be processed. 

  So in terms of this announcement, it makes no impact on their continuing  processing. 

  QUESTION: What happens tomorrow and those who arrive tomorrow? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Those who are not currently in detention or in the control of  Australian officials will have the suspension applied to them. 

  So the suspension applies immediately for any new arrivals. 

  QUESTION: In practical terms, a boat turns up from today, or next three months, six  months - what happens? You're not turning them back. You're still intercepting,  escorting them to either Christmas Island or elsewhere. 

  CHRIS EVANS: No, no, they'll all… 

  QUESTION: While they just stay in limbo for three to six months. 

  CHRIS EVANS: No no. The persons will be intercepted. They'll be taken to  Christmas Island. They'll be treated as offshore entry persons, and they'll go through  the normal process of health, identity, and security checks. They will then be in a  position where we will not start processing any claim they make for asylum for the  period of which the suspension is in place. 

  Following any review of the suspension, we would then - if the suspension was lifted  - the Government would then seek to process their asylum claims. 

  They will remain - well, the combination arrangements will be determined according  to our capacities, but they will remain in detention for the period of the suspension,  and the suitable accommodation arrangements will be made. 

  But they will remain in detention. 

  But they will be taken to Christmas Island, they will be legally offshore entry persons,  and they'll have the normal health security checks. 

  QUESTION: [Inaudible] Christmas Island is going to overflow… You have to go to  Darwin… 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well the reality is, yes, that we have pressure on Christmas Island.  Depending on the numbers of arrivals, we would obviously, as we've said for  months, look to use other mainland detention facilities, but as I say, that depends on  arrivals, and obviously we've also got to increase capacity on Christmas Island. 

  But as we made very clear, if we exceed the capacity, we'll access mainland  detention facilities. 

  QUESTION: [Inaudible] fallen victim to a scare campaign, the scare campaign from  the Opposition? Doesn't it make it seem that the Government has fallen victim to the  scare campaign from the Opposition? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well not at all, not at all. This Government retains its commitment to  treating people humanely and appropriately.  

  We've made a decision on the suspension based on very sound public policy  grounds. We've analysed the country information. We've looked at all the factors that  impact on processing. We've had some experience now of processing against new  country information. We have the knowledge of UNHCR and other information made 

  available to us, and the UNHCR's public announcement of its review. And based on  all that information, the Cabinet has taken a decision to suspend these two  caseloads. 

  QUESTION: Just in terms of push factors and the reason people are coming here,  aren't you now admitting that pull factors playing a crucial part too? 

  CHRIS EVANS: No, what we're saying is that the push factors continue to drive large  numbers of people out of these countries. Afghanistan I think has become the largest  - I think it's the largest if not the second largest - refugee producing country in the  world. 

  But there are millions of people who are in need of assistance or who have been  displaced who are not refugees. Those push factors are still strong. What we're  doing is responding to what's happening in those countries, and what's happening in  those countries is that the conditions are changing; that while there's still disruption,  there's still a lot of concern about those conditions, people who seek asylum are  assessed against the grounds of the Refugee Convention. And merely because  things are tough, that the situation in the country is not good, is not a reason for  giving someone refugee status. 

  So a lot of people flee who are not found to be refugees. What we're saying is we're  responding to changed international information, as other countries in the UNHCR  are, and the suspension was seen as the best way for dealing with that evolving  situation - and the impact on claims for asylum in this country. 

  STEPHEN SMITH: Can I just reinforce that point before I throw to Michelle, and it's  to reinforce a point that I made in my opening remarks: what we're dealing with here  are changing or evolving country circumstances in two source countries. 

  As we have made clear in the past - as the UNHCR has made clear recently - what  drives movement of people, what drives displaced peoples, is circumstances in  countries or source countries. 

  And in both Sri Lanka and Afghanistan, we see countries which have been the  subject of very serious security situations in recent times, indeed in the case of  Afghanistan, ongoing. 

  But the basis of the decision are changing or evolving country circumstances. In Sri  Lanka generally, but in Afghanistan, particularly as that applies to individual or  minority communities, and in our case, that of course particularly applies to Hazara  Afghans, who have always formed the vast bulk, if not almost exclusively, the  composition of Afghan asylum-seekers to Australia. Michelle. 

  QUESTION: Isn't it true that you've essentially lost control of and that this has led to  a serious compromise on this policy, that the situation has got out of hand, and that  this has led to a serious compromise on your pledge, when you came to office, to run  a humane policy which got people through the system as quickly as possible, I think  within three months? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well I reject that interpretation. I mean, what we have made very  clear is that we continue to treat people humanely, we continue to treat people with  dignity. And we've rejected the approach of the previous government. None of that  changes. Those detention values will continue to be applied. 

  But what we have had is a situation where we have had a large increase in arrivals,  and we've had to respond to that too, but today's announcement is driven by  changed country information. My department is already applying that in these  refugee's assessments. And early signs are that we are seeing a different pattern in  outcomes of asylum claims from those two sources. And that is supported by the  UNHCR's public announcement that they are reviewing conditions in those two  countries. 

  QUESTION: Well, you could just send them back. 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well no, people will still continue to have their claim assessed in  accordance with the Refugee Convention. There is no suggestion that they won't  have the ability to make a claim. 

  QUESTION: No, but you could just deal with the problem by sending them back if  circumstances have changed. 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well we would deal with problem in the sense that people would still  be able to access their rights under the Refugee Convention. They would have their  asylum claims assessed. And if found to be a refugee, would be given protection in  Australia. If found not to be a refugee, we would seek to return them - as we do now. 

  What the pause says is that we think conditions are improving, that the advice from  the UNHCR is they're reviewing their advice, and their advice is one of many that we  use - the State Department and other organisations. When we combine that country  advice, we're seeing an improved situation. And what we would expect is if things  continue to improve - both more generally in Sri Lanka, but also in terms of minority  groups in Afghanistan, then we would be likely to find less people to be refugees,  and more people… well, more people would be able to be returned. 

  And our preference is - and the preference has always been - that people will be  able to return in safety and dignity to the country of origin. 

  QUESTION: On the issue of suspending applications, does this now - and your  intention to use the Darwin facility - does this mean that you can transfer people,  who've arrived, from now on, to Darwin, under suspension, and they get no access  to appeal … so it allows you to move people to Darwin without the access to appeal.  And what happens at the end of the three months? 

  Is it a rolling three months as people arrive, are they then reviewed after three  months? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Look. The legal status doesn't change for these persons whether  they're suspended or not, and whether they are on the mainland or offshore  Australia. That's always been the case under the Howard Government legislation. 

  They are offshore entry persons. And they have the suite of rights associated with  that. And that included barring them, if you like, to full court appeal. None of those  circumstances have changed. 

  So whether they're on Christmas Island, Darwin, or Sydney's North Shore, their legal  status is the same and their legal status in terms of their rights as off-shore entry  persons will not change by virtue of the suspension. So that's fundamentally the case  and that's not in dispute. 

  Your question about rolling suspension, no, what we have announced is that there  will be a review after three months of the suspension of processing of all Sri Lankan  asylum-seekers who arrive from today's date and suspension for six months of any  Afghanis who arrive from today's date. That is a Government review that will be  undertaken at the three month or six month mark.  

  QUESTION: Mr Smith, has any other country suspended applications from  Afghanistan and Sri Lanka and can you honestly say that this new information that  Australia has about these two countries has nothing to do with the political pressure  you're under on border protection? 

  STEPHEN SMITH: I'll make the same point that Minister Evans did and I expressly  draw to all of our attention the comments yesterday made publicly by the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’ representative in Australia. 

  Firstly, in respect of Sri Lanka, that country's circumstances were evolving and  evolving quickly. Secondly, as a consequence of that, the UNHRC was conducting  its own review of country circumstances and comments in respect of Afghanistan  indicating that because of changing circumstances in Afghanistan a comparable  review was occurring in Afghanistan. 

  So we have been doing carefully and methodically our own assessments. 

  As I said in my opening remarks, we are very much bolstered and very much  reinforced by the fact that the UNHCR is doing precisely the same thing. 

  Our policy response to those evolving and changing circumstances has been to say  we will effect a pause or a suspension of consideration of new asylum-seekers from  Sri Lanka and Afghanistan for limited periods and after three months, in the case of  Sri Lanka, we will review circumstances and after six months, in the case of  Afghanistan, we will review circumstances. 

  As I said, we are more confident that there might be a crystallised or a clearer picture  so far as Sri Lanka is concerned. So that forms the basis of our decision. We are not  the only country on these matters that has been in consultation with the UNHCR or  indeed is contemplating taking action of their own. 

  In the case of Afghanistan, we may well be the first country to effect a pause or a  suspension but we make our judgements on our decisions based on our absolute  attachment to fulfilling our international legal requirements and our adherence to the  provisions of the Refugee Convention. 

  So far as Sri Lanka is concerned, my advice is that a number of countries have over  the last recent period effected a suspension, a small number, and I'm very happy to  have provided to you those particular countries. 

  But the movement of people from Sri Lanka or from Afghanistan is not a movement  solely in the direction of South East Asia or Australia. The vast bulk of movements  for example from Afghanistan are towards Europe. So we're not the only country  grappling with the changing circumstances or dealing with a very large number of  displaced people. And that is why in our context, as I reinforce again, we work very  closely with the source, the transit and the destination countries within, in our region,  the Bali Process. 

  But what underlines the fundamental basis of our decision here is we have two  source countries where historically, in the case of Sri Lanka for over two decades,  and in Afghanistan we have seen very substantial push factors displacing people  and moving people as a result of serious conflict. 

  We've recently seen that conflict end in Sri Lanka. We're hopefully seeing a  transition in Sri Lanka from war to peace. We want that very much to occur. But on  the UNHCR's own analysis and on our own analysis, it is an evolving circumstance  that is seeing the effect - has seen the effecting of a pause. 

  In the case of Afghanistan, it is a different analysis, but nonetheless an analysis  which says that particularly in the case of minority communities, especially Hazaras  previously, indeed up until quite recently or the recent past, it was almost invariably  the case not just in Australia but elsewhere that if you were an Afghan Hazara you  were effectively almost automatically entitled to recognition under the Refugee  Convention because you were suffering, just because of the mere fact you were a  Hazara Afghan, from a well founded fear of persecution. 

  The fall and decline of the Taliban, constitutional legal reform in Afghanistan and  better security circumstances in some parts of Afghanistan has seen not just  Australia but the UNHCR say it's actually time for us to effect a careful consideration  of the evolving and changing circumstances in Afghanistan so far as they relate to  people falling within the provisions of the Refugee Convention. 

  What that will cause us to do in Afghanistan, in the case of Afghanistan, is a much  more careful individual consideration of circumstances. 

  QUESTION: Please clarify for me, if I am an Afghan intercepted at sea tomorrow, I'm  taken to Christmas Island, I'm told that I won't get refugee status for at least six  months, but hang around you never know what's going to happen, so if it comes up  to six months and there's still a suspension what happens to me? Do I take a punt  and stay another six months or what? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well people are obviously always able to return voluntarily and  some people do. We've had quite a history of people deciding to return voluntarily for  a range of reasons so that's a decision for them. 

  What we're saying is the Australian Government will suspend processing of their  claim until the review in six months. So they will not have their claim formally  considered in that period. That's the message to them. They will be detained and if  they choose to pursue their claim, they will have to wait six months before we begin  to entertain - well before we review the suspension and take a decision. If the  suspension is then ended, we would process their claim. 

  QUESTION: Are you willing to extend the suspensions beyond three or six months if  circumstances overseas are not clarified in that time? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well, the Government would make a decision then based on the  country information available to it. That is what we've said; we'd review the  suspension in those time periods. 

  The UNHCR for instance have indicated they're more likely to make a new report on  Sri Lanka available quite quickly. That's expected in weeks rather than in months.  Again that's a matter for the UNHCR but those are the indications they've given.  Their advice on Afghanistan is likely to be longer and they're saying we'll have to  wait longer for that advice.… 

  QUESTION: But isn't [inaudible] detention what you railed against in Opposition? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Can I just finish that - this question first? So while we make the  point that the UNHCR will not be the only determinant for our decision - we take  other sources of information, my department has done that for years - we will make  an assessment and that information will be available to government when we review  the suspension at the three month and the six month mark. 

  QUESTION: Wouldn't a TPV be more humane? Minister could you explain how it's  humane to not start processing an asylum-seeker's claim for three to six months? 

  CHRIS EVANS: Well it's humane because people will still have access to  consideration of their refugee status. They will still be treated with dignity and treated  as human beings. But what we're saying is as a result of changing circumstances we  intend to delay consideration of their claims because we think the situation in their  country is improving. We think they are less likely to be found to be refugees and  owed our protection and that it's a matter of the timing of that decision and that the  best option for people is return safely to their home country. And so we think by  virtue of the delay, more people will be able to return safely to their country and we  will make those decisions then but they will be detained and they will be entitled at  the end of any suspension to have their claims considered if they want to pursue  them. 

  QUESTION: What about indefinite detention sentences? 

  CHRIS EVANS: There will be no indefinite detention. 

  STEPHEN SMITH: Sorry, sorry, question on a different subject, sorry. 

  QUESTION: [Indistinct]. 

  STEPHEN SMITH: Well first up, I haven't read the speech. I've seen reports of it,  firstly. Secondly, I'm not proposing to engage in a running commentary about  Australia or East Timor or Indonesia's view of history. 

  QUESTION: He also criticises aid partners very strongly, and it appears - he doesn't  mention Australia, but he's talking about boomerang aid, money going in and straight  back out. 

  STEPHEN SMITH: Australia works in partnership with East Timor. We have a  substantial program which we agree in partnership with East Timor which meets our  view of the need to assist in terms of capacity building but also East Timor's priorities  and we do that with agreed country strategies on a regular basis. 

  QUESTION: You're comfortable with the current status - the current arrangements  for aid? 

  STEPHEN SMITH: I'm very comfortable with the support that we give to East Timor  to build the capacity to manage their affairs and to improve the service delivery to  their people. 

  Thanks very much guys, cheers. 

  END 

   

