---
title: "Kevin can't spin the boats away as boat K125 arrives."
date: "2010-05-13"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338652
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ICYW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 Kevin can't spin the boats away as boat K125 arrives 

 Thursday 13th May 2010 

 The arrival of boat K125 and the exposure of Kevin Rudd’s attempt to try and spin them 

 away shows yet again that Labor cannot be trusted to protect our borders, Shadow Minister 

 for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs 

 and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “The revelation of attempts by the Prime Minister’s office to inject their spin into the 

 announcement of the 100th boat to arrive this financial year, has proved yet again that Kevin 

 Rudd is all spin and no substance on border protection,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Kevin Rudd needs to understand that you cannot spin the boats away. You need the 

 resolve, commitment and consistency displayed by the Coalition, that reduced boat arrivals 

 to zero on our watch,” he said.  

 

 “The illegal arrival of 125 boats with more than 5,750 people is proof that it’s business as 

 usual for people smugglers under the Rudd Government.  

 

 “K125 will add to the $1 billion border budget blow out this week and the costs for onshore 

 detention will also increase as detainees are moved off a full Christmas Island to detention 

 centres and motels around the country.  

 

 “When the latest boat arrivals land on Christmas Island, the total detention population of 

 immigration detention centres around Australia will exceed 3,500 people, an increase of 

 more than 1,500 since January, when people started being transferred off Christmas Island.  

 

 “The Rudd Government has failed to budget for any increase in the cost of running our 

 onshore detention centres despite the surge in detention population. They must be 

 expecting the reopened Curtin Detention Centre to run by remote control. This will mean 

 further budget blowouts in months and years ahead,” he said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest hat trick of arrivals in the wake of the Government’s budget is a 

 sign of things to come under Rudd Labor, with no new measures planned to stop the flood of 

 boat arrivals.  

 

 “In an email bungle that saw a confidential note broadcast to the world, the Prime Minister’s 

 office instructed the Minister’s office to mention the Bay Class vessels in their press release 

 announcing this latest arrival.  

 

 “This was despite there being no announcement of new boats in the budget.  

 

 “If Kevin Rudd’s promise of new funding announcements until 2013 is to believed, then the 

 reality of new Bay Class vessels is years away.  

 

 “This Government is trying to paint itself as tough on border protection - the reality is they 

 have slashed funding and staff from the Customs and Border Protection Service, slashed 

 funding from the AFP and shelved the much needed replacement of the Bay Class patrol 

 vessels until after 2013,” Mr Keenan said. 

  

