---
title: "Labor's lies on Nauru betray border desperation by Gillard."
date: "2010-07-07"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341278
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/WJ9X6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 

 Labor's lies on Nauru betray border  desperation by Gillard   07/07/10  

 Labor’s claim that the UNHCR was not involved in the processing of asylum seekers  in Nauru under the Howard Government is a desperate lie, by a desperate Government  with no credibility on the issue of offshore processing, Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “Contrary to claims by Minister Evans, not only was the UNHCR specifically  involved in the processing of more than 500 asylum seekers on Nauru, when the  centre was first established, including those transferred from the Tampa on the HMAS  Manoora, but the centre was managed by the International Organisation for  Migration,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “The report for the Senate Select Committee into a Certain Maritime Incident in  October 2002, makes clear that as at 16 April 2002, 525 people on Nauru were being  processed by the UNHCR and that processes adopted on Nauru by the UNHCR and  by the Australian Government were essentially the same processes[1],” he said. 

 “In evidence to the Committee Mr Robert Illingworth, Assistant Secretary, Onshore  Protection, DIMIA, advised that: ‘the Australian processing arrangements have been  modelled very closely on the arrangements that the UNHCR follows in Nauru and  elsewhere in the world, and we have liaised closely with the UNHCR in refining those  arrangements to ensure that is the case.’ 

 “Julia Gillard and Labor do not know what they believe when it comes to addressing  the mess they have created by rolling back the Coalition’s strong border protection  regime. 

 “This morning Labor Parliamentary Secretary Jason Clare said Labor and the  Coalition’s policies were 95% the same, yet was contradicted minutes later by the  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Evans, claiming a world of  difference. 

 “The real difference between Labor and the Coalition on border protection is that  Julia Gillard can simply not be trusted to implement any policy on asylum seekers,  especially the knee jerk response announced yesterday with no detail, no process and  no support. 

 “Labor is looking for a political solution, not a pacific solution, nor any solution that  will actually address the unprecedented arrival of illegal boats under their failed  policies. 

 “By contrast, the Coalition has had a consistent and proven record on implementing  strong policies that deal with illegal boat arrivals, including the establishment of off  shore processing in a third country, that continued for more than six years. 

 “Julia Gillard’s off shore processing announcement survived barely six hours, before  being undermined by a senior member of the Government in East Timor, and the New  Zealand Prime Minister who had clearly been verballed by a desperate PM, looking  for cover. 

 “Julia Gillard’s claim that she would establish off shore processing in East Timor is as  hollow as the claim made by Kevin Rudd when he said he would turn the boats back,  the day before the last election. 

 “Under Labor, the processing of asylum seekers in another country is even less likely  than the Gillard Government achieving a budget surplus. 

 “Minister Evans claims a facility will not be up and running until 2011. You can rest  assured that under Labor it will not be up and running at all” he said. 

  

