---
title: "People smugglers costing others the chance to reunite with family."
date: "2010-04-03"
creators:
  - "Humphries, Gary"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336625
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BYCW6%22
---

 Senator Gary Humphries  Liberal Senator for the ACT 

 Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Families, Housing & Human Services,  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Citizenship     

 3 April 2010 

  

    

  

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 PEOPLE SMUGGLERS COSTING OTHERS  

 THE CHANCE TO REUNITE WITH FAMILY 

 

 Concern is rising about the effect of the escalating number of unauthorised boat arrivals on  family reunion programmes for refugees already in Australia. 

 A report in The Age today highlights the problem that under our laws every visa granted to a  person arriving illegally by boat comes at the expense of a former refugee living in Australia  trying to bring out family members who may be living in dangerous circumstances. 

 "The greater the number of boat arrivals visas, the smaller the number ofvisas available to the  family members of refugees and other humanitarian arrivals,” Opposition citizenship  spokesman Gary Humphries said today. 

 "This is yet another reason why Rudd Labor must dump its shambolic and failing border  protection policy." 

 This anomaly comes about because Australia’s Humanitarian Assistance Program bundles off  and on-shore arrivals into the same category and places a cap on both. Thus former refugees  applying for visas to reunite with their families will have less chance of success because such  visas come from the same pool as those that come via boat. 

 According to The Age's report, the refusal rate for refugees wishing to sponsor family to join  them sits at 90% and is set to grow more as those places are filled by people coming by boat.   

 “With more than 3,500 arriving by boat this financial year alone, such a high refusal rate is  hardly surprising. 

 “These arrivals are 'taking away the places set aside' for other humanitarian reunions,  according to a former immigration official. 

 "Rather than uncapping the total number of humanitarian places Australia offers each year -  already one of the world's most generous - the Rudd Government should be discouraging  arrivals by boat to allow more places for those who  Come through the refugee and  humanitarian program. 

  “Labor need to resolve the problem they have created, for the sake of all of those people who  are sitting in camps overseas waiting patiently to come to Australia. 

  “This is a fundamental injustice to all of those people who have done the right thing.  Labor  must immediately resolve the disaster zone that our borders have become,” Senator  Humphries concluded. 

