---
title: "People smugglers remind Rudd who's the boss as another boat arrives."
date: "2010-02-24"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334682
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/GD0W6%22
---

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Mr Michael Keenan MP   Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 

 Wed, 24th February 2010    

 PEOPLE SMUGGLERS REMIND RUDD WHO'S THE BOSS AS ANOTHER  BOAT ARRIVES 

 Federal Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Federal  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said Kevin  Rudds claim to be taking action on illegal boat arrivals has been mocked by people  smugglers as the 15th boat of the year carrying 47 people was intercepted by ACV Ashmore  Guardian, at 10:45am (AEDST) today near the Ashmore Islands.  

 Mr Morrison said: “While the Attorney General was announcing the Rudd Government’s  proposed response to people smuggling in the parliament another boat was on its way to let  the Rudd Government know who was really in charge, the people smugglers.  

 “The interception of the 15th boat this year brings this year’s total number of illegal arrivals to  more than 800 people.  

 “The arrival of this boat underscores the Coalitions message that it is the government’s soft  policies that is causing the escalation in illegal boat arrivals to Australia. Until they  acknowledge this fact they are leaving Australia’s borders wide open to abuse by people  smugglers.  

 “The Rudd Government is literally kidding itself on this issue. People smugglers are immune  to Labor’s spin. People smugglers only understand the type of action and resolve  demonstrated when the Coalition was last in Government.  

 “The Coalition is ready to pick up where we left off on protecting our borders. That is a  message the people smugglers will understand,” Mr Morrison said.  

 Mr Keenan said: “Despite this being the 83rd boat to arrive since August 08, the government  continues to deny that they are buried in a crisis of their own making.  

 “The fact that they have taken almost 12 hours to announce this latest arrival is an indication  of the lack of seriousness the government is showing towards this flood of arrivals.  

 “When will Minister O’Connor acknowledge that he has failed to secure Australia’s borders?  Mr Keenan said. 

  

