---
title: "$4 million per boat as boat arrivals set new record under Kevin Rudd."
date: "2010-03-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336520
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/75YW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 $4 million per boat as boat arrivals set new record under Kevin Rudd 

 Wednesday 31st March 2010 

 The rate of boat arrivals has hit an all time record in the first three months of 2010, with each 

 boat now costing taxpayers more than $ 4 million, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 

 “Under Kevin Rudd one new boat is turning up at least every three days, with almost 50 

 people on each boat,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 “Based on information provided by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship to Senate 

 Estimates, each additional person arriving at Christmas Island is costing the department 

 almost $82,000, this means each additional boat is costing taxpayers more than $4 million 

 each,” he said. 

 

 “In 2010 the rate of boat arrivals in terms of the number of boats and number of arrivals has 

 hit an all time high at the end of March. 

 

 “There are now almost 11 boats arriving on average each month and almost 540 people. 

 This compares to previous peaks of just over 7 boats per month in 1999 and 460 people per 

 month in 2001, under the Howard Government. (chart attached) 

 

 “Interestingly when the Howard Government was dealing with the surge in illegal boat 

 arrivals, global asylum applications were 40% higher than they are today. The other key 

 difference is the Howard Government did something about it, taking direct action which saw 

 the number of boats in 2002 reduce to just 1, from 43 the previous year. 

 

 “By contrast Kevin Rudd remains in denial, confirming his status as a border protection 

 sceptic. He dismissed illegal boat arrivals as a non issue while in Perth recently and 

 considers this all just business as usual. 

 

 “The cost of dealing with the surge in illegal boat arrivals continues to escalate and we still 

 do not know the cost of the charter flight taking rejected asylum seekers to Sydney to appeal 

 their decisions, rather than sending them home in the other direction. 

 

 “In February this year the Rudd Government told Senate Estimates that 400 new beds on 

 Christmas Island would be ready by the end of March. This deadline will not be met today 

 and it will be some weeks before the extra accommodation is available. 

 

 “This will create further pressure on Christmas Island, which has already breached its 

 capacity with hundreds of people now having been transferred to the mainland, ending 

 universal offshore processing. Christmas Island has become a revolving door. 

 

 “A three week delay in providing the additional beds could see another seven boats and 350 

 people turn up, based on the current rate of arrivals. So I assume we can expect some more 

 late night mystery flights from Christmas Island.  

 

 “The Coalition is committed to doing what it takes to stop the boats and restore control of our 

 immigration programme,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

