---
title: "K132: another drop in Rudd's rolled gold bucket of failure."
date: "2010-06-05"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339840
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/YRYW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 K132: another drop in Rudd's rolled  gold bucket of failure   05/06/10  

 The arrival of the third boat in 24 hours is just another drop in Kevin Rudd's rolled  gold bucket of failure, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael  Keenan said today. 

 Mr Morrison told the NSW Liberal State Council in Penrith today that "the only boats  Kevin Rudd was trying to stop were those with iron ore on them, and they were  heading in the other direction. 

 “Kevin Rudd has tried to walk every side of the street on the asylum seeker issue and  has taken a good trip around the nature strips as well,” he said. 

 “Kevin Rudd's asylum freeze has proved as ineffective as it is discriminatory. 26  boats carrying more than 1,100 people have now arrived in less than 2 months since  the freeze was announced. 

 “The Curtin Detention Centre has been reopened to take those subject to the freeze.  Legal challenges are being lodged in the High Court. There are 427 children being  detained compared to just 21, when the Coalition left office and there has been a $1 

 billion blowout in the Government's budget on this issue. 

 “This is the evidence of failed policy and failed resolve that has attracted almost 6,200  people in 132 boats since Kevin Rudd rolled back the strong border protection regime  he inherited from John Howard,” he said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Three boat arrivals in 24 hours should send a reminder to this  Government that Australia's border protection system remains in tatters. 

 “Over the past 24 hours Labor has used every trick in their book of spin to try and  avoid scrutiny over these latest arrivals, instead of working to fix the source of the  problem. 

 “The Australian people have wisened up to Labor's usual smoke and mirror tactics  and will not be fooled by this latest attempt to spin these boats away. 

 “A Coalition government will rely on action and not spin to restore Australia’s border  protection system. 

 “Only the Coalition has the resolve necessary to make the hard decisions and stop the  boats from coming,” he said. 

