---
title: "$10 million to enhance Victorian settlement services."
date: "2010-06-07"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339904
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VAYW6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 $10 million to enhance Victorian settlement  services  7 June 2010 

 Delivering a mainstream sports program to migrant and refugee youth is just one  excellent example of the important work carried out by agencies funded under the  settlement grants program, the Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and  Settlement Services, Laurie Ferguson, said today. 

 As part of $10 million settlement grants program (SGP) funding for Victoria, the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will provide $160 000 to Spirit  West (Footscray Football Club) in Melbourne. 

 'Besides the health benefits from engaging in sport, this project will also deliver  improved social and emotional health benefits for individuals,' Mr Ferguson said. 'It  will increase personal and social development, integration and participation and build  communities.' 

 The Spirit West project will deliver a sports program, including a variety of Australian  mainstream sports such as cricket, swimming, bike riding, football, lawn bowls,  soccer, volleyball and basketball, as well as an after-school program, healthy living  information, and opportunities for participants to become involved in volunteering. 

 In the 2010-11 financial year, the settlement grants program will provide $10 million  towards 51 projects that will help new arrivals settle into Victoria. 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations. 

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2010-11 funding round is available on  the DIAC website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in Victoria,' Mr Ferguson said. 

