---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: United Nations, New York: 21 September 2010: international meetings; asylum seekers; Commonwealth Games"
date: "2010-09-21"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "RUDD, Kevin"
  - "international meetings"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Commonwealth Games"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211343862
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/230331%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0457 791 556                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW    

 UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK, UNITED STATES   

 21 SEPTEMBER 2010   

 

 

 Subjects: International meetings; asylum seekers; Commonwealth Games   

 

 

 E & O E  

 

 

 JOURNALIST: Can we start off by asking you - the Prime Minister is doing quite a bit of  overseas travel over the month or so, which of these forums do you think might be most  important?   

 KEVIN RUDD: The Prime Minister is travelling to Brussels for the first participation by  Australia in the Asia Europe Meeting. That is something which Australia has lobbied for  years. It’s very important we are there for the first time, and at Head of Government level. It  also provides the Prime Minister an opportunity to have extensive bilateral meetings with  various other European and Asian Heads of Government.    

 The Prime Minister is also attending the East Asian Summit. This is very important, the  reason being that the East Asian Summit for the first time will include the United States. This  has been a core objective of Australian foreign policy over the last two years, enshrined in  our approach to an Asia-Pacific community. It is good that America is coming. It is good that  America is in. And it’s therefore good and important that Australia is a full participant in that  meeting.    

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0488 484 689                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 Beyond that again, of course, we have the Prime Minister’s participation in other regional  gatherings, including APEC. APEC is important, as is the G20.    

 The G20 is going to be an important gathering when it comes to the further handling of the  global economic crisis. Those who think that the global economic crisis has gone away are  wrong. My recent discussions in Washington underline that fact. My recent discussions with  Foreign Ministers here in New York underline that fact. There is a continued major project  of ensuring that we have resilience in the world’s international financial institutions. So  these proposed and announced visits by the Prime Minister abroad are all in Australia’s  fundamental national interest.   

 JOURNALIST: You wouldn’t single out any particular one?   

 KEVIN RUDD: Each of these visits is important in their own right. Australia is a middle power  with global interests. For that reason, we cannot at any stage shrink from our global  engagement. That’s why, the Prime Minister’s decision to engage in this range of meetings  is so important.   

 JOURNALIST: As you know, there must be many people questioning the sort of working  relationship that you now have with the Prime Minister. Can you describe that for me? For  example, have you been briefing her constantly while you’ve been here at the United  Nations?   

 KEVIN RUDD: The Prime Minister and I have a positive and professional relationship.   

  And on the key question of our engagement in foreign policy, of course, I maintain a  continued dialogue with both the Prime Minister and her advisers. Upon taking up the  position of Foreign Minister, I had an extensive discussion with the Prime Minister on our  major foreign policy priorities at present. I was also engaged with her on an extensive  telephone conference less than 24 hours ago.    

 JOURNALIST: So you’ve been in frequent contact with her while you’ve been here?   

 KEVIN RUDD: I maintain contact with both the Prime Minister and her advisers, as was  entirely normal, and is entirely normal, for any Prime Minister and any Foreign Minister.   

 JOURNALIST: May I ask you about asylum seekers? Do you think you’ll make any headway  on that issue during some of these meetings that you’re having here at the UN, particularly  with the Indonesian Foreign Minister, [and] the East Timorese?   

 KEVIN RUDD: As both the Prime Minister and the Minister for Immigration have said in  Australia, this will be a long-term process. It will involve extensive dialogue with our regional  partners, and therefore we need to be very mindful of the responses of regional countries,  the attitude of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International  Organisation for Migration, and of course our international legal obligations under the  Refugees Convention.    

 JOURNALIST: But we’re not going to expect any major outcome to that issue as a result of  the negotiations here, are we? 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0488 484 689                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 3 

 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: As I said before, both the Immigration Minister and the Prime Minister have  indicated this is a long-term process. Carriage for this lies with the Immigration Minister,  and my responsibility as the Foreign Minister is to support his engagement with regional  countries and of course I’ll do that.    

 JOURNALIST: May I ask you about the Commonwealth Games. Do you have any concerns  for the safety of Australian athletes going to New Delhi?    

 KEVIN RUDD: As both the Minister for Sport and others have said in Australia, it’s important  for all Australians to pay close attention to the travel advisory which has been issued by the  Department of Foreign Affairs. The travel advisory speaks for itself, and it is not a document  which is put together lightly.    

 Thank you.   

 

 END 

