---
title: "The Oceanic Viking Had To Go?"
date: "2010-04-30"
creators:
  - "Macdonald, Ian"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR NORTHERN AND REMOTE AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337837
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X5MW6%22
---

 SENATOR THE HON IAN MACDONALD  Liberal Senator for Queensland 

 

 The Oceanic Viking Had To Go?  30/04/10  

 The announcement by the Minister for Home Affairs, Brandon O’Conner, of a new  Southern Ocean maritime patrol vessel raises serious questions about the protection of  Australian waters. 

 Senator Ian Macdonald, who was Fisheries Minister at the time the Oceanic Viking  was acquired and armed for patrol work in the Southern Ocean, has queried the fate of  the Oceanic Viking. 

 “Is it going to be maintained as a second Southern Ocean patrol vessel, or is it now  going to become a permanent home for illegal boat people in Northern Australia”? 

 “Or, is the lease of the Oceanic Viking not being renewed because the name is  synonymous with another of the Rudd Government’s failures - this time in its border  protection policy,” asked Senator Macdonald. 

 “As Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Northern and Remote Australia, the  announcement of this work by a Newcastle company also reminds northerners of the  way the Federal & State Labor Governments have conspired to shut the once vibrant  ship building industry in Cairns. 

 “It now seems that all major ship building works in Australia are being conducted in  politically sensitive southern electorates whilst the Cairns ship building industry is  again overlooked,” he said. 

 “Perhaps Mr Jim Turnour, the Labor Member for Leichhardt and Senator Jan  McLucas, both of whom claim to be advocates for Northern Australia, might explain  why yet another government ship building opportunity is being overlooked for the  North. 

 “The Oceanic Viking was primarily responsible for cleaning up the illegal Patagonian  tooth fish trade in the Southern Ocean. 

 “I only hope that whatever the government is now doing, doesn’t in any way lessen  Australia’s first class record in the protection of the Southern Ocean from  environment and fishing vandals,” said Senator Macdonald. 

  

