---
title: "$12.2 million funding to enhance NSW settlement services."
date: "2010-06-07"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339910
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/SAYW6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 $12.2 million funding to enhance NSW settlement  services  7 June 2010 

 The development of the Radio Sudan community radio program is an excellent  example of the important work carried out by agencies funded under the settlement  grants program, the Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services, Laurie Ferguson, said today.  

 As part of the $12.2 million settlement grants program (SGP) funding allocated to  NSW, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will provide $75 806 to  St Anthony’s Family Care in Central Western Sydney. 

 'This funding will assist St Anthony's Northern Care in its work with newly arrived  Sudanese migrants and refugees in Blacktown and Central Western Sydney,' Mr  Ferguson said. 

 'This project will empower the Sudanese community and provide helpful resources to  the community to assist them become self-reliant and have the capacity to support  their families and their community networks.' 

 St Anthony’s Northern Care will also provide support to Sudanese families in one-on-one, playgroup and community settings.  

 'Being part of a community in Australia assists new arrivals to better negotiate the  settlement experience and in turn provide support to more recent arrivals,' Mr  Ferguson said.  'Projects such as this provide a forum for the Sudanese community  to engage in community building projects and gain new skills, resources, personal  networks and enthusiasm.' 

 During the 2010-11 financial year, DIAC’s settlement grants program will provide  $12.2 million towards 79 projects which help new arrivals settle into New South  Wales. 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies, and community and welfare organisations. 

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2010-11 funding round is available on  the DIAC website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in New South Wales,' Mr Ferguson said.  

