---
title: "Australians face $1 billion immigration bill for Rudd's border failures."
date: "2010-03-12"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335421
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/RZXW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 

 Australians face $1 billion immigration bill for Rudd's border failures 

 Friday 12th March 2010 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for 

 Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today that the interception of 

 the fifth boat in just six days continues the massive surge in illegal arrivals under Labor 

 which will end up costing Australians more than $1 billion.  

 

 “The Rudd Government has already admitted to a $132 million blow out in the cost of 

 processing illegal arrivals on Christmas Island this financial year, plus another $34 million to 

 increase the number of beds on Christmas Island, because they had incredibly predicted 

 only 200 people would arrive illegally by boat this financial year,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “So far this financial year 3,086 people have arrived on board 67 boats. Even on a 

 conservative estimate, by the end of July the Rudd Government will be forced to spend an 

 extra $230 million to deal with the sustained surge in arrivals under their failed policies,” he 

 said.  

 

 “The Rudd Government is currently only planning on spending $130 million per year over the 

 next three years. Based on this year’s expected cost blow outs they will have to upgrade 

 these estimates by an extra $300 million each year.  

 

 “Over four years, including 2009/10, this will leave Australians with an additional bill of over 

 $1 billion in immigration costs alone because of their failed immigration policies and rolling 

 back the Coalition’s strong border protection regime.  

 

 “The Rudd Government has been in denial about the magnetic impact of their failed 

 immigration and border policies since day one.  

 

 “The only action Australians have seen over this worsening situation is more spin and more 

 spending from a government well versed in both.  

 

 “The impending transfer of detainees from an overcrowded Christmas Island to Darwin, 

 before they have finalised their asylum claims which meanwhile will bring an end to the 

 integrity of Australia’s off shore processing regime and provide a further incentive for people 

 smugglers.  

 

 “Labor has failed to secure our borders. Australians know that the Coalition stopped the 

 boats before and will again,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “It’s now the norm, rather than an anomaly, to have a boat arrive before the 

 end of the day.  

 

 “This week we’ve seen 5 boats arrive in 6 days - that’s dangerously close to a rate of a boat 

 a day.  

 

 “Another day, another boat - this is what we’ve come to expect under the Rudd Labor 

 Government,” he said. 

 

