---
title: "Irregular migration: the global challenge: address to the Sydney Institute."
date: "2010-03-24"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Refugee boat movements"
  - "Regionalism (International relations)"
  - "International cooperation"
  - "UN High Commissioner for Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336209
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/JSEW6%22
---

  

 Senator Chris Evans   

 Irregular Migration - The Global Challenge 

 Wednesday 24 March 2010 

 The Sydney Institute 

 Ladies and gentlemen, 

 Firstly, I would like to formally acknowledge the traditional owners and custodians of  these lands and pay my respects to their elders, both past and present. 

 Secondly, I would like to thank the Sydney Institute for hosting me this evening. I  was invited some months ago and appreciate Ann and Gerard's patience and  perseverance in getting me here. 

 I recently came upon a quote which neatly encapsulated my experience over recent  months. 

 ‘This is one of those incredibly difficult issues where on the one hand there are  people screaming at us saying that we're being too harsh, which we're not, and then  on the other hand there are some people saying “well you've got to do something to  stop people coming in” yet not really offering any alternative other than the very  harsh and unacceptable one, from the humanitarian point of view, of turning people  back into the sea.’ 

 It may surprise you to learn that those words were uttered by former Prime Minister  John Howard on 17 August 2001, a week or so before the Tampa sailed into  Australian waters. 

 I well understand his frustration. 

 But the Rudd Government doesn't intend to head down the path he took. 

 The challenge for the Rudd Government in 2010 is how to respond to the increase in  irregular boat arrivals effectively but humanely. 

 To do that we must understand what drives irregular movement and acknowledge its  root causes. We must accept that irregular migration is a global challenge and must  be seen, and addressed, in that context. And we must resist the urge to discuss and  debate the challenge of irregular migration in hysterical and simplistic terms. 

 As recent history clearly demonstrates, a comprehensive approach - strongly  focused on regional and international engagement - offers the best way forward. 

 The challenge of irregular migration is not new, and it is not Australia's burden alone. 

 As United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees AntÃ³nio Guterres said in 2007:  ‘The 21st Century is a century of people on the move… Some move because they  want a better life, a better future for their children. But many unfortunately move  because they are forced to flee. They have no alternative… It's not only a north-south movement, it's also a south-south movement. We witness it around Europe,  we witness it in southern Africa, we witness it in South Asia, we witness it in Latin  America.’ 

 At the end of 2008 there were 42 million forcibly displaced people worldwide,  including 15.2 million refugees. Of these, 24 million were receiving protection or  assistance from UNHCR. 

 The total population of concern to UNHCR has grown from 20 million at the end of  2001 to 34 million at the end of 2008, which represents about a 70 per cent increase. 

 Asylum numbers to industrialized countries are dwarfed in comparison to the number  hosted in neighbouring and developing countries. Some four fifth of the world's  refugees are hosted in developing countries. Three quarters of refugees seek refuge  in neighbouring countries or their immediate region. 

 As yesterday's UNHCR report on Asylum Levels and Trends in Industrialized  Countries 2009 showed, of the 42 million displaced people, only 377 000 asylum  claims were lodged in what could be considered 'safe' countries. 

 That is the enormity of the global problem. 

 Here in Australia we are in the midst of our fifth major wave of boat arrivals over the  past three decades. There have been boat arrivals to Australia in 27 of the last 35  years, so the Fraser, Hawke, Keating, Howard and Rudd Governments have all  faced similar challenges. 

 Far from believing he had solved the problem Howard spent $400 million building the  800 bed Christmas Island detention centre, which wasn't completed until 2008.  

 The Rudd Government is committed to controlling our borders and managing those  who seek entry to our country. Australians rightly expect that the Federal  Government will only allow authorised entry and orderly migration that is managed  with integrity in the national interest. We understand that irregular migration  undermines perceptions of the integrity of orderly migration procedures and evokes  resentment and sometimes fear among Australians. 

 Importantly, irregular migration places often-vulnerable people in the hands of  criminal syndicates running people smuggling and trafficking ventures. People  getting in those shoddy overcrowded vessels take extraordinary risks that often  result in loss of life.  

 But I would like to contextualise the dimensions of the problem. 

 Last year Australia accepted 170 000 permanent migrants to this country and had  four million temporary entrants, of whom more than half a million had some form of  work rights. At the same time we had 1375 air arrivals refused entry at the airport,  and 2726 irregular maritime arrivals. 

 Without diminishing the challenge of irregular arrivals - it is worth considering these  numbers in the context of total immigration numbers. 

 This will continue to be a challenge. While there is poverty, famine, wars, weak and  corrupt governments, chronic unemployment, environmental degradation, natural  disasters and racial, religious and political persecution, we will see people on the  move. And Australia, as a wealthy developed country, where there is stable  Government, an abundance of opportunity, and most importantly - where you can be  safe - will always be an attractive destination. 

 We need to accept that irregular migration will be with us for the foreseeable future,  and design our policy responses with that reality in mind.  

 As I indicated, Australia has experienced five major waves of boat arrivals over the  past 30 or so years. The first wave was in the late 1970s, when just over 2000  Indochinese came to Australia after the fall of South Vietnam in 1975. The second  wave was between 1989 and 1993 when mainly Cambodians fled conflict between  Government and Khmer Rouge forces. The third wave was between 1994 and 1998,  they were mainly Sino-Vietnamese and Chinese seeking relief from economic  hardship. The fourth wave began in the late 1990s and included the three biggest  years of boat arrivals on record, peaking at 5516 people in 2001. In this case, the  brutal regimes of the Taliban in Afghanistan and Saddam Hussein in Iraq were  driving people to flee and seek protection elsewhere. 

 Each wave of arrivals was generated by deterioration in peoples' circumstances in  their home country. All were abated by changes in country circumstances or by  concerted international action by other countries. 

 Many in Australia now seek to deny the reality of these circumstances and attribute  people movements to pull factors driven solely by domestic policy. 

 Boat arrivals to Australia dropped dramatically from the end of 2001. Our political  opponents like to claim that their policies of this time - TPVs, the outsourcing of  Australia's international obligations with the establishment of the Offshore  Processing Centres at Nauru and Manus Island and the turn-around of a couple of  boats - were responsible for the reduction in boat arrivals. Basically they argue that  domestic policy changes were solely responsible. 

 But the argument doesn't withstand close analysis. 

 Let's be clear, Temporary Protection visas did not stop the boats. The record number  of arrivals between 1999 and 2001 came in spite of the introduction of TPVs in  October 1999. In fact, in the two years after the introduction of TPVs there were 

 8455 irregular maritime arrivals on 94 boats. And because TPVs did not allow for  family reunions or enable refugees to travel freely they actually encouraged women  and children to make the dangerous journey to Australia by boat. 

 Nor were people deterred by the temporary nature of the visa: only about 3 per cent  of those granted a TPV actually departed Australia. 

 The Pacific Solution also failed. Not only did it damage our reputation internationally,  but the majority - 70 per cent - of those accommodated on Nauru and Manus Island  were ultimately resettled to Australia or other countries. Some 95 per cent of those  resettled in Australia were recognized as refugees, the bulk of whom had fled  Afghanistan and Iraq. One of my first tasks as Minister was to deal with 82 Sri  Lankan men who had arrived in 2007 and had been left on Nauru by the Howard  Government despite being found to be refugees. 

 The arguments about TPVs and the Pacific Solution are conducted without any  reference to significant international developments of the time. 

 The drop in boat arrivals from the end of 2001 coincided with the international  intervention in Afghanistan in October 2001 and the subsequent fall of the Taliban. In  2002 a large scale voluntary return programme of Afghanis in Pakistan and Iran  began - the single largest repatriation operation in UNHCR's 59-year history in fact.  Under the programme, governed by the Tripartite Agreements between UNHCR and  the Governments of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran, more than 4.4 million people  returned. More than 400 Afghanis returned to Afghanistan from the offshore  processing centres in Nauru and Manus Island. 

 Afghanis stopped coming because they would not, at that time, be found to be  refugees. 

 The drop in boat arrivals to Australia after 2001 also corresponded with a global fall  in asylum seeker numbers. More importantly for Australia, there was a significant  decline in Afghani and Iraqi asylum seekers - who up until then dominated  Australia's arrivals.  

 The recent surge has mainly consisted of Afghani and Sri Lankan Tamil asylum  seekers driven by the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan and the final  stages and aftermath of the Sri Lankan civil conflict.  

 The situation in Afghanistan declined significantly in 2008 and 2009. According to the  UNHCR's 2009 report, released overnight, Afghani asylum-seekers are, for the first  time since 2001, the largest group seeking asylum to industrialized countries. 

 Sri Lanka is of course emerging from the aftermath of a 25 year old civil war.  Escalating violence throughout 2008 and early 2009, as well as the displacement of  hundreds of thousands, led to an increase in the number Sri Lankan asylum-seekers  claiming protection in industrialised countries worldwide in 2008. There have been  some recent indications of improvement in the security situation in Sri Lanka and a  number of failed asylum seekers have been returned to Sri Lanka in recent months. 

 More than three quarters of boat arrivals since September 2008 have been from  either Sri Lanka or Afghanistan, and instability in these countries has largely driven  boat arrivals to Australia. As UNHCR Regional Representative Richard Towle stated  in January 2010, ‘The two principal factors that drive asylum seekers' movements  towards Australia, New Zealand and the broader Pacific region are conflict and  human insecurity in their countries and regions of origin and the lack of any credible  opportunities for people to find asylum and solutions en route to this region.’ 

 Put simply, the surge in irregular maritime arrivals is consistent with what is  happening globally and within our region. The whole history of boat arrivals to  Australia is the history of conflict and displacement in our region. 

 Addressing irregular migration needs us to have a comprehensive and integrated  approach internationally - tackling at the same time some of the root causes of  displacement in source countries, as well as supporting transit countries to develop  managed migration systems that effectively regulate the entry of people. 

 It needs us to support countries in building their own protection systems, which  ensures that host countries do not carry the burden of refugee populations in the  long term. 

 We also need to better understand the motivations of why people choose to take the  enormous risk of leaving their homes - there is rarely one single reason but a  combination of factors such as armed conflict, persecution, discrimination and  poverty. 

 Understanding these motivations gives us a clear platform from which to build on  existing policies and reshape the agenda. 

 Our clear long-term priority must be to address the root causes of irregular migration  flows. We need to know what to target in our development assistance, peacekeeping  and other operations to assist in stabilizing populations - in particular poverty  eradication, institution and capacity building and conflict prevention.  

 There are no clear answers but we have to start exploring what can we do. For  instance, we know that a large proportion of arrivals from Afghanistan have left from  one region - should we be working more strategically in the region to assist in  reconstruction? Do we have a role in assisting in the development of safer  environments with access to alternative livelihoods? How do we collaborate with the  provincial reconstruction teams in the region to address these issues? 

 We also need to address the issue of transit and secondary movements. Many  countries in the region host substantial displaced populations - they often also have  a limited capacity to host such populations over long periods of time without it  impacting on their own communities and social institutions. We know from long  experience that people displaced are vulnerable to further displacement and often  live fragile lives at the fringes of the host community. 

 Developing countries, with limited capacity to host large displaced populations, carry  by far the largest burden. The risk, when there appears to be no hope of a durable 

 solution, is that these people become easy targets (willingly or otherwise) of  smuggling networks. 

 This is often compounded by countries having limited and inconsistent domestic  capacities to deal with such population inflows - often lacking in effective border  controls, inadequate and compromised visa systems and non-existent or inadequate  legislation to deal with smuggling networks. 

 Protection systems are also weak - with limited understanding of concepts of  protection and lack of durable solutions.  

 So what is the answer? 

 No one country can tackle these issues on their own - our best chance is to work  across boundaries with regional governments and international organisations. 

 Neither Australia nor countries in the region are starting with a blank canvas - the  Comprehensive Plan of Action was a good model in its time and in recent years we  have built strong institutional linkages with Indonesia under the Regional  Cooperation Arrangements and through the Bali Process. 

 For example, our recent work under the Bali Process is important in starting to map  out approaches to displacement across the region - from source and transit to  destination - identifying where the gaps and weaknesses are, and what we can do -  through capacity building, technical cooperation, and support in developing new legal  frameworks on managed migration - to strengthen the institutional capacity of  regional governments to tackle these issues.  

 We have been working closely with UNHCR on how we can develop a broader  regional protection framework under the 10-point plan of action. 

 Our diplomatic engagement with regional countries is also important, underpinning  all of Australia's efforts to manage irregular migration and people smuggling. In this  context, the commitment of Indonesia's President to criminalize people smuggling is  a highly significant and valuable development. 

 We need to continue working on multilateral and bilateral agreements - they are an  important avenue to build cooperation and trust and achieve enduring solutions to  the problem of people smuggling. 

 The contemporary debate in Australia has been characterized by a narrow focus on  domestic policy and a return to demands for simplistic and punitive policy responses,  with no regard to evidence of likely success. 

 Despite claims that irregular maritime arrivals represent a failure of border security,  the Rudd Labor Government has maintained and extended the Howard  Government's border security measures. 

 We retain excision of offshore places, we continued offshore processing of irregular  maritime arrivals on Christmas Island, and we maintain mandatory detention of those  arrivals for health, identity and security checks.  

 When growing international pressure led to greater irregular movement and an  increase in people smuggling activity, the Rudd Government responded with  measures including increased maritime and aerial patrols and surveillance and  boosting the AFP, Immigration and Customs resources dedicated to international  anti-people smuggling activity. 

 In 2009, we committed an additional $654m in resources to combat people  smuggling as part of the Rudd Government's $1.3 billion strategy to strengthen our  borders.  

 The commitment to effective border control, interception at sea of unauthorised  arrivals, processing on Christmas Island and mandatory detention is bipartisan. 

 There has been no weakening of border security arrangements under the Rudd  Government - rather there has been an increase in resources to meet the task. 

 The Rudd Labor Government has delivered on its commitment to major reform of  immigration policies. These reforms have included the dismantling of many of the  unfair and harsh policies of the Howard Government. Howard himself had embarked  on changes in 2005 and the current opposition did not oppose many of the changes  we implemented at the time they were announced. 

 The Rudd Government is proud of its reforms in abolishing temporary protection  visas, closing the so-called Pacific Solution, introducing decent values to detention  policy, providing independent review of negative asylum decisions and abolishing  detention debt. 

 They reflect values of fairness, respect and decency in dealing with asylum seekers  not a weakening of border security. 

 Tony Abbott's ascendancy to the leadership and the return of Phillip Ruddock to a  position of influence has seen the opposition again looking to punishment of  refugees as a political message. They seem keen to resurrect Howard's rhetoric but  have been reluctant to develop any policies other than to reintroduce the failed  TPVs. 

 The Opposition spokesperson Mr Morrison yesterday suggested we return to the era  of prison hulks. 

 Mr Abbott is looking to exploit community concern by pretending that there are viable  simplistic solutions to the challenges we confront. 

 The deliberate burning of SIEV 36 when passengers were advised to return to  Indonesia and the result in loss of life and serious injuries to Australian Navy  personnel highlights the risks involved. 

 The Rudd Government very much understands the concern and anxiety in the  Australian community over irregular maritime arrivals. Australians' general sympathy  for humanitarian entrants is challenged by the unauthorised nature of arrival, the  involvement of payment to people smugglers and the notion that more deserving  people are displaced by those apparently 'jumping the queue'. 

 There is no doubt that an increase in arrivals places political pressure on the  Government of the day. 

 While the public debate has been more balanced and less shrill than in 1999-2001,  the Oceanic Viking episode dramatically highlighted the issue. 

 The Rudd Government is determined to respond within a framework of balanced  public policy rather than opportunistically seeking to exploit community anxiety. 

 Domestic policy changes that can contribute to improved outcomes will be vigorously  pursued. 

 The political debate in Australia over irregular arrivals has been dominated by  emotion, fear and simplistic domestic notions offered as solutions to complex  international problems. 

 The global nature of the issue and international factors driving these waves of  irregular arrivals are given little recognition. 

 The domestic debate always focuses on the simplistic notion that individual domestic  solutions will end the problem. 

 The current opposition seeks to exploit the issue for opportunistic political  advantage: that's what oppositions do. 

 Of course in government they had a different view. As Phillip Ruddock said in 1999,  ‘Australia is not alone. We are also seeing large numbers of people seeking asylum  in developed countries - people from the same groups as we are seeing in  Australia.’ 

 The reality is that combating people smuggling and irregular migration requires a  broad range of international and domestic policy responses. 

 The Rudd Government is committed to taking action on all fronts: law enforcement;  international cooperation; source country stabilisation and investment; a strong  humanitarian programme; effective border management; fair and robust asylum  determination processes. 

 It is only by taking action on all of these fronts that we can effectively respond to the  challenge of irregular migration. 

 The Rudd Labor Government will continue to adjust policy settings and respond to  changing circumstances. 

 What we have rejected is the notion that domestic responses can include  abandoning our commitment to the Refugees Convention or deliberately seeking to  punish those found to be owed our protection as a means of deferring others from  seeking asylum. 

 Nor will we demonise these people or exploit community anxiety. 

 The Australian people experienced that approach under the Howard Government  and decided that it did not reflect the values of Australian society. 

 The commitment of this Government is to respond to the latest wave of irregular  maritime arrivals on the basis of a mature analysis of the issue and sound public  policy. 

 

 See:  Index of speeches and transcripts 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/2010/ce100324.htm   Last update: 26 March 2010 at 08:59 AEST  

 

