---
title: "Arrival of boat K112 adds to Kevin Rudd's chaos on border protection."
date: "2010-04-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337340
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/R5XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 ARRIVAL OF BOAT K112 ADDS TO KEVIN RUDD’S CHAOS ON BORDER PROTECTION  Wednesday, 21 April 2010   

 The arrival of boat K112 will add to the chaos that has become Kevin Rudd’s border  protection and immigration policy, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael  Keenan said today.    

 “The arrival of the latest boat, K112, shows that Kevin Rudd has no lasting solution to  stop the boats, just another cynical election fix,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “This is the seventh boat to arrive since Kevin Rudd announced his cynical election fix to  put his failed polices into suspended animation until after the election,” he said.    

 “K112, carrying 48 people was ‘intercepted’ once again near the Western Australian  coast, and takes the tally of people arriving by boat to 5,186 since Kevin Rudd rolled  back the strong border protection regime he inherited from the Coalition.    

 “This is the 44th boat this year and the 11th to arrive this month. So far in April 574  people have arrived, which is more than the total capacity of the Northern Detention  Centre in Darwin.    

 “The arrival of the latest boat is just another page in Kevin Rudd’s volume of policy  failures on border protection.    

 “These asylum seekers will add to Kevin Rudd’s chaos on Christmas Island and detention  centres around Australia.    

 “Already the Northern Detention Centre in Darwin is half full and places in other  detention centres around the country are filling up. Minister Evans is also still yet to deny  reports that immigration officials have been asked to soft pedal on visa compliance  because of the Rudd Government’s self made crisis on asylum seekers    

 “There are also still no details about Kevin Rudd’s decision to reopen the Curtin Centre  near Derby, closed by the Howard Government. How much will it cost? What works will  be required? What alternatives were considered? How much has already been spent on  reconnaissance flights, accommodation and consultants? How long has this been in the  planning? When will it really be ready?    

 “K112 will add further pressure on all of these issues, and this pressure will continue to  mount as every new boat arrives,” Mr Morrison said.   Mr Keenan said: “Remarkably this latest illegal boat was, according to the Minister,  under surveillance for ‘days’ and yet the overworked BPC could only meet it today after  it had reached within a stones throw of Western Australia.    

 “This is just another example of how under the Rudd Government’s failed policies Border  Protection Command has effectively become a ferry for people smugglers and is  struggling under the demand.    

 “BPC is under stress and the illegal boats are coming closer to the mainland. Kevin  Rudd’s election fix has not changed a thing,” he said.  

