---
title: "Rescue mission highlights why we must stop the boats."
date: "2010-02-06"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211333929
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/BZXW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Rescue mission highlights why we must stop the boats 

 Saturday 6th February 2010 

 Federal Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison has expressed 

 concern for the 45 people reported to be on board a distressed vessel south west of 

 Christmas Island, that has been the subject of a rescue mission by the Australian Maritime 

 Safety Authority. 

 

 “This boat is reported to have been drifting for days without food and water, putting at risk 

 the lives of the 45 people on board. It highlights once again just how perilous this voyage is 

 and why we need to do all we can to prevent people taking these extreme risks,” Mr 

 Morrison said 

 

 “While there is natural sympathy for people seeking a better life for themselves and their 

 families, strong borders and strong immigration processes play an important role in 

 protecting people from what can be fatal decisions,” he said. 

 

 “Last October there were reportedly 105 Afghans who set out from Indonesia for Australia 

 that have never been heard from again. We will probably never know.  

 

 “In addition, in November, a boat carrying 39 Sri Lankans sunk west of the Cocos islands, 

 where a dozen people are believed to have lost their lives. 

 

 “The Coalition believes we must frame polices to make sure that getting on a boat to 

 Australia is not worth the risk. This is one of the key reasons why the Coalition is so strongly 

 committed to tougher border protection. 

 

 “At the moment too many people are prepared to take this risk. This summer, in the midst of 

 the monsoon and cyclone season, we have now had 23 boats arrive. Last year there was 

 just four. 

 

 “We fear that until there is a change in the Government’s position on border protection, we 

 will continue to see even more boats set out to illegally arrive in Australian waters. Some of 

 these will never reach their destination,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

