---
title: "Gillard flounders on 'regional' processing centre"
date: "2010-10-25"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211345162
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/314535%22
---

 The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin 

 Gillard flounders on 'regional'  processing centre   25/10/10  

 The Prime Minister continued to flounder in Question Time today with her inability to  define even the most basic concepts surrounding her proposed regional framework for  asylum seekers and regional processing centre for East Timor.  

 Last week, she described the regional framework as applicable to the “Asia Pacific  region”. 

 In Question Time today, the Prime Minister ridiculed suggestions that other countries  would send asylum seekers to her proposed regional processing centre, which was in  direct contradiction to recent comments by the Minister for Immigration. 

 “We have a lot of asylum seekers through the Asia-Pacific region and a lot of asylum  seekers seeking to get to various countries, and the regional processing centre would  need to have an agreed framework for choosing the case load that was sent there by  Australia and potentially other nations.” (Chris Bowen - ABC Lateline, 13/10/2010)  

 The Secretary of the Department of Immigration last week in Senate Estimates  defined the region as the member countries of the Bali Process, which includes Iran  and Pakistan. The UNHCR states there are more than two million Afghan refugees in  Iran and Pakistan. 

 Given the large number of displaced people in the region and beyond, it is vital that  the Prime Minister defines the membership of her regional framework and the  definition of asylum seekers eligible for transfer to the proposed regional processing  centre. 

 The Prime Minister also claimed a superior knowledge of geography in terms of her  knowledge of the region, however this claim is undermined by her comments in July  this year when she confused Nauru with East Timor. 

 "I don't want to stop boats at sea, I want to stop them leaving shore and setting sail in  the first place. That's why I outlined my plans for a regional processing centre and  why we commenced the dialogue with Nauru." (Julia Gillard - AAP, 29/7/2010)  

  

