---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 18 April 2010: reopening of Curtin Detention Centre; transfer of asylum seekers to the mainland."
date: "2010-04-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337179
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/O8YW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 Transcript - Doorstop interview 

 Sunday 18th April 2010 

 Subjects: Reopening of Curtin Detention Centre, transfer of asylum seekers to the mainland  

 

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well in a further admission today of the government’s failed decisions 

 and policies on border protection and immigration, Kevin Rudd has had it announced today 

 that they are going to open a detention facility that the Howard Government closed some 

 years ago because it simply wasn’t needed. This is an absolute admission of the failure of 

 this government which has seen the Christmas Island with the house full sign go up, we’ve 

 seen people now transferred to Darwin which the government said it would do once 

 Christmas Island was overflowing and so we now see a complete end to offshore processing 

 in this country. There is no remnant of any of the Coalition’s border protection regime that 

 this government inherited. It has been completely rolled back and the chaos we see on 

 Christmas Island, the transfer of people onto the mainland, the reopening of a facility at 

 Curtin near Derby that was closed for very good reason is now being reopened as an 

 admission of a failure the government continues to deny. 

 

 So this is a further chapter in the chaos that has become Kevin Rudd’s asylum seeker policy, 

 it has been made up on the run and as a result the Australian people have every reason to 

 be completely bamboozled by what has become an excuse for border protection policy 

 under the Rudd Government. 

 

 QUESTION: Isn’t it just common sense to [inaudible] 

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well there is room in Darwin, there is in Villawood, there is room in a 

 number of facilities around the country. To reopen this facility, a facility that was closed by 

 the Howard Government is an absolute admission of the desperate situation this government 

 has got to under its own policies. What we continue to fail to see from Kevin Rudd is an 

 admission of the fact that his policies have failed which has led to these rather bizarre 

 actions that won’t lead to a deterrent to asylum seekers. They are now effectively being told 

 they will be transferred to the mainland. Now this was not something that was pursued by 

 the Coalition in government, we reduced the boats to zero and our policies were effective. 

 

 The other thing I should say that this government needs to come clean on today is how 

 much will this cost, what is the ongoing cost of their failed border protection policy, will we 

 see those costs in the budget, will the government come clean and tell us that those who 

 were transferred from Christmas Island to Villawood recently, apparently on their way home, 

 have they gone home yet or are they still waiting there and because of the stress of what is 

 happening on Christmas Island and the blow over onto the mainland, the Minister has still 

 yet to confirm what instructions were given to Immigration officials allegedly last week that 

 they should soft peddle on other visa compliance issues. 

 

 QUESTION: The fact that they are all going to be on the mainland, does that affect their 

 chances of getting residency, does it change the legal equation? 

 

 SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think the legal situation of people being transferred to the 

 mainland is, as the Coalition has said for some time, incredibly murky. The government’s 

 decision to transfer people with the most challenging cases, those whose claims have been 

 rejected have already been transferred to the mainland, to Villawood, where they will be 

 pursuing the appeals that this government has provided for and whether they are able to 

 pursue further appeals could well be tested in the courts but now we have this situation 

 where those whose asylum claims for assessment have been suspended, a decision that 

 has been roundly criticised by the legal profession, we could well see test cases emerge as 

 a result of their transfer to the mainland as well. So the government continues to do this on 

 the run, it exposes our system to further challenges to its integrity and takes us back to the 

 days where we could potentially see people lining up in courts with bridging visas for years 

 on end. 

  

