---
title: "Suspension of processing of Afghan asylum seeker claims to be lifted"
date: "2010-09-30"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "BOWEN, Chris, MP"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Afghanistan"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344193
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/270060%22
---

 Chris Bowen, MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for McMahon 

 Suspension of processing of Afghan asylum  seeker claims to be lifted  Thursday, 30 September 2010 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced the  government will immediately lift the suspension of processing of asylum claims from  Afghan asylum seekers. 

 ‘In recent weeks the government has been closely considering whether the  suspension, which was due to expire on 8 October, should be lifted or should  continue,’ Mr Bowen said. 

 ‘During the last six months, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship has been  working to improve its understanding of the situation of asylum seekers from  Afghanistan, particularly the situation of Hazaras, who comprise the majority of  Afghans seeking asylum in Australia. 

 ‘The government's decision to lift the suspension has been informed by the  additional information the department has gathered from a range of sources and  close collaboration with the Australian embassy in Kabul.’ 

 All Afghan asylum seekers affected by the suspension will now be provided with  access to an Immigration Advice and Application Assistance Scheme agent and  assisted to prepare a statement of claims. 

 They will have their claims assessed on a case by case basis by Department of  Immigration and Citizenship decision makers, who will also be informed by a Country  and Policy Guidance note to be issued to them shortly. 

 ‘The government is committed to providing protection to those who are found to be  genuine refugees, in accordance with Australia's international obligations,’ Mr Bowen  said. 

 ‘Those people who are found not to be refugees will be returned to Afghanistan. The  government is working closely with the UNHCR and the Afghanistan Government to  facilitate safe, sustainable returns of unsuccessful asylum seekers. 

 ‘As well as working to facilitate the return of unsuccessful asylum seekers, the  government has a number of other measures which are aimed at reducing the use of  people smugglers, including committing to the development of a Regional Protection  Framework and Regional Processing Centre. 

 ‘East Timor remains the government's focus for the establishment of a Regional  Processing Centre and that is why I will be visiting Dili in the week commencing 11  October to take this matter forward,’ Mr Bowen said. 

  

