---
title: "$4.5 million to enhance Queensland settlement services."
date: "2010-06-07"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339903
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UAYW6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 $4.5 million to enhance Queensland settlement  services  7 June 2010 

 Providing school-age migrants and refugees in Milpera in Brisbane with information  about the Australian legal system and their rights and responsibilities using music  and role playing is an innovative and effective example of the work carried out by  agencies funded under the settlement grants program, the Parliamentary Secretary  for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie Ferguson, said today. 

 As part of $4.5 million settlement grants program (SGP) funding for Queensland, the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will provide $33 000 to Refugee  and Immigration Legal Service (RAILS) in Brisbane.  

 'One of the issues we face in settling refugee and migrant youth into Australia is  making sure youth understand their rights and responsibilities under the Australian  legal system,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 'It is important to provide young new arrivals with information about family  relationships, police, traffic, drugs, discrimination, harassment, and conflict resolution  and where they can find assistance if they need it.'  

 The legal education program at RAILS will assist migrant youth to navigate the  Australian legal system and to access assistance when necessary.  

 In the 2010-11 financial year, the settlement grants program will provide $4.5 million  to fund 21 projects that will help new arrivals settle in Queensland. 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations.   

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Mr Ferguson said. 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2010-11 funding round is available on  the DIAC website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in Queensland,' Mr Ferguson said.  

