---
title: "100 boats follows Gillard's 100 days"
date: "2010-10-05"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344314
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/286594%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 100 Boats Follows Gillard's 100 Days   05/10/10  

 100 days ago Julia Gillard said Labor had lost their way and identified illegal boat arrivals as  a key reason why Kevin Rudd was dumped but 100 days later Julia Gillard has welcomed  Labor's own 'ton' of boats, with the 100th boat intercepted today, carrying 73 people, Shadow  Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs & Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today.    

 “Almost 5,000 people have now arrived so far in 2010, and more than 8,000 since Labor first  rolled back the strong border protection regime they inherited from the Coalition,” Mr  Morrison said.    

 “Despite their failures, Labor continues to refuse to restore the immigration and border  protection controls they abolished. As a result there are now more than 5,000 people detained  by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship,” he said.    

 “The consequence of Labor's border protection failures is a detention network in crisis and a  budget out of control.    

 “Labor’s East Timor proposal is a never never plan. Instead Labor is expanding the on shore  detention network by 1,000 beds and when asked in Parliament last week they refused to  nominate the cost to the taxpayer for the expansion or explain their denial of these plans  before the election.    

 “Labor has no answers to the crisis they have created in the detention network and no answers  to stop the unprecedented arrival of illegal boats since they softened Australia's border  protection and immigration regime that now stands at 168 boats and 8,020 people,” Mr  Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “Each attempt by this Government to look tough on border protection has  been found to be nothing more than political spin.    

 “The plans for a processing facility at East Timor have gone nowhere while the assessment  freeze on Afghan asylum seekers has been scrapped altogether.     

 “Despite all their talk about being serious on border protection, 100 boats are proof that Julia  Gillard and Labor have neither the will nor the intention to restore security to our borders.    

 “Australians deserve a government that sees border protection as more than a political  problem and one that will take the task of protecting our borders seriously,” he said.  

