---
title: "Immigration failure: Government must move beyond band-aid solution."
date: "2010-05-19"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339093
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FORW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens   

  

 Immigration failure - Government must move  beyond band-aid solution  

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Wednesday 19th May 2010, 1:29pm 

 Reports today that the immigration department have asked churches to house asylum seekers due to 

 overcrowding on Christmas Island, yet again highlights the need for the Government to overhaul its failing 

 immigration system, according to the Australian Greens. 

 "This piece-meal approach to asylum seekers is not a practical or long term solution. The Government 

 needs to move past band-aids such as this and actually acknowledge its international obligations," said the 

 Greens Immigration Spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 "Churches and other community groups should be commended for showing compassion to vulnerable 

 people, when the state is failing. However it is not appropriate for the Government to shirk its 

 responsibilities. They need to step up and make the policy changes required." 

 "Unfortunately, after promising an end to indefinite detention and no children in detention, Labor has 

 backflipped and toed the Howard line on immigration. They're putting party politics ahead of what is right 

 and it shouldn't be left up to the non-government sector to pick up the slack." 

 Senator Hanson-Young said that an end to processing on Christmas Island and an end to indefinite 

 detention, should be the cornerstone of any compassionate immigration policy. 

 "The Greens will continue to provide leadership on this important issue. We will be taking a long term, 

 practical and humane immigration policy to the next election. We call on all parties to do the same," 

 Senator Hanson-Young said. 

  

