---
title: "Rudd follows Howard's lead on refugees: Greens."
date: "2010-05-26"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339448
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/UHUW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens   

 

 Rudd follows Howard’s lead on refugees - Greens  

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Wednesday 26th May 2010, 3:19pm 

 Plans to move women and children to old mining camps in the WA desert, is yet another example of the 

 Government failing to meet its humanitarian obligations, according to the Australian Greens. 

 "Detaining asylum seekers in isolated desert camps is a sad return to the Howard era," said Greens 

 Immigration Spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 "Kevin Rudd promised no children in detention, but now we have the Government housing vulnerable 

 women and children in make-shift camps, in the middle of nowhere." 

 "Unfortunately, Kevin Rudd appears locked in a race to the bottom with Tony Abbott on this issue, with 

 neither party offering a responsible solution, simply being obsessed with using vulnerable people as 

 political footballs." 

 "With the suspension of asylum seeker claims, indefinite detention, reopening of Curtin and now the 

 establishment of new Woomera-like, desert detention camps, those who believed Mr Rudd when he 

 promised a change from Howard-era politics, will be disappointed." 

 "The Government must do better than this out of sight, out of mind approach. Dumping vulnerable women 

 and children, who have suffered torture and trauma in the desert, is irresponsible and inhumane." 

 "The Government needs to be processing asylum seekers on Australian soil and this should be close to 

 communities and close to services." 

 "The Greens will continue to argue for a practical, long term and humane solution. I look forward to the day 

 when the old parties join us in this," concluded Senator Hanson-Young. 

  

