---
title: "Abbott admits 'turning back boats' is another shallow slogan."
date: "2010-07-14"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341505
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5IDX6%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

   Wednesday, 14 July 2010                                                                                                                                                                       

 Abbott admits ‘turning back boats’ is another shallow slogan   

 Tony Abbott has finally conceded that his pledge to ‘turn back the boats’ is dangerous and  won’t work.   

 Tony Abbott today spoke with the wife of a Navy officer in the electorate of Lindsay:   

 Wife of Navy officer: Hi how you going? I’ve got a question for you. Now my husband’s in  the Defence Force (inaudible). Now my concern is basically you’ve come out and said  you’ll send all boats back that are safe to be sent back?   

 Abbott: We will rely very much on the judgment of the people on the spot.   

 Wife of Navy officer: Well what my concern is, is last year we had the incident with HMAS  Albany. Now basically that was, obviously the ship scuttled itself, so it wouldn’t have to be  turned back, not that it would have been anyway.   Now are you concerned that there’s going to be more incidences like that? Because I am?   

 Abbott: And look, I think, I think you’re right to be.   

 “Finally Tony Abbott has admitted that Australians are right to be worried about his  dangerous policy that risks the lives of passengers and our hardworking Navy and Customs  personnel.   

 “Tony Abbott needs to realise that his poorly conceived ideas threaten the lives of the people  on the border security frontline - that’s something Labor won’t do,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 Tony Abbott’s frank admission comes a day after ACT Senator Gary Humphries exposed his  leader’s unworkable policy on ABC Radio in Canberra:    

 Host: ... it doesn’t really work as a concept in 99 per cent of cases does it?   

 Humphries: Of course it doesn’t but it’s not intended to be effective every time you see a  boat on the horizon. It’s meant to be a deterrent.   

 And on Monday, former Howard Government Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock  discussed the consequences of the plan, telling Alan Jones on 2GB:   

 We certainly didn’t turn every vessel around. We certainly did experience what Labor  claims might occur - that is, that the people on these vessels determined to come on would  take steps to try and disable vessels and make it impossible for them to be safely returned.    

 The Minister for Home Affairs has been advised that the return of vessels to Indonesia  without Indonesia’s consent would be inconsistent with Australia’s international obligations.  It would also place at risk the lives of asylum seekers and Navy and Customs personnel.    

 “Tony Abbott has been backing away from this dangerous and unworkable policy each day.   

 “Tony Abbott must now confess that ‘turning back the boats’ is unworkable, dangerous and  won’t be delivered,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 Media Adviser: Jayne Stinson 0458 547 512 jayne.stinson@ag.gov.au   

 

 

