---
title: "Bowen looks for leave pass on Labor's asylum failures"
date: "2010-10-08"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344444
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/286548%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook 

 

 Bowen looks for leave pass on Labor's  asylum failures   08/10/10  

 Labor’s new Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen has told a Migration Institute  conference in Sydney he wants to talk more and do less when it comes to Labor’s  failed asylum policies, Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.  

 

 “Minister Bowen may want to get on the new paradigm bandwagon however this is  no substitute for changing Labor’s failed border protection policies that have created  the mess we are now in,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “Like his Prime Minister, Minister Bowen sees endless talk as a substitute for action.  He sees a new parliament as an excuse to do nothing and walk away from  commitments made before the election,” he said.    

 “The Australian people are not looking for a new conversation on Labor’s failed  border protection policies. They are looking for Labor’s failed policies to be fixed.    

 “A new conversation does not reduce our record detention population of over 5,000  people. It also does not take the lure of permanent visas off the table. It does not stop  the cost blow-out of $1.1 billion and counting. And it will never stop the  unprecedented flow of illegal boat arrivals that today reached 101 in 2010.    

 “Labor’s plan for a regional processing centre is as fundamentally flawed as it is  unlikely ever to be implemented.    

 “Minister Bowen has yet to learn that Australia is the regional problem, when it  comes to regional asylum seeker issues.    

 “Afghanistan is not in our region. Asylum seekers are coming into our region as  secondary movers, because of the failed policies of the Labor Government. The  UNHCR in Indonesia recently quoted a 900% increase of people movements in to 

 Indonesia in 2009.    

 “Establishing a regional processing centre will create a further asylum magnet in our  region that will only exacerbate the problem faced by near neighbours such as  Indonesia, who are already living with the consequences of Labor’s failed policies. 

 This is precisely why a regional asylum processing centre has never previously been  on the agenda of the Bali Process regional dialogue, initiated by the Coalition and co-chaired with Indonesia.    

 “Labor must deal with their own policy failures, rather than fabricate a regional crisis  to absolve their own lack of understanding and resolve,” he said.  

  

