---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: National Convention Centre, Canberra: 2 July 2010: National Youth Policing Model; resources rent tax; asylum seekers."
date: "2010-07-02"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "National Youth Policing Model"
  - "resources rent tax"
  - "asylum seekers."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341035
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2L7X6%22
---

  

 E&OE PROOF ONLY 

  

 Doorstop with NT Chief Minister Paul Henderson and Victorian Police Minister Bob Cameron 

 National Convention Centre, Canberra 

 Friday, 2 July 2010  Topics: National Youth Policing Model; resources rent tax; asylum seekers 

  

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Today is a very important day for the national police agreement on  youth. This is an issue that confronts all communities in Australia. We are very concerned  with the way in which we deal with young people. What we do know is that young people  are in the higher bracket as offenders and as victims of crime. And we need to therefore do as  much as we possibly can to prevent young people being victims of crime or young people  being offenders.   For that reason, the police ministers today met to discuss the best way to deal with this  challenge and we've reached agreement on a National Youth Policing Model, a set of  understandings around the way in which we should operate in the future.   That includes borrowing the best ideas from around the country to adapt to other places.  Ensuring that we have, for example, a strong response to drug and alcohol abuse amongst  young people. Ensuring we have a strong response to the way in which young people are 

 driving on our roads. Ensuring we have the best practice approach to diversionary strategies  to ensure that young people are not offending, that young people are not attracted to anti-social behaviour.   The best way we can do that is to borrow those ideas that are successful in other jurisdictions.  And so for example, if it's working in Victoria why can it not be adapted for other parts of  the country? If it's working in Darwin why can it not be adapted and used in other parts of  this country?   That is the approach that we want to take out of the discussions we held today. We want to  reduce the likelihood of young people offending. We want to reduce the likelihood of young  people being victims.   We do know that if you're a victim when you're young in life, you are more likely to be an  offender later in life. For that reason and for the concern that the community have about  young people acting, in some cases, in an anti-social manner, in a violent manner, we have  got together, as governments, in order to confront and deal with this challenge.   

 BOB CAMERON: Well, thank you very much, Brendan. Can I just say that, you know,  we've got great young Australians. The bulk of them are going to grow up and they're going  to make this nation great. But, of course, as in every cohort of young people, there's a very 

 small number that are unfortunately possessed with anti-social behaviour, that get involved in  crime, that get involved in strife and in mischief.  

 And sometimes, you know, they're otherwise good kids. They just, they get a bit off the  tracks, and what we need to do is look across the board as to what are the best things to try  and get kids back on the tracks as quickly as possible.   Because what we do know from experience - and I practised law for 10 years - if you get a 

 kid that goes off the track one or two times he'll probably go off the track again three or four  times. But if you can get them early, get a diversion program in early, then more than likely  you will be able to pull them back.  

 So having a strategy, having a framework really for us to work through, I think is going to be  very important. The sharing of ideas is so essential because when it comes to youth there is  no one simple solution. Anybody who thinks that the issue of dealing with youth and youth  crime is simple is kidding themselves. It's complicated and recognising that it's complicated  and learning from each other is going to be very important as we go forward.    

 PAUL HENDERSON: Thank you, Bob. It's great today that we've been able to come  together, the Commonwealth and all of the states, to sign off on a national model for youth  policing. And certainly, as Bob was just saying, the vast majority of young people around  Australia are great Australians and they're great kids.   But too many find themselves being victims of crime or perpetrators of crime, and this is  about collaboration. This is about sharing best practice. This is about what works and sharing  what works around Australia in terms of early intervention, in terms of diversion.  Certainly, juvenile diversion in the Northern Territory, the jury is well and truly out. It  works. Diversion programs quite successfully ensure that 70 per cent to 80 per cent of young  Territorians who get involved with police, if they go on a diversion program they're very  unlikely to reoffend.   So we want to learn about what is best practice with juvenile diversion programs, get those  kids into those programs, because they do ensure that kids, if they have been on a successful  diversion programs don't reoffend.  So this is about collaboration, about sharing best practice and it's a good agreement with  police ministers today.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr O'Connor, how quickly can this new agreement be put in place?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: What we've done today is reach agreement on a set of principles  and strategies. The work had been already undertaken through our offices and the  departments to come to a position that will be more effective in our community. And we start  from today to make sure we formally share information - as the other ministers have said - 

 share information so we use the best practice approach to protecting our community, to  preventing young people getting into either anti-social behaviour or attracted to a life of  crime.   And that means we've not only got to have a policing strategy in place but we also, and it's  referred to in the model, look to those other social services that young people require, as the  Chief Minister said, to prevent them falling into this trap.   And the other thing we know, of course, is that we also intervene to prevent people  committing an offence again. We know we can actually tackle recidivism, by intervening  early and using diversionary tactics, strategies to get them engaged in employment and in 

 study.   If we can do that, if we can stop people falling between the gaps between employment and  education, we will have done a better job for young people in this country and we would  have made, as a result, our communities much safer.    

 JOURNALIST: So much of the structure's there, is that what you're saying? Much of the  structure's there for the communication between the Commonwealth and the states, and the  states and the states?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's absolutely right. There are already existing initiatives that  are doing a great job in all jurisdictions. We need to really pick those best initiatives and  apply them nationally, adapting them to local communities.   So what works necessarily in the Northern Territory - and the Chief Minister can talk about 

 this - may not work exactly the same way elsewhere. But certain elements of it may be very  applicable to other parts of Australia. Paul, if you wanted to add to that.    

 PAUL HENDERSON: Certainly in the Northern Territory we've got a number of diversion  programs, for example, for young Indigenous people in Darwin and Palmerston, where there  are Indigenous non-government organisations that will take these kids out of Darwin, out of  Palmerston, out into a remote setting and reconnect some of those Indigenous kids back with  their culture, back with their elders, in regards to what is right and what is wrong. 

 And there's no difference between Indigenous culture in terms of what is right and what is  wrong, in terms of non-Indigenous. And sometimes it's just about breaking the cycle, giving  young people some breathing space, having them surrounded by people with profile and  people that they respect as strong role models. And certainly the evidence and the jury is very  well and truly out that people come out of those experiences reconnected back into the  mainstream and cease their offending.   So you know, it is about sharing best practice, what works, and we now have a mechanism to  do that.    

 JOURNALIST:  Chief Minister, the resources rent tax, obviously you've been a supporter of  Kevin Rudd's plan. Are you disappointed about the concessions that the Federal Government  has made?   

 PAUL HENDERSON: Oh, not at all. I'm very pleased today to see that at last we've got an  agreement. I've been saying from day one that a profits based resource tax is a good tax.  We've had this in place in the Northern Territory since 1982 and it has not been a barrier to  investment in the mining industry.   So the Northern Territory should always have been, in this debate, a focus on, hey, this can  work and it really was to do with the structure of the tax, some of the detail around that. And  I have said from day one that this is a tax that does work. It has worked in the Northern  Territory. Australians only get one opportunity to exploit these resources and it's certainly  more than appropriate that all Australians share in the benefits of those resources.  I urged from day one that the Australian Government and the mining companies sit down,  negotiate in good faith, around a profits based tax that the mining industry has always argued  for because in the Northern Territory it has been a good tax that has seen significant  expansion of our resources industry.  So I'm delighted today that there has been agreement. It's been common sense that's been  brought to the table, a win-win outcome for the mining industry for all Australians. This is a  good day.   

 JOURNALIST:  Minister O'Connor, are you able to shed any light on reports of a boat  carrying about 70 asylum seekers this morning?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I can confirm I've been advised by Customs and Border  Protection, there is a vessel that's been located and boarded at Christmas Island. I haven't  been advised to all of the facts but I can confirm that.  As you know what we do as a government is ensure that we rigorously assess the  circumstances in which a vessel may have arrived in our shores. In many cases that's an  interception at which point the Customs and Border Protection have an obligation to firstly  undertake the care of those passengers onboard. Secondly ensure that they do so and they  have them board their own vessel in a safe manner.  After which there are other assessments made. At this point I can confirm the vessel. But I do  not want to go into the details until I've been properly advised. There's already been too often  a misreporting by some media outlets about vessels and I will announce as soon as I possibly  can - it will be sometime today - the other facts that I normally disclose as soon as they've  been confirmed to me properly.  And I certainly won't be speculating because that's not what governments do.   

 JOURNALIST:  Mr O'Connor, has the amount of boats this year had any impact on the  government's stance towards asylum seekers?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We are very concerned about the vessels that seek to come to our  shores in such a manner. As the Prime Minister has made very clear, she is very well aware  of the anxiety that some members have in the community about these vessels and about the  way in which they seek to come to our shores.  It's for that reason this government dedicates more resources than any other government  previously in protecting our borders. We have more aircraft and more fleet and we work 24  hours a day, seven days a week, every week, every year to make sure that we protect our  borders. That's what the Australian community expect.   As a result of the dedication of more resources, we have had a much greater record in  preventing undetected arrivals on the mainland. Under the previous government, almost 10  boats landed on the mainland, including in places close to some very significant  communities, Townsville, Cairns. The New South Wales coast was also a place where  vessels were arriving.   We had, the Chief Minister's here, we had under the previous government vessels arriving in  Northern Territory and Western Australia. Now, we've had a much better record.  But of course in the end, this matter, this challenge will be dealt with by increasing our  cooperation with countries within the region, working closely with transit and source  countries so that we can slow and ultimately stop these vessels.  We believe that we are, as signatories to the UN convention, that we should treat people  properly. But if they are not refugees they will be sent home.   

 JOURNALIST:  Can you shed any light on the 000 call that was made last night?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I cannot confirm all of the matters that went to this vessel. I've  been, as you might understand, at a conference all day today. I've been advised as to the  existence of a vessel at Christmas Island and I will be disclosing shortly, the facts  surrounding that vessel.   

 JOURNALIST:  Obviously the boat itself was discovered in Australian waters. What does  the government need to do to ensure that these vessels don't necessarily make it undetected  into Australian waters?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, firstly we can't intercept a vessel outside of Australian  waters. We can only intercept a vessel pursuant to law inside the waters. As I've said,  Customs and Border Protection, that is our naval personnel and our Customs and Border  Protection personnel, do a magnificent job in preventing these vessels hitting the mainland  which is by way of comparison, a much better performance than was the case under the  previous government.  So we'll just continue to make sure we do our very best in preventing these vessels hitting our  mainland.   We will continue to work very closely with countries within the region. As I've made clear  recently, there have been significant disruptions in Indonesia. The Australian Federal Police  work very closely with the Indonesian National Police to disrupt those ventures. So basically  disrupting people smuggling syndicates that seek to lure people onto dangerous vessels on  perilous journeys, take their life savings and place them in danger.  This is something that this government takes very seriously. That's why we work so closely  with the Indonesian Government. That's why there's been more than 3800 people disrupted  from embarking on journeys from Indonesia. In fact, in total in the region, almost 5000  people have been prevented embarking on these vessels because of the work of our agencies  in those countries working closely with their counterparts.   

 JOURNALIST:  If this latest vessel does have genuine refugees, Christmas Island is near  capacity. Where are these people going to go?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Christmas Island is not at capacity but as you've said you know,  we are dealing with an increased number of people seeking asylum. That's as a result of the  external factors. It's as a result of the conflict in Sri Lanka and of course the increased 

 violence in some parts of Afghanistan.   We will continue to deal with this in a practical manner. These are practical challenges. So,  for example, Minister Evans has increased accommodation on Christmas Island.   But let's not forget, the Christmas Island Detention Centre was built by the Howard  Government for $405 million of tax payers' money. They did that after 2002, after they had  supposedly stopped the boats. The reason they built the Christmas Island Detention Centre,  commissioned it in 2002 for it to be complete in 2006 was because they knew then, like they  know now that from time-to-time people will seek to come to our shores in this manner.  And the Gillard Government is working very hard with countries in the region to prevent  these vessels coming to our shores, prevent people leaving Indonesia and other countries,  through working very closely with the Indonesian National Police, working closely with their  People Smuggling Taskforce and will continue to do that because we want to prevent people  endangering their lives and we respect the fact that people in our community are anxious  about the way in which they seek to come to our country.  And we'll continue to do whatever we can to slow and ultimately stop the vessels.  Thanks very much.   

 

  

 

 

  

