---
title: "Offshore hotels not the answer to stopping the boats."
date: "2010-07-09"
creators:
  - "Fielding, Steve"
  - "Family First Party (Australia)"
source: "Office of FIELDING, SEN STEVE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341376
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/X2EX6%22
---

 Senator Steve Fielding  Leader of Family First 

 OFFSHORE HOTELS NOT THE ANSWER TO  STOPPING THE BOATS  Press Releases July 09 2010  

 Family First Leader Senator Steve Fielding says the only way to stop the boats is to send queue jumpers to the  back of the line in refugee camps because Hotel Christmas Island, Hotel East Timor and Hotel Nauru are not the  answer. 

 Senator Fielding is once again urging the Government and the Coalition to look at his idea of sending queue  jumpers to the back of the line to put a stop to the dirty business of people smuggling. 

 Under the proposal put forward by Senator Fielding, queue jumpers, whether they are genuine refugees or not,  would be sent to the back of the queue at various refugee camps around the world. 

 Australia would then take two refugees for every queue jumper sent to a refugee camp.  

 “The only way to stop the boats is to make sure the people smugglers have no product to market to the people  jumping the queue,” Senator Fielding said. 

 “Every time we accept a refugee into our country by boat, another refugee waiting patiently in a camp somewhere  else is forced to wait even longer.  

 “There are thousands of refugees waiting patiently in line in camps across the world who are trying to gain  asylum.  

 “Boat people have no right to push them further down the queue and this proposal would stop this from  happening.  

 “This scheme would save millions of dollars as well as countless lives and put an end to the people smuggling  trade into Australia. 

 “Australia is a fair and compassionate country and we should do our fair share to help refugees, but we should  not encourage queue jumpers. 

 “If the Julia Gillard or Tony Abbott was serious about stopping the boats then this idea should be adopted  immediately.” 

  

