---
title: "Budget 2010: Budget disappointment for Wide Bay."
date: "2010-05-12"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338556
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/A5PW6%22
---

  

  

 Budget disappointment for Wide Bay   12-May-2010  Source: Warren Truss, MP -  

 

 Federal Member for Wide Bay Warren Truss tonight said the Rudd Labor  Government’s Budget will disappoint families, businesses and community groups in  Wide Bay.   

 “Labor has failed to deliver for Wide Bay. People will be disappointed that the Rudd  Labor Government has passed up the opportunity to take real action to improve local  services and infrastructure,” Mr Truss said.   

 “In this Budget we pay the price for Labor’s lavish legacy of debt funded spending  sprees, waste and mismanagement. There is a Budget deficit of $40.8 billion, net  public debt of $93.7 billion and an interest bill of $4.6 billion, rising to $6.5 billion  2012/13.   

 This Budget has been required to fund $1 billion to undo the roof insulation debacle,  $1 billion blowout for asylum seekers, and $1 billion will be spent on school computer  cost overruns.   

 “The Budget provides $500 million for the new Federal hospitals bureaucracy, but  there is no dedicated funding for the Maryborough, Gympie, Murgon or Noosa  Hospitals. It is hard to see how Kevin Rudd’s convoluted and contrived hospital plan  would increase services at local hospitals when it adds another layer of expensive  bureaucracy to a struggling health system. I am concerned that local hospital  services will deteriorate under Labor’s plan.”   

 Mr Truss said motorists would be rightfully angry that the Budget did not contain any  commitment to upgrade the remaining 50 kilometre section between Cooroy and  Curra to four lanes.   

 “While the Budget did bring forward money for Ipswich Road in Brisbane, the Rudd  Government has failed to fund any improvements to the dangerous Cooroy to Curra  section of the Bruce Highway, nor has it committed to any timetable to complete the 

 upgrade of the entire section.    

 Under Labor, there is no end in sight to the 90km/hr speed limit between Cooroy and  Bells Bridge,” Mr Truss said.   

 “The needs of the Mary Valley have been ignored by the Rudd Labor Government. In  spite of Environment Minister Peter Garrett’s commitment to support a recovery plan  to protect the Valley’s threatened and endangered species, the Budget provides no  special funding to restore economic, social or environmental security to Mary River  communities. The Caring for Our Country program which Peter Garrett identified  suffers an $81.3 million cut, such is his commitment to the environment.   

 “The Rudd Labor Government has failed to deliver a regional development funding  program that could have supported the building of extensions to Pomona Community  House or the rebuilding of Maryborough’s Aquatic Centre, or other worthy projects  throughout the electorate.   

 “Labor’s debt, waste and uncontrolled, extravagant spending has produced a  promise breaking Budget that delivers little of substance for families, businesses and  community groups in Wide Bay. 

  

