---
title: "Rudd's border protection failure complete - asylum seekers to be brought to the mainland."
date: "2010-01-14"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211333118
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/L5NV6%22
---

 Thu, 14th January 2010  

 RUDD'S BORDER PROTECTION FAILURE COMPLETE - ASYLUM  SEEKERS TO BE BROUGHT TO THE MAINLAND 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 As a result of the failure of its border protection policies which have softened our laws and encouraged 

 people smugglers back into business, the Rudd Government is planning to bring asylum seekers to the 

 Australian mainland to be processed.  

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Evans told Perth radio that “I’ve always made clear: we 

 have a detention centre at Darwin with capacity for 500 that is purpose-built and has been used in the 

 past. If we need to do that for final stages of processing (we can)...”  

 “This is another gift from the Rudd Government to the people smugglers,” said Mr Keenan.  

 “They will be able to tell would be customers that they can now get them to the Australian mainland 

 because Australia is such a soft touch.  

 “The legal status of people who are brought to the mainland for the final process of processing is 

 unclear.  

 “The Government will claim that it won’t affect any rights of appeal, however they know full well it is 

 murky legal territory and that is why they have always tried to create the impression that they wanted 

 people processed offshore.  

 “Labor’s failure to protect our borders has led them to this situation, as the Christmas Island facility 

 becomes overwhelmed by arrivals encouraged to come by Labor’s soft approach.  

 “This is the final nail in the coffin of our orderly immigration process.” 

  

