---
title: "The Coalition's real action plan for restoring integrity and fairness to refugee decision making."
date: "2010-07-06"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211341203
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/ME8X6%22
---

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH 

 The Coalition's real action plan for  restoring integrity and fairness to  refugee decision making   06/07/10  

 Only the Coalition can be trusted to protect the integrity of our borders. 

 The Coalition will take direct and real action to further improve the integrity of our  refugee assessment process to give Australians greater confidence in our immigration  system. 

 Each year Australia accepts 13,750 people under our refugee and humanitarian  programme. This is the most generous resettlement programme per capita in the world  today. 

 It is only right that the Australian Government should do everything it can to preserve  the integrity and fairness of this programme to ensure that we provide our assistance  to the most deserving cases. 

 This means giving preference to those people who apply off shore from the various  camps and other settlements around the world, rather than those who seek to take their  place by arriving illegally, whether by boat or other means. 

 In particular this means attacking the criminal business of people smugglers and  denying them a product to sell, namely almost guaranteed permanent residence, as  currently occurs under Labor's policies. 

 That is why the Coalition has announced it will restore the strong regime of border  protection policies that were so effective under the last Coalition Government, in  particular off shore processing in another country, temporary protection visas and  being prepared to turn back the boats where the circumstances allow. 

 These are the policies that must be implemented on our side of the fence to deter  people smugglers, in addition to the continued commitment to regional and  international cooperation. 

 Today, we announce further measures to increase the integrity of our assessment  process to give Australians greater confidence that those who benefit from our  protection are genuine refugees. 

 We will do this by putting an end to Labor's tick and flick approach where decisions  are made on a 'balance of probabilities' rather than hard evidence of a person's  identity. 

 A Coalition Government will make a presumption against granting refugee status to  any applicant who is believed to have deliberately discarded their identity  documentation prior to presenting themselves to Australian authorities. 

 The Coalition will also put greater accountability and transparency into refugee status  determination, shifting the final decision away from those who make the original  assessments and increasing Ministerial scrutiny, including the ability to challenge  approval recommendations. 

 A Coalition Government will also increase the opportunities for legitimate refugees  applying off shore through the appropriate channels by increasing the proportion of  places we make available out of the 13,750 quota for those recommended by the  UNHCR programme and the Coalition will also trial a refugee sponsorship  programme similar to that employed in Canada, to enable groups within Australia to  directly extend their generosity and sponsor a refugee, over and above the official  programme. 

 Under Labor we have seen the number of illegal boat arrivals increasing from three  per year under the Coalition to more than three per week. 

 The number of people in detention under Labor has also increased from just four  people who arrived illegally by boat in November 2007 to more than 3,500 today. 

 The costs of our detention programme to taxpayers have blown out by at least $1  billion, while people smugglers continue to reap their profits. 

 All of these pressures run the risk of compromising the integrity of our decision  making process. 

 A Coalition Government will introduce the checks and balances needed, with the  Minister taking ultimate responsibility, to ensure Australians can have confidence that  those we accept as refugees are legitimate and are therefore deserving of our  protection and support. 

 All those who fail this test must be returned home. 

 This is currently not occurring under the policies of the Labor Government. The  combination of Labor's asylum freeze, lengthy appeals processes and now access to  mainland courts, means even when people are not legitimate refugees they remain in  Australia. 

 Labor's policies are giving people smugglers a product to sell. One hundred and forty  three illegal boat arrivals do not lie. Labor cannot be trusted to implement policies  that secure Australia's borders and protect the integrity of immigration programme. 

 6 July 2010 

 POLICY MEASURES: 

 The Coalition has already released a number of policy initiatives to restore the strong  border protection regime abolished Labor and put people smugglers out of business.  These include to: 

 o restore universal off shore processing of all illegal boat arrivals, including in a  third country;  o restore Temporary Protection Visas;  o turn back the boats where circumstances permit;  o apply mandatory work for benefits scheme for all protection visa holders; and  o restore the 45 day rule and oppose complementary protection 

 The following measures build on these announcements and will improve the integrity  of our assessment process. By imposing greater objectivity and transparency on the  decision making process, these measures will give Australians greater confidence  about who Australia decides to accept as a refugee, consistent with our international  obligations. 

 A Coalition Government will end Labor’s ‘tick and flick’ approach to refugee status  determination. We will require those making asylum claims to give the Australian  Government, wherever possible, more reliable information about their identity. 

 Proof of identity  

 The Coalition will establish greater objectivity in the determination of the refugee  status of asylum seekers who are unable to present identity documentation. 

 While the Coalition recognises some applicants may never have had such  documentation, or may have had their documentation destroyed or confiscated, there  are also cases where such documentation is deliberately discarded or destroyed by  applicants. 

 Where an assessor makes a reasonable assessment that an applicant for asylum has  discarded their identity documentation deliberately, there will be a presumption  against awarding refugee status under Section 91W of the Migration Act. 

 Integrity in decision making  

 Under a Coalition Government the Minister for Immigration will have greater  oversight of decisions made on protection claims, and will reserve the right to directly  intervene in the decision making process - thereby providing an additional check and  balance within the system. 

 Around the world the rate of rejection and acceptance for refugee status determination  varies markedly for asylum applications. 

 Determination of asylum applications on Christmas Island and on the mainland  depend upon a ‘balance of probabilities’ assessment conducted by our immigration  officials. 

 The Coalition is concerned that protection visa applicants are being waved through  the system to clear the increased volume of applications and to relieve pressure in  overcrowded detention facilities, both of which are a product of the Labor  Government losing control of our borders. 

 While rejection decisions can be appealed by the applicant to a merits review panel  established by Labor, there is no process for appealing or testing the veracity of  affirmative decisions. 

 In relation to the processing of applications made by off-shore entry persons, the  Secretary of the Department or his or her delegate will be required to make the final  determination of all recommendations made by on site departmental assessors. 

 The Minister will also be given power under the Migration Act to call in any  assessors’ recommendations prior to determination by the Department before making  a final determination. 

 The merit review panel introduced by Labor will be abolished. Instead, the applicant  will have the option of appealing a recommendation made by an assessor, to another  assessment officer, as practiced by the UNHCR elsewhere. Where the Department  rejects an affirmation recommendation made by an assessor, the applicant may appeal  the decision to the Minister. Consistent with other provision of the Migration Act  regarding Ministerial decisions, the Minister’s decision either on appeal or through  intervention will be final. 

 No additional right of appeal will be made available to off shore entry persons than  they would be entitled to in Indonesia or any other location where their assessment  would be undertaken by the UNHCR. 

 The Coalition will also abolish Labor’s policy of providing free legal advice to  applicants appealing their decision. 

 A fairer chance for resettlement - off shore applicants first  

 A Coalition Government would give priority to resettlement of refugees who have  made off shore applications to Australia’s refugee and humanitarian visa programme. 

 To achieve this goal, a Coalition Government would increase the number of  resettlement places made available through the UNHCR process for off shore  applications each year by 1,500 persons, increasing the overall share of these places  as part of the overall programme. 

 While the UNHCR would be free to recommend persons for resettlement, the decision  of who is granted resettlement will be a decision of the Australian Government. 

 The total number of places under the Refugee and Humanitarian programme would  remain at 13,750. 

 The Coalition will re-introduce our policy, abolished by Labor, to require off shore  entry persons to first make an application for permanent residency to countries other  than Australia, before being granted the permission to make application for a  protection visa in Australia. 

 Off shore entry persons would remain in detention until such time as they have been  able to secure resettlement to a third country other than Australia, have voluntarily  chosen to return to their country of origin, or are given permission to make an  application for an Australian visa and are granted resettlement to Australia. 

 This provision would enable the Australian Government to ration the number of  places made available to off shore entry persons, and protect the primacy of our off  shore resettlement programme. 

 Private refugee sponsorship pilot  

 The Coalition will trial a refugee sponsorship programme, to enable groups in  Australia to privately sponsor refugees over and above our regular intake on a fully  bonded basis. 

 These bonded private sponsorships would operate in a way similar to the contributory  parent visa programme and enable community groups, approved by the Government,  to provide sponsorship to people assessed as refugees by the UNHCR off shore. The  programme would not be available to individual sponsors to protect against any abuse  of the programme and would not be available to persons who entered Australia  illegally. All sponsored persons would need to satisfy health, identify and security  checks and be approved by the Australian Government. 

 The programme could potentially apply to both temporary and permanent protection  visas, with different bond rates for each. The level of bond would be set to ensure the  program was self funding, with no net cost to the budget. 

 The number of places would be in addition to those established each year for our  regular refugee and humanitarian programme. 

 The pilot would be introduced in the first term of Coalition Government with a view  to establishing a permanent programme in a subsequent term. The private sponsorship  programme could therefore enable Australia to lift our refugee intake to 15,000 within  three years. 

 The Coalition will consult on the development of the pilot programme, which would  be based on the Canadian model. 

  

