---
title: "Heywire celebrates young people in rural and regional Australia"
date: "2010-11-26"
creators:
  - "Garrett, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR SCHOOL EDUCATION, EARLY CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346646
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/414862%22
---

 Senator Joe Ludwig 

 Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  Manager for Government Business in the Senate  Senator for Queensland 

 Heywire celebrates young people in rural and regional Australia 

 26 November 2010  DAFF10/056LKJ 

 Joint media release  Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth, Peter Garrett  Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Dr Mike Kelly 

 Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator Joe Ludwig, today congratulated the  33 rural and regional winners of the 2010-11 Heywire initiative. 

 Heywire is a national competition held by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation that gives  young people living outside of major cities an opportunity to tell their stories about life in  rural and regional Australia. 

 “Young people are the key to the future of primary industries in rural areas and it is vitally  important that they are given a voice through initiatives such as Heywire,” Minister Ludwig  said. 

 “Heywire gives young people a platform to stand up and talk about the issues that affect  them and the experiences that have shaped their lives. 

 “These stories help us develop a deeper appreciation of the value and challenges of life and  work in rural Australia.” 

 Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth, Peter Garrett, announced the  Heywire winners earlier today, and thanked them for their work in raising awareness of the  breadth of experience of young people in regional Australia. 

  “From the refugee family settling in Shepparton, Victoria, to the skateboarding community  in northern Tasmania; this year’s Heywire winners are challenging the stereotypes of  regional Australia. 

 “It’s with great pleasure that I congratulate the winners, and commend them for illustrating  the diversity of our nation.” 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Dr Mike Kelly said the Gillard  Government wants to hear from young people and celebrate their stories. 

 “By having the opportunity to share their stories with a national audience, Heywire helps  build the profile of the issues affecting young people and fosters an understanding across  the wider community of life outside the cities. 

 “This year’s winners have a range of different stories to tell, from escaping war-torn  Afghanistan and settling in Australia, to the fulfilment that comes from working as a  stockman in North West Queensland. 

 The 37 winners will come together for the Heywire Youth Issues Forum in February 2011 in  Canberra. They will participate in leadership and community building activities and network  with Members of Parliament, government and community leaders. 

 This forum feeds into another important government initiative, the Australian Youth Forum,  which engages young people in ongoing public discussion and encourages young people to  get involved in their communities and see that they can make a difference. 

 The Australia Government has sponsored Heywire since 1998 and provided $80,000  towards the event in 2010-11. 

 People aged 16-22 are invited to submit stories in text, pictures, film or audio, about life in  Australia outside the major cities. 

 Further information about Heywire can be found through their website at  http://heywire.abc.net.au/ The Australian Youth Forum website can be found at  http://www.youth.gov.au/ayf/home.htm. 

 

