---
title: "Address to the Menzies Research Centre Policy Roundtable."
date: "2010-02-26"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Liberal Party policy"
  - "Menzies Research Centre"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211334794
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/461W6%22
---

 Fri, 26th February 2010  

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ADDRESS TO THE MENZIES RESEARCH  CENTRE POLICY ROUNDTABLE 

 The Hon Tony Abbott MHR  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 E&OE  

 In an early meeting with his new staff as opposition leader, my former boss John Hewson declared that he could 

 live with losing the next election but not with failing to adopt policies that would change Australia for the better. In 

 this, my predecessor had discerned a great truth: what’s the point of winning elections if you don’t subsequently 

 make a difference?  

 Although his policy ambitions turned out to exceed his ability as a political marketer, his Fightback! manifesto was 

 a sign of the Liberal Party’s readiness to put the long term good of the country ahead of short term political 

 advantage. It was the most thorough-going articulation of the reform agenda that had been taking shape since 

 late in Malcolm Fraser’s Government.  

 The case for economic reform was so intellectually persuasive that, for a time, even the Labor Party felt 

 constrained to support less regulation and greater reliance on freer markets with the Liberal Party often driving 

 the reform agenda from opposition. Prime Minister Rudd’s dismissal, in his notorious Monthly essay last 

 February, of 30 years of “neo-liberalism” testifies to how foreign all this was to Labor’s instincts.  

 The Hawke and Keating governments are now remembered largely for deregulating finance markets, cutting 

 tariffs and beginning privatisation. These are the policy positions originally associated with the late 1970s Liberal 

 ginger group around John Howard and that the Rudd Government now vehemently opposes. It shows the extent 

 to which the Liberal Party has become the mainstay of ideas, debate and reform (based, of course, on enduring 

 values) while Labor risks becoming the party of sanctimony and follow-the-leader. .  

 The Liberal Party has understood, in a way that even the most enlightened Labor figures rarely can, that a 

 cohesive society is impossible without a strong economy to sustain it. Notions of success without struggle, wealth 

 without effort and rights without responsibility are deep in Labor’s DNA and end up legitimizing resentment. 

 Liberals are just as committed to fairness as their Labor counterparts but understand more readily that holding 

 people back can be just as unfair as not giving them a start. Liberals are just as committed to effective 

 government but appreciate better that too much government can be as bad as too little.  

 Australians are understandably reluctant to give politicians much credit, at least while they remain in public life. 

 Still, the last generation of national political leaders has, on balance, served us very well indeed. They 

 implemented the reforms on which our present prosperity rests. The challenge for this generation is to 

 understand, as they did, that today’s reforms create tomorrow’s prosperity and to devise for our time a policy 

 agenda to match the one that they successfully implemented for theirs.  

 Australia was only able to take advantage of the China boom because we were no longer the unreliable supplier 

 of two decades earlier. Without the financial deregulation which gave us stronger banks, the tariff reform that 

 gave us stronger businesses and the industrial reform that gave us more adaptable workers, Australia would not 

 have been able to ride out the Global Financial Crisis. Our current relative prosperity owes far more to previous 

 governments’ reforms than it does to the current government’s spending spree. The real danger for Australia, as 

 we enter what could easily turn out to be a long period of seventies style low growth and high inflation, is not just 

 that the Rudd Government has saddled us with debt and deficits but that it’s undoing the reforms on which a 

 golden age was built.  

 Six months into his term, Mr Rudd convened his 2020 summit: a thousand people to provide a thousand ideas. 

 There were too many people for any of them to be taken seriously and too many ideas for any of them to 

 command attention. Looking back, it was about networking not ideas. The Prime Minister’s real plan was to 

 surround himself with celebrities without looking like a lightweight.  

 This, if you like, is the alternative 2020 summit: smaller, more focused and certainly less politically correct. We 

 are meeting today with some of Australia’s best thinkers on economics, on society and on relations with the wider 

 world. It’s happening well before the election so that it can influence the policies we take to the people. That 

 testifies to which side of politics takes big ideas more seriously. Each speaker has been asked to offer just a few 

 key thoughts that government could take to heart to produce a stronger and more cohesive Australia a decade 

 hence.  

 Along with my senior colleagues, I will listen, learn and respond. There will be no commissions, enquiries or 

 reviews. We will say simply which ideas we like and how we might develop them further.  

 Last July, in my book Battlelines, I made a personal contribution to the debate about the changes that should 

 shape our future. We needed fewer people on welfare and more in work. We needed better schools and hospitals 

 so that people could be better placed to make the most of their lives. We needed to sort out the dysfunctional 

 federation which makes every discussion about health, education, infrastructure, and water a blame game 

 between the Commonwealth and the states. So I canvassed a fair go for families through a universal payment, a 

 fair go for working women through a comprehensive paid parental leave scheme, carrots and sticks to keep 

 people in the workforce, community control of schools and hospitals and resolving which government is really in 

 charge so that the public know who’s responsible when things go wrong.  

 Not all of this is likely to become Coalition policy. Any move to improve the federation, for instance, would have to 

 consider giving the states financial clout to match their spending responsibilities as an alternative to giving added 

 authority to the national government. In any event, this may not be a priority. Still, if we are to win against a first 

 term government, our election policy can’t be the usual opposition-speak about eliminating waste and being 

 better managers. Voters have a right to know how we would be different and why we might be better.  

 In key areas, the Coalition’s policy is already clear. We will have much stronger border protection measures with 

 unauthorised boat arrivals rigorously processed offshore and given temporary visas if found to be refugees. We 

 will try to end 100 years of parochialism over the Murray Darling basin and ensure that decision-makers are 

 accountable to the people affected by them. We will intervene in the states with the most suffocating 

 bureaucracies to ensure that all significant NSW and Queensland public hospitals are run by local boards. We 

 will seek to renew our former mandate to take the unfair dismissal monkey off the back of small business and to 

 allow workers and managers to make individual employment agreements that are fair.  

 And we will save Australia from Mr Rudd’s Great Big New Tax on everything. Why should Australia be in a rush 

 to establish a $15 billion a year market in the non-delivery of an invisible substance to no one? Mr Rudd surely 

 can’t object to turning the next election into a referendum on his policy given that it addresses what he repeatedly 

 claimed was not just a serious problem but no less than the greatest moral challenge of our time.  

 Knowing what you’re against is important for oppositions but it’s not a recipe for effective government, as Mr 

 Rudd is finding out. The Liberal Party’s positive preference is always for stronger families, successful small 

 businesses and respecting institutions that have stood the test of time. It’s for smaller government, lower taxes 

 and greater freedom. Solving contemporary problems in ways which advance these values is the policy challenge 

 which today should help us to meet.  

 It would be a travesty for a political party to enter government without knowing what it wanted to achieve. Good 

 governments don’t spend their first terms working out what they stand for and blaming every problem on their 

 predecessor. I certainly can’t guarantee that all the ideas presented to us today will become party policy. I do 

 guarantee, though, that they’ll all get a fair hearing and that the ones we adopt will be capable of being 

 implemented.    

