---
title: "Three boats in three days as K116 arrives at Chaos Island."
date: "2010-04-28"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/J7MW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Three boats in three days as K116 arrives at Chaos Island 

 28/04/10  

 The arrival of the third boat in as many days, carrying 54 people, will add to Kevin  Rudd’s border protection chaos on Christmas Island and around the country, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “As April draws to a close we have seen 15 boats and more than 730 people arrive,  with ten boats turning up after the Government’s recent announcement to suspend  asylum applications for Afghans and Sri Lankans,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “This is the second highest number of illegal arrivals in any given month, eclipsed  only by the record set by Kevin Rudd last month when 16 boats arrived,” he said. 

 “So far during 2010 we have had 48 boats arrive. Last year it took until the end of  November to reach this mark. Boats are arriving at a rate of more than three per week,  compared to just three per year during the last six years of the Coalition Government. 

 “While the Government says they are taking the asylum seekers to Christmas Island,  they will be waiting a while to get a bed. 

 “Christmas Island has become Chaos Island under Kevin Rudd’s failed border  protection policies. 

 “The detention facilities are full and the additional temporary accommodation for 400  detainees promised to be completed by the end of March, is still some weeks away. 

 “The arrival of K116, will mean more transfers off Christmas Island to the mainland,  where centres are also starting to fill up. Both Darwin and Villawood are believed to  be half full,” he said. 

 Mr Keenan, who is currently visiting Christmas Island, said: “Today I’ve seen first  hand the impact these boat arrivals are having on the community. 

 “The daily arrival of boats is clearly stretching facilities here on Christmas Island  beyond their limit. 

 “The Rudd Government has created this problem and the people on Christmas Island  and indeed all Australians are paying the price,” he said. 

  

