---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: 7 March 2010: South Australian election; unauthorised boat arrivals; Belinda Neal; Anzac Day; health."
date: "2010-03-07"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335181
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NU3W6%22
---

 Sun, 7th March 2010  

 ABBOTT DOORSTOP - SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ELECTION AND  UNAUTHORISED BOAT ARRIVALS 

 The Hon Tony Abbott MHR  

 Leader of the Opposition 

 Subjects: South Australian election; unauthorised boat arrivals; Belinda Neal; Anzac Day; health.  

 E&OE  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 It’s great to be here, it’s great to be able to help with Isobel Redmond’s campaign launch. I think she is one of the 

 new breed of authentic politicians. Australia is sick of spin, Australia is sick of politicians and leaders who are all 

 announcements and no follow through. I think she’s got a great chance of victory Saturday week and I’m 

 delighted to be here to support her as part of the enthusiastic and wider Liberal family. The other point I want to 

 make is that we’ve had two more boats arrive near Christmas Island. This brings the total this year to 20. That’s 

 more than 1,000 unauthorised arrivals this year alone. It just goes to show that Kevin Rudd has completely lost 

 control of our borders. John Howard found a problem and created a solution; Kevin Rudd had a solution and he 

 created a problem because he wanted to appear compassionate, he wanted to make a big hero of himself to 

 inner city electorates and this is the mess he’s created.  

 QUESTION:  

 The loss of Belinda Neal’s preselection, did she bring that on herself?  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 Look, the problem is not any particular candidate, the problem is the Rudd Labor Government which has been all 

 talk and no action, and whether it’s one person or another person it’s still the Rudd Labor Government which is 

 the problem.  

 QUESTION:  

 She was a pretty authentic politician though, wasn’t she, fairly spin-free with some of her comments?  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 The problem is that it doesn’t matter who Labor puts up, they’ll be asking people to vote for a Prime Minister who 

 is all talk and no action. They’ll be asking people to vote for a Prime Minister who, when he does propose policy, 

 proposes bad policy, and I think the public are sick of Prime Minister Blah Blah.  

 QUESTION:  

 Mr Abbott, would you have sent these asylum seekers back where they came from?  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 A Coalition government would not have changed a situation that was working. The policies that the Coalition put 

 in place had secured Australia’s borders and Prime Minister Rudd should have been smart enough to leave well 

 enough alone.  

 QUESTION:  

 Queensland RSL is wanting to ban kids from marching with their parents or grandparents on Anzac Day. What do 

 you make of that?  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 I think it’s great that so many Australians take Anzac Day seriously. It is a very important day. It’s a sacred day. 

 It’s a day that commemorates something that has been very, very important to our nation. In the end, though, I do 

 think it’s up to the organisers to decide who should march.  

 QUESTION:  

 Just to make it clear, what would you do, what would a Liberal government do about asylum seekers?  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 Well, a Liberal government would have had the common sense to leave well enough alone and we would never 

 have tampered with the policies that were working.  

 QUESTION:  

 The suggestion from health bureaucrats that the Government’s health reforms might involve the GST being 

 bumped up to 12.5 per cent. What do you think of that?  

 TONY ABBOTT:  

 Look, I think that every Australian should be very concerned that Mr Rudd and his ministers can’t rule out tax 

 increases to pay for their experimentation with public hospitals. Mr Rudd’s plan - it wasn’t well thought through; 

 he didn’t take people into his confidence beforehand. It won’t end the blame game. At least in the first few years it 

 doesn’t involve any new money. It has the potential to close down hundreds of country hospitals. It will add 

 substantial additional bureaucrats, and he can’t in the longer term rule out new taxes to pay for it. So, all up it’s a 

 disastrous plan, it’s being attacked by the state Labor premiers, it’s being attacked by clinicians and other people 

 who have a passionate interest in better hospitals, and really, if Kevin Rudd hadn’t been a one man band, if he 

 had been prepared to take people into his confidence beforehand, he wouldn’t be in this predicament now.    

