---
title: "K118: Rudd brings up half ton of boats in 2010."
date: "2010-05-04"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338003
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/36XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 K118: RUDD BRINGS UP HALF TON OF BOATS IN 2010  Tuesday, 4 May 2010    

 Boat K118 is the 50th illegal boat to arrive this year, marking another milestone  of failure under the Rudd Government’s disastrous border protection and  immigration policies, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today.    

 “We are barely four months into 2010 and already Kevin Rudd has racked up a  half century of boats, with more than 2,400 people on board. This is a  staggering policy failure. This time last year three boats had arrived, now they  are arriving at a rate of three a week,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “For two successive months boat arrivals have hit record levels and 09/10 is  already a record year with 94 boats arriving carrying 4,373 people. These are  three gold medals the Australian people won’t be celebrating,” he said.    

 “Kevin Rudd’s failed policies have transformed Christmas Island into Chaos  Island and the government is virtually running its own airline for asylum seekers  from the overcrowded island onto the mainland.    

 “Today’s boat arrival is also the 12th since the Rudd Government’s cynical  election fix of suspending processing of Afghans and Sri Lankans, proving yet  again that Kevin Rudd is unable to secure our borders from illegal arrivals. He  can’t spin the boats away.    

 “With each asylum seeker to arrive on Christmas Island costing Australians  almost $82,000 in processing costs alone, it’s another reminder that whether on  boats, batts or the BER, the only things Kevin Rudd delivers are higher spending,  mismanagement and higher taxes,” he said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “I visited the Christmas Island detention facilities last week and  wonder where these latest arrivals will be housed.    

 “What I saw last week was a facility that has been stretched beyond its intended  capacity to accommodate this growing surge in arrivals, and will be tested again  when this latest boat arrives at the island.    

 “50 boats in just over 4 months is another milestone to hang on the Rudd wall of  failures, and further proof that this Government has failed to act to fix this  problem,” he said.  

 

