---
title: "Timor not even credible enough for Gillard's sloganeering"
date: "2010-11-29"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211346690
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/396098%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 Timor not even credible enough for  Gillard’s sloganeering   29/11/10  

 Julia Gillard’s speech today showed that her never never East Timor ‘solution’ is too  ridiculous for her own focus group sloganeering, Shadow Minister for Productivity  and Population and Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  said today. 

 “The Prime Minister’s East Timor ‘solution’ has become a rolling farce that now  can’t even make the cut for one of her focus group tested speeches,” Mr Morrison  said. 

 “This thought bubble has well and truly popped. The Coalition has consistently  referred to the idea as a never never plan. There is still no formal proposal, there is no  funding in the budget and it has failed to make the list of the Prime Minister’s  priorities for 2011. 

 “Citizen Richo has rightly described the plan as ‘increasingly ridiculous’.  It is  becoming a policy orphan in this Government, leaving Labor with no response to their  record immigration and border protection failures that have produced a record number  of illegal boat arrivals, a record number of people in immigration detention and a  rolling crisis in our detention network.  

 “The fact that East Timor can’t even make it past the Hawker Britton focus group  slogans shows no one is being conned. 

 “This comes after a weekend which saw a further three illegal boats arrive with 114  people on board and revelations today of divisions in the Department of Immigration  over failed asylum seekers. 

 “This is a government mired in immigration and border protection crisis that gets  worse by the day. Since the election alone, 39 boats have arrived with almost 2,000  people on board. 

 “Our immigration detention network is bursting. Riots, break outs, protests, self  mutilation and suicides are occurring. No wonder Minister Bowen wants to talk about  ‘changing the conversation.’ 

 “Labor’s continued inertia on our borders shows that as long as Labor continues to  lose its way the people smugglers will continue to find their way to Australia. 

 “It’s time the government got serious and picked up the phone to the President of  Nauru to re-open the Australian taxpayer funded processing centre,” Mr Morrison  said. 

  

