---
title: "Brisbane marks Refugee Week 2010."
date: "2010-06-18"
creators:
  - "Ferguson, Laurie"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SETTLEMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211340345
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VG2X6%22
---

 Laurie Ferguson MP 

 Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services   

 Brisbane marks Refugee Week 2010  18 June 2010 

 Refugee Week celebrations are set to begin in Brisbane and across Australia, the  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie Ferguson,  said today. 

 ‘Refugee Week 2010 will recognise the central role refugees play in constructing the  blueprint of Australia’s cultural diversity,’ Mr Ferguson said. 

 Mr Ferguson will attend two preview events tomorrow which will kick off Refugee Week  events in Brisbane. 

 A candlelight walk and lantern parade is on at the Southbank Parklands to celebrate the  achievements of refugees in Australia and remembers the many millions in refugee camps  as well as stateless people across the world. 

 About 1000 people will attend from various communities including Rohingyan, Liberian,  Ethiopian, Congolese and Sudanese communities from Brisbane and surrounds. 

 The ‘Many Cultures - One Home’ art exhibition will also be launched tomorrow. The  Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) has supported the exhibition, which aims  to highlight the artistic contributions of refugees. 

 ‘These events sum up what Refugee Week is all about - welcoming refugees to our country  while sharing their experiences and looking forward to their bright future in Australia,’ Mr  Ferguson said. 

 World Refugee Day on Sunday is celebrated by 100 countries and kick starts Refugee  Week. In the coming weeks, community organisations, schools and individuals across  Australia will host hundreds of special Refugee Week events including markets, morning  teas, art exhibitions, sports tournaments and theatre performances. 

 ‘Since World War II, nearly 750 000 refugees have been welcomed to Australia,’ Mr  Ferguson said. 

 ‘This program year, the humanitarian program will grant 13 750 humanitarian visas to  Australia. About 1400 of these people will make their home in Queensland. 

 ‘I would like to urge Australians in Brisbane and across the nation to seek out Refugee Week  events in their local community, particularly on World Refugee Day this Sunday.’ 

  

