---
title: "Appointment to National Library of Australia Council."
date: "2010-06-01"
creators:
  - "Garrett, Peter"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, HERITAGE AND THE ARTS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339661
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/IOWW6%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE The Hon Peter Garrett MP Minister for Environment Protection, Heritage and the Arts

 PG /63 1 June 2010 

 APPOINTMENT TO NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA COUNCIL 

 Minister for the Arts, Peter Garrett, today announced the appointment of Dr Nonja Peters to  the Council of the National Library of Australia (NLA). 

 “I am delighted Dr Peters has agreed to serve on the National Library Council,” Mr Garrett  said. 

 “Dr Peters is a widely respected academic, author and exhibition curator in the fields of  migration and culture adaptation. Her experience will be extremely valuable and will  complement the Council’s existing expertise. 

 ”Currently the Director of the Migration, Ethnicity, Refugees and Citizenship Research Unit at  the Curtin University Sustainability Policy Institute, Western Australia, Dr Peters was  awarded a Dutch knighthood for her work on emigrants from the Netherlands in Australia and  a Centenary Medal for her work on emigration to Australia. 

 “Her current research project focuses on digitisation as a way to preserve immigrants’  cultural heritage. 

 “The appointment is for three years and I look forward to working with Dr Peters,” Mr Garrett  said. 

 The National Library of Australia Council oversees the Library’s role in making a significant  contribution to the continuing vitality of Australia’s cultural heritage. 

 As one of Australia’s major national cultural institutions, the Library collects, preserves and  makes accessible documentary resources of national significance.

 For more information about the National Library of Australia visit: www.nla.gov.au.

