---
title: "Labor set for boat arrival record - two illegal boat arrivals in 24 hours."
date: "2010-03-07"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335171
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3X3W6%22
---

 Sun, 7th March 2010  

 LABOR SET FOR BOAT ARRIVAL RECORD - TWO ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS  IN 24 HOURS 

 Mr Scott Morrison MP  

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 

 Mr Michael Keenan MP  

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and 

 Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today that the illegal arrival of the second boat in 24 hours underscores 

 the massive failure of the Rudd Government’s immigration and border protection laws.  

 “This is the 20th boat to arrive illegally this year, the second in 24 hours and the 88th since the Rudd Government 

 rolled back the Coalition’s strong immigration laws,” Mr Morrison said.  

 “In 2010, illegal boat arrivals are occurring at an even faster rate than our highest year on record in 1999, when 

 86 boats arrived at an average of around 7 per month. In 2010, boats are arriving at the rate of more than nine 

 per month, more than 25% higher than in 1999,” he said.  

 “In the first nine weeks of 2010 we have had more boats arrive illegally than in the last six years of the Coalition 

 Government.  

 “Knowing they cannot spin the people smugglers, Labor tries to spin Australians by claiming the sustained surge 

 in illegal boat arrivals is all about international push factors.  

 “In fact, since Australia last experienced a surge in illegal boat arrivals a decade ago, the number of asylum 

 applications in western countries has fallen by almost 40%.  

 “Data recently released by the UK Government Home Office showed that last year asylum applications in the UK, 

 Canada and the US all declined, yet in Australia they increased by more than 30%. In the UK, asylum 

 applications in the December quarter fell by 30%.  

 “Even though global demand is lower, there has always been plenty of business for people smugglers. The 

 difference is that Australia has not always been a soft touch for their trade,” he said.  

 Mr Keenan said: “The Australian people deserve an explanation, as to how this latest arrival was allowed to get 

 within 100 km of Western Australia.  

 "The Government needs to release the details of exactly how close this boat was intercepted to Western 

 Australia's shores, and explain how it was able to come so close to our coastline.  

 "This boat was intercepted only a stone's throw from Western Australia's coast - how much longer will it be before 

 they begin to arrive on our beaches?” Mr Keenan said.    

