---
title: "106, 107, 108...[boat arrivals]."
date: "2010-04-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
  - "boat arrivals"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336874
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/M5XW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 106, 107, 108.[boat arrivals] 

 

 Saturday, 10 April 2010   

 Another day has passed and another boat has arrived as the Rudd Labor  Government shirks its responsibility of protecting Australia’s borders, and fails to  take real action on the border protection crisis.    

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan said  the boats are still coming, and will keep coming, despite the Government's  bandaid solution announced yesterday to temporarily suspend asylum claims  from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan.    

 "This Government has announced a bandaid wait-and-see solution to this crisis,  instead of taking real action to stop the boats, and has now walked away from  the problem as if it's been resolved," said Mr Keenan.    

 "Today's arrival has book-ended the Government's announcement, with boats  106, 107 and 108 all arriving within a day of the Minister's announcement.    

 "The arrival of a new boat on each of the past three days has highlighted the  severity of the crisis at hand - a crisis that requires real action, not a bandaid."    

 The latest boat was intercepted north east of Ashmore Island, with 40 people on  board.    

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison said the arrival of this latest  boat showed it's business as usual for people smugglers under the Rudd  Government.    

 "Kevin 107 has been quickly followed by Kevin 108," said Mr Morrison.   "Kevin Rudd opened another chapter in his failed policy on asylum seekers on  Friday. Two more boats quickly followed, showing Kevin Rudd that the people  smugglers are still in charge. Kevin Rudd needs to understand you can’t spin the  boats away.    

 "Kevin Rudd's announcement on Friday has fooled no one, especially not the  people smugglers. Low cost carriers have now entered the people smuggling  market due to the business boom created by Kevin Rudd's failed policies and  flawed decisions 

 

