---
title: "Minister Bowen to engage with regional partners on border protection and people smuggling"
date: "2010-10-08"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344464
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/371717%22
---

 Chris Bowen, MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for McMahon 

 Minister Bowen to engage with regional partners on border protection and people smuggling 

 Friday, 8 October 2010 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen, will depart Australia on Monday  (October 11) to visit Indonesia, Malaysia and East Timor to continue discussions regarding a regional  approach to irregular migration. 

 Mr Bowen said the Australian Government is committed to strong cooperation with regional  neighbours on people smuggling and border security issues. 

 ‘Indonesia, Malaysia and East Timor are key partners for Australia and our governments are  committed to close, practical working relationships,’ Mr Bowen said. 

 ‘This will be an important opportunity to discuss our mutual interest in enhanced cooperation to  address issues surrounding people smuggling and irregular migration in our region. 

 ‘I’m keen to talk to our neighbours about a sustainable Regional Protection Framework as part of the  visit. 

 ‘A framework involving our regional partners is the most effective way to holistically address  irregular migration in the region and to remove the incentive for people to undertake the dangerous  sea voyages that put lives at risk. 

 ‘The framework would include developing a comprehensive approach to the processing of asylum  seekers with the cooperation of regional partners and relevant international organisations, including  the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 

 ‘Our focus must be on building sustainable, lasting solutions to the problem of people smuggling  with our regional partners and key international organisations.’ 

 The minister will meet with President Jose Ramos-Horta and other senior Timorese officials in Dili on  12 October; the Minister for Law and Human Rights, Mr Patrialis Akbar, and Vice-Minister for  Foreign Affairs, Mr Triyono Wibowo, in Jakarta on 13 October; and Minister of Home Affairs, Mr Y.B  Dato’ Seri Hishammuddin Tun Hussein, and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Y.B Dato’ Sri Anifah Haji  Aman, in Kuala Lumpur on 14 October. 

 The meetings in East Timor will discuss the potential for East Timor to play a role in the proposed  Regional Protection Framework, including the possible establishment of a Regional Processing  Centre in East Timor. 

 In addition, the minister will also meet with representatives of the UNHCR, the International  Organization for Migration and other key stakeholders during the trip. 

 ‘What differentiates this government’s approach from our current opposition’s position on border  protection and people smuggling is our commitment to engaging both with our region and the  international community.  Importantly, we recognise that the challenges we face are regional and  global in their scope,’ Mr Bowen said. 

 ‘I appreciate the positive engagement from East Timor, Indonesia, and Malaysia on these issues and I  look forward to the opportunity to meet with more of our regional neighbours shortly to further  discussions on a Regional Protection Framework.’ 

 

 See: Index of Media releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/2010/cb10068.htm  Last update: 08 October 2010 at 15:29 AEST  

 

