---
title: "Coalition calls for immediate lift of Afghan processing freeze"
date: "2010-09-29"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "Immigration detention centres"
  - "MORRISON, Scott, MP"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211344088
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/253645%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 Coalition calls for immediate lift of  Afghan processing freeze   29/09/10  

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population and Shadow Minister for Immigration  & Citizenship, Scott Morrison has lodged a notice of motion in the Parliament calling  on the Gillard Government to immediately lift its discriminatory and ineffective  processing freeze on Afghan asylum seekers which is contributing to the chaos in  immigration detention. 

 “The Coalition has always opposed the discriminatory and ineffective freeze applied  by failed Immigration Minister Chris Evans in April which is only adding more  people to our already overcrowded detention centres and keeping them there longer,”  Mr Morrison said. 

 “The freeze is contrary to the non-discriminatory principles contained in the UN  Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (Refugees Convention) which states  that - ‘contracting States shall apply the provisions of this Convention to refugees 

 without discrimination as to race, religion or country of origin.’ 

 “The freeze hasn’t stopped the boats - since it was implemented for both Afghan and  Sri Lankan asylum seekers on 9 April, 57 boats with 2,852 people on board have  arrived. 

 “Labor admitted the Sri Lankan freeze failed when it was lifted in July. They now  have a detention system overcrowded with 5,000 people including more than 600  children and beset by protests, riots and escapes and the freeze is only making an  already crisis situation worse.    

 “Immigration Department figures show that as of mid August there were 2,248  Afghans in detention, almost half the total immigration detention population. This is  more than double the 1,059 Afghans in detention before the freeze. 

 “The freeze has also kept more people in detention for longer. Before the freeze only  30% of people in immigration detention had been there for more than three months.  By mid August that figure had more than doubled to 64%. 

 “The Coalition’s motion calls on Labor to lift the freeze and begin processing Afghan  asylum seekers immediately. 

 “The motion also calls on Minister Bowen to provide Safe Haven Visas to successful  refugees, to accommodate potential changes in refugee status resulting from changed  conditions in the country of origin. 

 “Safe Haven Visas do not discriminate between races or countries of origin while  acknowledging that circumstances in source countries change. 

 “Labor’s immigration detention crisis is a crisis of their own making and so far  Minister Bowen’s only response is to build more beds, with further revelations this  week that an extra 100 will be built at Darwin’s Airport Lodge centre. 

 “The Labor Government simply can’t be trusted to end the crisis in immigration.  Labor have tried to spin boats away, they have tried cynical election fixes and they  have broken their promise not to expand detention centres. 

 “This is a record of failure that will only continue so long as Labor fails to implement  the policies necessary to get our immigration system back under control,” Mr  Morrison said. 

  

