---
title: "Illegal boat arrivals eclipse 2009 tally in just five months."
date: "2010-05-29"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339581
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/FCYW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Illegal boat arrivals eclipse 2009 tally in just five months 

 Saturday 29th May 2010 

 The latest illegal boat arrival carrying 55 people has matched last year's total number of 

 arrivals in less than five months, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott 

 Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan 

 said today.  

 

 “Kevin Rudd should be more interested in stopping the profits of people smugglers than he is 

 in the destroying the profits of our mining sector,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “The latest boat, K129, is the 61st to arrive this year. This is the same number that arrived 

 throughout all of 2009, the only difference is that more people have turned up on these 61 

 boats,” he said.  

 

 “In 2010 we have now had more than 3,000 people arrive, compared to around 2,800 in 

 2009. This is also more than half the total number of people to have arrived illegally in the 

 129 boats since Kevin Rudd first started rolling back the Coalition’s strong border protection 

 regime in August 2008.  

 

 “The continued escalation of arrivals this year underscores the announcement made this 

 week by the Coalition to restore the policies that Labor abolished, with temporary protection 

 visas, universal off shore processing and turning boats around where we are able to do so.  

 

 “Kevin Rudd's border protection policies have failed. Our detention centres are filling up, the 

 costs are blowing out and the boats keep arriving.  

 

 “Kevin Rudd refuses to take the hard decisions needed to stop the boats that puts people’s 

 lives at risk and allows people smugglers to continue their profits.  

 

 “Only the Coalition will restore what Labor has abolished and introduce the polices that are 

 need and have been proven in the past to stop the boats,” he said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This government has run out of chances to prove it can keep Australia’s 

 borders safe.  

 

 “This is the 61st time this year that this government has failed the Australian people on 

 border protection. Last week we outlined how a Coalition government will stop the boats 

 from coming.  

 

 “Only the Coalition has the resolve to restore control of our borders. We have done it before 

 and will do it again,” he said. 

  

