---
title: "A Liberal-National Government will restore control to our borders."
date: "2010-05-28"
creators:
  - "Scott, Bruce"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of SCOTT, BRUCE, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339574
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XPWW6%22
---

 A Liberal-National Government will restore control to our borders  

 28-May-2010   

 Source: Bruce Scott, MP -    

 Federal LNP Member for Maranoa Bruce Scott said a Liberal-National Coalition will restore the strong  border protection regime that the Rudd Government has abandoned.   

 Mr Scott said that since the election of the Rudd Government illegal boat arrivals have gone from  three a year to more than three a week.   

 “128 illegal boats carrying almost 6,000 people have arrived on our shores under this Labor  Government’s watch, demonstrating that they have lost control of our borders,” Mr Scott said.    

 “A Coalition Government has a direct action plan that will stop the boats. This includes:   

 1. In government, we will commence discussions to establish an off shore processing detention  facility in another country. This off shore facility will be the destination for anyone seeking to  enter Australia illegally by boat.    

 2. We will reintroduce temporary protection visas and require those on these visas who  receive benefits to make a contribution through a ‘work for benefits’ scheme, as is required  of Australian citizens.   

 3. We will require those who have arrived legally on-shore once again to make any claim  within 45 days.    

 4. We will turn back boats where circumstances allow.   

 “The Rudd Government abolished temporary protection visas and replaced them with a permanent  protection visa. This gave people smugglers a product to sell - ‘permanent residency in Australia’.   

 “Reintroducing temporary protection visas and off shore processing is critical to crippling the people  smuggling business and stopping the flow of boat arrivals.    

 “The Coalition has a proven track record of being prepared to do what is necessary to control our  borders and protect the integrity and fairness of our immigration system.   

 “The only way to restore sovereignty and control to our borders is to elect a Liberal-National Coalition  government,” he said.   

  

