---
title: "Budget 2010: Savage cuts to the front line agencies dealing with Rudd's border crisis."
date: "2010-05-17"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CUSTOMS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338854
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/LUQW6%22
---

 Michael Keenan 

 Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs 

 Savage cuts to the front line agencies dealing with Rudd's border  crisis -   Monday, 17th May 2010   

 Labor has responded to the surge in illegal boat arrivals brought on through their soft policies by slashing  funding, staff and resources to the government agencies charged with protecting Australia’s borders.  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan said the Government has failed to  acknowledge the severity of the crisis, and failed to act to fix Australia’s broken border protection system. 

 

 “We are facing a border protection crisis of the Government’s own making, and their response is to reduce  resources to the front line agencies dealing with the consequences of Labor’s failed policies,” said Mr Keenan.  “The Government has opted to make budget cuts rather than take action to address the heart of this problem - a  broken policy that attracts, not deters, the operation of people smugglers.” 

 

 “In last night’s budget, the Rudd Labor Government revealed it will axe 250 staff from Customs and Border  Protection Service, the men and women putting their lives on the line each day to secure our borders.  “They will also slash the budget of the Customs and Border Protection Service by $146.3m. 

 

 “The Australian Federal Police, whose resources are already massively stretched as they respond to the border  crisis, perversely also suffered a huge funding cut. 

 

 “Labor’s headline of acting on replacing the aging Bay Class patrol vessels was revealed to be completely hollow  - they are actually delaying the procurement of these much needed vessels and have allocated no funding at all  for the construction of the boats. 

 

 “Mr Swan claims to have increased funding to border protection, however this was funding already announced  and mainly funds security measures at airports.  “The reality is this budget has completely ignored the demand for extra resources to protect our borders, just as  Labor continues to ignore the crisis. 

 

 “What’s more, the budget allocated $800,000 to improve the quality of the complaints mechanisms for detainees  on Christmas Island - a funding allocation that, combined with the front line agency cuts, truly shows a worrying  insight into Labor’s border protection priorities.” 

  

