---
title: "Budget 2010: Growing local concerns over Labor's weak border control."
date: "2010-05-20"
creators:
  - "Neville, Paul"
  - "National Party of Australia"
source: "Office of NEVILLE, PAUL, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339214
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/VGSW6%22
---

 Mr Paul Neville MP  Federal Member for Hinkler  The Nationals Whip - House of Representatives   

 

 Growing Local Concerns Over Labor’s Weak border  control   20-May-2010  Source: Paul Neville, MP -   Kevin Rudd must explain how many asylum seekers will be transferred off Christmas  Island and where they will be transferred to in order to make way for yet more illegal  boats arrivals, Member for Hinkler Paul Neville said today.    

 In light of reports that the government has asked church groups to supply housing for  asylum seekers, Mr Neville said it was clear local residents were very concerned that  the government had given up on border protection.    

 “I’ve actually been contacted by a constituent concerned that a longstanding booking  she had at the Virginia Palms motel in Brisbane might have to be cancelled because  it is housing Afghan asylum seekers, and it may have to take more,” he said.    

 “While it seems her booking is safe, her concerns are still quite legitimate.    

 “The fact that church groups are now being hit-up to house asylum seekers is the  clearest sign yet that Labor’s soft approach to people smuggling is resonating more  and more with everyday Australians.    

 “Right now, there are now more than 3,500 people in some form of immigration  detention around Australia, including Christmas Island, and the latest boat arrivals  will push Christmas Island beyond its 2,500 person capacity.    

 “That means more asylum seekers will have to be housed in motels and church-arranged accommodation.”    

 Mr Neville said more than 5,800 asylum seekers have landed on our shores since  August 2008.    

 “In fact, more people have arrived illegally by boat so far this year than in the entire  12 months of 2009 due to Labor’s failed immigration and border protection policies.    

 “The rapid escalation in the detention population created a billion dollar budget  blowout of costs for Christmas Island and to increase the capacity of on-shore  detention facilities, including the reopening of Curtin.    

 “Yet the Rudd Government has still not budgeted for either the increase in costs to  run their expanded onshore detention centres, or the increase in the onshore  detention population.    

 “Thanks to budget and staffing cuts in last week's budget on top of a broken border  protection policy, Australia will continue to be a magnet for people smugglers. This  Government is all talk and no action when it comes to securing Australia's borders.” 

  

