---
title: "Kevin Rudd hits another ton: 100 boats in 09/10."
date: "2010-05-13"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211338656
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/Q5PW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Kevin Rudd hits another ton: 100 boats in 09/10   13/05/10  

 The arrival of the 100th boat this financial year, the second in less than 24 hours of  the Budget, confirms the border protection choas that has been created by Kevin  Rudd’s failed policies and weak decisions, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “K124 brings up a century of boat arrivals carrying 4,658 people for Kevin Rudd this  financial year, a year where the Rudd Government predicted only 200 people would  arrive illegally by boat,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Including the most recent arrival, this latest boat will see the detention population on  Christmas Island and other centres around Australia reach nearly 3,500 people, an  increase of almost 1,500 since January this year. 

 “Kevin Rudd’s failed immigration and border protection policies have already  presided over a $1 billion border budget blow out. Every extra boat that arrives only  adds further cost pressures. 

 “The announcement of the 124th boat  to arrive since Kevin Rudd rolled back the  Coalition’s strong border protection regime, demonstrates that the rate of boat arrivals  continues at pace. 

 “Kevin Rudd has neither the conviction nor resolve to take the hard decisions to stop  the boats and fix the border protection mess his failed polices have created.  Australians deserve real action to secure our borders and get our immigration system  back under control,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Today’s boat arrival delivered a budget hangover for the  Government and their so-called border protection measures. 

 “We have seen the people smuggling industry respond to Rudd Labor’s budget with  two new boat arrivals - a clear message that this Government remains a soft touch on  border protection. 

 “Last night’s budget included no new deterrents for people smuggling, and instead  emboldened the people smuggling industry with budget and staffing cuts to AFP and  Customs and Border Protection Service. 

 “Securing Australia’s borders is at the bottom of this Government’s priorities, and  with no new measures announced in last night’s budget, people smugglers will  continue to profit from a Labor Government soft on border protection,” Mr Keenan  said. 

