---
title: "SA needs another progressive voice in the Senate."
date: "2010-04-16"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337167
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/QUGW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens   

 SA Needs Another Progressive Voice in the Senate 

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Saturday 17th April 2010, 7:30am 

 Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has said she looks forward to the prospect of working with another 

 progressive woman from South Australia, Penny Wright, in Federal Parliament after the next election. 

 Senator Hanson-Young, Greens Senator for South Australia, congratulated Ms Wright, an experienced 

 lawyer and mediator, on her selection as the Greens' lead Senate candidate in South Australia for the 

 upcoming Federal Election. 

 "South Australians have a wonderful opportunity later this year to elect a second Greens Senator and 

 provide another voice for the environment, social justice and democracy in the Senate,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 "Penny will bring a wealth of experience to the Senate and I look forward to working with her." 

 With a legal career spanning 20 years in South Australia, Ms Wright has worked as a tribunal member, a 

 lecturer at Flinders University in Public and Environmental Health law and a qualified mediator. 

 She has worked with vulnerable and disadvantaged Australians in various areas such as tenancy law, 

 mental health, social security, refugees and violence against women and children. 

 Ms Wright, 49, has campaigned for human rights and to protect the environment with many organizations 

 including Amnesty International, Oxfam, The Wilderness Society, ACF and Greenpeace. In the early 1990s 

 she helped establish the Environmental Law Community Advisory Service (ELCAS) - a forerunner of the 

 South Australian Environmental Defender's Office. A passionate advocate for the importance of public 

 institutions, she was President of the state's Friends of the ABC from 1996 to 1999. 

 A passionate advocate for investment in public services, she was head of the state's Friends of the ABC 

 from 1996 to 1999. 

 Ms Wright says it is a privilege to be chosen to represent the Greens at the Federal Election. 

 "The Greens are the party of the future - the only party to really face up to the many challenges we face this 

 century and have the courage  to offer creative, intelligent solutions,'' Ms Wright said. 

 "The Greens offer South Australians the vision and courage we need to turn this century's challenges into 

 opportunities. I look forward to joining my colleagues in the Senate after the election, when there is a real 

 possibility that we will hold the balance of power." 

