---
title: "The Government can't be trusted: asylum-seekers need judicial review."
date: "2010-04-22"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211337390
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/NCIW6%22
---

 Sarah Hanson-Young   Australian Greens   

 

 The Government Can't Be Trusted - Asylum-Seekers Need Judicial Review 

 Media Release | Spokesperson Sarah Hanson-Young  

 Thursday 22nd April 2010, 3:51pm 

 The Australian Greens have responded to the Federal Government's recent backflip on asylum-seeker 

 policy by moving to introduce legislation to provide judicial review for people in immigration 

 detention. 

 

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration and Human Rights, 

 says she will bring forward a bill to amend the Migration Act to impose a 30-day limit on 

 detention, requiring the Government to seek and justify extensions of orders. 

 

 "The Government has changed its policy in recent weeks, by suspending asylum claims to 

 establish indefinite detention, and re-opening the desert prison at Curtin Detention Centre,'' 

 Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 

 "Now that the Government has also rejected any possibility of a charter of rights in Australia, 

 it is clear that there is a need for an independent check on these new policies, and that is 

 why we are moving legislation to allow judicial review for individuals in immigration detention. 

 

 "The absence of a charter, coupled with the absence of trust in this Government to do the 

 right thing in dealing with vulnerable asylum-seekers, means we need independent oversight 

 to protect those in detention. 

 

 "We are particularly concerned about the detention of children - there are more than 110 

 children currently detained on Christmas Island, plus an unknown number of unaccompanied 

 minors. The new review is designed to give these children some protection.'' 

 

 The office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has spoken out 

 about Australia's changes to asylum-seeker policy, saying the combination of mandatory 

 detention, suspension of asylum claims and the isolation of detention centres was "deeply 

 troubling,'' given the lack of judicial review. 

 

 "The UNHCR's concern reinforces the message that the Government's new policies are a 

 step backwards in how we treat vulnerable people,'' Senator Hanson-Young said. 

 

 "The Government should have to prove that detainees are a security risk to continue 

 detention or there is another serious concern - the fact that people are waiting for their 

 asylum application process to be looked at or completed should not by itself be a reason for 

 detention. 

 

 "The new bill will be just one part of the Greens' continuing fight for better treatment of 

 asylum-seekers.'' 

  

