---
title: "Labor's failed border protection pushes detention centres to break out point."
date: "2010-05-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211339372
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/XQTW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Labor's failed border protection pushes  detention centres to break out point   25/05/10  

 The breakout of another 9 detainees from Villawood, with six still on the run, is  further demonstration of Labor’s border protection and immigration chaos, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “The latest breakout follows similar incidents in Darwin and Melbourne, and 7 people  breaking out in Villawood back in March,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “In response to the Villawood breakouts in March, Deputy Prime Minister Julia  Gillard tried to avoid responsibilty by blaming the Government’s contractor, stating  ‘we obviously don’t want to see any repeat of this poor conduct’. The Government  promised “swift action’ in a statement issued by the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship. 

 “The time for excuses is over. The Rudd Government must take responsibility for  these breakouts, as it is their policies that have pushed the system to breaking point. 

 “Since January the number of detainees held in onshore detention centres has risen by  more than 240%, due to record illegal boat arrivals, with hundreds of detainees  transferred to the mainland. 

 “According to Department figures, there were 329 people being held in onshore  detention on January 1. As at May 7 this figure has risen to 1,126 detainees. 

 “The failure of the Rudd Government’s border protection policy is placing increased  pressure on our onshore detention facilities and it will only get worse. 

 “Since the Rudd Government announced their asylum freeze, 22 boats have arrived  carrying almost 1,000 people. The overwhelming majority of these illegal arrivals will  be from Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, who will be staying for at least 6 months and 3  months respectively, before their claims are even assessed. 

 “Detainees subject to the suspension will be transferred onshore to the Curtin  detention centre when it is reopened, further swelling the numbers being held onshore. 

 “Despite the significant increase in the onshore detention population, the Rudd  Government has made no provision for any increased funding to cover these costs. 

 “According to the Government budget, the reopened Curtin detention centre is going  to run itself, while increased detention populations around the country are cost free.  Kevin Rudd is masking yet another detention budget blowout,” Mr Morrison said. 

  

