---
title: "Another boat arrives as house full sign goes up on Christmas Island."
date: "2010-03-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211336098
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/30YW6%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release 

 

 Another boat arrives as house full sign goes up on Christmas Island 

 Monday 22nd March 2010 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for 

 Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today the abolition of 

 universal offshore processing is now a certainty after the arrival of the 26th boat this year. 

 

 "Under the Rudd Government 94 boats have now arrived. There are currently 2004 asylum 

 seekers on Christmas Island, not including 18 crew members who were reported to be on 

 the island just a week ago,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 “The arrival of this latest boat with 18 people and 4 crew will take Christmas Island to its 

 limit,” he said. 

 

 “The Rudd Government has run out of options. The Government has reportedly admitted 

 that the additional 400 beds promised by the end of this month will now not be available until 

 mid April.  

 

 “This means that the next boat will put the no vacancy sign on Christmas Island and the 

 Rudd Government will abolish universal off shore processing and send asylum seekers to 

 the mainland whose claims have yet to be determined. 

 

 "Under the Rudd Government Christmas Island has become a visa factory. 

 

 “Already in 2010 we have had 659 permanent visas granted, more than half the 1,131 

 granted in 2009. The rejection rate has also fallen from more than 10% last year to less than 

 3%, just 19 rejections so far this year as the pressure to get people off Christmas Island 

 increases,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat arrival is merely a stones throw away from the Western 

 Australian coast. With Border Protection Command becoming increasingly stretched beyond 

 capacity, it is no wonder the boats are sneaking through. 

 

 “Since Mr Rudd dismantled the Coalition’s strong border protection policies in August 2008, 

 94 boats have arrived, carrying more than 4270 people. 

 

 “Under the former Howard Government we only had 18 boat arrivals over six years. The 

 flood under the Rudd Government is only going to increase, particularly if we are seeing an 

 end to offshore processing. The rate the boats are arriving in 2010 is unsustainable. 

 

 “This is a Government that couldn’t run a chook raffle without losing the prize. Mr Rudd has 

 lost the plot and has lost control of our borders,” Mr Keenan said.  

 

