---
title: "International Women's Day 2010."
date: "2010-03-08"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
  - "Australian Labor Party"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211335205
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/KSEW6%22
---

  

 Senator Chris Evans   

 International Women's Day 2010  Monday, 8 March 2010 

 International Women's Day provides an opportunity for all Australians to consider the  plight of vulnerable refugee women and children, and Australia's efforts to help them. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said Australia  provided assistance to many vulnerable refugee women and children through the  ‘woman at risk’ program. 

 ‘The life of a single female in a refugee camp is very hard as women are often  vulnerable to violence, abuse and torture,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘The program assists women and their children in cooperation with the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to help these families settle and  rebuild their lives in safety in Australia.’ 

 The ‘woman at risk’ visa category is part of Australia's humanitarian program and  was introduced in 1989 to help women and children living outside their home country  without the protection of a male relative. 

 Since the introduction of the program, more than 10 000 ‘woman at risk’ visas have  been granted to some of the most vulnerable people in the world. 

 Some 788 visas were granted in the 2008-09 program year, while about 470 visas  have been granted so far in 2010. 

 The top countries of birth under the program include Burma, Afghanistan, the  Democratic Republic of Congo, Bhutan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Rwanda, Sudan, Iraq and  Liberia. 

 ‘International Women's Day is a chance for Australians to recognise the nation's  efforts to help people rebuild safe and secure lives in Australia,’ Senator Evans said. 

 ‘Last financial year the Australian Government provided $16.5 million for  international projects assisting displaced persons and refugees, including vulnerable  displaced women in Asia and the Middle East. 

 ‘This included $700 000 for a UNICEF project in Iran that provides basic education  and health services to women and children from Afghanistan. 

 ‘Through these and other measures, we are targeting our assistance to women who  are in danger of victimisation and abuse because of their gender. 

 ‘I encourage all Australians to reflect on the new life and opportunities we are  offering this vulnerable group on International Women;s Day.’ 

 

 See:  Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2010/ce10020.htm   Last update: 09 March 2010 at 15:54 AEST  

 

