---
title: "Budget 2011: Labor fails Australian families"
date: "2011-05-12"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352804
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1046643%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 Federal Member for Dickson 

 Shadow Minister for Health & Ageing Media Releases   

 

 LABOR FAILS AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES    

 12 May 2011 “The Federal Budget confirms how out of touch Julia Gillard and  Wayne Swan are with Australian families. It fails the essential test: to ease the cost  of living on Australians who face higher prices every day,” the Member for Dickson  Peter Dutton said today.    

 “There is nothing in the Budget for Australian families doing it tough. All this Budget  delivers is more deficit, more debt and more spin.    

 “The government’s failure to rein in its wasteful and reckless spending will lead to  higher inflation and higher interest rates.    

 “This Budget is not worth the paper it is written on. There is a hole in its heart. The  absence of the carbon tax means the government’s claim to deliver a surplus in  2012/13 can’t be taken seriously.     

 “The revenue figures for 2012/13 are wrong. The expenditure figures are wrong, as  are the forecasts for inflation, economic growth and unemployment.     

 “Strong leadership provides certainty. This government is weak, unstable and  directionless and lacks the leadership to do what’s right for Australian families and  businesses.    

 “This year’s Budget deficit has soared to $49.4 billion and the forecast deficit in  2011/12 has blown out by $9.6 billion to $22.6 billion.     

 “Net government debt has climbed to a record $107 billion in 2011/12 and is forecast  to remain above $100 billion across the forward estimates. This amounts to more  than $4700 for every Australian.    

 “Again we’ve seen a typical, old fashioned Labor Budget that’s big on taxes and big  on spending, but fails to help households battling higher costs of living - petrol,  electricity and gas, groceries, health costs and home repayments.    

 “The government is launching a $2 billion assault on families by freezing the  indexation of key family tax payments and income thresholds for three years.    

 “This is the first budget in eight years that has not provided tax cuts for everyday  Australians. The government is being tough on families because it’s failed to be  tough on itself.  

 

 “Labor has lost control of Australia’s borders. Offshore asylum seeker management  has blown out by a record $1.75 billion since last year’s budget. Labor’s incompetent  approach to border protection is in disarray.    

 “The new arrangements for taxing company cars will slug small business operators,  tradesmen and farmers with increased costs at a time when they’re already doing it  tough.    

 “Regional Australia has again been short changed by a city centric government that’s  cut $500 million in regional funding. There is not a single new cent in this Budget for  road or rail projects across Australia.    

 “Since coming to power, Labor has employed 24,000 additional public servants. The  Government is asking the Australian people to tighten their belts, but it’s refusing to  do the same itself.    

 “Australians are looking for stability and certainty from their government, not this  weak and directionless approach.”   

   

