---
title: "Prime Minister Gillard must stop bullying East Timor"
date: "2011-04-01"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211351212
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/824282%22
---

 The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin 

 

 Prime Minister Gillard must stop bullying East Timor 

 Friday, 01 April 2011  

 Prime Minister Gillard must reveal when she was first informed by the East Timor government that it  would not host her proposed “regional processing centre” for asylum seekers. 

 East Timor Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao is reported to have said during an interview on 7 March  this year that he "finally put the idea out of its misery". 

 Ms Gillard has continued to claim this week that negotiations with East Timor were still under way.  

 This clear statement by Prime Minister Gusmao comes after months of strong hints by various senior  members of the East Timor government and official rejection by its parliament. 

 The Australian Government’s proposal is so unpopular in East Timor that the opposition has  announced that it will campaign against the idea in the upcoming election. 

 East Timor is one of the poorest nations on Earth and faces enormous development challenges. It is  highly inappropriate for the Australian Prime Minister to try to bully East Timor into submission over  her failed proposal. 

 The government of East Timor has shown great tact, maturity and patience in responding to the  “regional processing centre” for asylum seekers that Prime Minister Gillard announced without  consultation last year. 

 It has been clear from the outset that East Timor does not want the centre and has used clear  diplomatic language to voice its concerns. 

 Prime Minister Gillard has deliberately chosen to ignore these concerns to get her out of a political  mess of her own making. 

 This is behaviour unbecoming of a Prime Minister in dealings with another nation. 

 It is further confirmation that she lacks interest and skill in foreign affairs, after last year declaring that  “Foreign policy is not my passion”. 

 Ms Gillard must immediately abandon her support for an East Timor “regional processing centre” for  asylum seekers and stop using taxpayers dollars in her ongoing attempts to bully the East Timorese  people into accepting something they do not want. 

  

