---
title: "Another boat arrives as Malaysia deal starts to unravel"
date: "2011-06-05"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355434
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/826539%22
---

 Scott Morrison, MP 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook   

 Another boat arrives as Malaysia deal starts to unravel 

 05/06/11  

 As Labor's people swap deal continues to unravel, the boats continue to arrive, with  59 people on board the latest illegal boat to arrive, Shadow Minister for Productivity  and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan  said today. 

 “Labor's Malaysian people swap deal is not yet one month old but more than a quarter  of the 800 places have already been filled,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “This is the fifth boat to arrive since the Government rushed news of their panicked  'agreement' with Malaysia just four weeks ago. 

 “Since that time, Labor has been making it up as they go along, changing their  position on critical issues, such as the treatment of children, on what seems like a  daily basis. 

 “Labor simply doesn't think these issues through. It is clear that important  commitments about human rights and the treatment of children had still not been  agreed when the Prime Minister rushed this panicked proposal out the door a month  ago. 

 “The Malaysian people swap deal appears to be going the same way as the East Timor  processing centre. It's time the Prime Minister got over her pride, picked up the phone  to Nauru and reintroduced TPVs,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “People smugglers clearly understand that Labor's Malaysian people  swap deal is unravelling as they continue to smuggle people into Australia. 

 “They can see that the Malaysian deal is the only strategy Labor has to stop them but  that the deal looks increasingly unlikely to go ahead. 

 “There is nothing therefore from stopping them pursuing business as usual and the  fifth boat arrival since that announcement shows them calling Labor's bluff,” he said. 

  

