---
title: "Another arrival as Christmas Island becomes travel lounge"
date: "2011-06-07"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355566
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/877836%22
---

 Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 

 Another arrival as Christmas Island  becomes travel lounge   07/06/11  

 The arrival of the sixth boat since Julia Gillard rushed out to announce her Malaysia  people swap deal a month ago shows that people smugglers continue to be  unconvinced by a government that can’t make up its mind and can’t keep its policy  the same from one day to the next, Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “People smugglers have sent 275 people to Australia on illegal boats since Julia  Gillard rushed out for a headline last month to announce a deal that wasn't done,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 “Labor has been making it up as they go along, changing their position on critical  issues such as the treatment of children, on what seems like a daily basis,” he said. 

 “Meanwhile Christmas Island is fast becoming the largest transit lounge in the  country, with hundreds of people now being kept indefinitely in detention. 

 “Labor still can't say where they will be transferred to or when, in what has become  another rolling farce. 

 “The people smugglers are clearly undeterred by Labor's continued policy bungling  for illegal arrivals. 

 “Today Minister Bowen refused to say that those who have arrived since the Prime  Minister’s announcement would even be sent to Malaysia, once again highlighting the  farce that is Labor’s policy on boat arrivals. 

 “Labor simply doesn't think these issues through. Important commitments about  human rights and the treatment of children remain unresolved but that didn’t stop the  Prime Minister rushing this panicked proposal out the door a month ago. 

 “It’s only the Prime Minister’s vanity that is preventing her from picking up the phone  to Nauru, reintroducing temporary protection visas and getting on with it,” Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Today’s arrival is further confirmation that people smugglers are  and will continue to pass judgement on Labor’s deal with Malaysia. 

 “Labor is fast approaching its swap deal quota with 287 people arriving since they  announced their Malaysia plan. 

 “Labor’s record in government has been to lurch from self induced crisis to self  induced crisis on border protection. 

 “Labor’s incompetence when it comes to securing our borders has never been more  evident. No matter what Labor tries the only real answer is to return to the Coalition  policies that they abolished upon coming to Government,” he said. 

 

