---
title: "Pontville debacle continues unabated - plans revised 15 times"
date: "2011-08-17"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "Office of ABETZ, SEN ERIC"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358926
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1008383%22
---

 

 

         - MEDIA RELEASE -  SENATOR THE HON. ERIC ABETZ   Leader of the Opposition in the Senate   Shadow Minister for Employment & Workplace Relations  

 Liberal Senator for Tasmania  

 

  1 

 17th August 2011 

 

 Pontville Debacle Continues Unabated - Plans Revised 15 Times   

 The Pontville Detention Centre Tasmanians have been promised will close in  October this year, will only be completed on the 26th of September 2011, according  to answers to questions asked by Senator Abetz. (1) (See answer 1(j)   

 “The debacle that is Labor’s Pontville Detention Centre has had its plans revised 15  times up to the 30th of June,” Senator Abetz said today. (See answer 1(g))    

 “The head contractor was not obtained through a competitive tender.” (See answer 1(b))   

 “The Tasmanian people were told that Pontville was only needed as a temporary  facility until the Northern Territory Detention Centre was opened in October 2011.”    

 “That is why we were promised the facility would only be used for 6 months,” Senator  Abetz said.   

 “Yet, we now know that the Northern Territory facility is to be completed (Stage 1) in  late October 2011.” (See answer 2))    

 “As a result this $15 million waste of money will be used for just one month,” Senator  Abetz said.   

 “Labor must explain this maladministration, the delays and the 15 changes to the  plan, the initial rush and now the further delay which has resulted in this gross waste  of taxpayers’ money.”   

 “Labor has broken its promise to the people of Tasmania.”   

 “It’s patently clear that they deliberately intend using both the Pontville and Northern  Territory facilities to avoid being embarrassed by the failure of their asylum seeker  policy.”   

 “Obviously the flood of arrivals has been so great they will now need both facilities,”  Senator Abetz said.   

 “Labor needs to come clean and be honest with the people of Tasmania.”   

 2 

 

 

 

 2 

 

 Questions that need to be answered are:   

 1. When will the first intake for Pontville arrive?  2. When will the Centre close?  3. Why were Tasmanians promised that the Centre would be closed by  October? 

 4. Has the Government changed its mind about the closing date, if so, when was  that decision taken and why?    

 “This debacle follows the trend of the Government’s botched border protection  policy, East Timor non-solution, the Malaysian embarrassment and now Pontville.”    

 “All this mess and expense has occurred because Labor, in lockstep with the  Greens, refuse to accept that the Howard Government’s solution is the fairest, most  humane and cheaper policy solution,” Senator Abetz said.     

 

 

 

 

 Media enquiries: David Allender - 02 6277 3019, 0457 590 881    

 www.abetz.com.au   

 





