---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices, Adelaide: 21 July 2011: privacy reforms; asylum seekers; David Hicks"
date: "2011-07-21"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "privacy reforms"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "David Hicks"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211357910
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/941927%22
---

 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND JUSTICE    

 TRANSCRIPT  

 

 E&OE PROOF ONLY   

 Press conference, Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices, Adelaide  Thursday, 21 July 2011   

 Topics: Privacy reforms, asylum seekers, David Hicks   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Okay, well, thanks very much for coming.  The Government  has decided to consider the Australian Law Reform Commission’s recommendations into  privacy and we do so because we believe it's time now to consider these matters.     

 The Australian Law Reform Commission had a comprehensive report that went to many  areas in relation to privacy, dealing with agencies, such as the health sector and the  credit sector and, indeed, there are recommendations. The recommendations go to the  intersection of privacy laws and the role of the media, but also the role of individuals in  the way in which they may encroach on people's privacy.   

 The fact is that the Government supports two very important ideals in this country.  We  support the freedom of press and freedom of expression on one hand and we also  believe in the right to privacy, the right for Australians to have a private life.  And these  are two important ideals that sometimes collide. We need to make sure we have the  appropriate balance between these two ideals, so that people in this country feel they  are afforded sufficient protection against serious invasions of privacy.   

 And so I'll be considering the recommendations that have been outlined by the Law  Reform Commission.  We will be releasing an issues paper to allow public debate and I  invite public responses to that paper and I'll be engaging with interested parties, of  course, including media organisations and others.  But it is timely now that we look at  these matters and the Government, after that consultation process, will determine how  we respond to those recommendations.  I'm happy to take any questions.   

 FEMALE REPORTER:        You said that it was timely to look at this now.  The report  was finished in 2008, why are you looking at this now, rather than in 2008?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Yes, there are 298 recommendations in the Australian Law  Reform Commission report and what we've been doing is dealing with the  recommendations methodically. We have been going through different parts of the Law  Reform Commission's report, because these are really important issues, I think, for the  public.  For example, how do credit agencies hold private information? Who do they give  it to?  What rights do consumers have about getting the information that credit agencies  might hold?  The same goes for the health sector, we are looking at all of these issues.   

 But there were specific recommendations that went to the intersection of how the media  and other organisations operate with respect to people's privacy concerns.  And we've  brought those recommendations forward in light of a number of factors.   

 

 Firstly, there has been some public disquiet about the mass breaches of privacy where  there has been theft of information from organisations, like Sony PlayStation, where  literally millions of people's personal details, including credit card details were taken  improperly and of course, not only are we concerned about that, but we're also  concerned about how organisations respond to disclosing those breaches, so customers  and clients are not badly affected.   

 The other, of course, is the scandals in the United Kingdom in relation to News of the  World.  These are concerning, I think, to many people around the world, including  Australia.  And whilst I don't suggest for the moment that the gross invasions of privacy  that occurred in the United Kingdom occurred here, I think there is sufficient public  expectation that the Government consider these recommendations in light of what had  been, of course, some very reprehensible forms of behaviour in terms of invading  privacy overseas.   

 FEMALE REPORTER: I have a slightly different topic here I'd like to ask you about.  Did  you deliberately time the release about another boat being intercepted to come after  Chris Bowen's press conference in Sydney today?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I didn't know Chris Bowen had a press conference in Sydney  today.  We release all of the information in relation to irregular arrivals within 24 hours,  which compares favourably with the previous Howard Government, which would  sometimes take six weeks.  And I don't recall the media asking them these questions.   Six weeks to disclose vessels arriving at our shores.  So as I say, I had no involvement  or engagement in that.  We deal with these matters properly.  I always ensure the facts  are certain before we release them, but we do so in a timely matter.   

 And by way of comparison we are far more upfront with the Australian people on these  matters, when it comes to comparing our history with that of the Howard Government.   We know they threw the truth overboard on these issues.   

 FEMALE REPORTER: The Government expects freedom of expression in Australia,  then did you not think it's necessary to bring in laws for freedom of expression like they  do in the US to go hand in hand with these privacy laws?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, we'll examine all matters.  The fact is there is no  constitutional right to freedom of expression under our constitution and there is no  constitutional right to privacy.  But I think you have to have regard to these two principles  together, you have to deal with them together.   

 So for example, there will be situations where disclosing private information is entirely  justifiable, because it's in the public interest.  And I think sometimes the right to express  those matters and disclose that information prevails over the right to privacy.  These will  be, in the end, determined on the facts of each case. But that's why I say these two  ideals have to be considered concurrently and indeed, the Law Reform Commission  says as much.  So there are defences in terms of arguing against invoking the right to  privacy.   

 But the United States and indeed, Canada and other countries, have statutory rights to  privacy.  And I think it's worthy now for us to consider whether, in fact, we need to do  more.  The British common law is far more developed in relation to affording rights to 

 privacy than the Australian common law.  So for a variety of reasons it's really important  that we consider these matters and I do believe there has been public disquiet as a  result of the revelations in the United Kingdom.   

 And the fact that senior executive members of that organisation said as recently as 24  hours ago, they weren't even aware that those things were happening and indeed, were  denying that they happened some months ago, says to me that these are questions that  need to be considered.     

 And I think one of the best ways we can look at this matter is: do we provide sufficient  protection for ordinary citizens in this country about how their private information is dealt  with? That is a good debate to be had.  I'll keep an open mind, but we are having regard  to the Law Reform's Commission's recommendations.   

 FEMALE REPORTER: Do you not think, though, that it's just going to put money in the  pockets of celebrities who can afford to sue?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I've heard that sort of populist phrase, but my concern is  more about ordinary citizens who are having their privacy invaded for, you know, for print  fodder or for other purposes.  I think people want to establish the right balance and I  think it's true to say, whether you're a noted person or whether you're a celebrity, you  would expect to have more of your information out there in the public realm - it comes  with the job.     

 But what is really concerning me is, increasingly, the information that is getting out there,  perhaps improperly, is information about ordinary citizens.  And I don't believe that there  is any certainty in terms of civil redress for those people.  And so sometimes what's  titillating for us to read or hear today and be forgotten tomorrow is something that is  never forgotten for the person who has been grossly violated.   

 But as I said from the outset, I think we need to make sure that we enshrine and protect  the two ideals that any robust democracy must have.  One is that we enshrine the  freedom of expression, the freedom of speech, but we also allow people to have private  lives.     

 And if there are issues around whether we have got the balance right, they should be  properly examined and that is what the Government will be doing.   

 FEMALE REPORTER: Do you seriously believe that journalists here are undertaking the  same criminal activities they are in Britain?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, as I said to you earlier, I'm not suggesting there is any  evidence that there are examples here similar to what has occurred overseas, but that's  not the issue.  The issue is there is some public disquiet. I think there is an issue of  confidence in how private information is being used and the Australian Law Reform  Commission presented recommendations to the Government, which we were to attend  to in due course, and we have just brought that forward.  So there is nothing new in us  responding to these matters, these were for us to respond to.     

 But in light of some of the concerns that people have and the anxiety as a result of such  reprehensible behaviour that has been depicted overseas, I think the public would  expect the Government to consider these matters. 

 

 FEMALE REPORTER: Privacy laws have been a longstanding policy for the Greens, is  this just another example of the Government adopting a Greens' policy?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, as I say, it is this government that has been responding in  a comprehensive way.   

 FEMALE REPORTER: So it not the Green's pressure?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: This government is responding to the recommendations of the  Australian Law Reform Commission. I might add that the Australian Law Reform  Commission report was referred to the Law Reform Commission by Philip Ruddock, the  Howard Attorney-General, so this is a long-standing comprehensive report. It is  comprehensive in its considerations. It's something that the Opposition in government  referred to the Law Reform Commission, and we've been responding to these matters  for some time.  I think because these issues, these particular recommendations, do  involve the media, there is more of a media interest in these particular  recommendations.    

 But I have to say to you that I have been dealing with other recommendations that  impact on other areas, such as those I mentioned earlier: the health sector and how  private information is stored; the credit sector and how you would, for example relay a  credit rating of a particular customer to another agency, how that should happen. I  mean, these things are going on. We have been conducting these consultations  throughout the course of our term in government.    

 But we have brought forward these issues because of the concerns that the Government  shares with the public about some issues around whether we have got the balance right  between freedom of the press and expression and the right for a private life. And I think  it is an important examination. I think people would agree with us.    

 FEMALE REPORTER: Have the Greens lobbied you to introduce these types of laws  recently?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I have not spoken to anybody from that political party in relation  to these matters, on any of the issues. And, as I say, the only thing I have done in this  regard is bring forward these recommendations that were to be considered by the  Government in due course. We decided to consider them now because clearly there are  some concerns about instances overseas.   

 And also, as I said earlier, there have been some mass breaches of private information,  effectively theft from organisations, and there are issues about when those breaches are  disclosed to customers and clients in this country. And I think those are issues that  should also be considered.    

 So it's for a variety of reasons we have sought to do this. But we make no apologies for  examining whether Australians in this country have afforded proper protection in terms of  their own privacy.   

 FEMALE REPORTER: But given examples of Sony, one of the privacy breaches  recently within Australia, are there any other examples that you can think of where  privacy has been breached? 

 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yes, there is a whole array of organisations. Telstra and other  companies have had similar problems where people have hacked into their  organisations and stolen personal information. And so we need to have a real national  debate about these issues. The Australian Law Reform Commission's recommendations  provide the basis for that discussion, and as minister I'll be engaging with interested  parties and indeed the public generally.   

 FEMALE REPORTER:        Minister, there's no love lost between the Gillard  Government and News Limited. Is this a bit of a case of schadenfreude? Are you not on  a bit of a witch hunt?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  That's a German phrase, is it?   

 FEMALE REPORTER:        Yes, it is…   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Right. The media would never do that, surely. But can I say in  relation to that, none of these matters are specific to any organisation, or indeed just to  organisations. They also go to whether individuals invade the privacy of others. So this is  not about something specific to any concern, and that has been asked of me before.    

 These are recommendations that have been presented to the Government well before  the scandal happened in the United Kingdom, but it has brought to bear, it has shone a  light, on the concern that people have about the rights of people's privacy vis-Ã -vis the  rights of people to express things freely. And I think it's an appropriate time now to  consider whether we've got the balance right.   

 FEMALE REPORTER:        News Limited was targeted recently by Miss Gillard, saying  that News Limited had some hard questions to answer within Australia. Do you agree  with this and what questions do they need to answer?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Clearly Mr Hartigan agrees that there needs to be some  assurance to his readers and to the consumers of News Limited, and that's why I seem  to be seeing an announcement every day by News Limited about what they're doing to  restore confidence or ensure confidence in the company. I think what Mr Hartigan's  doing in that regard seems proper. There is no doubt that when you see something that  reprehensible occur in the United Kingdom, that is part of an organisation that also exists  here, people will ask questions.   

 And I'm sure that News Limited is seeking to assure its readers that what they do here is  perfectly fine and proper. So I think that's the only issue that the Prime Minister was  referring to. People were shocked, entirely shocked, by the fact that there was a  murdered child's phone hacked into by a journalist in the United Kingdom. Now, that's  not to suggest that happens here, but that has raised some serious issues about privacy  breaches overseas, and I can understand why Mr Hartigan would want to respond and  start putting in place protocols to ensure confidence of that organisation.   

 FEMALE REPORTER:        In relation to the report on illegal workers, do you think that  more needs to be done to try to dissuade, what 100,000 people who are here working  illegally at the expense of Australian jobs? Have we got the focus wrong by looking at  boat people instead of looking at these people?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Look, no, I haven't heard about the report. You'll have to ask  directly the Minister for Immigration who has responsibility for those matters. I don't have  that report and have not read it, and it would be wrong for me to be providing answers to  that.   

 MALE REPORTER:             Minister, in relation to the David Hicks issue, the  Government's attempt to just sue him effectively for proceeds he might make on his  memoirs under the proceeds of crime laws; his crimes weren't committed here in  Australia. Is it fair for the Government to effectively try to take money off him under that  law?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, the Government's not doing anything of the sort. The  Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, which is an independent statutory body,  makes decisions pursuant to the laws in this country about whether anyone has broken  the law. They have chosen to serve this order upon Mr Hicks yesterday as I'm advised,  and no minister, not the Attorney or I, have any direct involvement in the decision by the  Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to do that. But I have full confidence in  our independent body to make the right decision and to ensure that our laws are upheld.   

 MALE REPORTER:             Are you confident with the laws as they stand in their broad  nature that they're able to cover someone that commits crimes outside of Australia to still  be challenged under that law?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well look, that will come down to jurisdictional questions  before a court. There are of course extra jurisdictional matters that are sometimes  considered by courts. But of course, in the end, the Commonwealth Director of Public  Prosecutions has taken its action. It is entirely independent from government and I  guess we will see what happens. But they must be confident in their actions. I have full  confidence in that agency doing its work.   

 MALE REPORTER:             Our Attorney-General here is looking at trying to make some  changes with regard to children and Facebook and basically stopping - or allowing  parents to have access to children's Facebook sites. Is that something that you deem to  be a risk of breaching the privacy of children, perhaps?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Attorney-General Rau has presented that onto the Attorneys-General meeting for today and tomorrow. I think it's being discussed tomorrow. I'll be in  attendance. I haven't seen the body of work or the presentation that the Attorney will be  putting to us.    

 But of course, parents will always be concerned about their kids in the real world and the  cyber world. We have to be very careful what we legislate. We don't want to legislate  family disputes if we don't have to. But it does say to me that organisations like  Facebook have a responsibility, a moral responsibility and indeed a legal responsibility  to ensure that no harm is done to people.    

 I mean, they're not responsible for everything, but I do think we need to make sure  they're responsive to concerns by parents. I'll certainly consider the matters, as will I'm  sure the Federal Attorney-General, when it's presented to us tomorrow, and I guess after  which there will be some discussion about whether it's suitable to consider legislating in  the manner that is being considered by the South Australian Government.   

 MALE REPORTER:             I guess it's hard to get that balance between not breaching  people's privacy but also protecting children as well.   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Sure, and I guess we're more likely to err on the side of  protecting children than concerning ourselves with privacy, but these are issues that  need to be considered by private organisations, governments, and indeed families  themselves. I would hope to think that if there is a sufficient level of trust between  parents and children, the likelihood of them being a problem and needing the  requirement of a third party is limited.   

 FEMALE REPORTER:        The whistleblower protection thing - law has been put off  until the end of the year. Now you've announced that you're going to be introducing  these privacy laws, is this paramount to restricting the freedom of the press to be able to  report?   

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, I was asked almost an opposite question earlier today  when I was asked, why did we introduce laws shielding journalists when we now look at  considering laws that go to privacy? The fact is, we do what's in the public interest. We  believed it was in the public interest to protect journalists by shielding them against  certain levels of intimidation. I didn't hear anyone in the media questioning us doing that.    

 Here, we're looking to protect the interests of ordinary citizens and want to make sure  we've got the balance right about their privacy and how it's used, and also ensure that  we have a robust media that is able to express themselves freely, but having regard to  those individual concerns. So no, there is no question that we're looking to put matters  off. We are looking to bring this matter forward because it's in the interests of the  community that we consider whether we've got the appropriate balance in place.  Thanks. Thanks very much.   

 - ENDS -   

 

