---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Kuala Lumpur: 25 July 2011: signing of Malaysian transfer agreement"
date: "2011-07-25"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
  - "Hussein, Hishammuddin"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358021
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/952366%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  

 MALAYSIAN MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS  

 DATO’ SERI HISHAMMUDDIN BIN TUN HUSSEIN  

 *TRANSCRIPT*  

 JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE, KUALA LUMPUR  

 MONDAY, 25 JULY 2011 

 

 SUBJECTS: Signing of Malaysian transfer agreement.  

 HISHAMMUDDIN HUSSEIN: I first would like to thank Minister Chris  Bowen personally because this journey that we started a year ago has  reached the extent of signing this arrangement, which many people do not  realise how important and how serious it is. In a world that is so borderless,  issues of human trafficking, issues of human smuggling, when looked at in  the context of other transnational crime [inaudible] will be a major factor that 

 will destabilise not only the world regionally, bilaterally or in our individual  nations.  

 So Australia and Malaysia have decided quite some time ago to look at this in  a very serious way and the arrangement that we have today, I think, is  landmark. It is just a start to bigger agenda and working relations, and I  thank both the IOM and UNHCR for having the foresight and agreeing to work  and get this through. We are moving forward; we are not looking back. And  the target and the people we really want to send a clear message are the  syndicates who are profiting on innocent people, not to look especially to  Australia and Malaysia as a safe haven for them to profit on the misery of  those who are not in the position to defend themselves.  

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thank you Minister, and I’d also like to personally thank  you for your engagement. This is an innovative and bold arrangement, which  is at the cutting edge, not only in our region but around the world. And this  would not have been possible without your personal leadership and your  engagement with Australia. And I’d like to personally thank you for your  assistance at every step of the way, from the time we first discussed the  potential for this arrangement last December. We’ve been in very close  contact since then.  

 On behalf of Prime Minister Gillard, I’d also like to thank Prime Minister Najib  for his leadership and also the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister Hanifa, for 

 his assistance and all the many officials in your department, in the Royal  Malaysian Police, in the Attorney-General’s chambers, Ministry for Foreign  Affairs, who’ve worked so hard on this arrangement.  

 As the Minister said, this is an arrangement which sends a very clear signal  that Malaysia and Australia are serious about stopping people smuggling. This  is an arrangement which sends a very clear signal that Australia and Malaysia  are very serious about the crime that is people smuggling and the human  misery that’s involved in it. As Immigration Minister, I hope I never get 

 another phone call telling me that people have drowned trying to make it to  Australia and that children as young as two months old have drowned trying  to come to Australia. And this arrangement we’ve signed today is a very clear  indication of our commitment.  

 What we’ve done is something that many people have said would be  impossible: Australia working with regional partners under a regional  cooperation framework, working with the UNHCR and the IOM to pull the rug  out from the people smugglers’ business model and to ensure consistent  protection across our region. And that’s an achievement, as I say, which I  think many doubters have said would not be possible, but with goodwill on  both sides and with the UNHCR and IOM’s assistance we’ve done that.  

 I’d also like to thank the UNHCR. When Minister Hishammuddin and I first  discussed this last December we both agreed that the feedback and  involvement of the UNHCR and IOM would be vital, and through goodwill and  cooperation. I’d like to thank Director-General Swing and High Commissioner  Guterres and Assistant High Commissioner Feller for the engagement that  we’ve had.  

 Today is not the final step. Today is not the end of the road. In many senses,  today’s the beginning. The people who doubted our resolve to get this  arrangement this far will test our resolve further. People smugglers will test  our resolve further. Just as we’ve shown the resolve to get here, Australia and  Malaysia are at one in having the resolve to implement this arrangement, and  to do so in such a way that treats people with dignity and respect, but clearly  sends the message that people smuggling is not the way to reach protection  around the world; that countries will work together to improve protection  outcomes. And I’m very glad that Australia is able to take 4000 more refugees  under this process. This is a win for Malaysia, a win for Australia and a loss  for the people smugglers. It’s a very good day in terms of the progress that  we’ve made as two nations together, working in a spirit of goodwill under the  regional framework.  

 Thank you very much.  

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Would you mind just walking through some of the  key points in particular, addressing whether or not it will be backdated to 

 include asylum seekers that have already arrived, and also when you expect  to see it operationalised?  

 BOWEN: Sure. The key points in the document are, as has been publicly  known: 800 people transferred to Malaysia; 4000 people over four years  taken by Australia; Malaysia has, with feedback from the UNHCR, agreed to 

 standards of treatment and protection which include rights of self-reliance -  work rights, access to education and health, etc.  

 The arrangement applies from midnight tonight, so for 800 arrivals after that.  Those people who have arrived in between the announcement of the  arrangement and the signature today, we will process those people in  Australia given some of the delays with our discussions with New Guinea, etc,  which have been publicly well known.  

 JOURNALIST: Can you clarify, is that arrival in Australia or arrival at  Christmas Island from midnight tonight?  

 BOWEN: Well, from the time of interception.  

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask Minister Hishammuddin what safeguards will be put  in place? The Minister talked about work rights, education rights. Could you  explain?  

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Yeah, I think the fact that at the outset, we decided and  we realised that UNHCR and the IOM had to be on board. They will ensure  that the benchmark is set and I think that’s the way forward for Malaysia too,  in putting ourselves with other developed nations in the future.  

 This is a global phenomenon. What we’re doing with Australia is new. It may  be a model for others to look at because the movement of people in a  borderless world involves movement of money, drugs, arms, terrorists, and if  it’s not dealt with in a new way, manner, business cannot be as usual.  

 JOURNALIST: So what rights will those people have, the 800 who come  from Australia? What rights?  

 HISHAMMUDDIN: That we will prove on the operational side and that has  already been put in place. I think the best way for me to answer that is to  actually prove to you when it is operational that those fears are unfounded.  

 JOURNALIST: Will they have a legal right to work and to school and to  healthcare?  

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Yes, yes.  

 JOURNALIST: And what about the other -  

 HISHAMMUDDIN: I don’t think the UNHCR would come on board unless  those international standards have been assured to them and I can give you  an assurance on behalf of the Malaysian Government that all those people will  be treated with dignity, as Minister Chris Bowen has said.  

 JOURNALIST: When the deal was first announced, both governments said  there wouldn’t be preferential treatment between the 800 asylum seekers and  the refugees and asylum seekers who were already in Malaysia. Does it  change the position?  

 BOWEN: No, we made it clear that there would be no preferential treatment  in terms of processing and that remains the case. We also said there’d be  appropriate safeguards in place. The arrangement makes it clear that people  transferred to Malaysia will be legally permitted to stay in Malaysia until  they’re resettled in some form or other. So that is a clear commitment, in  keeping with the arrangements announced by the two Prime Ministers on 7  May.  

 JOURNALIST: But are you effectively creating a two-tiered system? You now  have 90-odd thousand refugees who can’t work and 800 who can.  

 HISHAMMUDDIN: But the point, what we’re trying to say here is that you  have to look at it in perspective. How are the human trafficker syndicates  treating those victims? We are looking at a mechanism where we are trying to  ensure that this vile trade, which I look at it as a modern day slavery, treating  innocent people in ways that should not be condoned. Are we going to put  that all aside when we are discussing this arrangement? What I would like the  media to realise is that we are trying the best we can and with UNHCR in  place, with IOM in place, we are dealing with people who are evil, people who  do not look at these humans as human.  

 JOURNALIST: But could I put it to you that if you extended work rights, for  example, to all of those -    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: We have and that’s basically in the operational side of it,  which have been agreed upon. And basically, like I said, again, as we did in  the last six, seven months is that we have not looked at particular arguments  which now would be superfluous, because those fears that they had before  are now not realised. So why don’t I suggest that look at the operational side. 

 We’ve been very transparent in what we do. UNHCR will be there to monitor  and safeguard the standards that we set and we make sure that at least we  are dealing and declaring war on people who are universally known as evil  people who are profiting on very innocent men, women and children.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister Hishammuddin, how long will asylum seekers who  are transferred from Australia be held in detention here?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: We have the details, but this issue I would like not to go 

 into the micro side of it. We will deal with it tomorrow, the day after, because  this is operational.    

 JOURNALIST: So that hasn’t been finalised?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: No, it has.   

 JOURNALIST: It has? So why can’t you tell us right now?   

 BOWEN: Sorry, let us deal with it. The arrangement makes clear that there’ll  be a transit facility, that people will be in the transit facility up to 45 days  before they move into the community. But of course, as Minister  Hishammuddin has said, the ministry will be working to make that period as  short as possible. But the arrangement makes it clear it’s up to 45 days.   

 JOURNALIST: Have you seen those facilities?   

 BOWEN: There’s a number of facilities that are being developed across the  region. They are not existing detention centres, they are not places where  people are currently held; they are different facilities that are appropriate and  have been developed in consultation with the IOM and UNHCR, and in that  coming period as Minister Hishammuddin said, in an open and transparent  way people will be able to have those sites identified.   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] across the region?   

 BOWEN: Across this region, the Kuala Lumpur region.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 BOWEN: Yes, yes. Not the broader Asia-Pacific region, the Kuala Lumpur  region.   

 JOURNALIST: How will the Malaysian Government identifying the 800  transportees from Australia?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Well, we’ll meet together with all the other partners.   

 JOURNALIST: So Malaysia will be able to pick and choose -    

 BOWEN: Well, the arrangement makes clear that it is 800 people. Malaysia,  of course, will have the opportunity to check those names against their watch  lists - their terrorism watch lists and to respond applicably; just as Australia 

 will have that right with the 4,000 that we are taking.    

 JOURNALIST: So what happens to the ones that arrive in Australia then,  and don’t meet Malaysia’s standards? Do they then stay in Australia? Are you  not opening the gate to some asylum seekers that will fail the character test 

 as far as Malaysia’s concerned, but will arrive at Christmas Island -    

 BOWEN: I think you’ll find the number of people of people on the terrorism  watch list for Malaysia that relates to Australia is pretty small.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen, can you give us a walkthrough of the  arrangements for unaccompanied minors? There’s been a lot of discussions  about the issue of unaccompanied minors, are there going to be  unaccompanied minors sent to Malaysia under this agreement?   

 BOWEN: In relation to unaccompanied minors, the situation is exactly as I’ve  outlined in the past, that a blanket exemption is not appropriate. That would  send the wrong message to people smugglers, that you can smuggle children  and that they’d not be covered by this. What we will have and do have again,  and the feedback of the UNHCR’s been important to us, is an arrangement to  ensure that particular people’s vulnerabilities are considered in the decision as  to whether to transfer, the decision that Australia will make. And also that  we’ll work closely with Malaysia, the UNHCR and IOM to ensure that  appropriate individual support is in place for all people transferred,  particularly minors.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Malaysia has not signed the Refugee Convention,  any comment on both sides?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: We are working under the regional framework in the Bali  Process, which does not require that we sign, and the fact that the UNHCR is  also on board shows that we have given assurance that standards are going 

 to be kept. The issue here is not about pieces of paper: we are dealing with  people, we are dealing with evil people and we want to do that, we just get  on with it. Rather than us talking about it, lets operationalise it, get on with it,  get the bad guys and save those innocent people that have been exploited.   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]. How much?   

 BOWEN: $296 million Australian, which the majority is transferring 4,000  people from Malaysia to Australia and then the residual is the costs of  implementing the arrangement in Malaysia.    

 JOURNALIST: When do you expect to see asylum seekers touching down in  Kuala Lumpur?   

 BOWEN: What we’ve said is - and the arrangement makes clear when  you’ve had the chance to read it, when the arrangement is fully operational,  people would be transferred within 72 hours of arrival in Australia. Obviously  for the first period it will take a little bit of time to ramp that up, but it’s  something Minister Hishammuddin and I have discussed and we are very  clear that we want the arrangement fully operational as soon as possible, but  it will take a little bit of time to ramp up.  

 

 JOURNALIST: How about coming the other way, the refugees -    

 BOWEN: That begins immediately. They’re covered under our -    

 JOURNALIST: Do you have a date?   

 BOWEN: Well look, we resettle people all the time and that will happen very  quickly.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 BOWEN: Well, the facilities are existing, and of course there are some leases  that are being entered into, these are not facilities currently in Government  ownership and each facility will have its own costs which we would -    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] one-off deal by Australia, so does this underline  the [inaudible] Australia trying to reach deals with other countries?   

 BOWEN: Well, look, I think Minister Hishammuddin and I are at one that this  is, as we say, a cutting-edge deal. I think its an example that other countries  in the world are watching closely and watching closely the benefits of this  arrangement. Minister Hishammuddin and I have said in the past we regard  this as a pilot project, if it works and works well then we’ll consider our next  steps at the appropriate time. And of course, under the regional framework,  Australia is always open to talk to other countries about various models which  can break the people smugglers business model. But we’ve been focused on  this arrangement because this has been, if you like the key, the first steps  under the regional protection framework.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] considering even the UNHCR refugees sometimes  get arrested, how will these 800 asylum seekers sent here be differently  treated by Malaysian enforcement officers? What assurances has Australia  sought from the Malaysian Government?   

 BOWEN: The arrangement makes it clear that people who are transferred to  Malaysia are legally permitted to remain and that is a very important step and  its something we discussed closely with Malaysia and our other colleagues in  terms of these arrangements. It also makes clear that we have an  implementation taskforce, consisting of representatives of Australia, Malaysia,  the UNHCR and the IOM who will also have an advisory group which will  consist of various non-government organisations. So, as Minister  Hishammuddin has said, judge us by the results, the commitment is there.    

 JOURNALIST: So they will be treated differently [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: They will hold identity cards which will be jointly issued between  Australia and Malaysia. 

 

 [Malay]   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: I think the most important point here is the issue of us  moving forward. The issue here is us addressing the human traffickers. This  issue here is nothing new to other countries, but we between Malaysia and  Australia is trying to do something about it.    

 Now you talk about the abuses of people that are being trafficked, we talk  about women being exploited for vice by syndicates. What are they doing  about it? At least on our part there are international standards being set, we  are setting - at least a start to something which may be an example to  others, because I do not see any other solution or formula that has worked in  the past.    

 [Malay]   

 JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen, I’m just looking at clause four of the  Agreement. It seems - and correct me if you’re wrong - that Australia  undertakes to repatriate failed asylum seekers back to their country of origin.  Is that correct? And if so, can you talk us through how, in practical terms  Australia can do that?    

 BOWEN: Well, certainly it indicates that Australia will play a role in assisting  Malaysia in achieving that; that’s correct. Australia will take some  responsibilities there; that’s appropriate. That means that Malaysia, working  with Australia and UNHCR - and there are further clauses which go into more  detail about returns and makes it clear that voluntary returns are preferable;  that Australia will work with Malaysia because we do have experience in 

 returning people in an appropriate way, to countries from whence they’ve  come - where they are not genuine refugees.    

 As you well know, we have experience in that - particularly in countries like  Sri Lanka and other countries. We have done that; it’s something that  Malaysia has asked us for our assistance on, and we’re happy to oblige.    

 I just want to answer this question down here, from before: ‘Why has this  taken so long?’ Minister Hishammuddin and I discussed this last December;  we announced it on May 7. Frankly, I don’t accept the premise of the  question as to why it’s taken so long. I’d appreciate anybody showing me an  agreement of this substance and this importance, which has been negotiated  around these complex issues, as quickly as this arrangement has; and that’s  down to the goodwill of Australia and Malaysia.    

 JOURNALIST: At the time though, you did say that it would be ready in  coming weeks - and it’s been months.  

 

 BOWEN: Well, frankly, it’s been a period of weeks; and I know people want  to focus on the journey - and that’s fine - but Minister Hishammuddin and I  are very much focussed on the destination that we’ve reached today - which  is a landmark agreement.    

 JOURNALIST: As recently as Thursday though you said that the people that  are already, that have arrived in Australia, would be processed in a third-country; you’ve now back-tracked. Do you accept you’ve back-flipped on that  assurance? As recently as Thursday, saying they will now be processed in  Australia.    

 And can you also give some more detail as to Papua New Guinea, who have  said as recently as Saturday - their Foreign Minister has said he would take a  proposal, an Australian proposal, to their Cabinet within two weeks.    

 BOWEN: We have adjusted our position on those roughly 500 people; and  that’s been necessary; it’s the appropriate and responsible thing to do in light  of the changing circumstances in New Guinea. I don’t walk away from that.    

 I think that message was very important - in terms of the reduction in the  number of boat arrivals that we saw after the 7 May announcement. It was  very important that we put on the table that our position as a Government  had changed; but because of the political instability in Papua New Guinea that  has taken longer than people might have expected. So, yes, we have had to  adjust that position, but the message is very clear, from midnight tonight, as  to the arrangements in place.  

 

 In relation to Papua New Guinea, Foreign Minister Rudd made statements  about that just the other day, and I would refer you to those statements.    

 JOURNALIST: I just want to ask about work rights. Could you clarify: you’re  saying the 800 people who come to Australia will be able to work - what  about the existing refugees in Malaysia? Will there be any change to their  position?    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: When we’re talking about refugees, it’s not something  that we’ve not gone through before. With the Vietnamese boat people and  refugees it took us 20 years to resolve the issue. It’s not something -    

 JOURNALIST: So the people here already -    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: - I believe that this arrangement will put us into a  different landscape: benchmarking on detention and that’s the way forward  and -  

 

 JOURNALIST: So you’re saying, over time -    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: - and I feel with the UNHCR and the IOM, over time;  because the Vietnamese refugees took 20 years for us to resolve in Malaysia.    

 JOURNALIST: But just as a point of fact for now: 800 will be able to work -    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Yes definitely -    

 JOURNALIST: - but then what about the others, over time?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: We’ll do it within the timeframe that is available. We  have to look at the particular circumstances of each case. The arrangements  of some of the asylum seekers and refugees in Malaysia are awaiting to be  placed in third countries; they don’t even want to be here in Malaysia. That  depends on whether the recipient countries will accept them.    

 JOURNALIST: But that’s partly because they can’t work. If they had rights  here they -    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Not necessarily. You have to talk to individual cases to  see circumstances in which they are in. So we are not going to that area but  as Malaysia moves forward; as we engage in a situation where the world is  very porous at the moment, and I’m sure in Europe and the Middle-East they  will be facing the same problems. But here, we are taking pro-active  measures; but on the Malaysian part, I think it’s capacity building, it is  navigating maybe unchartered waters - in a bigger numbers; but I think it is 

 also very good for nation building.    

 JOURNALIST: In that case, why not start with the 90,000 -    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: What makes you think we haven’t started on those? I  said we haven’t announced it yet.    

 JOURNALIST: So they will be given rights to work and access to welfare?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Well, I didn’t say that either. The fact is that we will  announce it when it comes; because before anything -    

 JOURNALIST: Can we just clarify where the asylum seekers are going;  because I thought Minister Bowen - you said - they were going to a new  facility but then you said there’s existing facilities in KL.    

 BOWEN: No, they are facilities that have been built but they’re not currently  being used for any transit or detention; they’re used for other purposes. So  they are not facilities that we need to build from scratch.    

 JOURNALIST: Are they ready Minister Bowen? Because I get the sense,  from your language, that they’re not actually operational yet. Is that the  case? 

 

 BOWEN: They are leases that are in the process of being entered into.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on that point: isn’t it the case that Malaysia is currently  not ready?   

 HISHAMMUDDIN: Can we allow the Malaysian press to ask a few questions  please - and we can one or two more questions.    

 [Malay]   

 JOURNALIST: Do you have plans to ratify the UN Convention for Refugees?    

 HISHAMMUDDIN: That involves other parties and the discussions and  negotiations are ongoing; it’s not related to this particular item.    

 Thank you - one last question.    

 JOURNALIST: From what you’ve said, it sounds like the 800 that are sent  here are going to get a better deal than existing refugees in this country. How  is that going to discourage people to get on a boat and trying to get to  Australia?    

 BOWEN: People get on a boat to get to Australia to live in Australia. They  will not get on a boat and pay the very substantial cost that that involves,  with the protections that we’ve built in. Some people have accused us of not  having enough protections, now people are saying we have too many - well  that’s a criticism that I’ll accept.    

 Ends   

 

