---
title: "Australia responds to the humanitarian crisis in the horn of Africa"
date: "2011-07-20"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242216859
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/937165%22
---

 

 

 PRIME MINISTER  

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AUSTRALIA RESPONDS TO THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN THE HORN  OF AFRICA   

 The Australian Government is responding rapidly to the emerging crises to  provide food rations and other emergency relief to some 6.7 million people  caught in the Horn of Africa’s worst drought in 60 years.   

 Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd have today  increased Australia’s assistance to the crisis by $30 million to provide urgently  needed food rations and shelter to the millions affected by the drought,  including nutrition supplements for malnourished women and children.    

 More than 10 million people in Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and Uganda  have been severely affected by the consecutive droughts and a lack of food.  UNICEF estimates that there are 480,000 severely malnourished children in  drought-affected areas   

 The situation in Somalia is especially dire as continuing violence,  compounded by natural disasters and waves of drought, generate an acute  humanitarian crisis. A third of children under the age of five in southern 

 Somalia are malnourished.    

 Australian assistance will support the United Nations High Commission for  Refugees (UNHCR) deliver relief packages to an additional 126,000 of the  worst-affected people in Southern Somalia.    

 Australia’s funding will be provided through the World Food Programme, the  UNHCR, as well as to Australian NGOs, which are already working on the  ground in some of the worst-affected areas, complimenting Australia’s funding  to UN partners.     

 The latest funding builds on a package of assistance announced on 13 July,  which is already supporting the World Food Programme to feed Somali and  Sudanese refugees in Kenya, as well as helping the UN Food and Agriculture  Organization to assist farmers with their livestock.    

 Australia’s total commitment to the crisis is now $41.2 million. Australia’s  assistance is helping to fill urgently needed gaps as the situation continues to  escalate.   

 The UN estimates total humanitarian requirements for the response to this  crisis to be around US$1.8 billion, of which only one half is currently funded.    

 CANBERRA  20 JULY 2011   

 PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744  MINISTER RUDD’S MEDIA CONTACT 0434 664 589   

