---
title: "Helping humanitarian entrants navigate the private rental market"
date: "2011-12-08"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211365585
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1292871%22
---

 

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural  Affairs 

 Helping humanitarian entrants navigate the  private rental market  Thursday, 08 December 2011 

 The Gillard Government has extended an initiative to assist humanitarian  entrants in negotiating the private rental market, the Parliamentary Secretary  for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, announced  today. 

 The announcement follows the review of a pilot initiative undertaken in 2009-10 which extended free telephone interpreting services to selected real estate  agents around Australia. The review showed the service has been successful  in helping non-English speaking residents to communicate with real estate  agents. 

 'Declining affordability and vacancy rates in recent years have led to an  increasingly competitive private rental market, which poses particular  challenges for new humanitarian settlers with little or no English,' Senator  Lundy said. 

 'As part of this successful pilot, selected real estate agents were offered  access to free telephone interpreting, through the Department of Immigration  and Citizenship's translating and interpreting service, TIS National.' 

 Participating real estate agents reported that the service helped them to  communicate more easily with their non-English speaking clients on tenancy  issues including contract signings, rental payments and inspections. 

 The pilot was linked to a small number of housing-related projects being  delivered under DIAC's settlement grants program in locations of high migrant  and humanitarian settlement. 

 Senator Lundy said the pilot has now been expanded, providing three times  as many real estate agents with access to the free telephone interpreting  service. 

 The expanded pilot will capture other major areas of high settlement need  across Australia and in addition to wider metropolitan coverage, will include  more regional centres. 

 'Last year, the Australian Government provided settlement support to about  13 750 refugees and humanitarian entrants,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Strategies for embracing new arrivals as part of Australian society are a  critical element of this commitment, but it is also important for them to build  self-reliance and foster connections with mainstream services as soon as  possible after arrival, to assist them in becoming participating members of the  Australian community.' 

 The extended pilot will run from October 2011 for 12 months. 

 

