---
title: "Abbott needs to come clean on asylum seekers"
date: "2011-06-08"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355580
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548172%22
---

 

 Abbott Needs to Come Clean on Asylum Seekers  Wednesday, 08 June 2011 

 Joint Media Release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship and Brendan O'Connor MP -  Minister for Home Affairs and Justice 

 Opposition leader Tony Abbott needs to answer some key questions about the  Coalition's suspect policies on asylum seekers at his Lowy Institute speech today. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and the Minister for  Home Affairs and Justice, Brendan O'Connor MP, challenged Mr Abbott to move  beyond simplistic three-word slogans and get real about the complexity of the issues  facing our region. 

 The questions Mr Abbott needs to answer on asylum seekers: 

 1. Will he monitor asylum seekers sent to Nauru like the last time round, when one  man was there for over five years and more than 120 people were left to rot for  three years or longer - including children? 

 2. How much will Nauru cost, including both capital and operational expenditure?  3. What's the point of Temporary Protection Visas if more than 95 per cent ended  up with permanent residency?  4. How does he propose to tow back boats without risking the lives of those 

 involved, and where will he tow them to, considering Indonesia has said simply  returning boats would be 'a backward step'?  5. How can he call the Malaysia arrangements a 'dud deal' due to Australia  increasing its humanitarian intake by 4000 people over four years, when Mr 

 Abbott offered to double the refugee intake at a cost of billions of dollars in  exchange for the support of Andrew Wilkie - for just one vote?  6. Considering Scott Morrison last year outlined plans for a transfer agreement, not  with Malaysia but with Iran - how would Mr Abbott propose to safeguard the 

 human rights of asylum seekers sent to Iran? 

 'Mr Abbott has been hiding behind hollow slogans and rhetoric about picking up the  phone to Nauru, but has failed to answer significant questions about the Coalition's  position,' Mr Bowen said. 

 Mr O'Connor said Mr Abbott was good at running scare campaigns and good at  negativity but unable to deliver constructive solutions. 

 'Mr Abbott has never explained how he will turn back the boats or even where they  will go. Given Indonesia has publicly stated it won't allow asylum seeker boats to be  returned, where will Tony Abbott turn back the boats to?' Mr O'Connor said. 

 

 

