---
title: "Transcript of press conference: New York: 09 March 2011: United Nations Secretary General; Libya; United Nations Security Council; Afghanistan; East Timor"
date: "2011-03-09"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "United Nations Secretary General"
  - "Libya"
  - "United Nations Security Council"
  - "Afghanistan"
  - "East Timor"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211350347
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/631031%22
---

  

 

 

 Transcript of press conference, New York  WED 09 MARCH 2011 

 Prime Minister 

 Subject(s): United Nations Secretary General; Libya; United Nations Security Council;  Afghanistan; East Timor 

 PM: Thank you very much. I’ve just met with the United Nations Secretary General and I  thank him very much for his discussion with me today. Our discussion has focussed on  circumstances in the Middle East, particularly the circumstances in Libya. We share a deep  concern as to what is happening in Libya and a deep concern about the continuing violence. 

 We discussed Australia’s support for humanitarian efforts to assist those who have fled to the  borders because of the situation in Libya. We also discussed the work happening within the  United Nations, the work so far undertaken by the Security Council and then continuing  discussions about further action and Australia welcomes the fact that Security Council  members are engaged in further informal discussions at this stage and considering further  action. 

 We also welcome the fact that there is contingency planning occurring for potential further  action on Libya. I had to opportunity too to talk to the United Nations Secretary General on  two areas of key concern to Australia and where we are substantial contributors. 

 First, in Afghanistan, where Australia is the largest non-NATO contributor of troops and  where we are pursuing the mission in Afghanistan, most particularly in Oruzgan province.  We discussed the prospects for transition in Afghanistan and particularly the work the United  Nations is undertaking on development and governance assistance in Afghanistan. 

 Second, we discussed East Timor. Australia is a key contributor there, we work under a  United Nations mandate and the Secretary General and I discussed the prospects for what  would occur beyond the end point of that mandate in 2012. 

 Of course as a very near neighbour, Australia has a deep relationship with East Timor which  will continue, but we did discuss particularly what would occur after the 2012 United Nations  mandate period. 

 It’s been a good opportunity for me to be here, discussing issues of concern with the  Secretary General. I took the opportunity to congratulate him on the work he has personally  led for women in the United Nations. This week of all weeks, when we have celebrated 

 International Women’s Day, it was the right time to congratulate the Secretary General on his  leadership of work for women in the United Nations. 

 I also discussed with him and congratulated him on the work he is leading about  sustainability. This is work where our Foreign Minister, Kevin Rudd, makes a contribution on  the expert panel and we discussed this sustainability work which has been well lead by the  United Nations Secretary General. It’s been a great opportunity to have these discussions and  I thank him for making himself available for the discussions today. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you inform Secretary Moon of our official position on  Libya on the no fly zone not happening without the express position of the Security Council  and did you use the opportunity to also further our bid to become a temporary member of the  Security Council? 

 PM: I certainly raised with the Secretary General that Australia, as part of our continuing and  deep commitment to the United Nations, has put its name forward for consideration for the  Security Council. 

 On Libya, the question of a no fly zone is of course a question for the Security Council and  its determination, rather than the determination of the Secretary General and so the Australian  position on that is we understand contingency planning is underway. We understand a range  of options are on the table, including a no fly zone. We understand that members of the  Security Council have commenced discussions with each other about further action, including  potentially a no fly zone and we welcome the fact that those discussions are underway. 

 The Security Council has of course already acted with sanctions against Libya. We as a  nation acted with autonomous sanctions and welcomed the sanctions that flowed from those  Security Council discussions. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you actually tell the Secretary General that Australia’s  position, or preferred position at least, was for imposition of a no fly zone? 

 PM: The Secretary General, when we discussed Libya, made it very clear that issues like a no  fly zone were for the Security Council to consider and for the Security Council to speak on.  So the Australian position is as I’ve just outlined it. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on that, you said your position was understanding various scenarios, I  don’t think that is a position, a position has been presented by Kevin Rudd and that is his  preference for a no fly zone. Is that your position too? 

 PM: What Foreign Minister Rudd has said is that he’s deeply concerned about the  deteriorating situation in Libya. Of course, I am deeply concerned about that deteriorating  situation, no one wants to see the kind of violence that we’re seeing in Libya continue. 

 What Foreign Minister Rudd has also said is that he welcomes the fact that the Security  Council and members of it are discussing a range of options, including the no fly zone. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what’s your view of the proposal for a naval blockade that  might not require endorsement by the UN, might that be sufficient? 

 PM: Our position is the United Nations Security Council to date has spoken for the world  when it’s come to Libya. We were pleased that the Security Council moved quickly to put  sanctions in place, we had already autonomously imposed our own sanctions, but we believe  the Security Council spoke for the world and acted for the world, putting those sanctions in  place and our view is that further measures should be considered by the Security Council. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the no fly zone that you and the Foreign Minister and the  Secretary General are discussing a declaratory no fly zone, or a no fly zone in the sense  described by US Secretary of Defence Robert Gates, when he said you have to go in, take out  their defences and thousands could potentially die? 

 PM: I’m not a military planner, but my understanding of course is that if one is to impose a  no fly zone that does mean that you need to consider circumstances like airfields and  potentials for surface-to-air missiles and all of those matters that would come into military 

 planning and logistics. 

 JOURNALIST: Could I venture, is that potentially the difference between what your  interpretation definition of this no fly zone is, which is the US definition and the definition  that Kevin Rudd might be using? 

 PM: Look, there’s no difference between me and Foreign Minster Rudd on what is needed to  achieve a no fly zone effectively, that is a question for military planners and for people expert  in these enforcement matters. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, no fly zones are very expensive. Has Australia volunteered  any weapons, monies, forces toward any prospective no fly zone? 

 PM: We are a long way from Libya and what we’ve said is that in the first instance NATO  would need to work through this question of the no fly zone and the Security Council would  need to authorise any further action involving Libya, including potentially a no fly zone. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a non Libya question, there was a joint Australian-Sri  Lankan citizen who is the Sri Lankan Ambassador here at the UN, Palitha Kohona. There’s  been a case filed with the ICC, namely because Australia is an ICC member. I wanted to  know for his role in the bloodshed at the end of the conflict in Sri Lanka, are you aware of  that case, what do you think of it and what do you think of the UN’s dealing with that final  stage of the conflict? 

 There’s been an investigation, but with no conclusion, no visit to the island. What can you  say on that? 

 PM: I’m not personally aware of all of the details of that case. We are a supporter of the ICC.  We are a supporter of proper legal processes and practices and one of the rules that come  with proper legal processes and practices is that political leaders shouldn’t make commentary 

 about legal matters when they’re underway. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss the issue of a processing centre in East  Timor? 

 PM: No, we did not. 

 JOURNALIST: Or your regional strategy for refugees? 

 PM: No, our discussion about East Timor was specifically in the context of the UN mandate,  which is timed to come to an end currently in 2012 and consequently what role the United  Nations Secretary General saw the UN playing beyond that time. So the discussions were  specifically in that context. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your favoured option for dealing with Libya? You’ve  spoken of a range of options other than a no fly zone, where would you like to see it? 

 PM: I think it’s appropriate for the Security Council to consider a full range of options, I  don’t believe that range of options should be narrowed. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will happen within days, the next action? 

 PM: I think everyone is seized of the urgency of this situation and the fact that it’s  deteriorating and causing a lot of harm and a lot of bloodshed and a lot of loss of life. 

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at the Congress today were you moved by the reaction that  was evident among some of the Congressmen who were there listening to your speech today? 

 PM: On Congress today, I always viewed giving that speech at Congress as an honour for  Australia, an honour for Australia to celebrate sixty years of our alliance. I was very moved  and very overjoyed to see the reaction but I think the emotion in the room was about the  bonds between our two countries. 

 JOURNALIST: Was that a little dust in your eye at one point? 

 PM: A little? 

 JOURNALIST: Dust in your eye? 

 PM: It was some emotion showing. I think the bonds between our two countries are deep, we  feel them deeply. I feel them deeply and it was a big occasion today for Australia. Thank you  very much.  

  

