---
title: "More than $13m to enhance NSW Settlement Services"
date: "2011-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355877
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1005902%22
---

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 More than $13m to enhance NSW Settlement  Services   Thursday, 16 June 2011 

 Joint Media Release with Senator Kate Lundy - Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and Chris  Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today  announced that $13.37 million would be allocated to New South Wales agencies  under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to help refugees and migrants settle  into their new communities. 

 As part of the grants program funding allocated to NSW this coming financial year,  the Government will provide $91 000 to the Auburn Youth Centre for the first part of  the two-year project, to help newly arrived migrant and refugee youth across central  Sydney become independent and increase their life skills. 

 'There is an identified need for intensive assistance to better prepare migrant and  refugee youth for the employment market and to assist them with other issues  including education and training, health, social participation and intergenerational  family relationships,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'This project provides that assistance through casework, referrals and information  sessions, as well as through youth specific programs around schooling, sports and  other recreational activities.' 

 Senator Lundy said the project would empower young people by helping them to  build their independence and become self-reliant. 

 'Being able to live independently is an important step for any individual and it is  important we provide our newly arrived refugees and migrants with the tools and the  support necessary to make them successfully self-reliant,' Senator Lundy said. 

 In the 2011-12 financial year, the Immigration Department will provide $8.87 million  towards 62 new projects to help new arrivals settle into New South Wales. Funding  is also provided for a number of successful projects continued from previous years. 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies, and community and welfare organisations. 

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Senator Lundy  said. 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on  the Department of Immigration website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 

  

