---
title: "Govt must establish 24-hr medical services for fragile detainees: Greens"
date: "2011-10-28"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211362738
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1185556%22
---

 Australian Greens Media Release   

 Friday, 28 October 2011   

 Govt must establish 24-hr medical services for fragile detainees: Greens   

 Reports today that the ambulance called to Villawood to attend the suicide of a detainee  on Tuesday night was phoned by a member of the public outside the facility is another  reason why there must be 24-hour medical care at all detention centres, the Greens said  today.   

 “With each day comes another sad revelation about the circumstances which led  confirmed refugee ‘Shooty’ to take his own life, because he was ignored by those meant  to ensure his protection,” Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said.   

 “There is no excuse for not having 24-hour medical care and a resident psychiatrist  available at each detention facility.  On a daily basis detainees are suffering mental  illness, anxiety and attempting self-harm as a result of their incarceration and lack of  appropriate medical and psychiatric support.    

 “If the Government is going to keep asylum seekers locked up in detention, they must  provide the basic medical support and treatment they need. This is clearly not  happening.    

 “The Greens also back the statement today by a coalition of health groups calling for the  government to immediately release into the community all mentally-fragile detainees and  others at risk, as a matter of urgency.”   

 Today we also have more reports of self-harm in the Darwin Detention Centre involving  a man while two other detainees are protesting on the roof for a fourth day.    

 “The government must take steps today for a permanent fix to the persistent problems  with detention centres,” Sen. Hanson-Young said.   

 “These are: moving people into the community after an initial health and security check,  30-day limits on detention and for any extensions beyond that to be reviewed by a court.   

 “In the meantime, making sure doctors, psychologists and mental health experts are  caring for those in detention who are suffering -- rather than security guards trained to  lower standards than nightclub bouncers -- would be a start.”   

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760                                                       

 

