---
title: "Community organisations receive grants to reduce violence against women and their children"
date: "2011-10-27"
creators:
  - "Ellis, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR THE STATUS OF WOMEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211362544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1183058%22
---

 THE HON KATE ELLIS MP  MINISTER FOR THE STATUS OF WOMEN 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 27 October 2011                                                                    

 

 

 Community organisations receive grants to reduce violence  against women and their children   

 Minister for the Status of Women Kate Ellis has announced new funding today  for Western Australian community organisations to take action to reduce  violence against women.   

 The Minister for the Status of Women, Kate Ellis today announced that City of  Stirling and Association for Services to Torture and Trauma Survivors will  share in almost $500,000 as part of the Government’s National Plan to  Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2010-2022.   

 The National Plan brings together the efforts of governments across the  nation to make a real and sustained reduction in the levels of violence against  women. The Australian Government has committed more than $86 million in  funding to support the implementation of the plan. 

 “Shockingly, nearly one in three Australian women experience physical  violence since the age of 15, and almost one in five women are victims of  sexual violence,” Ms Ellis said.    

 “We know that reducing violence is something that the Government cannot do  alone, which is why it is so important that we work with community  organisations on the ground to promote relationships that are based on  respect.”   

 “All forms of violence against women are unacceptable - in any community  and in any culture - and it is everyone’s responsibility to reject and prevent  violence.”   

 “These grants will support activities that prevent, respond to, and speak out  against violence, change community attitudes and behaviors, and encourage  community responsibility to support the reduction of violence against women.   

 The Australian Government will provide:    

 - $250,000 over three years to the City of Stirling to run workshops on  primary prevention programs such as non-violent alternatives, conflict  resolutions, anger management and respect; and 

 - $247,875 over three years for the Association for Services to Torture  and Trauma Survivors to support the education of the African  community in Perth on domestic violence and other family relationship  related challenges. 

 

 City of Stirling Mayor, Cr David Boothman said, “Domestic violence knows no  socio-economic or cultural boundaries, it touches ever corner of our  community and this grant will go a long way to ensuring families in such  environments within the City of Stirling are assisted to improve their lives.”   

 Ms Allison I’Dell, CEO, Association for Services to Torture and Trauma  Survivors, welcomed the Community Action Grant, saying it would “enable us  to extend the work we are doing in partnership with African communities with  a refugee background in promoting healthy family relationships and reducing  violence against women.”    

 Ms Ellis commended City of Stirling and Association for Services to Torture  and Trauma Survivors for their commitment to addressing this serious issue in  the community, and said these grants will support them to lead and support  social change.   

 “Changing community attitudes is a long-term challenge. By working together  and challenging the attitudes and behaviors that allow violence to occur, all  levels of government are saying a very loud “no” to violence,” Ms Ellis said. 

 

 The Australian Government has committed $3.75 million for Community  Action Grants, which will be distributed amongst 17 community and sporting  organisations across the country.   

 A range of funded projects will support different communities, with these two  Perth projects supporting Indigenous women and women from culturally and  linguistically diverse communities.   

 A copy of the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their  Children 2010-2022 is available from www.fahcsia.gov.au.   

 Minister’s Media Adviser: Jamila Rizvi 0438 644 603   

