---
title: "Ombudsman's Christmas Island Report: time for the Govt to face the facts"
date: "2011-02-03"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211348953
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/528912%22
---

 ** MEDIA RELEASE**   

 Thursday, 3 February 2011    

 Ombudsman’s Christmas Island Report - Time For The  Govt. To Face The Facts    

 The Australian Greens welcome the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s report into the  oversight of immigration processes on Christmas Island and agree that the centre is  unsustainable and impractical.   

 “Holding vulnerable asylum-seekers in a remote island location was always the  wrong approach to immigration detention,” said the Greens Immigration  Spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.    

 "It is extremely expensive, highly impractical and inhumane to house people who are  seeking our protection in such a location, so far from necessary support and  services. And let's face it; it has never worked as a deterrent.   

 The Ombudsman has made some practical recommendations on how to improve  Australia’s immigration system. For instance, he has cautioned against future  geographically isolated detention facilities (such as that proposed for East Timor)  and highlighted their impact on providing appropriate support and services (in  particular mental health).    

 “From the United Nations to the Australian Human Rights Commission, mental  health experts and now the Commonwealth Ombudsman - there is a mounting  chorus of organisations and prominent individuals critical of this policy.” 

 

 “It’s time the Government faced the facts and abandoned its failed policy.”    

 “The Greens remain the only party in the federal Parliament that offer a practical,  long term and humane immigration policy. My Private Senators Bill (currently before  Parliament) would abandon the Government’s failed excise territory policy, end  mandatory detention and indefinite detention and require judicial review.   

 

 “I will push for this to be debated, when Parliament resumes” Senator Hanson-Young  said.   

 Media contact: Robert Simms - 0427 604 760 

