---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 4 August 2011: Malaysian transfer arrangement; processing times."
date: "2011-08-04"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Malaysian transfer arrangement"
  - "processing times."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358478
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/988023%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  

 *TRANSCRIPT*  

 DOORSTOP, ADELAIDE  

 THURSDAY, 4 AUGUST 2011 

 

 SUBJECTS: Malaysian transfer arrangement, processing times.  

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming, everybody.  

 As you’re aware, the boat that we intercepted earlier this week off Scott Reef  has now arrived at Christmas Island and the asylum seekers have been  disembarked at Christmas Island. They are now in appropriate detention  facilities on Christmas Island.  

 Of course, this is the first boat arrival after the signing of the Malaysia-Australia transfer agreement last week. Accordingly, the process now begins  to transfer these people to Malaysia in terms of that agreement. This is an  important step. It’s very important we send the message very clearly that  there is no benefit in getting on a boat and taking the dangerous boat journey  to Australia. People who do that will be transferred to Malaysia. This an  important signal, an important step in terms of the Government’s very firm  message that getting on a boat, taking that dangerous boat journey, is an  inappropriate way to seek asylum in Australia.  

 For those of you who are unaware, the breakdown of the 55 people on that  vessel is that there were 36 adults and 19 people who are either clearly  minors or who are claiming to be minors. As we’ve said before, the process  now begins of pre-transfer vetting of these people and providing the  appropriate steps to begin the transfer to Malaysia in the coming period.  

 Happy to answer some questions.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister, how long will it take to process these people?  

 BOWEN: Look, as I’ve said previously and as is clear in the agreement, the  aim is to process people within 72 hours. However, as I’ve said as early as  last Monday, it will take some time to ramp up to that. We’re in very active  and advanced discussions with the Malaysian Government about the date of  transfer. It may well be that there’ll be a number of transfers and that they  will occur over a period of time. We’ll provide more information about that  when we’re in a position to do so.  

 JOURNALIST: Have they been told yet?  

 BOWEN: As I understand, they’re in the process of being told.  

 JOURNALIST: Are there any unaccompanied children amongst that group  [inaudible]?  

 BOWEN: Well, let’s be clear: there are no blanket exemptions. Anybody who  comes to Australia by boat can expect to be transferred to Malaysia. Of the  breakdown of those children, three of the minors are accompanied by a  parent, 14 are unaccompanied and two are in the company of an older adult 

 brother or sister.  

 JOURNALIST: What’s the reaction been so far from those who’ve been told?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, that’s in the process of occurring and it’s an operational  matter that’s well under way. I wouldn’t provide feedback on that. Obviously,  this arrangement has been well known for some time, it’s been very widely  publicised in Australia and in the region. We’ve taken steps to make sure that  those people contemplating the journey to Australia were aware that if they  come to Australia they can work on the basis that they would be transferred  to Malaysia.  

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that people smugglers will try and send  unaccompanied children [inaudible]?  

 BOWEN: Look, I’ve said before we could expect people smugglers to try it on  and we could expect people smugglers to lie to the people contemplating  whether to make this journey. People smugglers will tell all sorts of stories  and all sorts of lies, that they can somehow get people exempt from these  arrangements.  

 I think when this operation is well under way and has been implemented, it  will be clear to all the resolve of the Australian and the Malaysian  Governments to implement this model and this arrangement, and therefore  the message will be very clear: do not make the dangerous boat journey to  Australia and do not let your children make the dangerous boat journey to  Australia. But I have no doubt the people smugglers will try it on and will  continue to test the resolve of the Australian Government, and we’ll be equal  to that challenge.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister, if the people smugglers do choose to lie then, what’s  to stop them from continuing to do that? I mean, I’m taking that a lot of the  people that are the victims of this sort of crime don’t watch our news, don’t  see that this is the result, and if these people smugglers do continue to lie  won’t they just keep putting them into boats anyway?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, I think there’s plenty of evidence that people  contemplating whether to come to Australia do very closely watch  developments in Australia and word spreads very quickly. So as I’ve said  previously, I think we have seen some effect from the announcement in the  reduction of people arriving in Australia by boat.  

 But only when it is fully implemented and being implemented will you see the  full effect. We have a publicity campaign throughout the region, of course,  with Customs and Border Protection very actively advertising and promoting 

 the change in the situation, and that is counteracting the people smugglers’  lies. But of course people smugglers will be determined to try and continue to  make their evil trade and to make their money off vulnerable and distressed  people. We will be publicising and continue to publicise these arrangements  and the effect of these arrangements.  

 JOURNALIST: Minister, if the aim is to turn around or to process those who  are subject to the Malaysian solution in a 72-hour period, I mean, is that  going to be the aim for other people who, I guess, arrive subsequent to the  Malaysian solution?  

 BOWEN: Well, no, let’s be clear: the 72-hour turnaround is not people’s full  refugee processing. That’s the first basic checks for fitness to fly, for any  special vulnerabilities, and for the Malaysian Government to undertake its 

 vetting as part of this arrangement. So that’s very different to a full refugee  assessment. I would envisage, of course, that 72-hour period, once it  becomes fully operational, then people being transferred to Malaysia and then  as we see the people smugglers’ business model being smashed, reduced  numbers of boat arrivals in Australia.  

 JOURNALIST: But that 72 hours is for initial security assessment, I  understand. Is that right?  

 BOWEN: Well, it’s the initial health assessment, the initial vulnerability  assessment and the checking against the Malaysian watch list, as is outlined  in the arrangement.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you expect the three unaccompanied minors to be  transferred to Malaysia?   

 BOWEN: Three accompanied minors?   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 BOWEN: No, no, there’s three accompanied minors; three minors in the  company of their parents.   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 BOWEN: Well, look, there’s no blanket exemptions and the message is very  clear: if you come to Australia by boat, even if you are a minor or are  claiming to be a minor, you can work on the basis that you will be returned to  Malaysia. That’s my message, very clearly. I’ve said right from the beginning  no blanket exemptions.   

 Now, the pre-transfer process will take its course. If there’s any results from  that, then that will be made public at the appropriate time. But people should  work on the basis if they come to Australia by boat, they will be transferred to  Malaysia.    

 JOURNALIST: A Senate Committee heard today a Green proposal that after  30 days in detention here in Australia, an application to a magistrate could be  made for release which would save taxpayers millions upon millions of dollars.  Is that something the Government would support?   

 BOWEN: No. I think the Greens’ policies in this area are highly unrealistic.  We have a situation and a policy of mandatory detention; it’s an appropriate  one. Having said that, I do believe we need to process people as quickly as  possible. Not only do I believe that, we’re implementing that. Over the last  three months, you’ve seen 2000 people released from detention facilities,  either into the community or been granted a protection visa. So the Greens 

 are talking about it and we’re actually getting on with better and more  efficient processing.    

 JOURNALIST: With the YouTube campaign, how much of what’s happening  today and in the next couple of days is going to be [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: Look, there’ll be appropriate filming of the transfer: that will take  into account people’s privacy and dignity, of course. But as I said before, I  think this is important in terms of the lies that people smugglers will tell. It’s  very important and only fair to people in the region contemplating whether to  take the boat journey that we make it clear that this is real, this is serious and  occurring, and the Government’s policies are being implemented. There’s no  starker or more effective way to do that than to film the transfer and  operation, with people’s privacy and dignity being respected as part of that  process. And that will be put on YouTube and all the relevant websites that  we know asylum seekers and others would be watching from Indonesia and  elsewhere.    

 JOURNALIST: Is the pressure on now? I guess, if your message has been  given and you hope that it sends the message, is the pressure on to sit back  and wait and hope the boats do in fact stop?    

 BOWEN: Well, look, I’ve said all along that I think that once this  arrangement was fully operational, we would see an impact. An important  part of that is communicating that it’s fully operational.    

 As I say, we’ve seen some reduction in boat arrivals over the last couple of  months. June was the second lowest month for boat arrivals since 2009 July  was the third lowest month. Clearly, the announcement of the Malaysia  arrangement had some impact, but it’s not going to have full impact until it’s  fully implemented and that will take some time for that message to get right  through to people smugglers and asylum seekers that Australia is not an open  route for boat arrivals. We are a closed destination.    

 We will take asylum seekers and refugees processed by the UNHCR through  the normal processes who’ve been waiting for resettlement. That’s the  appropriate way to seek resettlement in Australia. I want to take more  refugees and we are taking more refugees, but we’re doing so in a way which  means that people don’t take that dangerous boat journey to Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, if a 72-hour processing period is adequate for  people who are going to be resettled in Malaysia in terms of security and  health screenings, why isn’t it enough for people to be initially placed in our  community?    

 BOWEN: Well, again, I think you are, with respect, confusing two different  types of processing. The 72-hour processing is very basic processing, which  goes to somebody’s fitness to fly on an aeroplane, their very basic health  checks, and checking against Malaysia’s security watch list. That’s quite  different to the full security checks that somebody would go through if they  were being resettled into Australia, quite different to the full refugee  assessment.   

 Of course, these people will then be transferred back to Malaysia where they  will begin their refugee assessment, which is quite different. They’ll be  assessed by the UNHCR in Malaysia. That can take a very considerable period  of time, in some cases several years. So it’s quite different, the 72 hours is  quite different to a refugee assessment, which is what we undertake while  people are in detention in Australia, and then their security assessments.   

 JOURNALIST: What happens if someone’s on Malaysia’s watch list  [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: Well, the arrangement’s clear that if Malaysia finds that somebody’s  on their terrorism alert watch list, then they would not be accepted into  Malaysia, just as for the 4000 people who we are taking from Malaysia would  go through our security checks first, and if we have security concerns we  would not accept them into Australia. It’s a reciprocal arrangement.   

 Thank you very much, cheers.    

 Ends 

