---
title: "100th boat arrival since election is business as usual under Labor"
date: "2011-11-14"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211363938
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2243344%22
---

 100th boat arrival since election is business  as usual under Labor  14/11/11 

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 95 people on board, is the 100th boat to arrive since  the last election, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said  today. 

 "The arrival of this latest boat is further proof of the government's border protection failures  and impotence on this issue. At 95 passengers, it is the fifth largest boat to arrive this year,"  Mr Morrison said. 

 "As the monsoon season approaches, smugglers will seek to put more people on boats, just as  they did last year and the year before under this government's failed policies," he said. 

 "As long as this government continues to cling to policy failure, the boats will continue to  come. The government is also expected to be airlifting detainees to the mainland this week  with many more detainees expected to be released into the community under the  government's new softer policies. 

 "Minister Bowen has yet to be up front with the Australian people on the cost of the  government's new Greens solution for illegal boat arrivals. 

 "Labor's adoption of the Greens' policies of community release of illegal boat arrivals on  bridging visas will come at a price. This government has a history of fuzzy maths on the  budget for asylum seekers. Taxpayers should be very wary of their silence on this issue. 

 "This government which had lost its way under Kevin Rudd has now thrown out the  compass. Even more people have arrived illegally by boat on Julia Gillard's watch than Kevin  Rudd's. 

 "Julia Gillard should admit that her proposals have proved even more damaging than Kevin  Rudd's failures and restore the proven solutions of the Coalition to stop illegal boat arrivals,"  Mr Morrison said. 

 

