---
title: "Transcript of press conference with Prime Minister of Libya, Dr Abdurraheem Al-Keeb: Tripoli: 8 December 2011: visit to Libya"
date: "2011-12-08"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "visit to Libya"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211365587
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1294938%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE WITH   PRIME MINISTER OF LIBYA, DR ABDURRAHEEM AL-KEEB   

 TRIPOLI   

 8 DECEMBER 2011   

 

 

 Subjects: Visit to Libya   

 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 KEVIN RUDD:  Let me say one or two things. First of all, thank you Prime Minister for your  time this afternoon.  Australia is a long way from Libya geographically but Libyan people are  close to us in their hearts. When we saw the revolution happening here in Libya, we in  Australia wanted to help. 

 We were the first country in the international community to call for the UN Security Council  to impose a no fly zone over Libya.  

 We were the first country in the international community to call for the Qaddafi regime to  be put before the international criminal court. I did so in statements on the twenty fifth of  February this year.  It was when I also wrote to the President of the Security Council. 

 I come here to Libya today to salute the courage of the freedom fighters of Libya.  I also  come here in solidarity to work out how we can support the new Libyan Democracy and we  will work closely together in the challenges ahead.  

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 During the revolution we are proud of the fact that we in Australia assisted the people of  Libya, in food, in water, in shelter, in helping refugees, through all the agencies and the Red  Crescent. That is the assistance we have provided so far, now it’s a question of how we work  with them in the future. We are supporting financially the UN agencies here now, including  those who are engaged in preparations for the election, those who are assisting the  demining of Libya, as well as the World Health Organisation. And we are going to work  together now in agriculture and dry land farming. Australia is almost as dry as Libya. And so  we have much to share.  

 We are going to work closely in higher education.  During the civil war, we the Australian  government provided financial support to a thousand Libyan students in Australia to allow  them to stay at university. They will now come back to help build a new Libya, and will work  in other fields like oil and gas and mining.  

 So while we are two countries a long way from each other on the map, we are close to one  another in our hearts.  We see ourselves as supporters of Libya and the great challenges  which lie ahead for the Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, and other Ministers. 

 Thank you very much 

 JOURNALIST: What is the greatest challenge for Libya according to you now?  

 KEVIN RUDD: Well I’m a foreigner, why would I answer that question on behalf of the  Libyan government. The beginning of wisdom is not to tell other countries what to do. And if  I did have an idea on that, I’d tell our friends in Libya privately not publicly. It’s a matter for  the Libyan government to determine the country's priorities and the responsibility of a  friend is to work with them in implementing these programs. We don’t believe in preaching.  

 Thank you.  

 END   

