---
title: "It's time for Labor MPs to hold their own PM to account over Malaysian deal"
date: "2011-06-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356278
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/880049%22
---

 Scott Morrison  Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 

 It's time for Labor MPs to hold their own PM to account over  Malaysian deal  

 22/06/11  

 The Prime Minister has told Parliament today that Malaysia is a better option than Nauru  because it will treat asylum seekers more harshly, Shadow Minister for Productivity and  Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “For more than a decade the Labor Party vilified the Coalition for our policies that stopped  the boats and broke the people smugglers business model, in particularly the Pacific Solution  and temporary protection visas,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Today the Prime Minister said these policies were too weak, basically saying that her  Malaysia people swap would be more effective than Nauru because it would treat asylum  seekers more harshly, and send a stronger message,” he said. 

 “She says she wanted a tougher policy than Nauru, when for years she and her Labor  colleagues decried the Coalition’s Pacific Solution, saying it was too tough and inhumane. 

 “The Government’s inconsistency, hypocrisy and failure to be up front with Australians on  their Malaysian people swap is the reason Australians have lost confidence in Labor on this  and so many other issues.  

 “Labor’s anything but Nauru strategy has led them to embrace the unthinkable in Malaysia. 

 “The Government cannot answer the most basic questions about their Malaysia policy. 

 - Will children go to public schools?  

 - Where will they receive their hospital treatment?  

 - How long will they be there?  

 - How long will they receive support? 

 - How will they be protected from potential abuse, amongst the more than 90,000 asylum  seekers already living in Malaysia? 

 “Labor MPs who could not keep in their seats to condemn the Howard Government over  Nauru, have sat silent as their own Prime Minister opts for what she believes is the harsher  policy. 

 “It is time for Labor MPS to stand up and be counted or admit that their condemnation of the  Howard Government was all for show,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

