---
title: "Asylum seekers, regional cooperation and a humanitarian refugee policy: speech to ALP national conference, Sydney"
date: "2011-12-03"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Party platforms"
  - "Party conferences, National"
  - "ALP"
  - "Refugees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211365270
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1279358%22
---

 THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 SPEECH TO  

 ALP NATIONAL CONFERENCE 

 ‘Asylum Seekers, Regional Cooperation And A Humanitarian  Refugee Policy’   

 SYDNEY CONVENTION CENTRE, SYDNEY 

 SATURDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2011 

 

 Delegates, let us be clear about what this debate is not.  

 This debate is not about whether Labor should do the right thing on the one hand, or the  popular thing on the other.  

 You’re going to hear passionate speeches today, passionate speeches from people with  different views.  

 And everybody who comes to this podium will do so with a view that Labor should have a  compassionate and humanitarian refugee policy.  

 Everybody who comes to this podium today will argue that we should abide with Labor  values.  

 Everybody who comes to this podium today will correctly argue that their view is one driven  by the need for Australia to pull its weight and do the right thing by refugees.  

 I want to see Labor and Australia have a policy which means Australia can take more  refugees. Australia and Labor have to work with countries in our region and the United  Nations to ensure better protections across our region.  

 Australia and Labor need to work with the UNHCR, with countries in our region, to stop  people dying at sea.  

 The amendments I’m moving today recognise that Labor should and will work with countries  in our region to tackle people smuggling and discourage people risking their lives at sea.  

 There is nothing humanitarian in my view about a policy which says to people, ‘You’re best  chance of a new life in Australia is to risk your life to get here’.  

 We are approaching the first anniversary of the tragedy at Christmas Island. This is the most  obvious and poignant reminder of the risk that people take. But there have been others.  

 Just in the last few weeks, we saw the loss of life of people attempting to get to Australia. It  is no less tragic because it happened to occur in Indonesian waters.  

 And perhaps most worryingly of all, despite all the tragedies we know about over the last ten  years, there have inevitably been others that we simply don’t know about - people losing 

 their life on the high seas between Indonesia and Australia in a way and a time where there  is no TV cameras, nobody to see the tragedy unfolding.  

 Now delegates will rightly hear a lot about fairness in this debate, and so we should. Refugee  policy must always be about fairness.  

 In dealing with this human tragedy, in dealing with the complexities of this debate, we have  to tackle this issue with a soft heart, but a hard head.  

 I’m moving these amendments as Immigration Minister - my experiences informed as  Immigration Minister, my experiences formed as a Western Sydney resident, a Western  Sydney MP. Talking to people in my electorate, whose cousins, brothers and sisters, fled Iraq  ten years ago; were forced out of their homeland in Africa ten years ago; and had been  waiting, begging for resettlement in another country.  

 Colleagues, there are 43 million displaced people in the world. Last year, 55,000 refugees  applied to come to Australia. We all agree that we should play our fair role. In fact, I think we  all agree that we should do more. Under this Government, Australia takes more refugees per  head of population than any other country in the world and we should continue to do so, and  I think we can and should do more.  

 This is important. The United States, Canada and Australia are the only countries in the world  with any resettlement program to speak of. After us there is daylight. Without us there is no  chance, no hope.  

 We can do more, but we need to do more in a way which ensures the Australia public have  confidence in the integrity and the fairness and safety of our refugee program.  

 There’s a lot of talk in this debate, a lot of voices being heard. But this debate is not just  about those who make it Christmas Island and as compelling as many of their cases are,  there are people who never make it to Christmas Island. There are people who lose their life  on the way. There are people who would never dream of having the money to afford to get 

 to Christmas Island.  

 In this debate, let us not forget those people. In this debate let us stand up for them.  

 In this debate, these amendments, our position, and this Government’s action, give these  people a voice - because nobody else will. No other political party will. The Liberals certainly  won’t. The Greens won’t. We are the ones who will, and today I ask you to stand with the  Government, support our action, support our philosophy, and support everything we have  done to ensure that our refugee and humanitarian program is compassionate, is pro-refugee,  but gives everybody a chance of a decent life in Australia.  

 Thank you very much.  

 ENDS  

 

