---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Mount Martha: 8 October 2011: Labor divisions on Carbon Tax; asylum seekers and Rudd's leadership ambitions"
date: "2011-10-08"
creators:
  - "Hunt, Greg"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE ACTION, ENVIRONMENT AND HERITAGE"
subjects:
  - "Labor divisions on Carbon Tax"
  - "asylum seekers and Rudd's leadership ambitions"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211361544
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1145531%22
---

 

 

 THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Shadow Minister for Climate Action, Environ ment and Heritage   

  1 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP, MOUNT MARTHA  SATURDAY 8 OCTOBER 2011 

 

 Topics: Labor divisions on Carbon Tax, asylum seekers and Rudd’s leadership ambitions   

 E & OE…    

 GREG HUNT 

 Today the Labor Party are divided on the leadership, they are divided on the borders, and 

 now they are divided on the Carbon Tax. 

 

 It  is absolutely clear that Kevin Rudd wants Julia Gillard’s job.  He’s waiting for the green 

 light from the faceless men and in the mean time is promising the people that he will defer 

 the Carbon Tax.  

 

 If Kevin Rudd doesn’t even want the Carbon Tax, why should the Australian people.  

 

 If Kevin Rudd doesn’t want the Carbon Tax why should the Australian people have to have 

 it? 

 

 The Prime Minister should do the right thing and take the country to an elec tion so as the 

 people can decide on the Carbon Tax, not the faceless men.  

 

 JOURNALIST 

 Is there any doubt in your mind that Kevin Rudd is planning and actively trying to make a 

 come back right now? 

 

 GREG HUNT 

 Kevin Rudd is more interested in a come back than Dame Nellie Melba.  Let’s be clear that 

 Mr Rudd wants his job back.  Julia Gillard is looking over her shoulder rather than 

 forwards with the interests of the Australian people and everybody is waiting for the 

 faceless men to make their decision. 

 

 

  2 

 What we should do is end the wait for the faceless men, take the Carbon Tax to an election 

 and give the people a say and let the people decide their own cost of living issues because 

 that’s what they want and that’s what the country deserves.  

 

 JOURNALIST 

 Given his comments yesterday, Mr Rudd is very much going after Tony Abbott as though 

 he’s already the leader now. 

 

 GREG HUNT 

 Well Mr Rudd clearly wants to be the leader of the Labor Party.  He’s waiting for a green 

 light from the faceless men and unfortunately instead of being Prime Minister, Julia Gillard 

 is looking over her shoulder rather than looking forward on behalf of the country.  

 

 The Labor Party is in paralysis, it is a circus.  End the paralysis, take the country to an 

 election and give the people a say on the Carbon Tax. 

 

 It now appears that Kevin Rudd is walking away from the Carbon Tax.  The Labor Party is 

 divided on the leadership, they are divided on the borders and now they are divided on the 

 Carbon Tax. 

 

 How can they possibly run the country if they are so busy watching their backs or 

 sharpening their knives. 

 

  (Ends.) 

