---
title: "71 more asylum seekers arrive before High Court"
date: "2011-08-22"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359131
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2243354%22
---

 71 more asylum seekers arrive before high court  22/08/11 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan 

 JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT 

 71 more asylum seekers arrive before High Court decides on Malaysia deal 

 Another 71 asylum seekers on the fifth illegal boat to arrive since the government's stalled  Malaysian deal was signed less than four weeks ago, will join an overcrowded transit lounge  on Christmas Island, Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister  for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs  and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "There will now be 337 asylum seekers waiting in a transit lounge on Christmas Island for  the High Court's decision on Monday, following the latest illegal boat to arrive with 71  passengers and 2 crew on board," Mr Morrison said. 

 "More than 900 people have now turned up on 16 illegal boats since the Government first  announced their people swap deal. As each boat arrives the Government's quota of just 800  transfers is looking more and more perishable," he said. 

 "The announcement of a memorandum of understanding with Papua New Guinea yesterday  to reopen the Howard Government's Manus Island processing centre is unlikely to provide  any support for some time yet. 

 "Apart from the gross hypocrisy of reopening a centre the Prime Minister had previously  described as 'wrong in principle' the MOU has no dates, no dollars and no details. This means  there is no deal and the Coalition will not be holding it's breath for a deal to be completed. 

 "The latest boat is also the 99th to turn up since Julia Gillard became Prime Minister," Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Whilst the Labor Party continues to spin its wheels with failed plan after  failed plan the people smugglers will continue to bring people to Australia illegally. 

 "The chaos and uncertainty Labor has created does not pressure them to halt their evil trade. 

 "The boats will not stop until an unambiguous and workable policy is embraced that can  actually be delivered. 

 "Only the Coalition has a plan that meets this criteria," he said. 

 

