---
title: "Top gear driver training key to successful settlement"
date: "2011-10-31"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211362969
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1244192%22
---

 

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 Top gear driver training key to  successful settlement  Monday, 31 October 2011 

 Newly arrived refugees in Perth will benefit from a million-dollar driver education and  training program in the latest round of funding under the Gillard Government's 2011- 12 Settlement Grants Program, Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, announced in Mirrabooka today. 

 Senator Lundy said the driver project is part of the settlement support programs run  by Perth's Edmund Rice Centre, which is making a significant contribution to the  successful settlement of newly arrived migrants and refugees in Australia. 

 The program includes driving lessons, weekly language-for-driving lessons and  language classes for passing the driving test, accompanied driving and assistance  for logbook completion and test preparation. 

 'This grant will ensure our newest citizens with a learner driver licence can become  familiar with Australia's road rules in a safe and controlled environment,' Senator  Lundy said. 

 'Programs like this not only benefit newly arrived humanitarian clients but also  contribute to overall road safety, which is important to the wider community.' 

 'A driver's licence is more than a piece of paper; for many refugees it can provide the  key to successful settlement, increasing employment opportunities and providing  independence and mobility to move around in the community.' 

 'Under the program, further training will also be provided for some participants to  become qualified accredited driving instructors and gain employment as instructors.' 

 The Edmund Rice Centre will benefit from a total of some $1.17 million under the  Settlement Grants Program (SGP), with another project, 'Building bridges, breaking  barriers' providing humanitarian entrants with information and skills on navigating the  housing market. 

 In the 2011-12 financial year, the SGP will provide $2.71 million to fund 20 new  projects that will help new arrivals settle in Western Australia. Funding is also  provided to continue a number of successful projects from previous financial years. 

 'Some new arrivals face additional challenges because of factors such as their low  levels of literacy in English and their own language, years spent in refugee camps,  and significant experiences of torture and trauma,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Projects which address key issues like driving and housing are critically important to  help new arrivals successfully settle into the Australian community and promote  integration and social participation.' 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on DIAC's  website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 

 

  

