---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth: 23 April 2011: WA detention centres; Villawood riots; border protection"
date: "2011-04-23"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "WA detention centres"
  - "Villawood riots"
  - "border protection"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211351856
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/915321%22
---

 Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade   

 

 Doorstop interview, Perth 

 Saturday, 23 April 2011 

 Subjects: WA detention centres; Villawood riots; border protection 

 E&OE… 

 JULIE BISHOP    Reports today that Western Australian police have deep concerns about  the potential for violence in detention centres in Western Australia is just further evidence  that the Federal Government has not only lost control of our borders but is losing control of  our detention centres.     

 Before the last election Labor promised there would be no new onshore detention centres,  they have broken that promise and detention centres are being established all over the  country.    

 As the boats continue to arrive, as the detention centres become dangerously overcrowded,  the pressure will continue to build and there is concern that we will see outbreaks of violence  and riots, such as we saw at Villawood, elsewhere in the detention system.    

 The outbreaks of violence at Villawood are a direct consequence of the Government’s change  of policy to weaken our borders. The architect of that change of policy was Julia Gillard.     

 JOURNALIST    They’re being very quiet, Julie, about what sort of contingency plans  they’ve got in place. WA police today refused to comment saying it is a matter for the AFP.  Does that concern you that we are not being told what extra measures are being taken to  ensure that we don’t have another riot?     

 JULIE BISHOP    It is deeply concerning that the Western Australian police have raised  these issues, it is deeply concerning that we have seen riots and outbreaks of violence at  Villawood yet the Government appears to be doing nothing. It is time for the Government to  take responsibility.    

 Here in Western Australia not only is there the Curtin Detention Centre but also another  detention centre being established at Northam. People have a right to know what plans are in  place to keep them safe.    

 JOURNALIST    You are saying there is news of two more boatloads; apparently one of  those, as you said, came all the way to the Cocos Islands. How concerning is that? It seems to  be border control is out of control here. 

 

 JULIE BISHOP    The Government has lost control of our borders. We are now seeing boats  coming right up onshore at Cocos Islands. That is a first. The boats continue to arrive, the  detention centres become dangerously overcrowded, the pressure builds, that is why there is  so much concern about the potential for an outbreak of violence and riots such as we have  seen at Villawood occurring elsewhere in the detention system.    

 JOURNALIST    This refugee group has headed up to Derby, I think they headed off  yesterday or the day before, to hold a protest. What do you make of their actions; do you  think there is some danger that actually might be just inflaming the situation?     

 JULIE BISHOP    It does have the potential to make a bad situation worse. They could be in  some ways encouraging people to believe that they have rights that in fact they do not have.     

 And I must say any person engaging in the criminal behaviour that we have seen at  Villawood has lost their right to permanent residency in this country. I believe they are unfit  to hold a permanent residency visa; they have failed the character test.    

 JOURNALIST    How do you think the public feel when they see footage of taxpayers’  money burning effectively? Because when they smash up these places. How do you think the  public feel at home?     

 JULIE BISHOP    Over the last couple of days I have had feedback from people in my  electorate and elsewhere and they are very angry that this Government has not only lost  control of our borders but they are losing control of our detention centres.    

 There are now thousands and thousands of men, women and children in detention centres,  these outbreaks of violence are deeply concerning and the Government has no solutions at all.    

 What the Government must do is admit that it made a mistake when it changed the border  protection laws back in 2008, Julia Gillard must then take responsibility for finding a solution  and that is restoring the laws that the Howard Government painstakingly put in place to stop  the boats. 

