---
title: "Bridging visas for those seeking protection - a sensible policy change"
date: "2011-11-25"
creators:
  - "Migration Institute of Australia (MIA)"
source: "Migration Institute of Australia"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211364795
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1258601%22
---

 

 

 Bridging visas for those seeking protection - a sensible policy change 

 IMMEDIATE RELEASE  Friday 25 November 2011 

 Migration Institute of Australia  PO Box Q102, QVB Post Office, NSW 1230  p +61(0)2 9249 9000 | f +61(0)2 9279 3172  info@mia.org.au | www.mia.org.au 

 Available for Interview   Contact 

 Maurene  Horder     Brian  Duff   

 Chief Executive Officer    Communications  Manager 

 Migration Institute of Australia   0432  937  862  

 www.mia.org.au     brian.duff@mia.org.au 

 

 The Migration Institute of Australia (MIA) would like to add its voice to those who commend the Gillard  Government for granting bridging visas to an initial group of asylum seekers who arrived in Australia by  boat. Following health, security and identity checks, they will be able live in the community whilst their  refugee claims are finalised. 

 CEO of the MIA, Maurene Horder, said today that she believes it is much more humane that asylum  seekers who arrive by boat be treated the same way as those who arrive by plane, and that they should  be given bridging visas instead of being held in detention for long periods. Ms Horder welcomed today’s  announcement  as  the  beginning  of  the  process  of  moving  towards  a  single  system  for  assessing   people’s refugee claims. 

  “We  are  pleased  to  see  the  government  acting  on  this  and  would  like  to  see  as  many  people  as   possible  granted  bridging  visas  and  removed  from  detention as quickly as possible  to help solve the  alarming mental health issues for detainees.”  

 It  is  the  MIA's  position,  as  laid  out  in  its  submission  earlier  this  year  to  a  parliamentary  inquiry  into   Australia’s Immigration Detention Network, that onshore processing of all humanitarian entrants would  be in the best interest of asylum seekers and the Australian public alike.   

 “Offshore processing of refugees is an expensive use of public funds,” said Ms Horder. “Moreover, the  detention  of  refugee  applicants  while  processing  their  claims  is  a  burden  on  these  vulnerable   individuals and goes against Australian values as a fair society. Furthermore it is very costly.” 

 Ms  Horder  also  welcomed  the  government’s  intention  to  make  greater  use  of  community-based   alternatives  such  as  bridging  visas  and  community  detention,  as  well  as  giving  all  asylum  seekers   access  to  the  same  refugee  status  determination  process.  This  should  lead  to  a  fairer  and  more  

 efficient system. 

 

 

 

 

 NOTE: The Institute is the peak body for migration advice professionals, representing more than 2000  Registered Migration Agents (RMAs) across Australia and overseas, nearly 20 percent of which work  on Humanitarian Program visa applications.  

