---
title: "Another boat before ink is even dry on Malaysia deal"
date: "2011-07-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358257
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/985424%22
---

 Media Release 

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Scott Morrison, MP   

 31 July 2011 

 ANOTHER BOAT BEFORE INK IS EVEN DRY ON MALAYSIA DEAL 

 The arrival of another boat within a week of the deal being signed has demonstrated early  weaknesses in the Government's Malaysian people swap, according to Shadow Minister  for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison. 

 “Before the ink is even dry on the Malaysian people swap deal, another illegal boat has  arrived carrying 54 passengers,” Mr Morrison said today. 

 “As Julia Gillard famously said in opposition; another boat arrival, another policy failure.   The boat journey takes just a few days, so this vessel is most likely to have set sail after  the agreement was signed. 

 “Boats have arrived at the rate of one per week, with 621 people turning up since the  agreement was announced 12 weeks ago. 

 “The arrival of this first boat since the agreement was finally signed means the  Government is already borrowing against the deal, which will cover just 800 arrivals,” he  said. 

 “This is a one off deal, with a clear use-by date. If all of those who had arrived illegally by  boat since the deal was announced had actually been sent to Malaysia, the deal would  almost be exhausted.  Demonstrating the paralysis and inconsistency of Labor's policy,  the Minister was also unable to say on Australian Sky Agenda this morning how many  would end up in Malaysia, and rule out whether they could end up back in Australia. 

 “This is yet another backflip, with the Minister walking away from the Government's earlier  position that no-one going to Malaysia could end up in Australia. On May 7 he stated 'They  (those transferred to Malaysia) will not be in the 4000 we take from Malaysia'. 

 “The agreement also provides for failed refugees transferred to Malaysia to apply to come  to Australia under other International conventions. 

 “Just like their failed pledge that all those who arrived after May 7 would be transferred to  another country, the Government’s policy detail, once again, does not match their political  rhetoric. 

 “Labor have clearly worked out that their failed policies are the reasons so many boats  have come. However, just because they know they have got it wrong, does not mean they  know how to get it right,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

