---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 2 September 2011: health reform; Malaysia agreement; nurse practitioners"
date: "2011-09-02"
creators:
  - "Roxon, Nicola"
source: "MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING"
subjects:
  - "health reform"
  - "Malaysia agreement"
  - "nurse practitioners"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359716
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1070350%22
---

 

 THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP 

 Minister for Health and Ageing 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - BRISBANE - 2 SEPTEMBER 2011 

 TOPICS: HEALTH REFORM, MALAYSIA AGREEMENT, NURSE  PRACTITIONERS 

 E&OE ONLY 

 TONY ALLWORTH: So Honourable Minister for Health, members of the  media, colleagues particularly Shantha Kangaraj, Charles Denaro, Kate  Mason, part of the leadership team of the ECU, other colleagues including  doctors, nurses, and allied health professionals.  

 I'm Tony Allworth and as acting executive director of internal medicine  services, I'd like to welcome you all on this sunny spring day in Queensland. I  think it's always useful for our political leaders to come and visit us from time  to time and put faces to the people who both provide and receive care in our  hospital system.  

 Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital has a long history of providing  superlative care for our patients and our community and I'm sure you all share  with me my vision that provided with the appropriate resources we're able to  and keen to continue that tradition of care into the future at Royal Brisbane  and Women's Hospital.  

 So on that note I'd like to invite the Honourable Nicola Roxon to come to the  podium and address us and make her announcements.  

 NICOLA ROXON:   Thank you very much for that Tony and thank you to the  Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital having us here again. I feel like I'm  becoming a very regular visitor for all the right reasons and I very much enjoy 

 coming and meeting with your staff and thank you to David and Judy and the  team for having us here.  

 You were right that it's important as politicians to come and talk particularly  with the staff who work so hard to provide wonderful services to patients, but  also to see some of the patients in action, with the staff, working on all sorts of  projects that help them rehabilitate themselves in order to be able to get back  into their own homes.  

 And the announcement that I'm making today, but also the announcements  that I've made yesterday and others that will come this afternoon, are all very  much focused on an area of our health service that has been really neglected  I think in the past.  

 

 Our health reform commission identified this area of sub-acute care, whether  it was for rehabilitation, whether it's palliative care, whether it's a range of  other services. Perhaps an area that hasn't been focused on as much in the  health system as much as it needs to be, obviously you've already been trying  to fill that gap and our announcements today will be able to build on the work  that you've already done to expand the geriatric evaluation services and  treatment and rehabilitation services.  

 So I'm very pleased that as part of national health reform, something that our  government has worked very hard to deliver and has had a partnership from  very early on with the Queensland Government and now has a partnership  with every state and territory that we're able to now make announcements  about where that big health reform package is going to start delivering  different services within our health and hospital facilities across the state and  across the country.  

 So today I'm able to announce a $28 million package; an investment across  the metro north-west health service district. The lion's share of that is coming  here for the 28 bed geriatric evaluation and management unit and for the 

 expansion of in-patient and day rehabilitation services at the hospital.  

 This is really a fundamental part of our health reforms and whilst here it's a 28  bed facility, over the two days that I've been in Brisbane we'll be either  opening or announcing nearly 100 extra beds in this area.  

 The whole health reform package delivers over 250 beds in Queensland, or  bed equivalents, because some sub-acute services of course are not provided  as in-patient services.  

 So it's an exciting time for us and I hope it's an exciting time for you and your  staff. Many of you have worked on these projects for a long time, have been  pushing and looking for a way to fund them. This health reform package  allows us to do that and we've been very pleased with the partnership we've  had with Queensland Health who have identified areas of need and said that  we can go for it here in this area.  

 Let me just take the time to quickly tell you because I suspect our friends form  the media - well some of them - weren't at the events yesterday and won't be  at some of the other occasions. The 28 beds here, are part of 32 beds that  are being announced that will be at your hospital, 28 in the geriatric evaluation  and management unit and another four sub-acute beds.  

 For example we are also announcing a rehabilitation unit; an expansion of  out-patients at Carrara with 9 beds. The Brighton Rehabilitation services;  there are going to be 50 beds in total, 32 of those I'm going to be opening  today and there are 12 more that will be open by February and another six 

 that are to be announced today, so that's a $45 million package.  

 

 And the reason I want to highlight some of these other investments is  because we need to make sure these services are available where we can  across the state. As a leading tertiary hospital, you'll obviously attract patients 

 from a wide range of areas but making sure that we've got services in Ipswich  where I visited yesterday, making sure we've got services in different parts of  metro Brisbane and across the state is equally important for us and we're very  excited that our reforms are really starting to deliver and that people can see  well some new beds and facilities are being opened that the next lot are being  planned and are ready to go and that we are building on the investments that  many of you have worked so hard for.  

 So it's - it's really wonderful to be here, particularly with the range of  professionals, when you have geriatricians, when you have nurses that  specialise in this area, when you have your allied health team that are so vital  for providing rehabilitation services. To be able to say thank you for the work  that you do and we want to back that work by these investments that are  being made and I know that you will make the most of every single dollar that 

 has been delivered here so that the patients will benefit from it and ultimately  that's why you work in health services and why we at the political level want to  be able to deliver those services.  

 So thank you for having me here. We are doing as you can see, some of our  media here as well. I'll be very happy to answer questions on any issues that  people want to raise. I would be delighted if you want to ask some of them on  health services while the health team is here because of course we are  keeping people from the important work that they do. But I'll open that up to  any questions that people might have.  

 JOURNALIST:     [Inaudible] 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Look I think in this area of sub-acute care there's been a  lot of unmet demand in the past. We've committed to at least 1300 new beds  in this area being provided across the country. In Queensland that will be over  250 beds. So that's a big scale up.  

 JOURNALIST:     Do you have a timeframe? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   It's over the next four years. Some of those services will  be provided very quickly because they're going to be provided from existing  facilities and it will just be a matter of being able to recruit staff. When I say  just a matter for recruiting staff, that's of course difficult in an area where there  are some serious shortages.  

 So it does take a bit of time to scale up. Others need capital works to be done  before they come online. And in an unusual area for the Commonwealth,  there is a combination of both capital and recurrent funding and that's why it's  an important partnership with the states because they do have the  responsibility by and large for the recurrent funding until our health reform 

 deal has us step up to paying 50 cents in every dollar of growth in hospital  services into the future.  

 JOURNALIST:     Ms Roxon, what do you say to those in your party that claim  Julia Gillard has lost her authority? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well look, I just think that's wrong. I think this is by and  large media speculation. We've got a lot of issues that are complex issues to  deal with. No-one thinks that being in Government is an easy job but we're  very proud of the work that we are doing across the health system, across the  education system, across the national broadband network, and  

 of course our handling of the economy.  

 Our list is a very long one of areas where our determined approach to a lot of  difficult policies - and health reform is one of them - I think actually is standing  up to scrutiny. The fact that we're going to have some other difficult issues to  deal with is not unusual for governments and we've got a number of those  right now. But Prime Minister Gillard is doing everything that should be done  to tackle these difficult issues and she absolutely has our support.  

 JOURNALIST:     Have you been approached with discussions about her  leadership at all? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   No. Look, I really think the only people that have  approached me are the media and no doubt they're approaching lots of  people and that's fine. I'm not critical of the media wanting to do its job. I am  critical of any lack of balance in this though. We have a lot of issues where  our governments reforms and the determined approach that the Prime  Minister has taken to sealing this health reform deal for example, really are  things that make a difference day to day for everybody's lives.  

 The extra patients who will be able to get care right here in this hospital  because of the reforms that she has been able to finalise I think should not be  underestimated. So you know, this is not an issue that is leading to  questioning. I mean I bet you if you talk to any of the health professionals  here, they've all had a hard day at work. There are difficult days. You have  ups and downs. You don't walk away from something because it's difficult,  you try to find a new way to solve a problem, work with your colleagues to get  through it. Usually the next day or the week after it's a little bit better.  

 JOURNALIST:     Can you understand though the criticism or observations  over the asylum seeker issue that's gone on for so long, [indistinct] then we  had East Timor, then we had this, and the High Court decision, nothing's  really been sorted, nothing's been finalised, can you understand why people  are critical or observing her performance on that issue? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well I think when you say this is an issue that's gone on  for so long, you should then really put that in context. It's gone on for so long,  this has been an issue which is a difficult and vexed policy issue for the best 

 part of a decade. It isn't something that started being an issue when we came  to government and isn't something that's going to be resolved tomorrow.  

 It is a thorny issue where we need to balance compassionate treatment for  people who are in difficult circumstances with a very clear desire to not have  people in difficult circumstances risk their lives by getting on a boat which may  come to some terrible ending like we saw last year at Christmas Island. So we  do want to find a way to make sure that is not an attractive option for people  to risk their lives and we need to find a way to be compassionate for people  who are in very difficult circumstances. And that's difficult. 

 If there was an easy answer, people would have found that answer 20 years  ago. We haven't, and we need to keep working on what is a difficult issue to  find a good solution. 

 JOURNALIST:     [Indistinct] been harshly dealt with and harshly criticised and  harshly judged on this [indistinct]? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Look, I don't think that's for me. People are entitled in a  democracy to have their views. I mean, we have robust debate about all sorts  of things. What I do hope there will be in the community - and I think we saw  evidence of this at the Community Cabinet last night - people want to ask  questions about a whole range of things. They want to talk about their  excitement that we're going to introduce a national insurance scheme for  disability. They want to talk about where our aged care reforms are going.  They want to find out how a whole range of other things will affect them;  climate change, introducing a price on carbon. 

 It's not one issue - the government doesn't have the luxury of dealing with one  issue at a time. We deal with all of those issues, and some days it's more  challenging on some issues than it is on others; that's life. 

 JOURNALIST:     What do you think the effect of Nauru offshore processing,  and temporary protection Visa's had on the mental health of the asylum  seekers? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well, there's been a lot of discussion and debate  obviously. We know that, we need to be very conscious of any circumstances  where people are detained, whether it's onshore or offshore that they do have  access to good, strong mental health services. And our Government's made  some significant changes to ensure that more services are available to  people. 

 But I don't want to accept an assumption in your question that that's a course  of action we've decided to take. The Prime Minister and Minister for  Immigration have made clear that all range of options are on the table. But  we're assessing the High Court's decision and looking at what options are  workable, what are not. Which will have the effect that needs to be had, and  which will be appropriate for the treatment of people who are making asylum  seeker claims? 

 JOURNALIST:     How do you rate Chris Bowen as a minister? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   I think he's been an excellent minister. I think he has - you  know, he came up with, in face of a lot of criticism, a very creative, a very  constructive solution with Malaysia, one that was both providing compassion  and relief for 4000 extra refugees who've been waiting in other parts of the  world to be able to come and resettle in countries like Australia, as well as  being able to send a clear message to people who are making a decision  whether to take the risk to get on a boat and try to take a hazardous trip to  Australia, or to Ashmore Reef or Christmas Island. 

 Now the fact that the High Court has said that that is not an option we can  pursue doesn't take away from the fact that Chris worked to deliver a creative  and innovative solution which we believe would have had a very significant  impact. 

 He now, like the rest of the Government is obviously reassessing what options  we can pursue in the future. But I think he's very talented, he's done a really  good job in a difficult area, and he's pretty gutsy because he's just determined  now to find another way to get around what is a very difficult challenge. 

 JOURNALIST:     Miss Roxon, you come from a legal background. Do you  think it was appropriate for the Prime Minister to criticise the high court's  decision? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well I think what the Prime Minister was trying to do is to  have a discussion about the content of that decision. I think that's completely  appropriate. You're right, I come from this background. I was an associate at  the High Court. I have a very strong regard for the role that the High Court  plays in our system. 

 But that doesn't mean that we're not allowed to have a discussion about the  consequences of a decision. And I know it has been reported in this way, but I  don't, when I read the press conference, think the Prime Minister was trying to  make any attack on the High Court. She was simply saying the Government's 

 entitled to be surprised by the outcome when it did not - was not consistent  with previous precedents. 

 Now the High Court's the High Court; it's allowed to make new laws if it wants  to. But the Government is allowed to say we're surprised that this decision has  been made because previous laws, you know, didn't indicate that that was  likely. And we've got to act on the legal advice that we have. 

 JOURNALIST:     So that wasn't a scenario you would have thought could  have happened then?  

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well we've… 

 JOURNALIST::    In your experience with the High Court as well? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well I mean, my experience with the High Court is from  quite a long time ago. I don' think that I'm trying to make any sort of  judgement about - in fact, there is not a single judge on the High Court now  who was there when I worked at the High Court. So I don't think you should  interpret it in that way. 

 My point is that there's been law in this area. We took good advice on the law  and what was likely to be an appropriate option. We've done that in good faith.  We've been surprised by the decision that was made and now we have to 

 assess what other options are available for us. 

 JOURNALIST::    [Indistinct] 

 NICOLA ROXON:   [Interrupts] Okay I'm still looking for a health question  somewhere? 

 Go on Janelle, you will do it, won't you? I'll come to you after that. 

 JOURNALIST::    We're getting a nurse practitioner-lead clinic in Brisbane  which is opening later this month. The AMA has expressed concerns about it.  Do you have concerns as a Minister about nurse practitioners and the way the  model is going? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   No I don't. Our Government's been absolutely determined  to introduce opportunities to support the highly skilled workforce of nurse  practitioners which is a growing workforce. It's our Government that made the  changes that said nurse practitioners should be able to access Medicare  items directly and prescribe under the PBS within their scope of practice. 

 But what I am concerned about is that our changes require that people work  collaboratively. And collaboration is a two-way street. That means doctors  need to collaborate with nurse practitioners, and nurse practitioners need to  collaborate with doctors. 

 We saw this as a way of one, recognising the skills of highly trained nurses,  and two, providing more options for consumers. But it is not meant to be an  opportunity to further fracture care which is not positive when we're doing a  whole lot of other things to improve team based care. 

 So every business model that is being considered, and I don't make any  comments about this particular case - I'm not aware of the details of their  business model. I do urge doctors and nurses to work closely together that  the patients get the benefit of these new NBS items, but people work within  their professional scope of practice and have the proper backup if it's needed. 

 JOURNALIST::    Are there - is there any [indistinct]… so like standard bodies  or things like that, that are in place… 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Absolutely, and people can't access the Medicare items if  they don't have collaborative protocols in place. This is not available to a 

 nurse practitioner who sets up a shingle on their own and has now  relationship with GPs that provide backup to them. 

 But of course I don't like to see people being stuck in a [sic] old mind set that  you can never work together in this way or that you can never change or  increase the scope of practice. 

 So we are as a Government pushing those boundaries of traditional areas of  practice, but we've been convinced that nurse practitioners are well qualified  and able to do that. But we do require that they have protocols in place so  things that fall without - outside their scope of practice, or where they need  backup that they have an established relationship with GPs so that they can  get that. 

 JOURNALIST::    [Indistinct] 

 NICOLA ROXON:   [Interrupts] Okay, I think there was a last one up the back  - someone who was trying to, no - oh yes. 

 JOURNALIST::    I was just wanting to know, harking back to the leadership  issue, can you envisage Kevin Rudd returning? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   No I can't. 

 JOURNALIST::    I was going to ask about health. What's your response  about the story in [indistinct] this morning about the $600 million hole in  private health insurance. I mean, is there savings that you expect to receive? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Well obviously, we've been pursuing changes to the  private health insurance rebate for some time. We haven't had success so far.  But this is something that we are continuing to negotiate with members of  parliament, both in the House of Representative and the Senate. 

 I'm not entirely sure that the details of that story are accurate, so I might take  on notice we've said that we want to introduce this change having not  succeeded with it twice before to commence on 1 January this year. 

 There is an argument that the insurers and others are making about what that  will do in the middle of a financial year when people might take out their  insurance at a different time. I'm just not entirely confident that the reported  details are accurate. So I'm happy for Chris to get your details and follow that  up separately with you.  

 Okay, last one.  

 JOURNALIST::    Can I ask a health question? I listen to your talk at the  National Medicines Policy conference on Tuesday where you reaffirmed the  importance of the PBAC and the PBS and how important it was for cost  effectiveness and equity of access across the country, but what we probably  don't have, is that we don't have a similar process for medicines in hospitals. 

 We don't have a PBAC to work out what's the right cost effective resources to  [indistinct] in-patients in hospitals. At the same token, the Commonwealth  spends a lot of money in medicines in hospitals through a variety, a plethora 

 of schemes, confusion, cost shifting between state and commonwealth and  there is an inequity of access from South Australia… 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Yeah I understand the point, what's the question that  you're asking? 

 JOURNALIST::    …yes… 

 NICOLA ROXON:   Is there a question? Or you just wanted to make that  comment? 

 JOURNALIST::    The question is has your department thought about a  national forum, a PBAC-type system for hospital medications? 

 NICOLA ROXON:   We absolutely understand the issues. In fact hospital use  a number of medications that are not on the PBS and would not meet the  standards of a PBAC process, often because you're using unusual or  expensive or rare drugs where no manufacturer would actually go through the  listing process for the small number of people it might treat but a hospital  might make a decision that they absolutely believe it's necessary to treat in  that way.  

 So we're not contemplating the introduction of a system for state hospitals, but  because of the changes that we've negotiated which include the  Commonwealth stepping up to meeting 50 per cent of growth in costs into the  future and because those reforms include activity-based funding, something  that will be new in Queensland, where we price each and every intervention  and pay according to that price, it will set a base for us to have a proper  discussion about the way medicines are used and paid for. 

 And I think people - it's a bit of a hidden part of the reform because it sounds  like it's technical and it's about financing, it will actually help give us the tools  to make those assessments better, both in our public hospitals but also in  services that are provided outside hospitals. Thanks for a health question.  

 Thank you very much for coming.  

 TONY ALLWORTH: Thank you very much. I'd like to thank all of you for  coming and attending this morning, particularly like to thank David Alcorn and  Judy Graves and members of our executive team and especially Michelle and  the members of the team here in ECU for your hospitality and letting us use 

 your dining room for - for this venue.  

 But clearly I'd particularly like to thank the minister for coming to Royal  Brisbane and Women's Hospital. As mentioned before I think it's always  useful for us to have the interactions and particularly like to thank you for your 

 commitment to the improvement in services here at Royal Brisbane and  Women's Hospital. I hope you all have a great day.  

 Thank you.  

 Ends. 

 

