---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Kwinanana: 7 January 2011: National Ports Strategy; COAG; grain rail network; WA floods; Tony Abbott; High Court decision on asylum seekers"
date: "2011-01-07"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT"
subjects:
  - "National Ports Strategy"
  - "COAG"
  - "grain rail network"
  - "WA floods"
  - "Tony Abbott"
  - "High Court decision on asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211348035
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/660896%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  The Hon Anthony Albanese MP   Minister for Infrastructure and Transport    

 

 "National Ports Strategy; COAG; Grain Rail Network; WA Floods;  Tony Abbott; High Court Decision on Asylum Seekers" 

 APC002/2011  07 January 2011 

 Joint Press Conference in Kwinana with Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Infrastructure and  Transport Minister Anthony Albanese 

 PM: Thank you very much and thank you very much to - and I can even point to it - thank you very  much to CBH for having me here today and I have with me Minister Albanese and we're there for  two important purposes, first to launch our National Ports Strategy.  

 Now why is that important, well right around the country whether we're standing here in Kwinana,  whether we're in Geelong, wether we're in Newcastle, we have ports which we have to have working  productively to get our goods to market. 

 We are a great trading nation, but to make sure that we are strong and productive in the future, we  have to have our ports working at their best capacity and so as a government we've produced this  National Ports Strategy.  

 We know that the amount of volume going through our ports is going to triple in the next 20 years  and already 10 percent of the world's sea trade goes through Australian ports. So we're talking  about something of pivotal importance to the nation, to our future wealth and future prosperity.  

 The National Port Strategy that we're announcing today has for important elements.  

 First, and foremost we're going to ask ports to have long term strategies, we want to be prosperous  for the long term and to do that you've got to shape the future and plan.  

 Second, the strategy has a better balance between community use and the use of ports, to make  sure that the productive use and community use works together.  

 Third, with this strategy we are committing to streamlining approvals. We want to make sure that  Federal processes, State processes, when approvals for change are needed that that happens in a  streamlined way.  

 And fourth, it's about transparency. I think people know, I'm a big believer in transparency, that's  what My School and the education system was about and continues to be about.  

 We want to have transparency in ports too, because you can best make sure you're shaping the  future when you've got the best information about what's going on. 

 So I'm delighted to be here, launching today, the National Ports Strategy.  

 And I'm also delighted to be here with Minister Albanese, to talk about grain and the grain rail  network here in Western Australia. We've literally just seen some mountains of grain.  

 Now when people think of Western Australia they think of the resources boom, they think of 

 minerals and so they should, but this is also a very important place for growing grain. 40 percent of  Australia's grain is grown right here in Western Australia and 90 percent of that is exported. So  making sure that it moves well, moves productively, gets to where it needs to go, to facilities like this  one, and gets out to customers overseas, all of that is vital. 

 So I'm very pleased to be able to announce with Minister Albanese today, that as a government we  will be investing $135 million in improving the grain rail network. We'll be making this investment in  partnership with the State Government and in partnership with industry, with CBH and I very much  thank them for that. 

 When you put these two initiatives together what are they all about? Well they're about making our  economy more productive, if we can be more productive we can have a stronger economy, which  means better living standards for Australians. 

 Can I say finally, I will be leaving from here to go Carnarvon to meet with community members who  have been affected by flood waters and we know that flood water is continuing to rise there in  Carnarvon.  

 I have today announced that there will be some more assistance for the people of Carnarvon,  particularly for small business and primary producers. That assistance will come in the forms of  grants of up to $15,000 for small businesses and primary producers to engage in clean up.  

 That comes on top of the assistance that has already been flowing, including concessional loans  that will support small business and primary producers as they rebuild. And I want to talk to the local  community today about what work will need to happen to restore the local community.  

 The flood damage to infrastructure can often only be fully assessed when flood waters go down, but  I want to say to the people of Carnarvon that as Prime Minister, as a Federal Government, we know  that they've been doing it tough and we want to work with them in recovery. I'll turn now to Minister  Albanese for some comments.   

 MINISTER ALBANESE: Thank you Prime Minister and thank you very much for the warm welcome  here to CBH.  

 I also want to acknowledge the Infrastructure Co-ordinator from the Commonwealth, Michael  Deegan who is here with us today and the effort of Infrastructure Australia in producing what is  Australia's first National Ports Strategy. 

 We are an island trading nation, for us our ports are absolutely vital for our economic future and  given that trade is expected to triple over the next 20 years, it's vital because of the national  economic interest that we have a national approach to ports.   

 Currently there are overlapping regulations, much duplication in the way that our ports are run, a  lack of transparency, a lack of accountability. What this strategy has done is through Infrastructure  Australia, over the last two years consult with industry, consult with State Governments, consult with  all the players who know the importance of ports in terms of the economic significance, to develop a  strategy which moves ports forward as they should. 

 Moves it forward into the future, in a way in which we get planning right, so that we ensure that  buffer zones and freight and infrastructure corridors are created around ports.  

 Too often we have situations whereby ports have their precinct plans for what occurs directly in the  port area without due consideration to the land transport corridors.  

 With this announcement today, of the $135 million for grain rail, it is a good example of whereby  we're putting our philosophy when it comes to an integrated transport plan, into action.  

 A philosophy that says we need to reverse the 20 percent reduction in infrastructure spending that  occurred under the Howard Government, we've done that  

 

 But secondly that it's not just about public investment, it's also about policy reform.  

 That's why we established Infrastructure Australia, that's why we gave Infrastructure Australia the  task of consulting the with peak organisation Ports Australia and with industry about these  outcomes. 

 And I'm very pleased that the National Ports Strategy is now able to move forward to the COAG  process, but also that we're continuing to invest as we are here today in grain rail, which has an  economic importance, but also an importance in terms of removing trucks from our roads, so  therefore a road safety benefit, but also of course an environmental benefit, if we can get more  freight transported on rail rather than on road.   

 PM: Thank you very much, we're very happy to take questions. You might just have to shout loud. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 PM: Look, I'll ask Minister Albanese to answer that, he's worked on this a great deal.   

 MINISTER ALBANESE: Look there are some very practical examples that we see here, whereby  the port here has had to purchase a caravan park to ensure that there isn't encroachment on the  activities of the port. Now obviously it is the case that it is more difficult with established ports in the 

 capital cities, but what we can have, by having port strategies linked to land transport strategies, that  is how the goods actually get to the port, whether it be by rail or by road and looking more than just  a year or two ahead, looking 15, 30 years ahead, given that the life of infrastructure investment in  ports is around about 50 years. It's important by having those plans, precinct plan, but regional  plans and state plans as well, that look at the integrated transport and freight system as a whole.  

 Now later this month we'll be releasing the draft National Freight Strategy that's been developed  through Infrastructure Australia, that's the next part in the jigsaw puzzle of making sure that  Australia can get the economic benefit from an integrated transport plan that we so dearly need.  This is just a common sense approach. At the moment you have a port that can be considered in  terms of planning and development in isolation from what occurs around the port. That does not  make sense. I think Australian get that, I think State Government gets it, certainly the port authorities  themselves get it, which is why they've welcomed this plan. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: Well, by ensuring that we'll have these - this process goes to COAG to be  cleared, the jurisdictions will have responsibility for developing the jurisdictional plans ie. State wide,  but also for looking at regional plans and the port precinct plans.  

 You'll have local port, then how it fits in with regional economic development, then how it fits in with  the State.  

 By having a longer term approach, looking at the equivalent of master plan processes, the way the  airports occur at the moment, what you'll have is transparency so that you won't have developments  able to be approved without thought being given to the implications that are there for economic  development.  

 This is about making sure, as occurs with best practice in other areas, community interests are put  together with economic interests. 

 JOURNALIST: Isn't the real problem going to be the (inaudible), I mean many of these ports have  got (inaudible) now? 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: It is certainly the case, it is certainly the case, that it is far easier for newer  port developments to get it right than it is to change around the way the ports in our capital cities in 

 particular, the challenges which are there.  

 But at the moment you don't have that integrated transport strategy, by having jurisdictional plans as  well.  

 What you'll have potentially is that this is an area whereby by having jurisdictional plans there can  be more thought gone into regional economic development and here in Western Australia an  example of that is Oakajee, the plan to have a new port located, the Commonwealth have said that  subject to Infrastructure Australia support we would be prepared to invest in that port. 

 It's that sort of foresight that we need, rather than just ad hoc development that creates problems  down the track for future economic growth, but also creates problems for communities in terms of  noise and impact on those communities in terms of the impact that port developments have.   

 JOURNALIST: So at this stage it's just about strategy (inaudible) 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: No, this is a national approach to ports for the first time. At the moment we  don't even have consistent national data, ports have their own plans, the States have different  jurisdictions. 

 In Australia in 2010 it makes sense to have a National Ports Strategy given the importance of ports  to our national economic development. What this is about is a co-operative approach and that is  why we've put this strategy forward and that's what'll be discussed through the COAG process when  COAG meets, I think, next month. 

 JOURNALIST: In South Australia (inaudible) just before Christmas the State Government  announced a plan for (inaudible) development of shops, offices, combined. Is that something that  fits in with your (inaudible)? 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: No certainly, what fits in with is that the consideration of the ports plans fit  in with overall regional economic development in that case. So that you will have a process whereby  through the COAG process it's intended that we would establish a group that would oversee this  activity this activity. The group would be made up of private sector representatives as well as  government representatives. This is about creating a policy reform process that facilitates private  sector investment by creating greater certainty for investors.  

 That isn't there at the moment, so that at the moment if you're considering investing substantial  funds in a new port development you would not have the certainty about other land transport issues  away from the port that is needed if you're going to really drive that new investment.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: Look you're not going to solve problems overnight. What I would say is  were these structures in place those problems would not have arisen.  

 If you had a 15, 30 year plan you would not have the sort of issue whereby you have growth getting  ahead of infrastructure. The key to good infrastructure policy is making sure the infrastructure  development occurs either at the same time, just in time, but preferably ahead of growth.  

 That hasn't occurred at Newcastle Port, at Dalrymple Bay. We have made some major  improvements, assisted by the Infrastructure Australia process and by the Commonwealth  investment in rain in Hunter in alleviating some of the capacity constraints that are there.  

 So the Government has already, I think, got runs on the board in practical investment. What this is is  a national framework to take Australia forward, not for a year, not for this term of office, but for  decades ahead and it's the sort of approach to infrastructure which is why we established  Infrastructure Australia to lead that policy development process.   

 JOURNALIST: Will the framework delay projects that have already (inaudible) 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: Projects that are in the works in terms of, by and large in terms of new  development such as Oakajee, this process is perfectly consistent with that approach, but what it  will require is much greater transparency of any projects that are planned, so that the States will  have to give consideration to land transport issues and to that integrated approach rather than just  viewing them as islands, if you like, in isolation.  

 It's a similar approach to what we've taken with airport master plans, whereby airports as a result of  the Aviation Whitepaper we delivered two years ago, now have to give consideration to land  transport issues around the airport and there's nowhere where the failure to do that is more acute 

 than the lack of land transport planning around Perth airport, at the same time as the growth that's  occurred there. 

 So it's about making sure that we get it right into the future. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 MINISER ALBANESE: Well we are making investment in terms of port developments already.  

 This though is a policy framework for the medium and long term. You wouldn't expect that there'd be  a change this week, but immediately once COAG adopts this process that I'm very confident from  the positive feedback particularly from industry and business, that there'll be a positive response  from the State Government's who had input. We released a draft plan in May of 2010, so this has  been a very consultative process. 

 I'm confident it will have a great deal of support and once it is adopted by COAG then you'll see, I  think, a change in that culture whereby you have a much more integrated approach to ports  planning almost immediately.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) 

 PM: Look, I'm going to echo what Minister Albanese has just said and the important thing about  having this strategy is to have the best possible future, to have the most productive future, we need  to plan that future and that's why this strategy is so important.  

 As the Minister has said we are all familiar with examples around the country, when not having done  the planning is now resulting in bottlenecks and problems.  

 By having these long term plans for Australian ports under this strategy we'll know that we're  properly building for the future and we're not causing a problem by having a development that looks  good today, but in 10 years or 20 years time will cause a major problem for upgrading volume being  held at that port. 

 I had the opportunity to walk through the museum here and let's just remind ourselves how much  things change over time, from men lumping bags to the amazing facilities that you've seen today,  with that mountain of grain.  

 Now here they actually had a vision about the future and how much grain they wanted to go through  this facility, so they got the planning right.  

 It's a great example, if they'd said to themselves back then 'oh we'll always lump grain with bags and  we really don't have to plan for a bigger volume' then you wouldn't see the facility that we're  standing in here in today. We're taking the same approach to ports. 

 I am getting moderately envious of Anthony Albanese's haircut though, at this stage. What do you  think; I could go for a bit of a trim and have a more wind resistant hair style? 

 JOURNALIST: This is probably more of a question for Minister Albanese (inaudible) 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: Well there's not really a proposal at the moment.  

 What there is is a proposal for a committee and I do note that Tony Abbott's Coalition were very  hostile to the building of Traveston dam just a couple of years ago and the Coalition in New South  Wales have been very hostile to the proposal that was there for a dam in the Hunter Valley. 

 So I think that any proposals for dams should be considered on their merits, but at the moment all  we have from Tony Abbott, in contrast to the actions of the Coalition, is a plan for a committee. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 MINISTER ALBANESE: We consider proposals on their merits. 

 JOURNALIST: What about you Prime Minister, (inaudible) 

 PM: Can I firstly say, I mean we are in a time where there are Australians really hurting, still batting  flood waters, still dealing with the painful work of the recovery and my focus as Prime Minister is on  assisting those communities as they go through this difficult time.  

 Which is why, for example, I will be visiting Carnarvon today and why we've triggered additional  assistance for Carnarvon.  

 Now on dam policy, there will be plenty of time for people to put their various views, but I do note  that this is a plan for a committee.  

 It's against a backdrop where members of Tony Abbott's political party have consistently opposed  dam developments, so it's ok to say it in the broad, but to actually build dams you need people to  embrace them in specific locations.  

 And I would also say about this that we currently assess projects on their merits, now if we look at  what has happened in Queensland with the widespread devastation and flooding, we should not  conclude that that would have been fixed by the building of a limited number of dams. That's simply  not the case.  

 So we do have to deal with the flooding that is there at the moment, we do have to work with  communities that area really hurting at this time, there'll be plenty of time down the track for debating  these kind of policy issues if that's what people want to do and if Mr Abbott eventually produces the  plan. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 PM: We did trigger at an earlier stage of the flooding in Carnarvon some emergency grants to assist  people as they dealt with flood waters, so that had already been done.  

 We're in a situation where there's flooding, people are starting to move into recovery and now very  very tragically for the people up in Carnarvon they're watching the waters rise again. 

 But when it comes to recovery, clean up, we want to be there assisting small business and primary  producers with these direct grants. 

 JOURANALIST: Prime Minister, can I just ask you a couple of questions (inaudible). In essence  (inaudible) 

 PM: Look, the Minister for Immigration has dealt with this matter today, we did have a High Court  case, which indicated to us that there was the legal requirement for judicial review for the processing 

 of asylum seeker claims on Christmas Island, so we have responded with a processing system.  

 We understand that with the matters now capable of going to the court because that's what the  court's decided, that we need to work through and understand that there will also be court  processes which could occasion delays.  

 So the Minister for Immigration has outlined today a processing system, so we properly deal with  asylum seeker claims given the High Court case that was announced fairly recently. 

 JOURNALIST: Is there a risk in this (inaudible) 

 PM: The courts are separate from government and the court independently has made some  decisions and governments have responded to that decision. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 

 PM: No, we've struck proper processes to work with the law as now pronounced by the court. 

 Thank you very much 

 

 

 

  

