---
title: "Asylum statistics to be published online"
date: "2011-05-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211354579
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548162%22
---

 

 Asylum Statistics to be Published Online  Monday, 23 May 2011 

 A range of statistical information related to asylum seekers and refugee status  determinations will be posted online on a quarterly basis, the Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, announced today. 

 Mr Bowen said the information would be published on the Department of Immigration  and Citizenship (DIAC) website from today. 

 'In the interest of increasing understanding of Australia's onshore protection program  and providing accurate, up-to-date information, we will publicly release for the first  time, a new comprehensive biannual publication, Asylum Statistics - Australia 2010- 11,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'The DIAC publication will be posted online along with quarterly statistical updates of  asylum claims, including the processing of applications at various stages, the  number of grants and applications per country of origin, overturn and affirmation  rates, and final visa decisions.' 

 Mr Bowen said the updated statistics for the March quarter published today reflected  the reduction in irregular maritime arrival (IMA) numbers compared to the same time  last year. 

 The number of IMA requests for refugee status assessments (Table 3) in the first  quarter of 2011 was 727, down from the same period last year (756), less than a  third of the number of requests (2186) made in the June quarter last year and the  lowest quarterly figure since 2009. 

 The final protection visa grant rates (Table 14) for boat arrivals in the March quarter  was 48.9 per cent, compared to 91 per cent for the March quarter in 2009-10. 

 Asylum Statistics - Australia 2010-11 provides statistical information on applications  for protection visas within Australia (onshore protection) in the past financial year. 

 The biannual publication comprises two parts: the first contains statistical information  on non-irregular maritime arrivals (non-IMAs), while the second part provides  statistics in relation to irregular maritime arrivals (IMAs). 

 Statistics relating to ministerial intervention requests will also be published online in  coming weeks. 

 They can be found on the department's website.  See: www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/statistics/asylum 

 

