---
title: "The Australia and Indonesia Relationship: Address to Pnyx Foreign Policy Dinner, ANU"
date: "2011-09-15"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "Office of BISHOP, JULIE, MP"
subjects:
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Refugees"
  - "Live animal exports"
  - "Economic conditions"
  - "Political conditions"
  - "International education"
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition policy"
  - "AusAID"
  - "Dept of Foreign Affairs and Trade"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211360336
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1111710%22
---

 Julie Bishop 

 Address to Pnyx Foreign Policy Dinner, ANU - The Australia and  Indonesia Relationship  

 Thursday, 15 September 2011  

 E&OE…  

 Your Excellency, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

 A constructive relationship between Australia and Indonesia is indispensable.  

 It is, as the late distinguished Australian diplomat Alan Renouf once remarked, “the crucible of  Australia’s foreign policy”.  

 Few countries are more important to Australia than Indonesia.  

 Its fortunes over the coming decades will impact on Australia’s future prosperity and security, as well  as determine our broader role in the region. 

 The Liberal Party values Indonesia’s close friendship and we are committed to a strong, democratic  and outward-looking Indonesia.  

 In particular, its continued regional leadership is needed if we are to collectively overcome many of  the challenges now before us. 

 Our Party has a long history of positive engagement with the government of Indonesia and its people. 

 It is a relationship forged in the days of Menzies, Barwick and Hasluck - three great stalwarts of the  Liberal philosophical tradition. 

 For Sir Robert Menzies, it was a paramount necessity that Australia and Indonesia coexisted as good  neighbours. 

 Under his leadership, Australia co-sponsored Indonesia’s membership of the United Nations in 1950  and despatched the Minister for External Affairs to make Australia’s first official visit to Indonesia. 

 He was later supported by Sir Garfield Barwick who, as Minister for External Affairs, saw the need to  develop friendly and cooperative relations with Indonesia at a time of immense change in the region. 

 Decades on, at the height of the Asian Financial Crisis, it was Prime Minister Howard and Treasurer  Costello who advocated Indonesia’s interests to those overseas who had called for counterproductive  austerity measures. 

 Leadership of this nature is once again needed.  

 The opportunity costs associated with the Government’s hastily announced Asia Pacific Community,  its ill-conceived idea for a refugee processing centre on East Timor, its highly contentious asylum  seeker swap deal with Malaysia and its mismanagement of Australia’s live cattle trade, are  considerable. 

 In each instance, there was not the courtesy that I would expect would be shown to our close  neighbour by taking Indonesia into the Government’s confidence before these announcements - all of  which affect Indonesia - were made. 

 The fact that Australian and Indonesian officials first heard about the Government’s ban on exports  from Radio Australia rather than from the Government, as asserted by Richard Woolcott a former  secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, defies belief. 

 Rather than work patiently and respectfully behind the scenes, this government has shown a  propensity to rush policy announcements that impact upon the interests of our close friends and  partners in the region. 

 I try to work on the ‘No Surprises’ theory when it comes to our close friend in Indonesia. 

 Australia’s interests are best served when we work closely with partner countries to deliver mutually-beneficial outcomes.  

 This is the case for a range of issues, from counter-terrorism to people smuggling to building stronger  regional institutions. 

 Australia’s relationship with Indonesia is approaching a crucial juncture in our shared history. 

 It is my view that we cannot allow any of the current issues between us to impact on the overall  relationship nor can we assume that the Government’s approach has gone unnoticed in Jakarta. 

 I thank the Ambassador personally for his gracious, measured and positive approach at this time. 

 A reinvigorated agenda is needed to deal with a different and contemporary set of issues and  priorities - as the Shadow Foreign Minister I want to learn and understand more about what  Indonesia’s sees as the future of our relationship and what Indonesia believes needs to be done to  elevate it. 

 I am devoting much of my time in developing the Coalition’s foreign policy to Indonesia as I can think  of few countries more deserving of our focus. 

 In this ever changing strategic environment, we must be aware that some of the issues that have  shaped the course of the relationship up to this point will no longer hold the same level of significance  as they once did. 

 This shift is being driven by a changing balance of power in the region, as countries such as China  and India, and of course Indonesia, continue their remarkable economic re-emergence. 

 For Indonesia, the strength of its economy is even more significant because of the distance it has  travelled since the economic crisis of the late 1990s. 

 According to Michael Wesley, in his recent publication There Goes the Neighbourhood: 

 “In the year after the crisis hit, the economy halved in size and the rupiah was devalued by 500 per  cent against the American dollar. Unemployment and poverty rates doubled”. 

 Since then, Indonesia has enjoyed a decade of sustained growth.  Its economy is now twice the size  of its pre-crisis peak, with the wealth of its citizens doubling over this period. 

 International Monetary Fund figures show that Indonesian gross domestic product is now greater than  Australia’s based on purchasing-power parity. 

 Having set the goal of 7 - 9 per cent economic growth per year, Indonesia aims to become a  developed country by 2025 and one of the 10 major global economies. 

 For Australia, managing the changes that are now underway will require that we look at new ways to  strengthen our bilateral relationship.  

 The Coalition believes that working closely with the Indonesian Government to identify areas where  closer engagement can be achieved is a foreign policy imperative. 

 I am firmly of the view that our relationship must be elevated - across the board - with special  emphasis given to improving the level of understanding and interaction that exists at a person-to-person level between our two countries. 

 The importance of building up these networks was recognized in the Joint Declaration on  Comprehensive Partnership between Australia and the Republic of Indonesia, signed under the  Howard Government, as “the foundation of our relationship”. 

 While the relationship has changed over the years, many of the negative stereotypes that impede  closer engagement have not. 

 This disappointing reality was captured by the Lowy Institute in its recent 2011 survey on public  opinion and foreign policy. 

 According to the Institute, those surveyed were lukewarm in their feelings towards our neighbour.  “Little to no progress has been made convincing Australians to look more positively at Indonesia”. 

 These findings mirrored similar sentiments among Indonesians towards Australia. 

 The poor level of understanding that exists between our two countries was raised by President  Yudhoyono during a meeting a had with him during his visit here in 2010. 

 According to the President, many Indonesians have little knowledge of Australia outside of the basic,  often negative, stereotypes. 

 Similarly, many Australians have far too little knowledge of our important neighbour other than  misleading stereotypes. 

 Indonesia is at an exciting stage in its development. 

 It has made great gains in recent years in governance and political reform. 

 Since 2005, Indonesia has held more than 600 direct local elections.  

 The 2009 presidential election involved 174 million voters, 625,000 polling stations and 38 national  political parties. 

 The World Bank has labelled Indonesia the election capital of the world. 

 The success of its democratic transition has been a beacon of light to people of the Middle East and  North Africa, as they emerge from the shadow of political oppression, and I believe that this is a role  that will fit Indonesia well in the years ahead. 

 Indonesia’s ability to integrate different actors and strands of thought into its political system has led  many, including former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, to hold it up to the Middle East as an  example worthy of emulation. 

 More than a decade on from the dawn its Reformasi period, Indonesia is a vibrant, multi-party  democracy with a flourishing civil society. 

 The Indonesian Government, under the leadership of President Yudhoyono, has sought to lead the  region on issues of democracy and human rights. 

 It was Indonesia that insisted a commitment to democracy and human rights be included in the new  ASEAN charter, it was Indonesia that took a lead role in establishing the Bali Democracy Forum as a  space for countries to share their experiences and learn from best practice. 

 As Chair of the ASEAN, Indonesia has also played an important leadership role in promoting peace  and stability in the region.  

 Its efforts to bring Cambodia and Thailand together to ease ongoing tensions are to be commended. 

 In the same way that we must work to communicate these achievements to an Australia public, we  must endeavour to find new ways of reaching out to the people of Indonesia. 

 With a rising number of Indonesians accessing the Internet, e-diplomacy presents opportunities for  Australia to engage with grassroots communities in Indonesia.  

 New media and social networking tools have been employed by the United States mission in Jakarta  to communicate with a young, urban population that is increasingly moving away from traditional  media. 

 Taking action to strengthen the bonds between our two nations supports the sentiments of President  Yudhoyono that the 21st century will be about partnership networks. 

 One area where this can be achieved is education and student exchange. 

 Education is one of Australia’s great competitive advantages and an asset for peace and  development in the region. 

 Through the Colombo Plan, Australia reached out to the world, drawing in the best and the brightest  in the region to universities such as ANU. 

 In doing so, it built a legacy of enduring friendships and understanding between peoples and  countries in our region. 

 It was deeply grounded in the faith that improved educational and living standards would foster  political stability. 

 The benefits of student exchange were likewise championed by Arkansas Senator William Fulbright,  who held the betterment of individuals from far-off shores was not only in America’s interests, but that  of the free-world as well. 

 In bringing “a little more knowledge, a little more reason, and a little more compassion into world  affairs”, the Fulbright Program strives to create a world where nations can live in peace and  friendship. 

 So too it should be for Australia in the 21st century. 

 For students studying in Australia or Indonesia, the richness of their experiences and learning  opportunities is an invaluable resource that must be supported. 

 In cases where past students have assumed positions of leadership, as is the case of Indonesian  Vice President Dr Boediono, himself a recipient of a Colombo Plan Scholarship and as an  undergraduate at UWA, student exchange provides a precious insight into Australia’s political  process, our values and our interests. 

 This same applies to Indonesia’s Trade Minister Pangestu and Foreign Minister Natalegawa, both of  whom graduated from this university. 

 While over 17,000 Indonesians are currently studying in Australian, 150 Australians have ventured the  other way.  

 In my view this imbalance is in need of serious and urgent attention. 

 I have spoken previously about the worrying decline in Indonesian language education in Australia’s  schools and universities, and it is my view that this must be a matter of urgency for us and I have  been developing policies in that regard. 

 For I believe Australia should aspire to lead the world in understanding the issues that drive  Indonesian society and government as one of its closest neighbours. 

 The recently completed Independent Review into Aid Effectiveness recommended that more aid  money be given for research by Australian institutions.  

 The report cited ANU’s Indonesia Project as one of AusAid’s best-performing projects in the research  portfolio. 

 This is a worthy recommendation. 

 Australia should look at creating additional centres of excellence to drive research in areas such as  agriculture, health, economics, and governance that affect our closest neighbours in Southeast Asia  and the Pacific. 

 The Coalition believes that it is a priority that a greater level of business and investment activity  between our two countries is facilitated. 

 We welcomed the joint decision in November 2010 to commence negotiations on a comprehensive  economic partnership agreement as an important step in broadening and deepening our economic  engagement. 

 A joint feasibility study undertaken by the Howard Government in 2007 showed that “an ambitious  FTA, encompassing goods, services and investment” would “deliver real trade and economic benefits  to both countries”. 

 At present, the economic relationship between Australia and Indonesia remains well short of its true  potential.  

 According to DFAT, two-way merchandise trade in 2010 was valued at $9.8 billion, with the trade in  services adding a further $3 billion. 

 The fact that Australia exports more to New Zealand with a population of 4 million than it does to  Indonesia with a population of 245 million underscores the point. 

 As the world’s fourth most populous country, Indonesia’s strong rate of economic growth presents  unique opportunities for Australian businesses beyond the mineral resource and soft commodity  sectors. 

 According to Nomura Bank, Indonesia’s middle class has grown from 1.6 million in 2004 to  approximately 50 million in 2011.  This number could reach 150 million by 2014. 

 This growth is reflected in the number of vehicle sales in Indonesia.  

 In 2010, 850,000 new cars and 8 million new motorcycles were sold in the country.  

 Let me put that in context, almost as many two-wheel scooters were sold in Indonesia last year as in  India with its population nearing 1.2 billion.  

 Unlike other emerging economies, domestic consumption in Indonesia accounts for almost 50 per  cent of GDP growth. 

 As capital investment has moved from Jakarta to the rest of Indonesia over the past decade, the rise  in productivity levels has allowed the Indonesian Government to capitalise on its large demographic  dividend. 

 According to the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, Indonesia’s population is predicted to grow by 40  per cent between 2000 and 2050. 

 Indonesia’s Economic Masterplan projects that approximately two million people will enter the  workforce each year between 2010 and 2020.  

 Indonesia’s rising level of prosperity presents great opportunities for Australian businesses involved in  infrastructure and service delivery in particular. 

 According to the Australian Indonesia Business Council, investment is needed in areas such as  telecommunications, transport, power, ports, health and education. 

 At present, an estimated 450 Australian companies have a presence in Indonesia, including ANZ,  Macquarie Bank, Thiess, Leightons and Santos.  

 The Commonwealth Bank also has operations in the country, with 80 local branches providing  financial services to more than 84,000 people. 

 It is the Coalition’s aim to work with the Indonesian Government to ensure that all aspects of our  economic engagement fit in to a mutually agreed, long-term strategic vision. 

 We will also strive to eliminate the widest range of direct and indirect barriers to trade and investment  between our two countries. 

 According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report, these barriers include the  efficiency of government bureaucracy, supply of infrastructure and policy stability.  

 Australia can play a key role in assisting Indonesia to build the institutional capacity that is required to  further strengthen its international competitiveness. 

 One option is increasing the level of twinning opportunities for officials in Australia and Indonesia.  

 Ideally, this should occur at a local, state and federal level. 

 Institutionalising our relationship in this manner would not only aid in the two-way transfer of  knowledge and skills between our two countries, but also strengthen the people-to-people links that  are desperately needed. 

 The evolving nature of our bilateral relationship comes at a time of increased pressure on Australia’s  diplomatic network.  

 These challenges were highlighted again by the Lowy Institute in a series of publications on  Australia’s international policy infrastructure. 

 Australia’s 95 overseas diplomatic missions measured up rather poorly with the OECD average of  133.   We also had the lowest proportion portion of diplomats serving overseas, when compared to  the 13 other foreign services the study looked at. 

 While the staffing level at AusAID is almost double what it was in 1997-98, it has flat-lined at the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.   

 This comes despite the significant demands that have been placed on Australia’s consular staff in  recent years.  

 Requests for consular assistance now exceed 200,000 per year, representing a rise of 50 per cent  over the last five years.  

 Passport applications alone have grown by 16 per cent in the last two years. 

 And I know our embassy in Jakarta is one of the busiest in the region, if not the busiest embassy. 

 In government, the Coalition will look closely at our overseas diplomatic presence to see if it properly  reflects Australia’s diverse range of national interests in the 21st century. 

 Ensuring that Australia has the right level of representation, particularly in emerging centres of  influence in the Indian Ocean - Asia Pacific Region, will be essential if we are to prepare ourselves  for the 21st century. 

 We acknowledge the importance of increasing Australia’s diplomatic presence in countries in our  region but particularly in Indonesia, and if our relationship is to be broadened and deepened over the  coming years our diplomatic presence must be appropriate. 

 This step would complement our ambition to strengthen all aspects of Australia’s engagement with  Indonesia in the political, economic, trade, commercial, social and cultural fields. 

 Just as demography will be our destiny, so too is our geography - neighbours in the part of the world  that will become the centrepiece of an Asian century. 

 

