---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Fremantle: 12 August 2011: Cape Class patrol boats; carbon price; surplus; asylum seekers; immigration detention; Opposition's $70 billion black hole; AALD"
date: "2011-08-12"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Cape Class patrol boats"
  - "carbon price"
  - "surplus"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "immigration detention"
  - "Opposition's $70 billion black hole"
  - "AALD"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358788
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1003490%22
---

 

 

 

 The Hon Julia Gillard, MP   

 

 Brendan O’Connor, MP  Minister for Home Affairs  Minister for Justice  Minister for Privacy and Freedom of Information 

 Member for Gorton   

 Gary Gray, AO, MP  Special Minister of State  Special Minister of State for the Public Service   

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE   FREMANTLE  12 AUGUST 2011   

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:      Cape Class patrol boats; Carbon price; Surplus; Asylum  seekers; Immigration detention; Opposition’s $70 billion black hole;  AALD;    

 PM: I’m very pleased to be here with my ministerial colleagues Minister  Brendan O’Connor and Minister Gary Gray. Gary Gray is here in his capacity  as representing this part of the world in Western Australia, and we’re here  today to celebrate signing a major new contract with Austal. This is a contract 

 to build new patrol boats for our waters. We already have more assets  patrolling our borders than ever before, but we do want increase the capability  and reach of the vessels that patrol our borders, and so as a Government we  are investing $350 million in a new class of patrol boat, the Cape Class.   

 This will be 8 new patrol boats joining the efforts to patrol our borders, and of  course when we have these border patrols they’re about a series of potential  challenges: they’re about the importation of illegal substances like drugs;  they’re about combating people smuggling; it’s also about potential  environmental threats; and of course about illegal fishing.   

 I’m very pleased that we were able to make this investment and make it right  here in the skills and capacities of this workforce. This investment will support  500 direct jobs and indirectly will support around 1,000 more. It will of course  go to support further training efforts - more apprentices, more skills coming on  stream. I’ve had the opportunity to talk to people who work here, people who  started their apprenticeship and are still here building the vessels that we can  see behind us.   

 I’m very pleased that Austal will now more into generating the Cape Class  patrol boats. This new fleet will be fully available and in the water by  September 2015. Construction is going to start in 2012 and we will  progressively see these vessels come onto active use and come into our fleet.   

 I’ll turn to Minister O’Connor for some comments on the key capability  differences of this new class of patrol boat.   

 MINISTER O’CONNOR: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.    

 Well, the Prime Minister’s already outlined the threats that our border  protection must deal with each and every day. The Cape Class vessel of  course is an enhanced-capable vessel. It will advance its capability compared  with the Bay Class vessel and there’s no doubt as a result of the new design  these vessels will be able to sail longer - they’ll be able to sail 4,000 nautical  miles compared to 2,700 nautical miles. That allows them to have up to 28  sailing days. They’ll also be approximately 18 crew on each vessel compared  with 10 crew now, which again allows them to deal with certain challenges in  a more effective manner, and indeed these vessels are much larger, which  provides not only better amenities for crew but of course also the capability of  carrying other passengers, particularly either dealing with people smugglers  but most likely responding to safety-of-life-at-sea situations.   

 So, there is no doubt as a result of the contract being won by this Australian-owned company Austal we will see from early 2013 new vessels working with  Customs and Border Protection to protect our waters, to protect not only our  mainland coastline but to protect the coastline of our external territories. This  is indeed a magnificent project, not only jobs for Western Australia but it  means that Customs and Border Protection, who do a fine job now, will even  be able to do a better job once these vessels hit the water.   

 PM: And before we take questions can I just say a big thank you to everyone  who’s made us so welcome here today, to Andrew and Tim and Courtney and  Russell thank you very much.    

 So, we’re very happy to take your questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you seemed to get a pretty positive reception  last night at the People’s Forum. Do you think that’s an indication that people  are starting to accept your carbon tax message, or the message is getting  through?   

 PM: I certainly enjoyed the People’s Forum last night. I thought there were  some great questions and it was a good discussion.    

 I’ll continue being around the country, talking to people about the need to put  a price on carbon, how it will enable us to realise a clean energy future as we  support Australian jobs, cut taxes and increase the pension. So, I was  pleased to have that discussion last night and I’ll continue having them right  around the nation.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you seem to be changing, or your Government  seems to be changing, the language about returning the budget to surplus in  2012-13. Can you guarantee the budget will actually return to surplus in that  time?   

 PM: Clearly we’ve seen some instability in global markets and some stresses  and strains coming out of the US and also out of Europe, and we believe that  will have an impact on global growth and we’re not immune from that. It  makes the challenge of bringing the budget back to surplus in 2012-13 more  difficult, but it is certainly our objective to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13 and we expect to achieve that.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) rock-solid guarantee, though, previously (inaudible)  can you still maintain that rock-solid guarantee?   

 PM: I think you are possibly confusing me with Tony Abbott giving an iron-clad, rock-solid guarantee about the medical safety net at one election and  then immediately breaking that promise afterwards.    

 Of course, we’ve consistently said that our economy’s needs in 2012-13 will  be to have the budget in surplus. So, we had the days of the global financial  crisis and it was the right thing to do during those days to put stimulus into the  economy and to support Australian jobs, and we came out of the global  financial crisis stronger than any other developed country. We didn’t go into  recession, and the fact that today we have solid growth prospects, low  unemployment, good Government finances, all of these economic  fundamental strengths are in part because we came out of the global financial  crisis so strong.   

 As we came out of the global financial crisis we said the right thing was to  have fiscal discipline, fiscal rules that would return us to surplus in 2012-13.  We are determined to keep pursuing a budget surplus in 2012-13 and we  expect to achieve that surplus.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on asylum seekers, how concerned are you  that we’re not going to have a rush of boats (inaudible)?   

 PM: As the Minister for Immigration has made clear and I’m perfectly happy to  make clear, we have entered an arrangement with Malaysia. We believe in  the proceedings before the High Court we’ve got a very solid legal case, so  anyone who is contemplating paying a lot of money to a people smuggler and 

 risking their life at sea should thing again because the risk that they are  running is that they will promptly be taken to Malaysia.   

 JOURNALIST: In regards to the asylum seekers that might be sent to Manus  Island, will they then be sent to, if their refugee status is approved, will they be  sent to Australia?   

 PM: We’ll deal with all of the details of this arrangement following further  discussions with PNG. What we’ve said for a fair period of time now is that we  wanted to have an assessment centre in PNG. We were in active discussions 

 with the Government of PNG, and then of course Sir Michael, the then Prime  Minister and a very pivotal figure in the life of the nation of PNG, became  more unwell, causing, of course, the PNG Parliament and the PNG people to  focus on their own circumstances and issues.    

 Now, of course, a new government has emerged and Prime Minister O’Neill  has made it very clear that he is very positive towards the proposal and wants  to work with Australia on it, so we’ll take it to the next step and we will look to  conclude arrangements with PNG and obviously when we have we’ll make full  details of those arrangements available.   

 JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)   

 PM: We’ll deal with all of that a step at a time. What we’ve got now is a new  Prime Minister in PNG. He has said very publicly that he’s very positive about  entering into an arrangement with Australia for a centre, so we’ll get about  entering that arrangement.   

 JOURNALIST: Will the Cape Class vessels be better able to respond to  tragedies such what happened at Christmas Island?   

 PM: I’ll get the Minister to comment on that.   

 MINISTER O’CONNOR: Can I say in relation to the awful tragedy that  occurred on 15 December, the vessels in question that went to the assistance  of that vessel in distress that foundered on the rocks were in fact larger  vessels, they were not Bay Class vessels. ACV Triton and one of the  Armidales went to the assistance, so it’s not a situation that would most likely  engage a Cape Class vessel. Cape Class vessels are replacing Bay Class  vessels and the Bay Class vessel type was not in the position to go to the  rescue of those people. As I say, they were larger vessels in question.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the scathing report  from Comcare into the conditions inside immigration detention centres?   

 PM: This Comcare report was received a number of months ago and the  Department of Immigration has already acted to respond to its  recommendations. Of course, working in a detention centre environment is  challenging - it’s always been a challenging job across the long history of  mandatory detention in this country.   

 Comcare has made a series of recommendations and the Department of  Immigration is responding to them.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott’s (inaudible) this morning that he’s  given the opportunity to rescind a carbon tax that things like the pension  increases, the tax rebate (inaudible) and the family payments, those sorts of  things will go with it. What’s your response?   

 PM: In the last federal election campaign the Opposition got itself into an $11  billion black hole. Its promises just simply didn’t add up.  

 

 Now, from leaked internal documents from the Opposition, it’s clear that  they’re in a $70 billion black hole. To give people a sense of the size and  scale of that, $70 billion is the same as not paying out any Medicare money 

 for four years - no Medicare money for anyone for four years. Or it’s the same  as not paying the age pension or any other payment to senior Australians for  two years.    

 $70 billion is a lot of money, and when you’ve got a black hole that big, that  huge, when you have to see the size and scale of that black hole, you know,  what is the Opposition proposing to do? Not pay pensioners for two years?  Not pay anybody a dollar in Medicare for four years? That’s the size of the  black hole they’re talking about, so I think they’ve got some questions to  answer about how on earth they got themselves into this position and how on  earth they’re going to get themselves out of it.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Joe Hockey says the Coalition will find the  savings it needs by looking at Government waste. Do you accept that?   

 PM: How ridiculous - $70 billion. Not just aged pensions - every amount of  money we pay to senior Australians, for two years. Every dollar we pay out in  Medicare for four years. $70 billion is a huge amount of money.    

 We’re here today talking about building new vessels, important new vessels  for patrolling our borders. It’s big investment. It’s $350 million. I ask you to  imagine $70 billion in comparison.   

 I mean, you can only find that kind of money in the Government’s budget if  you say ‘we’ll smash education right across the board, we’ll smash into aged  pensioners right across the board, we’ll smash into Medicare right across the 

 board’. That’s the kind of thing you have to do to find $70 billion.   

 Any other suggestion is simply laughable.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you find it significant that this leak came from the Shadow  Cabinet in the first place?   

 PM: That’s really a question for the Opposition to answer. Maybe it indicates  that there’s someone in the Opposition who is very concerned that they’ve got  themselves into such an irresponsible position.   

 JOURNALIST: On the Manus Island solution, will the Australian Government  be the only country to fund it, or could you see there’s scope for other  international agencies?   

 PM: We’ve always said that this was a bilateral discussion between us and  PNG, so of course we’d make the appropriate provision to fund it - and we  did. In the budget that we brought down in May made the appropriate  provision to fund it. We’ll now get about talking to PNG about all of the details.   

 JOURNALIST: Why has the Government sidelined the UNHCR in terms of the  running of Manus Island?   

 PM: It’s not a question of that. UNHCR makes its decisions about what it  chooses to be involved in. It has been involved in the discussions leading to  the arrangement with Malaysia and it will be involved in the implementation of  that arrangement. We’ve never had the slightest expectation that UNHCR  would be involved in the discussions with PNG.   

 JOURNALIST: What are you hoping to achieve in the US leadership  dialogues over the weekend?   

 PM: That’s an important event right here in Perth. This is a big year for  international events in Perth. Of course we’ve got the Commonwealth Heads  of Government Meeting later this year. This weekend we’ve got the Australian  American Leadership Dialogue. This is a dialogue of longstanding between  Australians, parliamentarians, business people, people from education,  people from public policy think tanks, people from business and research  institutes with counterparts in the United States. It always helps us draw  closer as nations to have that kind of dialogue, so I’m looking forward to  participating in it tomorrow.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you be having a sit down, one-on-one, with the head of  the World Bank?   

 PM: I’ll be meeting with a range of participants at the leadership dialogue, so  right across the board I’ll be seeing people, and yes, there are some  attendees of some very considerable status there.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the surplus by 2012-13, is that a core promise from  you (inaudible).   

 PM: We’ve just got to show a bit of common sense about all of this, and the  common sense is of course we’ve seen events over recent weeks that will  have an impact on global growth. We’re not immune from that, but at the  same time we stand in a country with great economic fundamentals, and here  in Western Australia, more than any other part of the nation, you know about  growth: you know about the growth coming from the resources sector; you  know about the huge pipeline of investment, more than $400 billion. We’ve  got low unemployment, we’ve got strong public finances, our economy is the  envy of the world.    

 What we do is we update economic forecasts at budget time and also at the  time that we publish the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, and we’ll do  that again, but our continued objective is to come to surplus in 2012-13 and I  expect to do so.    

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)   

 PM: Let’s just show some common sense about this. Of course, we update  our economic forecasts. We’re not immune from what’s happening in the 

 globe. We’ve seen events in recent weeks. Obviously we take those into  account, our experts at Treasury do in terms of our economic forecasts, and  our economic forecasts will next be updated in the Mid Year Outlook.  Standing here I can certainly say to you it’s our expectation that the budget  will return to surplus in 2012-13.   

 JOURNALIST: There is a picture in a number of papers this morning of an 18-year-old asylum seeker (inaudible) think how could you send somebody like  that to Malaysia, what would have to say to those people?   

 PM: Well I’d just repeat the words the Minister and I have said consistently  about this arrangement - there are no blanket exemptions. There is a pre-assessment procedure but there are no blanket exemptions, and no-one who  is contemplating giving their money to a people smuggler, getting on a boat,  risking their life, potentially risking their child’s life, no-one should do that  assuming that there’s an exemption in place for them or their child. There are  no blanket exemptions.   

 Thank you very much.   

 [ENDS]   

