---
title: "Brimbank's African youth benefit from $60 000 grant"
date: "2011-08-29"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359470
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1244198%22
---

 

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 Brimbank's African youth benefit from  $60 000 grant  Monday, 29 August 2011 

 Young people from African backgrounds in Melbourne’s Brimbank area will benefit  from $60 000 in the latest round of funding under the 2011-12 Settlement Grants  Program, Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator  Kate Lundy, announced in Sunshine today. 

 The grant will assist the Brimbank Youth Pilot project, which helps young African  people find suitable education, training or employment opportunities. 

 'The Brimbank Youth Pilot is an initiative of the Centre for Multicultural Youth, which  advocates for the needs of young people from migrant and refugee backgrounds,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'This grant will enable the centre to continue working with African youth and  complement existing youth education and training services. 

 'It will focus on recognising and developing the strengths of young African men and  assist them to make a positive contribution to their communities.' 

 From 1 July 2011, a total of 179 new projects delivered through 148 organisations  have been funded under the government's Settlement Grants Program, which aims  to help refugees and migrants become self-reliant, contribute to the national  economy, and acquire crucial skills and knowledge about life in Australia. 

 Close to $11 million has been allocated to Victorian agencies to help refugees and  migrants settle into their new communities. 

 'More than 20 per cent of the African humanitarian entrants who entered Australia in  the past five years are in Victoria,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Many of them face challenges as they settle into their lives, because of factors  including low levels of literacy in English and their own language, years spent in  refugee camps, and significant experiences of torture and trauma.' 

 'Projects like the Brimbank Youth Pilot will promote social participation and assist  young people in their cultural transition into Australia.' 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on  the Department of Immigration and Citizenship’s.   See: Settlement Grants Program 2011-12 Grant Recipients 

 

 

 

 

  

