---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Nauru: 12 June 2011: visit to Nauru; Labor's Malaysian people swap"
date: "2011-06-12"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "visit to Nauru"
  - "Labor's Malaysian people swap"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355748
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/844461%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 12 June 2011   

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR,  JOINT DOORSTOP INTERVIEW WITH MR. SCOTT MORRISON MHR,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  NAURU   

 Subjects: Visit to Nauru; Labor’s Malaysian people swap.    

 E&OE……………………….…………………………………………………………………   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Today is going to be a very busy day on Nauru. It’s going to start with going to Mass with the President,  then there’s going to be a very intense inspection of the infrastructure of the island followed this afternoon  by meetings with the President and senior members of the Government and the Opposition and finally  tonight there will be a dinner hosted by the Foreign Minister. So, it’s going to be a very busy day.    

 I’m looking forward to seeing as much as I possibly can of the island, having a good long hard look at the  former processing centre. My understanding from Scott - who has visited the island before - is that it could  be up and running again within a matter of weeks at relatively low cost and the point I keep making is that  this is a much smarter option than Malaysia when it comes to the processing of boat people. If we’re serious  about stopping the boats, we know that Nauru worked - particularly in conjunction with temporary  protection visas - and that’s why I keep saying this is a trip that the Prime Minister should be making. It  shouldn’t just be me coming to Nauru, it should be the Prime Minister as well.   

 SCOTT MORRISON:   

 Can I just make one other point on that, Tony? Today, when we go and see the facilities you’ll see the State  House site which is on the programme this morning and that would be the first facility where we would look  to reopen, that’s the facility which is in a very good situation at the moment. The other point I would make,  too, as you go around, we’ll be visiting the power facilities here today. I mean, ten years ago, when this  facility was first opened in Nauru, it was in a very different position than it is today and Nauru has advanced  since then, particularly in the area of its infrastructure, and you’ll see the hospital later today as well. These  sorts of improvements only make this an even better option today than it was a decade ago.    

 QUESTION:   

 Mr Abbott, with the flight last night, you would have got a sense yourself of just how far Nauru is from  Australia. Is it appropriate for Australia to be sending boat arrivals this far into the Pacific and running at  arm’s length a detention centre here? Surely that is more expensive than Christmas Island?   

 2 

 

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well, the fact is that we ran Nauru from 2002 to 2007. Building and operating the centre cost less than $300  million in that time. Many, many hundreds of boat people were processed here, so the former government  did here in Nauru for less than $300 million what the Government is proposing to do just on a one-off basis  in Malaysia. So, I think that this is a far more economical option than Malaysia.    

 QUESTION:   

 But as Scott just said, infrastructure has come a long way since then, presumably running them will  [inaudible]. How are you so certain that it will be less than $300 million?   

 SCOTT MORRISON:    

 We’ve actually seen the reverse of that, I’d say. I mean, the fact that the infrastructure is in such better  condition today and there aren’t all those same establishment costs that we had last time; so there’s the  opportunity to come and operate now from a standing start. This is a facility that has already been operating  and, as I said, it’s in a better condition today than when we first came in ten years ago. I mean, ten years ago,  there just weren’t the facilities there but within nineteen days of the announcement, people were here on  Nauru.    

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 I mean, the point is that the Government says that it’s going to cost at least $300 million just to do a one-off  people swap with Malaysia. Now, under the Howard Government the Nauru centre was operational for six  years. It was built and operated for six years for less than the Government’s proposing to spend on this one-off deal with Malaysia. So, that’s why I say that it’s more economical and more humane for boat people to  be sent to Nauru than for them to be sent off to Malaysia.    

 QUESTION:   

 Is that dollar comparison done in today’s terms, though?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well, obviously I’m using the figures at the time, but there’s a world of difference between establishing and  running a centre for six years and a one-off deal. Now, this one-off deal with Malaysia is extraordinarily  expensive whereas we already have a taxpayer-funded and built centre here in Nauru and as I am confident  we will see today, it wouldn’t take very much to get that up and running again quite quickly.    

 Thank you.    

 [ends]   

 

 

