---
title: "Bowen misrepresents Solicitor-General's advice"
date: "2011-09-04"
creators:
  - "Brandis, George"
source: "SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211359732
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1405424%22
---

 Bowen misrepresents Solicitor-General’s Advice   04/09/11  

 Contrary to the claims by the Minister for Immigration, Mr Bowen this morning, the  Advice of the Commonwealth Solicitor-General does not rule out the possibility of  offshore processing on Nauru, following the High Court’s decision striking down the  “Malaysian solution”. It leaves that possibility open. 

 What the Solicitor-General advises, so far as concerns Nauru, may be summarized as  follows: 

 1. The declarations made under s.198A of the Migration Act by the former  Immigration Minister, Mr Ruddock, on 2 October 2001, and 25 November 2002,  would not have satisfied the tests set out by the High Court. The principal, but not 

 exclusive, reason they would have failed to meet those tests because Nauru was not a  party to the Refugee Convention at the time. As well, the Solicitor-General  emphasized the absence, at the time, of protections under the domestic law of Nauru. 

 2. The accession by Nauru to the Refugee Convention, which comes into operation on  26 September 2011, is “a material change of position of Nauru. The coming into force  of the Refugees Protocol in Nauru has subjected it to obligations under international  law, obligations which provide at least the elements found to be missing by the  majority in Plaintiff M70 [i.e. the High Court decision] in relation to Malaysia.”  [paras. 34-35] 

 3. In order for offshore processing in Nauru to meet the High Court’s tests, two  conditions must be satisfied: “first, that appropriate arrangements were in place to  ensure practical compliance by Nauru with its obligations under the [Refugee]  Convention and the Protocol; and, secondly, that Nauru in its treatment of asylum  seekers and refugees complied in practice with human rights standards acceptable at  least to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.” [para. 3] 

 I yesterday spoke to the Minister for Justice of Nauru, the Hon. Mathew Batsiua, who  affirmed to me that his Government intended to take such steps as were necessary to  enact domestic laws which ensured that Nauru was compliant with the High Court’s  decision. 

 Given that the Nauruan Government is prepared to take those steps, it now remains  for the Australian Government to demonstrate that it has the political will to make the  Nauruan solution effective. 

 Since the Government has considered that it is in the public interest to release the  Solicitor-General’s most recent Opinion, there is no excuse for it not to release the  Solicitor-General’s earlier advice, and other legal advice - now shown to have been 

 erroneous - on the basis of which it decided that the “Malaysian solution” would  withstand legal challenge. 

