---
title: "$10.89 million Victorian Settlement Services"
date: "2011-06-16"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355878
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1005903%22
---

 Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister  Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs 

 

 $10.89 Million Victorian Settlement Services  Thursday, 16 June 2011 

 Joint Media Release with Senator Kate Lundy - Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and Chris  Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today  announced that $10.89 million would be allocated to Victorian agencies under the  Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to help refugees and migrants settle into their  new communities. 

 As part of the grants program funding allocated to Victoria this coming financial year,  the Government will provide $100 000 to the Australian Multicultural Foundation in  Melbourne for the Social Inclusion Through Sports program, which links migrant and  refugee youth to mainstream sporting clubs and associations. 

 'As well as the physical health benefits from engaging in sporting activities, this  project will also deliver improved social and emotional health benefits for young  people and their families,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'It will also increase personal and social development, integration and participation,  and build stronger links in communities for new migrants.' 

 The Australian Multicultural Foundation will deliver the project through local  communities in the Melbourne's inner central suburbs, and the eastern suburbs. 

 'Inclusion through sport is a positive way to help young migrants and refugees  connect with their local communities, develop greater independence and improve  their life skills,' Senator Lundy said. 

 In the 2011-12 financial year, the settlement grants program will provide $6.55  million towards 43 new projects that will help new arrivals settle into Victoria.  Funding is also provided for a number of successful projects continued from previous  financial years. 

 Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations. 

 'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Senator Lundy  said. 

 A complete list of successful applicants in the 2011-12 funding round is available on  the Department of Immigration website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 

 

  

