---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Bali Process Ministerial Conference, Brisbane: 29 March 2011"
date: "2011-03-29"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211351034
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/690600%22
---

 

 Minister for Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen   

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP  BALI PROCESS MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE  29 MARCH 2011 

 E & OE - PROOF ONLY 

 Minister Rudd:   I saw the Foreign Minister in Jakarta this morning; I saw the President as  well. And so there are no easy fixes in this business but we will be working hard with our  Indonesian colleagues. 

 Journalist: Is the main goal reaching our regional agreement or having the processing centre  as part of that agreement? 

 Minister Rudd: We are working our way through each of the issues and to say what we have  said many times before, there are no easy fixes here, but many, many countries are in  attendance. We have been working hard with the delegations, the officials have as well, but  one step at a time. 

 Journalist: Does likely progress on a regional cooperation framework give you any reason to  hope that the type of processing centre you have been talking about has a hope? 

 Minister Bowen: Well certainly, as Kevin said, we are very focused on working together with  our regional colleagues to develop a framework. 

 Kevin and I will be arguing for better regional cooperation.   

 We believe part of that is an assessment centre as part of a broader framework but one step  at a time. These are complex diplomatic negotiations and we will be engaging in very serious  discussions with our colleagues from around the region over the next 24 hours.   

 Journalist: So you don’t see any hope at the moment... 

 Journalist: We are hearing that Timor has not been discussed in any of those meetings or  discussions today at the official level.  

 Minister Bowen: We have been consistent that this is about a framework. This is about an  assessment centre but the location of the assessment centre is for bilateral discussion, not  for discussion through the Bali Meeting itself. 

 Journalist: Does the bilateral push actually undermine what you are on about here? A  regional approach to asylum seekers and processing; a bilateral push hatched on the eve of  an election?  

 Minister Bowen: No, not at all.  What we are talking about is a framework, and a framework  then of course has its component parts, are further bilateral discussions. 

 Journalist:  Has a Timor Centre been mentioned in any of your trips up here at Jakarta - the  Prime Minister as well, have always said as well that it would be discussed at the Bali  Process and it is now not going to be... 

 Minister Bowen: No, we have always said that a Regional Framework with a regional  assessment centre as part of that, would be discussed at the Bali Process, at this meeting of  course, and it will be.  But the actual physical location of course, is also a matter of  discussion on a bilateral basis. 

 Minister Rudd: Just before I head inside to do some other things, guys, I want to also say  that I had the opportunity for good discussions this morning with the President and the  Foreign Minister about this year’s East Asia Summit.   

 The Summit is going to be hosted here in Indonesia. It is the first one the United States will  attend. It is therefore a critical meeting for the future of our regional institutions for the  future on peace, on security, on strategic challenges as well as our economic cooperation.  

 So we have had a very good discussion on what will be an important strategic year for  building this region’s institutions long term and having said that guys, we have got to zip.    

 END 

 

 Media Contacts:  0434 664 589 (Foreign Minister’s Office) 

    0400 510 802 (Immigration Minister’s Office) 

 

 

 

