---
title: "Tougher character test to send clear message"
date: "2011-04-26"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211351873
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548151%22
---

 

 Tougher character test to send clear message  Tuesday, 26 April 2011 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, will introduce a range  of measures to strengthen the consequences of inappropriate and criminal behaviour  in immigration detention. 

 Mr Bowen announced today that he will introduce amendments to the Migration Act,  including a new provision to toughen the character test. 

 'These changes will remove any doubt around the character test and send a strong  and clear message that the kind of unacceptable behaviour we saw recently at the  Christmas Island and Villawood detention centres will not be tolerated,' Mr Bowen  said. 

 'The government believes the powers under the Migration Act can be strengthened  to create a more significant disincentive for this sort of destructive behaviour.' 

 Under the proposed changes, the Migration Act will be amended so that: 

  A person would fail the character test should  they be convicted of any offence committed  while in immigration detention; and 

  The maximum penalty for the manufacture,  possession, use or distribution of weapons by  immigration detainees will increase from three  to five years' imprisonment. 

 'These changes send a clear message to anyone considering engaging in  unacceptable behaviour in immigration detention that this will only increase their  chances of not being granted a visa,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'This will apply to all people in immigration detention: onshore and offshore arrivals,  asylum seekers, or otherwise.' 

 Mr Bowen said that, subject to natural justice, he intended to use the full extent of his  powers to prevent people who have been involved in criminal, violent or destructive  behaviour, from being allowed to apply for a permanent protection visa. 

 These powers include only granting refugees provisional visas, which do not permit  family reunion and may be cancelled where they no longer require protection. 

 'As I have said all along, people's visa claims are addressed on a case by case  basis, and allowing for the ongoing criminal investigations, I have committed to  looking at these very closely and will respond accordingly,' he said. 

 The government will seek to introduce the changes during the next session of  Parliament. Subject to passage of the legislation, the character test amendments will  take effect from today. 

 

 

