---
title: "Senator Hanson-Young visits Inverbrackie Detention Facility"
date: "2011-01-20"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211348255
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/500197%22
---

 Thursday, 20 January 2011    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Senator Hanson-Young visits Inverbrackie Detention  Facility    

 A time limit must be placed on detention of asylum seekers, irrespective of where  they are being detained, according to the Australian Greens’ Immigration  Spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, who visited the Inverbrackie facility in  the Adelaide Hills today.   

  “These vulnerable people should have their claims processed quickly and efficiently  and if the Government insists on detaining them while it does this, then that  detention should be in a facility that is much more humane like Inverbrackie, rather  than Christmas Island. It’s time the Government dumped its failed off-shore  processing policy,” said Senator Hanson-Young.    

 The Senator visited Inverbrackie this morning and met with families being held in the  facility.   

 “This facility provides asylum seekers with some level of autonomy, so they can  better function like a family unit. Simple things like eating a home cooked meal  together aren’t possible on Christmas Island or other mainland facilities like Darwin  or Leonora, but they are at Inverbrackie. It’s telling that a 15 year old boy told me on  today’s visit that the best thing about being out of Leonora was the fact that he now  gets to enjoy his Mum’s cooking,” Senator Hanson-Young said.    

 “If we are to utilise facilities like Inverbrackie, they must be the first port of call, rather  than the exception to the rule. But irrespective of where people are detained, this  should be done quickly and efficiently. We know prolonged detention has a negative  impact on mental health and compounds the suffering of people who have already  experienced torture and trauma.”    

 “There must be time limits placed on detention to minimise suffering and the  Government must act to properly resource ASIO to quickly conduct security  clearances. There are already  increasing numbers of asylum seekers in detention  who have been deemed genuine refugees, yet due to ASIO’s backlog, they’re still  awaiting clearance.”    

 “These are people who will make a positive contribution to Australian society. I was  moved when I learned that some families had sought to use their credits (the  currency used in the facility for shopping) to make donations to flood victims in  Queensland. These are the kind of people we want as citizens and reflect the  compassion of the broader community at this time,” concluded Senator Hanson-Young.    

 MEDIA COMMENT - Robert Simms: 0427 604 760    

 Robert Simms    Adviser   Community Liaison & Campaigns   Office of Sarah Hanson-Young   Greens Senator for South Australia   Ground Floor, Telstra Building   30 Pirie Street Adelaide SA 5000   Ph: (08) 8231 9911 / Fax: (08) 8211 7533 

  

