---
title: "More detention riots just business as usual under Labor"
date: "2011-07-20"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR PRODUCTIVITY & POPULATION, IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211357848
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/941960%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population,  Immigration & Citizenship  Scott Morrison   

 More detention riots just business as usual under Labor   

 20/07/11    

 Another riot on Christmas Island and protestors back on the roof in Darwin  have become business as usual in Labor’s rolling detention crisis, according  to Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population & Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison.   

 “Another day, another riot, it’s all just ‘business as usual’ in a detention  network that’s been in a rolling crisis for more than a year,” Mr Morrison said  today.   

 “Once again, Australian staff working at the detention centre have been put at  risk. Once again, taxpayer funded facilities have been set alight and  damaged. Once again, Federal Police have been called on site to quash the  rioters.  Once again, the Prime Minister has made her hollow threats to deal  with the trouble makers. Once again, no-one believes her - neither the  detainees nor the Australian people.   

 “And once again, the only thing we can really expect is for it all to happen  again.   

 “All of these issues will now be examined as part of the Parliamentary Inquiry  into the Immigration Detention Network secured by the Coalition during the  past parliamentary sittings.  During this Inquiry I am keen to hear from those  working in our detention network about how they can be better protected and  better supported to do their job to maintain order.   

 “Submissions can be made to the Inquiry in confidence and with privilege. I  would encourage all those working in and with knowledge of what is really  happening in our detention network to come forward,” he said.   

 “The rolling crisis in our detention network is the direct result of Labor’s failed  border protection policies over the past three years.  Through the  announcement of their still to be finalised Malaysian deal, Labor have  admitted that their weakened polices have underwritten the people smugglers  business model.   

 “For years, the Government blamed everyone but themselves for the surge in  boat arrivals. Labor’s decision to now send asylum seekers to Malaysia is an  admission that it was the pull factors of their own policies that were  responsible.   

 “Whether the Malaysian solution stops the boats or not, time will tell.  Over  400 people, more than half the 800 provided for under the deal, have already  turned up.   

 “What is clear is that Australian taxpayers will be footing the bill in our  detention network for years to come for Labor’s past three years of denial and  failed border protection policy,” Mr Morrison said.   

