---
title: "Speech to the Youth Attainment and Transitions National Partnership conference, Novotel Hotel, Brighton Beach, Sydney"
date: "2011-11-29"
creators:
  - "Garrett, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR SCHOOL EDUCATION, EARLY CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH"
subjects:
  - "Youth"
  - "Transition from school to work"
  - "Transition from school to further education"
  - "Educational status"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211364952
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1260463%22
---

 

 

 THE HON PETER GARRETT MP  Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth   

 

 SPEECH TO THE YOUTH ATTAINMENT AND TRANSITIONS NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP  CONFERENCE   

 Novotel Hotel  Brighton Beach  Sydney 

 

 TUESDAY, 29 NOVEMBER 2011 

 

 **CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**   

 

 Acknowledgements    

 I acknowledge the traditional owners and custodians of the land on which we meet today — and  pay my respects to their elders, past and present.   

 I extend that respect to other Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who are here today.   

 I’d also like to acknowledge all the representatives from the Youth Connections and School  Business Community Partnership Broker organisations that are attending this two day  conference.    

 Welcome.   

 Introduction   

 It’s great to join you for this opening session and share the occasion with you.   

 I know many of you here are working directly with young people or developing policies and  running programs that benefit young people.   

 It’s rewarding but often challenging work, and I know you wouldn’t have taken it on if you didn’t  have a passion to see young people do well.    

 If you are working directly with young people, your salary probably doesn’t reflect the  qualifications and experience you have.    

 We’ve taken a step to address this, with the recent announcement by the Prime Minister that the  Government was prepared to provide over $2 billion to deliver a pay rise to workers in the social  and community services sector.   

 And earlier this year, the Prime Minister indicated the Government’s strong support for the  Productivity Commission’s vision for a system to radically reform the funding of disability  services. 

 

 I acknowledge these reforms won’t take effect immediately.   

 But over time, they will help many young people in our community — and importantly, many of  the workers who support them.   

 I hope you agree these changes are heading in the right direction, towards respecting young  people and appropriately recognising and rewarding the skills and efforts of people working with  them.    

 Young Australians   

 We live in a country with about four million young people.   

 A great many young Australians are doing well in terms of their health, education and  participation in their community.   

 We know that roughly three-quarters of 12 to 17 year olds live at home with two parents, and 22  per cent live with one parent.   

 About one in five of 12 to 24 year olds were born overseas, and the same proportion speak a  language other than English.   

 We also know that young people in Australia are the most likely group in the population to  experience a mental illness. With about three quarters of adult mental health and substance use  disorders beginning in childhood or adolescence.   

 And, although 2.5 per cent of the Australian population are Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islanders, it’s worth remembering that this figure is considerably higher in the general youth  population — currently about 3.7 per cent of young Australians are Indigenous people.   

 Around 70 per cent of 15 to 19 year olds are engaged in full-time education.    

 Of the 15 to 19 year olds not in full-time education, around 70 per cent are in full or part-time  employment.      

 In October this year, the overall youth unemployment rate was about 11 per cent [11.3], more  than twice the total population rate of around 5 per cent [5.2].    

 What we can draw from these statistics is that some young people are seizing with both hands  the opportunities that living in Australia provides, and others are really struggling, for a variety of  reasons.   

 And another group need a little gentle encouragement as they make the transition to adulthood  and a satisfying and productive future.   

 The first challenge we all share is to connect meaningfully with every young person about their  life, what they need, and their future.   

 That’s why we’ve opened the Australian Youth Forum to reach out and engage young people in  the online world — a medium many young people are using.   

 Then we need to identify the best way to help young people stay on a positive developmental  track that leads to a healthy, satisfying and rewarding life.   

 You will know that groups at serious risk of social exclusion include Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander young people, those with poor workforce skills, those not engaged in education or work  for extended periods, those with a disability and those living in low socioeconomic households.   

 We should never accept that a young person’s achievement and future happiness is determined  by where they live.    

 We know that education is one of the most important ways we can support young Australians to  achieve their potential.   

 Education contributes to each individual’s life satisfaction and success, and on a broader level,  to a productive economy.   

 Adolescence is a significant period of development — physically, psychologically, emotionally  and socially.    

 It’s one of those life stages when people can be vulnerable, but are also often receptive and  willing to engage with ideas and grow as a person.    

 Even a small intervention at this time can help someone to have a productive and rewarding life.   

 I am an Ambassador for the Mick Young Scholarship Trust which provides modest sums of  money to people who struggle with the costs of education.    

 Just having their study books paid for can mean a person who is struggling will get an  educational qualification they would otherwise give up on.   

 We’ve implemented a broad framework through the National Strategy for Young Australians.    

 This highlights eight priority areas for Government action to help young Australians including  health and wellbeing, education, employment and early intervention to prevent problems getting  worse.   

 The complexity and diversity of issues affecting young people is well reflected in the agenda  that you will discuss over the next few days, and I congratulate the organisers for putting  together such an impressive list of presenters for this conference.   

 National Partnership on Youth Attainment and Transitions   

 The national partnership which underpins this conference is all about making a substantial  investment in supporting education and skills development, and helping the transition from  school to work.   

 I see the national partnership as an essential part of our overall reform agenda. We want to  ensure that all Australian students are able to take a learning and skill journey that provides  them with opportunities to fulfil their potential and to contribute fully to the nation’s future  prosperity.    

 I recognise that local solutions are required to address local issues affecting young people.   

 The partnership is designed to be a catalyst for reform and an opportunity to build capacity  through expanding local networks.   

 Through this partnership all Australian governments are working to make sure students achieve  Year 12 or its equivalent and then make a successful transition into work or further study.    

 

 A few years ago, the Council of Australian Governments set new goals for successfully  transitioning young people into further education, training and employment.   

 The first goal is to have 90 per cent of all young people completing Year 12 or an equivalent  qualification by 2015.   

 The second goal is to get more young Indigenous people to complete Year 12 or an equivalent  qualification by 2020. Goals are important - they tell us where we need to get to.     

 The Australian Government is putting more than $700 million towards the achievement of these  goals through this national partnership.    

 The funding enables states and territories to give young people access to multiple learning  pathways, broader career development opportunities and mentoring support.   

 What excites me about the programs under this national Partnership is the way people are  coming up with creative ideas that meet local needs.   

 There’s Zara, who came to Australia as a refugee from Iran where she was not able to attend  school because of her family’s Baha’i faith.    

 Zara struggled at school and was referred through the Individual Support Service of the Youth  Connections program.   

 A girls’ refugee group commenced at Zara’s school, holding workshops on effective  communication and self expression.    

 Zara developed important life skills and was able to make new friends and relate to other girls  from similar backgrounds, which helped address her isolation and self-esteem issues.   

 She also received support in literacy, numeracy, time management and homework, and a range  of other carefully-targeted assistance. She is now well on the way to having the confidence to  achieve her long-term goal of finishing Year 12 and going on to tertiary education.   

 Zara was helped under the $287 million Youth Connections program, which in its first 18 months  of operation provided over 32 500 young people with individualised support and successfully  re-engaged over 14 800 young people with education or training.    

 Nearly 6500 young people have also been assisted to overcome barriers to their full  engagement in education.     

 The program is also playing an important role in assisting to close the gap, with over 18 per cent  of program participants being Indigenous Australians.       

 In Parramatta, here in Sydney, students of Warakirri College have benefited from a Financial  Literacy Partnership developed with Bendigo Bank.   

 To support students with low levels of literacy and numeracy, Year 10 students learned about  personal budgeting, savings plans, financial management and decision-making.   

 The College adjusted its timetable to meet the staffing and business requirements of Bendigo  Bank so the Financial Literacy program could be embedded in the curriculum.   

 Student attendance during the program was very high and it’s been a big success.  

 

 It’s just one example of how our $183 million investment in the School Business Community  Partnership Brokers program is improving community and business engagement with schools.    

 In the first 18 months, over 2100 partnerships were supported under the program.   

 These partnerships involved more than 9000 partner organisations with about one in six of  these partnerships having an Indigenous focus.    

 It’s great to see strong networks of providers developing and supporting young people under the  National Partnership on Youth Attainment and Transitions.   

 Indigenous Year 12 attainment   

 A big effort in our education reform agenda is directed to improving Year 12 attainment among  young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.   

 I hosted a Year 12 graduation ceremony in Parliament house in Canberra a week ago and it’s  terrific to meet young people who have had their lives opened up through education.   

 It’s clear that young Indigenous people are now more likely to see Year 12 as an attainable  goal.   

 There’s a long way to go but I am greatly encouraged by the progress being made to improve  Year 12 attainment among young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.   

 Other initiatives   

 Part of the national partnership is the Compact with Young Australians, where we are really  encouraging young people to be either learning or earning during this crucial period when they  are preparing for adult life.    

 There’s also the Youth Development and Support Program which provides financial support to  community groups to fund initiatives that will involve productive participation and encourage  social inclusion of young people with their community.    

 We are also working across government to lower youth unemployment and increase  engagement in education, employment and training for vulnerable young people.   

 This means investing billions of dollars in health and wellbeing, education, families,  communities, social inclusion, sports, arts and culture.    

 In this year’s Budget there was more than $800 million in new funding for schools, a substantial  increase for mental health services through the world-recognised ‘headspace’ program, and  initiatives to help teenage parents finish school and give Indigenous students a school-based 

 traineeship.    

 The National Trade Cadetships start next year to support students interested in a career in a  trade, and this ties in with our National Curriculum.   

 Students will be getting a comprehensive education which might take them into an academic  path or a trades path, with both being rigorous and well supported.   

 I should finish here by mentioning the Australian Vocational Student Prize.   

 It’s a way of raising the profile of vocational education and training in schools, validating it as a  worthwhile career option, and providing role models and inspiration for those who might be  interested.    

 With 500 prizes offered each year, we are able to engage with a large number of schools and  students through the prize. Nominations for the 2011 Australian Vocational Student Prize are  now open and I encourage nominations before the closing date of 2 December.    

 Conclusion   

 All young people deserve a chance to create a positive future for themselves.   

 It’s absolutely essential and fair that we strive to help each individual to achieve their untapped  potential.    

 Investing in the future of young people is also one of the best investments we can make as a  society.   

 I am determined to make a difference for the young people of Australia and your presence at  this conference and the work you do shows you share my passion.   

 This conference is a great opportunity to discuss how we can support young people better, to  harness new ideas and keep the reform journey on a sure footing.    

 I am delighted to declare the conference open. I wish you well as you discuss how achievement  and collaboration will improve opportunities for our young people and our country in the future.    

 ENDS         

 

 

