---
title: "The Regional Cooperation Framework"
date: "2011-05-07"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "Minister for Immigration"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352374
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/752657%22
---

 

 

 

 The Regional Cooperation Framework  SAT 07 MAY 2011 

 Prime Minister, Minister for Immigration 

 Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Immigration Chris Bowen today announced a  landmark new measure as part of a Regional Cooperation Framework that will help put  people smugglers out of business and prevent asylum seekers making the dangerous journey  to Australia by boat. 

 Today Prime Minister Gillard and Malaysian Prime Minister Dato’ Seri Najib Bin Tun Razak  issued a joint statement that outlined a groundbreaking cooperative transfer arrangement, that  will mean any person who arrives irregularly by sea in Australia could be transferred to 

 Malaysia. 

 After this agreement comes into effect, 800 people arriving in Australia by boat will find  themselves taken to Malaysia instead. 

 For every person Australia transfers to Malaysia, we will take five refugees from Malaysia -  adding an additional 4,000 places to Australia’s humanitarian intake over four years. 

 These places will only be open to those already in Malaysia and will not be open to those  who are transferred to Malaysia. 

 Australians are hospitable people and we believe in honouring our international protection  obligations.  

 But do not underestimate our resolve to break the people smugglers’ business model and the  trade in human misery that they rely on. 

 This landmark agreement will help take away the product people smugglers are trying to sell  - a ticket to Australia. 

 The key message this will deliver to people smugglers and those seeking to make the  dangerous sea voyage to Australia is: do not get on that boat. 

 Under this arrangement, if you arrive in Australian waters and are taken to Malaysia you will  go to the back of the queue. 

 The Gillard Government believes that the only way to respond to what is a regional problem  is to develop regional solutions. 

 That is why we worked closely with our neighbours to deliver an agreement for a Regional  Cooperation Framework through the recent Bali Process Ministerial Conference. 

 As part of this framework, the Gillard Government is also engaged in ongoing talks with  Papua New Guinea about the establishment of an assessment centre. 

 If this proceeds, it is the Government’s expectation that Australia would maintain the centre  but that it would be the first step towards a regional processing centre. 

 The understanding we have reached with Malaysia and the discussions with Papua New  Guinea are examples of steps we are taking to progress the wider Regional Cooperation  Framework that was agreed to with our regional neighbours at the 4th Bali Process Regional  Ministerial Conference in March of this year. 

 While there is no quick fix to eliminating entrenched people smuggling networks, these are  important steps in building a sustainable regional framework and a solid foundation upon  which to continue engaging with our neighbours and the international community.  

 

