---
title: "Oakeshott calls for bipartisan solution to migration policy impasse"
date: "2011-10-14"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROB, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211361863
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1380234%22
---

     

  

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 14 October 2011  

 OAKESHOTT CALLS FOR BIPARTISAN SOLUTION TO MIGRATION POLICY IMPASSE  

 THE stubborn refusal by major political parties to support an existing bipartisan approach to  people smuggling, people trafficking and related trans-national crime lies at the heart of the  current migration policy paralysis, Independent Lyne MP Rob Oakeshott said today. 

 “There currently exists a bipartisan framework that Australia promotes throughout the Asia-Pacific  region.  It should be a big part of our domestic laws and domestic debate.  It is known as the Bali  Process and provides a sustainable approach to the law enforcement questions, and does so with  a humanitarian backbone”, Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “The Bali Process was started in 2003 under the stewardship of the then Minister for Immigration,  Alexander Downer, and has been supported by every government, both Labor and the Coalition,  since. 

 “It provides for a longer-term regional approach to dealing with the estimated eight million  refugees in the Asia-Pacific region and involves the cooperation of more than 50 countries,  including Australia, Japan, China, New Zealand, Indonesia, Malaysia and Nauru.  

 “After years of having political one-upmanship driving the migration policy agenda, it is well and  truly time for a long-term, bipartisan, sustainable process that is supported by numerous  international agencies, as the principles that shape our policy,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “Apart from having the support of both major political parties, the Bali Process is supported by the  United Nations Human Rights Commissioner, the International Organization for Migration,  INTERPOL, United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime and the International Federation of Red  Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 

 “These agencies underpin the necessary framework to deliver a regional approach to not only the  irregular migration movements in the region, but also provide practical measures to help combat  people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related trans-national crimes,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “In the words of Andrew McLeod, the CEO of the influential business group, Committee for  Melbourne, ‘when a regional rural MP and a capital city business think tank agree, then people  should take notice. We agree with the strengthening of the Bali Process and we call for a regional  focus on resettlement to be the main focus of the Bali Process, rather than a domestic focus on  processing’.” 

 Further details of the Bali Process can be found at www.baliprocess.net 

 Please also find attached Committee for Melbourne media release. 

 ENDS                   Media Contact: Sharon Fuller - Ph. 0429 787320  

