---
title: "Budget 2011: Labor fails Australian families and our farmers"
date: "2011-05-10"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
source: "Office of STONE, SHARMAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211352475
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/757410%22
---

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray  Tuesday 10 May 2011  Labor fails Australian families and our farmers   

 According to Dr Sharman Stone, Federal Member for Murray, there is nothing much in this Budget for  rural families doing it tough.     

 “There is no new transport infrastructure commitment.  Quarantine services and rural research and  development for agriculture are not being boosted, even though they are critical for productivity boosts.   

 “Regional Australia has again been short changed by this city centric government that’s cut $500 million in  regional funding.  There is not a single new cent in this Budget for road or rail projects across Australia.   Echuca Hospital will get $12.1 million from the Federal Government to go with the more than $40 million  committed from the State, but there does not seem to be sufficient extra help for the aged care sector,”  Sharman Stone said.   

 “This year’s Labor Budget deficit has soared to $49.4 billion and the forecast deficit in 2011/12 has blown  out by $9.6 billion to $22.6 billion.   

 “Net government debt has climbed to a record $107 billion in 2011/12 and is forecast to remain above  $100 billion across the forward estimates.  This amounts to more than $4,700 of debt for every Australian.   We will have to pay $18 million a day in interest on this debt.   

 “Labor’s budget fails to help rural households battling higher costs of living - petrol, electricity and gas,  groceries, health costs and home repayments.  However, this government says it will save $2 billion by  freezing the indexation of key family tax payments and income thresholds for three years.   

 “This is the first budget in eight years that has not provided tax cuts for everyday Australians.   

 “Instead, offshore asylum seeker management has blown out by a record additional $1.75 billion since  last year’s budget.   There is also an extra $111 million to help mop up the pink batt disasters.  Imagine if  we had these funds to spend on rural support.   

 “The new arrangements for taxing company cars will slug small business operators, tradesmen, farmers,  the taxi and hire car industry with increased costs at a time when they’re already doing it tough.   Businesses travelling more than 25,000kms in their vehicles a year will be penalised.   

 “Since coming into power, Labor has employed 24,000 additional public servants.  The Government is  asking rural people to tighten their belts, but it’s refusing to do the same itself.   

 “While Labor is happy to add 16,000 extra skilled migration places for regions, our own home grown year  12 students who have been offered university places often cannot afford to go away to study.  Labor’s  changes to independent youth allowance killed their chances.  So this simply does not make sense,”  Sharman Stone said.   

 “There is no alternative support for the thousands of local farm families who have had their drought  support (EC) stopped in March, but who still do not have an income.  Instead, the Labor Government has  announced it will extend the new climate change trials for farmers in Western Australia by twelve  months.  This trial will then be evaluated.  That does not help locals needing support right now,” Sharman  Stone said.   

 Media enquiries:  Tim Young 0417 148 110 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

