---
title: "Urgent action on Newcastle settlement services following independent review"
date: "2011-05-23"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211354580
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548167%22
---

 

 Urgent action on Newcastle settlement services  following independent review  Monday, 23 May 2011 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime  Minister and for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP and Parliamentary  Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, have today  put Newcastle settlement service providers on notice following the findings of an  independent review into refugee support in the region. 

 Mr Bowen said following concerns from the local community and the Federal  Member for Newcastle, Sharon Grierson, Ernst and Young was commissioned to  conduct an audit and look into allegations of substandard housing as part of  settlement support. 

 The Ernst and Young report raised some very serious issues about settlement  services in the Newcastle region, including the actions of contractors Navitas and  Resolve FM, as well as departmental practices that may have contributed to the  problems. 

 Australia’s refugees settlement services have been recognised as some of the best  in the world, but it’s clearly not the case here - these findings are unacceptable and  decisive action needs to be taken. 

 Resolve FM has been notified that the Department has reserved its right to take  further action subject to the findings of the forensic audit that has been ordered. This  could include replacing Resolve FM with another provider should such action be  necessary and appropriate. 

 It is extremely disappointing that some refugees in Newcastle have been receiving  substandard services. This is completely unacceptable and this has been made very  clear to the Department of Immigration and Citizenship and the contractors. 

 The department has also taken immediate steps to address the settlement issues in  the Hunter region and elsewhere, in line with the recommendations made by Ernst  and Young. 

 To help ensure the robustness of the new settlement service contracts, Professor  David Richmond AO has been asked to conduct an independent review into the  adequacy of the performance measures and framework, as well as the department’s  contract management processes. 

 We have moved quickly to arrange for the relocation of people in inappropriate  residences and to inspect all accommodation provided to clients in the area.  Allegations of theft have already been referred to the NSW Police. 

 There will also be a forensic audit of financial management under the Integrated  Humanitarian Settlement Strategy contract to identify any inappropriate charges or  overcharging of refugee families related to rent, utilities and property insurance. 

 The contractors are on notice about the expected standards of service provision. The  government needs to be assured that vulnerable humanitarian clients are receiving  the appropriate settlement support and contract requirements are being met. 

 The department is also redesigning its contract management processes to improve  scrutiny of services and will be reviewing accommodation arrangements in other  regions to ensure there are not more widespread issues. 

 People gaining access to settlement services who want further information, or may  have concerns or questions, can call 133 177. 

 The Ernst and Young report can be found the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship's website.  See: Provision of Humanitarian Support Services in the Hunter Region 

 The Ernst and Young table of recommendations can be found the minister's website.  See: Actions suggested by Ernst & Young and government responses (25KB PDF  file) 

 

