---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Manila, Philippines: 21 October 2011: Death of Muammar Qaddafi."
date: "2011-10-21"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Death of Muammar Qaddafi."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211362273
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1176143%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   

 MANILA, PHILIPPINES   

 21 OCTOBER 2011   

 

 

 Subjects: Death of Muammar Qaddafi    

 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 

 JOURNALIST:  Can you give us your reaction regarding Qaddafi’s death?   

 KEVIN RUDD:  This is an historic day for the people of Libya, for the people of the wider Arab  world, and the world at large and people who love freedom.     

 It is also a day that we should reflect on the courage of the Libyan people in standing up for  freedom.  And it is also a day when we should reflect on the future.  A future where we  must work with Libya, the new Libya, to make sure that it does not become another Iran.     

 The task of nation building, the task of building Libya’s democratic institutions will be  difficult.  It will be complex.  It will be hard and there will be setbacks.  We in Australia,  together with other members of the community of democracies, stand ready to assist our  friends in Libya to undertake practical steps to make sure its democratic transformation  succeeds.     

 What I also say is this:  The Australian government is proud of the fact that we have stood  by the Libyan people from the beginning.  The Australian government, the Australian Labor  Government is proud of the fact that we have worked hard with the rest of the international 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 community to bring about a consensus to the United Nations Security Council to enable the  NATO action to take place to support the freedom fighters of Libya to obtain their national  freedom.     

 The Australian Labor Government is proud of the fact that we have helped in the  international community by being Libya’s third largest humanitarian donors throughout this  long period of civil war.  We have helped with humanitarian supplies, medical supplies,  emergency food supplies, working with the Red Cross, working with the World Food  Programme, working with United Nations High Commission for Refugees to preserve human  life.  And we are proud of the fact that, together with others, have a made a difference.     

 We also are proud of the fact as the Australian Labor Government that we have at home  provided financial support for more than a thousand Libyan students to continue their  studies in Australian universities during the course of this civil war.  Those young people  now studying in Australia will now form part of the new generation of Libyans going back to  their country to build a modern democratic state.     

 For the future, we have indicated already to the National Transitional Council of Libya that  we will assist them directly with building their democratic institutions through the agency of  the Australian Electoral Commission and in any other practical tasks that we can assist them  in this difficult period of transition.  The Australian government has formed a close working  relationship both with the Prime Minister, Mr Jibril, as well as with Mr Jalil who, of course,  heads the Council.  And we stand ready to work with them in this difficult period of  transition which lies ahead.      

 JOURNALIST:  What you are saying is that Libya should be careful not becoming another  Iran.  What’s the danger there? How should we do that?   

 KEVIN RUDD:  I remember clearly from history that when the Shah was removed from Iran,  there was great excitement and democratic excitement around the world.  Then in a period  following that, we saw the beginnings of political repression of the different type, and a  political repression which continues in Iran to this day.  My point is this.  Right now, there  will be many forces of work within Libyan politics, and the responsibility of international  community is to support democratic pluralist forces building a new inclusive Libyan state, a  new inclusive Libyan democratic state.  And that, I believe, is the course of action we all  want for the future.  Therefore, we have a combined interest in working with the  government in Tripoli to ensure that the new Libya does not turn into another Iran.     

 Okay. Thank you, folks. Appreciate it very much.   

 

 ENDS   

