---
title: "New research highlights refugee contribution"
date: "2011-06-17"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355994
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/851417%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 17 June 2011 

 NEW RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS REFUGEE CONTRIBUTION    

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today released new  research that shows refugees in Australia are likely embrace work opportunities in  regional areas, display entrepreneurial qualities and undertake volunteer work as part  of a significant contribution to society.   

 Mr Bowen said the Economic, Social And Civic Contributions Of First And Second  Generation Humanitarian Entrants report by Professor Graeme Hugo was the first  comprehensive study that also looked at second-generation refugees in Australia.   

 “In the lead up to World Refugee Day celebrations, the Government has  commissioned this research to better understand the economic, social and civic  contributions of humanitarian entrants or refugees to Australia,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “While many refugees do encounter difficulties in the early years of their settlement  here, this research shows that refugees make an important contribution to Australia  in areas including social engagement, workforce participation and business  ownership.   

 “For example, it finds that humanitarian entrants are increasingly settling in rural and  regional areas, which creates social and economic benefits for local communities.”   

 The research indicates that humanitarian entrants make a significant contribution to  volunteering, and provides evidence that a higher proportion of refugees display  entrepreneurial qualities compared with other migrant groups.   

 Professor Hugo also found that humanitarian entrants provided a unique contribution  to the economy by taking on low-skilled jobs not filled by other workers, filling  important shortages in the labour market.    

 “With the support of Australia’s world-class settlement services, most humanitarian  entrants are able to adjust effectively over time and eventually match Australian  levels of economic and social contribution, especially those in the second  generation,” Mr Bowen said.   

 The report is based on Census data, interviews conducted with hundreds of  humanitarian entrants, and in-depth discussions with more than 70 key stakeholders  in the refugee, employment and business sectors across Australia.    

 Findings from the research will be used to inform government decision-making in a  variety of areas related to humanitarian entrants.    

 A full copy of the report and a summary of key findings are available on the  Immigration Department’s website at www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/research/   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

