---
title: "Australian Government ignores more UN calls to reform mandatory immigration detention"
date: "2011-06-06"
creators:
  - "Human Rights Law Centre"
source: "HUMAN RIGHTS LAW CENTRE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211355477
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/826456%22
---

 Media Release  www.hrlc.org.au  For immediate release: Monday 6 June 2011 

 Australian Government ignores more UN calls to reform mandatory  immigration detention  

 A leading Australian rights group has strongly criticised the Australian Government for its outright rejection  of yet more international recommendations about contentious issues such as immigration detention,  comprehensive human rights protections and marriage equality.  

 The Australian Government has today released its written response to recommendations made by the UN’s 

 Human Rights Council in February this year, claiming it will accept, at least in part, 90 percent of the 

 recommendations arising from the Universal Periodic Review process. 

 The UPR is a new mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council which reviews the human rights records of 

 all 192 United Nations Member States. Australia had its turn in the hot seat for the first time in January and 

 received 145 recommendations from its global peers including the United Kingdom, Canada, Norway, New 

 Zealand, Ghana, Mexico and South Africa. 

 Whilst welcoming the majority of the Government’s response, the Human Rights Law Centre’s Director of 

 International Human Rights Advocacy, Ben Schokman, said the ten percent the Government has rejected 

 contain some of the most significant recommendations. 

 “On the asylum seeker issue the Australian Government has its head firmly in the sand. It continues to 

 deliberately ignore the growing chorus of international voices and authorities that are saying loud and clear 

 that mandatory and prolonged detention, including of children, is simply not acceptable. The Government’s 

 stance on immigration issues really is a blight on an otherwise decent response,” Mr Schokman said. 

 The Australian Government announced last year that it would move unaccompanied children out detention. 

 But by April the number of children in detention had increased by 300 to 1048. The Government recently 

 flagged that it will send unaccompanied children to Malaysia for processing. 

 “Being a stable and highly developed democracy, we’ve been quite hopeful that Australia would respond 

 well to the UPR process and really take on board the constructive suggestions received by some of our 

 closest international allies. On the whole they have done this, but it must be said the Government has 

 brushed aside the contentious issues such as migration detention and marriage equality and has also been 

 a bit slippery in their responses to a number of other recommendations,” Mr Schokman said. 

 About 30 percent of the recommendations accepted have been accepted on the basis that the Government 

 believes domestic laws already address the recommendations. Mr Schokman rejects many of these 

 assertions. For example he questioned the Government’s claim that changes to amend the Sex 

 Discrimination Act 1984 that were passed in May 2011 adequately address recommendation to strengthen 

 equality protections for women. 

 On the positive side, Mr Schokman believes it is very encouraging that the Government has accepted 

 many of the recommendations, but says that the Government now needs to build on its formal response by 

 developing a concrete implementation plan with clear responsibilities, timeframes and targets.  

 “Talking the talk is good, but now walking the walk will be the real test. The purpose of the UPR is to 

 improve human rights on the ground, so we’d like to see the Government move from best -practice 

 engagement to best-practice implementation,” Mr Schokman said. 

 The Human Rights Law Centre has long advocated that a national Human Rights Act - incorporating  international human rights into domestic law - is a key way to address the significant gaps in both the legal  protection and practical realisation of human rights in Australia.   

 The Australian Government is due to provide its response to the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva  this Wednesday 8 June 2011. 

 For further comments, please contact Ben Schokman on 0403 622 810 or ben.schokman@hrlc.org.au 

 The HRLC has prepared a list of Australia’s Response to All UPR Recommendations and a Summary  of the Key UPR Recommendations that were rejected or only partially accepted by Australia which  can be found online here.  

 Further background information on Australia’s Universal Periodic Review appearance, including the Australian 

 Government’s report, NGO materials and media coverage, is also available online. 

 www.hrlc.org.au 

