---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth: 31 March 2011: Australian author in China; regional processing centre; Libya"
date: "2011-03-31"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Australian author in China"
  - "regional processing centre"
  - "Libya"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211351162
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/676633%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   

 PERTH   

 31 MARCH 2011   

 

 

 Subjects: Australian author in China, Regional Processing Centre; Libya   

 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 KEVIN RUDD: Well, I've said what I have to say. Over to you guys.   

 QUESTION: Can you give us an update on the Australian writer in China?   

 KEVIN RUDD: Yes. This individual has been in contact with his family, as we're advised, and  we'll continue to work carefully on this case in the days ahead. We've been following it very  closely in recent times, and we've had quite extensive contact with the Chinese authorities.   

 QUESTION: Are there any concerns about his well-being, or is it simply a  misunderstanding of some sort?   

 KEVIN RUDD: No, he's - as I said, my advice he's been in touch with his family. We continue  to work on the case and we have taken this case seriously.   

 As I said, we've been in extensive contact through the Consulate-General in Guangzhou,  with the Chinese authorities.   

 QUESTION: Have consular… 

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 2 

 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: And we will continue to work on it.   

 QUESTION: Have consular officials actually seen him?   

 KEVIN RUDD: On the details of the consular case, I am reluctant to go into detail for  reasons of consular privacy. We have particular provisions which we're required to adhere  to in the privacy of individual cases, so I'm reluctant to elaborate further on details of the  case, because I'm mindful of the obligations on me.   

 QUESTION: But is it right that Australia and China have an agreement to notify each other  within three days if one of their citizens is arrested, and has that happened?   

 KEVIN RUDD: Well, the consular agreement between our two countries existed for a long  time and that is why we have been in contact with the Chinese authorities over some period  of time now.   

 But, as I said, we are advised that he has been in contact with his family, but we intend to  continue to follow this case through.   

 QUESTION: What do you make of…   

 QUESTION: Could you confirm though whether or not you've been notified that he has  been arrested?   

 KEVIN RUDD: As I said, we've been in contact with the Chinese authorities through our  Consular-General in Guangzhou, and we are relieved at this report that he's been in contact  with his family. I'm reluctant to enter into discussion of any further details concerning the  case; mindful of the requirements of confidentiality.   

 QUESTION: What do you make of Michael Danby's comments? I think he said that he  accused China of being provocative and contemptuous of, I suppose, our way of - our legal  system? What would you make of those…   

 KEVIN RUDD: My job as Foreign Minister of Australia is to look after the interests of each  and every individual Australian who gets in strife around the world. Any given day, there's a  lot of them. And so what my responsibility to do is to work within the legal constraints of  the country concerned.   

 In recent times, I've been getting people out of incarceration in Egypt, getting them out of  Libya, getting them out of all sorts of strange parts of the world.   

 This is just another practical challenge. We'll work on it professionally, as we work on all the  others.   

 QUESTION: But are they unhelpful comments [indistinct]?   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 3 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: My job as Foreign Minister is to attend to the practical task of helping  Australians. Individual MPs are free to say that which they wish.   

 QUESTION: Does it stop the practical process of consular officials helping this man in  China?   

 KEVIN RUDD: We'll continue to do our practical work. As I said, individual MPs can make  whatever statements they wish. This is a free country.   

 But my job as Foreign Minister is to do everything possible to secure the safety of  Australians, and let me tell you, the challenges can be complex. I have to tell you about how  much time and effort I put into the Middle East to make sure that your colleagues got out of  there in one piece.   

 QUESTION: The Prime Minister, this morning, said that Mr Yang [sic] was in hospital. Is  that your understanding?   

 KEVIN RUDD: As I've said, beyond that which I have said, I'm reluctant to elaborate on  further details concerning this consular case.   

 Yep.   

 QUESTION: Just on the case of the East Timor processing centre, there doesn't seem to  be - even though there was a regional agreement agreed to in Bali, there doesn't seem to be  any step forward on an actual concrete plan to go ahead.   

 KEVIN RUDD: First thing I'd say is that the International Office of Migration told us - that is,  the assembled countries in Bali yesterday - that there are 15 regional groupings of countries  around the world trying to develop, at this stage, a regional framework agreement for  dealing with asylum seekers in their parts of the world.   

 The second point I'd make is the only region in the world which has forged an agreement on  how to do that is our region. And that was what was achieved yesterday in the co-chairman  statement in Bali, which I released together with the Foreign Minister of Indonesia.   

 Thirdly, the next step is this, as I indicated in my statements in Bali yesterday, that the  framework agreement now provides the basis for individual states to cooperate with each  other in harmonising processing arrangements of asylum seekers and possibly the  development of regional centres, or a regional centre.    

 But you cannot do the latter without doing the former. And that is the practical task of work  we had and we are the first region in the world to have such an agreement. Fourteen hours  trying hard.   

 QUESTION: But East Timor's delegate, Alberto Carlos, doesn't seem to want a part of it.   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 4 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: Well, I think if you look carefully at what was said yesterday, the East  Timorese Council of Ministers has yet to formally deliberate on this matter. In fact, the East  Timorese Vice Foreign Minister said that to me directly.   

 And therefore we await the direct communications from the East Timorese Government  following its Council of Ministers' deliberations.   

 And I assume, given this proposal was put forward by the Australian Prime Minister, that the  East Timorese Prime Minister would then respond through the normal formal diplomatic  channels.   

 QUESTION: In relation to Libya, you were a strong supporter of a no-fly zone.   

 There are now reports that the United States may be contemplating sending arms to the  rebel forces in Libya. Is that something the Australian Government would consider doing?   

 KEVIN RUDD: We would have no plans to do that. I've noted carefully statements both by  the British Foreign Secretary and by the United States Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, on  that subject. And I'm also very mindful of what the Secretary of State has said concerning  the particular implications of UN Security Council Resolution 1973 on that matter.   

 Now, the bottom line is, the overall responsibility in Libya, which we the international  community face, is how to protect Libyan civilians from being killed, murdered, maimed by  the Libyan regime as this battle rages across the former battlefields of World War II in  northern Africa between Tobruk at one end and across to Tripoli at the other.   

 Our responsibility as the international community is, under this Security Council resolution,  is to protect those people.   

 Now, the practical definition of that and individual circumstances will be a matter for the  participating states, but the remit given under the UN Security Council resolution to protect  the Libyan people from the threat of attack by the Libyan regime is broad.   

 The other thing I'd say is this: what are we doing as Australia? Right now, across the entire  global community, we are the third largest global contributors to the humanitarian effort to  help refugees, to help the Libyan people themselves with food, medicine, water, emergency  accommodation, and we are doing that through the International Office of Migration, the  UNHCR, the World Food Programme, as well as the International Council of the Red Cross.   

 So the US is the first - is the largest contributor to the humanitarian cause, the EU is the  second largest contributor, we're the third largest contributor worldwide.   

 That's where our contribution is focused.   

 QUESTION: But in your reading of that UN Security Council resolution, would it allow for  the coalition to arm the rebels?   

 

 Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555 

 5 

 

 KEVIN RUDD: Well, again, I draw your attention to the statement by the Secretary of State  and - or the UK Foreign Secretary, one or the other of them, based on my recent readings as  reflected on that interpretation of Security Council 1973.   

 As I said, focus on what the Security Council resolution says. It says two operational things.   

 In operational paragraph eight, it says states - participating states are authorised to  establish a no-fly zone. Tick.   

 Second, operational paragraph four says that states - participating states are authorised to  employ all necessary measures to protect the Libyan people from threat of attack by the  Libyan regime. That is a broad head of power.   

 I note also that the battle on the ground is intense. I notice that the opposition forces have  suffered military setbacks again in the last 24 to 48 hours.   

 This is going to be a difficult and unpredictable war into the weeks ahead, and therefore the  resolve of the international community must remain firm to stand behind the Libyan people,  despite what's being thrown against them by one of the most brutal regimes in the world.   

 Folks, I've got to zip. Excuse me.   

 

 END 

