---
title: "In defence of youth: speech for the the Earle Page College Annual Lecture, [Armidale]"
date: "2011-07-27"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Youth"
  - "Armidale"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211358091
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/967276%22
---

 

 

 

 

 27TH JULY 2011 

  ‘IN DEFENCE OF YOUTH’   

 EARLE PAGE COLLEGE ANNUAL LECTURE  UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND  WEDNESDAY 27 JULY 2011    

      

 As part of a series: 

  

 In Defence of God - Address to the Sydney Institute   9 November 2009  In Defence of Liberty - Address to the Grattan Institute  11 March 2010  In Defence of Enterprise - Address to the Eidos Institute   14 April 2010  In Defence of Opportunity - Address to the the Sydney  Institute   9 March 2011 

   

 **CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY** 

   

 In  late  1998,  in  the  second  year  of  my  political  career,  I  took  

 my Palestinian born father back to his birthplace of Bethlehem.  

   

 It was an emotional journey for us both. 

   

 When  he  left  the  war  torn  Palestinian  state  in  1948  as  a  

 Christian  educated  21  year  old,  he  swore  as  he  crossed  the  

 Allenby  Bridge  into  the  Hashemite  Kingdom  over  the  grand  

 Jordan  River  that  the  land  he  was  born  in  had  no  future  for  a  

 young man. 

   

 So  50  years  later  when  we  walked  amongst  the  refugees  in  

 Gaza  and  then  Amman,  my  father  sadly  had  his  youthful  

 anxieties confirmed. A new generation of young Arabs shared 

 his despair that they had no hope, they had no voice, they had 

 no freedom and so they had no future. 

   

 This year it all changed. 

   

 I,  and  my  father,  have  lived  to  see  the  sea-change  events  

 unfolding in the Arab Spring. 

 We were shocked by the self immolation of a young Tunisian 

 street vendor that started the revolts that led to the toppling of 

 Ben Ali in January. 

   

 We  cheered  as  young  Christians  and  Muslims  took  to  Tahrir  

 Square in Cairo to protest against the denial of democracy and 

 ultimately force a long overdue regime change.  

   

 We  were  gutted  and  horrified  when  reports  emerged  more  

 recently of a young Syrian teenager, just 13 years old, who was 

 tortured  and  murdered  by  Syrian  authorities.  That  boy  has  

 become  the  enduring  symbol  of  the  struggle  against  the  

 tyrannical and murderous regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria.  

   

 A  close  observer  would  note  there  is  a  common  narrative  

 among all these movements. 

   

 Young  people,  across  the  world,  are  rejecting  the  demands  of  

 conformist  past  generations  and  starting  the  struggle  for  

 democracy that we in Australia, all too often, take for granted.   

   

 The young people of the Arab world have exhibited creativity, 

 idealism  and  a  zealous  desire  to  make  a  difference.   They  are  

 empowered by their demographic muscle. An amazing 51% of 

 their  population  is  aged  under  25.1[1]  Their  willingness  to  try  

 new things and seek out adventure is not just forged in the face 

 of a gun barrel but it is the historical destiny of this generation.  

   

 These  qualities  are  not  confined  to  the  Middle  East.  You  can  

 find  them  in  the  young  in  Soweto  and  in  Sydney,  in  Mumbai  

 and in Melbourne.  

   

 Around  the  world  young  people  are  relentlessly  searching  for  

 the  next  opportunity  to  make  a  difference.  This  desire  for  

 change  is  made  all  the  more  possible  by  new  technologies  

 which empower individuals and make the collective much more 

 mobile.   

   

 The  ‘youth  revolution’  is  happening  on  every  laptop,  desktop,  

 iPad  and  mobile  phone  around  the  world.  It  poses  many  

 challenges,  but  it  also  delivers  endless  opportunities  for  

 government,  for  business  and  for  the  activist.   It  has  changed  

 our community forever.  

   

 Young people as Global Citizens 

   

 Your generation is the first generation of truly global citizens.  

   

                                                               

 Even  though  social  philosophers  like  Canadian  Marshall  

 McLuhan who coined the phrase “the global village” in 1962, 

 foresaw  the  impact  of  new  technology  on  society  and  its  

 intercourse, there is still little appreciation we are, in this age, 

 citizens of the world.2[2] 

    

 My  children  will  grow  up  as  ‘participants’  and  not  mere  

 observers  of  some  of  the  greatest  periods  of  change  in  this  

 ongoing Age of Enlightenment.  

   

 The  rise  of  a  resurgent  China  and  India,  the  decline  of  the  

 traditional European stronghold, the increasingly confused and 

 unclear  role  being  played  by  the  United  States,  and  growing  

 turmoil in North Africa and the Middle East are reshaping the 

 geo-political  and  economic  framework  of  the  past  three  

 hundred  years.  Their  lifetimes  will  encompass  a  fascinating  

 period  of  change  in  the  world’s  history.  Unlike  their  

 grandfather  they  will  have  more  opportunity  to  forge  their  

 destiny  in  their  country  of  birth  than  any  generation  before  

 them. 

   

 This  global  citizenship  is  not  tied  to  a  common  base.  Young  

 people  communicate  and  engage  with  each  other  despite  

 differences  in  faith,  heritage,  culture  and  economic  

                                                               

 circumstance. They are empowered by the belief that they can 

 change the world. 

   

 This empowerment of ‘youth’ is by no means new -at the age 

 of  just  32  Alexander  the  Great  had  conquered  most  of  the  

 known world and Jesus Christ had saved it. Joan of Arc never 

 made  it  out  of  her  teens  and  Alexander  Graham  Bell  had  

 invented the telephone at the age of 28.  

   

 Robert Kennedy had a premonition of the power of technology 

 in his address to Cape Town University in 1966: 

   

 “Everywhere new technology and communications brings 

 men  and  nations  closer  together,  the  concerns  of  one  

 inevitably  becoming  the  concerns  of  all.   And  our  new  

 closeness is stripping away the false masks, the illusion of 

 differences which is the root of injustice and of hate and 

 of war.” 3[3] 

   

 At  that  time  Kennedy  was  simply  talking  about  the  power  of  

 observation as events unfolded in near real time on television. 

 However the globalisation of the young was already at work: 

   

                                                               

 “…as  I  talk  to  young  people  around  the  world  I  am  

 impressed not by the diversity but by the closeness of their 

 goals, their desires, and their concerns and their hope for 

 the future……It is these qualities which make of our youth 

 today the only true international community.4[4] 

   

   

 Smashing the Barriers 

   

 The  fact  that  we  can  now  travel  so  easily,  communicate  so  

 cheaply, and share knowledge so quickly are all things that help 

 break  down  the  traditional  cultural  and  religious  barriers  

 between  men  and  women.   Just  as  the  printing  press  took  the  

 control  of  knowledge  out  of  the  monasteries  and  the  palaces,  

 the  Internet  is  allowing  hundreds  of  millions  more  to  access  

 information and the works and deeds of others.   

   

 Facebook and Twitter are the modern printing presses but it is 

 the young people that are writing the manuscripts.  

   

 No  longer  can  political  tyrants  avoid  the  scrutiny  of  their  

 people  by  operating  in  dark  corners  with  complete  control  of  

 their media. Not even the meanest leadership on earth in North 

 Korea  has  been  able  to  avoid  the  power  of  new  technologies.                                                                 

 Modern tools have been able to shine a spotlight on the worst 

 behaviour in the darkest corners of our world. 

   

 This  became  more  of  a  reality  for  me  on  a  recent  trip  to  the  

 United  Arab  Emirates  where  I  spoke  with  Ministers  and  

 students  alike  about  the  role  that  Twitter  and  Facebook  are  

 having in Arab uprisings. 

   

 At the University of Wollongong’s Dubai campus students told 

 me  that  Twitter  was  a  way  to  both  disseminate  and  collate  

 information,  while  Facebook  was  a  method  and  tool  of  

 organisation and control.  

   

 The decentralisation of power through the internet has opened 

 up new opportunities for influence and it is young people that 

 have  stood  up  and  forced  governments,  civil  society  and  

 commentators  to  change  their  ways  to  accommodate  a  ‘new  

 voice’ on the Arab Street.  

   

 Young  people  in  Australia  don’t  have  to  look  overseas  to  see  

 examples of their peers taking the lead.   

   

 We see the very same values of creativity, idealism and a desire 

 to make a difference by looking at a critical aspect of European 

 immigration  in  colonial  Australia.  In  this  we  can  trace  an  

 undoubtable  trend  -  that  of  young  people  coming  to  Australia  

 in  the  search  for  adventure  and  excitement  and  ultimately  a  

 better  life  for  them  and  their  children.  Indeed  adventure,  

 experimentation,  and  even  risky  behaviour  are  part  and  parcel  

 of being young - they always have been. Too often these traits 

 have  been  portrayed  as  negative  values  -  I  see  them  as  

 inherently positive.  

   

 Adventure, experimentation and a healthy wariness of authority 

 should be encouraged and even applauded among our younger 

 generations.  They  are  the  traits  that  spur  on  entrepreneurship  

 and are characteristics to which we can attribute so much of the 

 Nation’s  history.  The  chance  of  adventure  and  ‘exploration  of  

 the  unknown’  are  the  traits  that  encouraged  a  young  William  

 John  Wills,  a  British  surveyor  to  migrate  to  Australia  in  the  

 1850s. 5[5] Only a couple of years later Mr Wills would lead the 

 first  expedition  crossing  Australia  from  north  to  south.  He  

 accomplished this at the age of 27, yet he will be remembered 

 as one of the pioneer geographers of our continent. He was part 

 of  the  iconic  Burke  and  Wills  duo  that  had  the  150th 

 anniversary of their death just weeks ago.6[6] 

   

                                                               

  

 I  fear  that  our  next  William  John  Wills  will  grow  up  in  an  

 Australia  where  he  is  stopped  from  participating  in  activities  

 because of an overprotective society that spends all of its time 

 mitigating risk through regulation and tax.  

   

   

 Why defend Young People? 

   

 Criticizing  young  people  has  always  been  one  of  the  

 indulgences of the elders. 

   

 None of the criticisms of today’s youth are in any way new. 

   

 Aristotle  (384-322  BC)  wrote  nearly  2,500  years  ago  in  

 reference to young people:  

   

 “Their lives are regulated more by moral feeling than by 

 reasoning…  All  their  mistakes  are  in  the  direction  of  

 doing things excessively and vehemently... They think they 

 know everything, and are always quite sure about it; this, 

 in fact, is why they overdo everything.”7[7] 

   

 But  today’s  criticisms  and  restrictions  on  young  people  go  

 beyond merely deploring the changes in manners and customs                                                                

 of  the  young  . We  regulate  or  tax  in  their  name  every  part  of  

 their being from the drinks they consume to the cars they drive. 

 For  example  it  is  older  generations  that  have  imposed  

 draconian expectations on a young person to spend 120 hours at 

 the car wheel in the presence of a licensed driver in order to get 

 their  provisional  licence  which  must  be  carried  around  for  3  

 years.8[8]  

   

 Some rules are necessary but we cannot go too far.  

   

 As a general rule we should be mindful that young people need 

 the  chance  to  explore,  experiment  and  engage  in  calculated  

 risk-taking behaviour, in order to grow into balanced adults and 

 pursue the future they aspire to. 

   

 I am a fervent believer in calculated risk taking. Our challenge 

 is to encourage it in the areas of business, politics, and broader 

 global  engagement.  As  legislators  we  must  build  a  safe  and  

 secure  environment  for  prosperity  without  diminishing  reward  

 for risk and innovation.  

   

 Young people need to be defended because the overwhelming  

 majority  are  upstanding  and  hardworking  individuals  willing  

 and able and indeed anxious to make a positive contribution to                                                                

 our society.  They have a vision for society that is as much ours 

 as theirs.  

   

 Who are young people? 

   

 A  quick  look  at  any  high  school,  or  university  college,  shows  

 there  is  no  stereotype  that  accurately  defines  young  Australia.  

 Furthermore we know that the statistics are ever changing.  

   

 For example, in 1945 only 1.5% of 15-19 year olds in Australia 

 were born overseas.  In the last census this was 12% with about 

 a  third  speaking  a  language  other  than  English  at  home.9[9]  

 Being  Australian  is  not  based  on  the  country  you  are  born  in  

 but the values you display and embrace as a citizen.  

   

 We do know that young people sometimes engage in mindless 

 risk taking, manifesting itself in dangerous behaviour like drug, 

 alcohol  and  substance  abuse.  10[10]   This  is  not  something  new  

 although the level of debate and awareness today is far greater 

 than  it  was  previously.  However  we  also  know  that  the  vast  

 majority of young Australians  who do engage in some of these 

 risky behaviours soon give them up and live their lives with the 

 scars of past indiscretions.                                                                 

  

   

 More  calculated  risk  taking  may  manifest  itself  in  starting  a  

 business.  9%  of  all  small  business  operators  are  young  

 Australians  under  30.11[11]  However,  the  businesses  started  by  

 young people tend to be more risky, engaged with technology, 

 and have limited initial outlay by using the internet as either a 

 marketing tool or a shopfront.  

   

 A recent article on techcrunch.com notes: 

 “Consumer  Internet  entrepreneurs  are  like  professional  

 basketball  players…  They  peak  at  25,  by  30  they’re  

 usually done.”12[12] 

 Sometimes  it  all  works.  Take  for  example  28  year  old  Ruslan  

 Kogan,  founder  of  the  $30  million  online  store  kogan.com.au.  

 Ruslan  funded  his  online  TV  and  technology  sales  by  pre-selling  his  first  shipment  of  goods  and  undercutting  major  

 brands  offered  at  retail  stores.13[13]  His  enterprise  did  not  

 require any special knowledge about business nor electronics, it 

 was  not  a  idea  that  could  be  taught  in  a  formal  education  

 system.  It  required  creativity  and  the  recognition  of  a  niche  

 market. It was delivered by a young mind.  

                                                               

  

  

   

 The  success  of  young  entrepreneurs  with  limited  formal  

 education is easily explained. Our education system has a basis 

 of  teaching  knowledge,  whereas  new  entrepreneurs  are  using  

 technology to create new knowledge and new ideas. It is why so 

 many  young  entrepreneurs  do  not  have  high  levels  of  formal  

 education;  creative  and  digital  entrepreneurs  often  expressly  

 reject the ‘knowledge based’ education system we have in our 

 high  schools  and  universities.  Into  the  future  our  education  

 system  needs  to  find  new  ways  of  encouraging  creative  

 thinking and fostering the best ideas of young people.  

   

   

 Education System 

   

 Modern  education  should  focus  on  teaching  ideas  and  values  

 relevant to tomorrow’s society.  

   

 Of  course  this  is  not  as  easy  to  deliver  as  it  is  to  proclaim!  

 Esteemed  creative  educator  Sir  Ken  Robinson  in  his  famous  

 TED  talk,  Do  Schools  kill  Creativity?,  recognised  this  

 educational challenge when he said that:  

   

 “Nobody has a clue… what the world will look like in five 

 years’ time. And yet we’re meant to be educating them for 

 it”.14[14] 

   

 It is only by encouraging a questioning mind that we can create 

 an  environment  where  young  people  feel  their  opinion  is  

 important,  and  as  valid  as  someone  their  senior.   This  is  a  

 formula that encourages creativity in our younger generations, 

 it  is  a  lifelong  skill  that  remains  pertinent  to  everyday  life  no  

 matter how advanced human knowledge becomes.  

   

 Healthy  scepticism  allows  young  people  to  question  their  

 superiors in a respectful way, providing a level playing field for 

 experimentation and risk taking.  

 

 The Australian National Curriculum should take a leaf from our 

 successful  international  competitors.   The  academic  rigour  of  

 programs  such  as  the  International  Baccalaureate  requires  

 students  to  study  basic  philosophy  and  complete  a  mini-thesis  

 on a topic of their choosing during their final year. It ensures a 

 breadth of education that allows students to ‘know a little about 

 a lot, rather than a lot about a little’. Most importantly the skills 

 rather than content focus of the IB ensure that students graduate 

                                                               

 with  skills  that  will  be  relevant  no  matter  how  much  human  

 knowledge changes in the future.  

   

 Learning  science  from  first  principles  provides  you  with  the  

 foundations necessary to question modern research and views.  

 Learning  the  principles  of  critical  analysis  of  literature  

 facilitates  your  examination  of  public  policy.  Learning  the  

 principles  of  historical  inquiry  allows  you  to  discern  future  

 trends. 

   

 There  is  nothing  new  in  challenging  orthodoxy  with  a  sound  

 educational  base.  In  fact  my  alma  mater  teachers,  the  Jesuits, 

 have been teaching just that for over 400 years.15[15]  

   

 The  responsibility  of  a  student  to  question  assumptions  and  

 authority was an integral part of my own education.  

   

 However, I fear that far too many of our schools are made up of 

 a  ‘teach  to  the  test’  attitude  -  a  dangerous  situation  that  

 encourages  ‘swatting’  among  students  intent  on  achieving  the  

 best marks but lacking broader interests. Unfortunately this is a 

 product of our tertiary education system; harming the freedom 

 of  choice  for  Australian  university  students  to  select  their  

                                                               

 courses  based  on  their  qualities  as  a  whole,  rather  than  just  a  

 final school year number.  

   

 Our  university  system  does  itself  a  disservice  by  generally  

 assessing  applications  on  the  basis  of  the  Australian  Tertiary  

 Admissions Rank (ATAR). 16[16] The ATAR is a percentile rank 

 of a school finisher, a score that bears little, if any, resemblance 

 to  a  student’s  academic  vigour,  lateral  thinking  skills,  or  

 success  at  university.  Research  skills,  group  work  and  essay  

 writing skills - all important and essential for university study - 

 have no bearing on whether you are accepted into the course of 

 your choice. 17[17] Sir Ken Robinson further observes:  

   

 “The whole system of public education around the world 

 is  a  protracted  process  of  university  entrance.  And  the  

 consequence  is  that  many  highly  talented,  brilliant,  

 creative  people  think  they’re  not,  because  the  thing  they  

 were  good  at  at  school  wasn’t  valued,  or  was  actually  

 stigmatized.”18[18] 

 Out  of  the  top  20  universities  in  the  world,  as  ranked  by  the  

 Times  Higher  Education  Supplement,  not  a  single  institution  

 has  entry  based  on  marks  alone  for  undergraduate  education. 

                                                               

  

  

 19[19]  If our universities want to be the best of the best we must 

 ensure  that  it  is  the  most  intelligent,  determined  and  well  

 rounded students who get places in the top courses, not just the 

 ones  that  memorise  essays  and  rote  learn  facts.  We  need  to  

 ensure  that  assessment  should  be  based  on  a  combination  of  

 marks,  participation  and  success  in  extra-curricular  activities,  

 and recommendations.  

   

 Our  university  entry  assessment  is  worse  than  most,  indeed  

 well  below  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States.   

 However  I  am  very  pleased  to  see  that  the  University  of  New  

 England has broadened its selection criteria to take into account 

 community leadership as well as academic achievement. 

   

 Furthermore,  in  recent  years  most  Australian  Medical Schools  

 have  stopped  accepting  new  enrolees  based  simply  on  their  

 HSC or other ranked scores - the 99.9s so easily manufactured 

 in  certain  subjects.   They  have  now  added  a  component  of  

 assessment based on the interviewing of potential new students 

 to  test  such  vital  -  but  subjective  things  -  as  their  ability  to  

 communicate or show empathy or respond to another person in 

 the way a successful medical practitioner needs. After all, who 

 needs  a  doctor  who  is  simply  brilliant  but  has  no  capacity  to  

 listen, communicate, advise, empathise?                                                                

   

 To  look  at  best  practice  in  this  area  we  will  take  a  journey  to  

 North America, where the college admissions process is one of 

 the  most  competitive  in  the  world.  An  application  to  Harvard  

 University  requires  a  high  school  diploma,  a  Scholastic  

 Aptitude  Test  (SAT),  peer  and  teacher  testimonials,  personal  

 statements and a one on one interview. 20[20]   

   

 My five year old, who started Kindergarden in February this 

 year, is constantly academically assessed in school. As a parent 

 I do want to know that he is doing well.  But I cannot help but 

 think of how constant assessment of students over 13 years of 

 school education could eventually undermine their self esteem 

 should they fail to keep up with their classmates. 

   

 Of course we expect all students to do well at school, regardless 

 of their abilities or interests.  We should not be afraid of formal 

 education failure. After all Einstein and Leonardo Da Vinci 

 dropped out of high school and the Wright brothers got the first 

 plane in the air without passing their final high school 

 exams.21[21]  

   

                                                               

  

 The pressure of the Higher School Certificate has been growing 

 over time. The pressure I faced was more than that of my older 

 brothers and sister. As my nieces, nephews and family friends 

 do the HSC I see a trend continuing - the stress of the HSC 

 increasing for little material gain, and at a physical and 

 emotional cost to our young Australians. As with anything once 

 the expectations get higher, the possible fall gets greater.  

   

 I would even attribute this increased pressure and assessment 

 with contributing to problems of depression, anxiety and 

 suicide in our younger generation. It is a harrowing statistic that 

 suicide is the leading cause of death among young Australians 

 under 35.22[22]  

   

 A  strong  education  system  is  one  that  encourages  responsible  

 risk taking, channels student’s idealism and proves to them that 

 working together, they can make a positive difference. It should 

 not stifle creativity, but encourage it. We should nurture these 

 values  to  develop  the  greatest  potential  in  our  young  

 Australians.  

   

 Making Culture 

   

 Young people are remaking our culture.                                                                 

   

 In  Australia  we  have  fantastic  young  film  makers  (especially  

 among  groups  from  non-English  speaking  backgrounds)  who  

 are  leading  the  revival  of  our  film  industry,  especially  in  the  

 areas  of  animatronics  and  animation,  3D  and  new  media.  It  is  

 our young film makers who are walking off with the prizes at 

 Cannes and Sundance. 

   

 Let me also refer you to a recent article by Janet Albrechtsen- 

 not a usual source for me - praising the role of Lady Gaga - as 

 a genuine role model for young women.23[23] 

   

 Similarly,  do  I  need  to  remind  you  of  the  influence  of  role  

 models in sport.  Consider the impact that the Stephanie Rice’s, 

 Ian  Thorpe’s  and  Matthew  Mitcham’s  have  had  on  young  

 swimmers  and  divers.  And  I  fully  expect  a  new  generation  of  

 cyclists  to  emerge  in  the  older  footsteps  of  a  slightly,  older  

 Cadel Evans. Mentoring and leadership are not only limited to 

 only face to face engagement.  

   

 Arts and sports are complemented by science in the making of 

 culture.  For  example  I  hope  all  of  you  are  familiar  with  the  

 career of Adelaide born Terence Tao, son of immigrant parents 

 from  China.  At  age  ten  he  competed  in  his  first  International                                                                 

 Mathematical  Olympiad.  At  age  24  he  was  appointed  a  full  

 professor  at  UCLA.  He  went  on  to  win  the  Fields  Prize  -  the  

 Nobel  equivalent  in  mathematics.  His  greatest  and  pioneering  

 work was done before he was 30.24[24] 

   

 He is a leader and mentor to many young people he has never 

 met! 

   

 Lack of a Reform Agenda.  

   

 As someone who entered Parliament at a young age I also wish 

 to raise tonight the issue of young people in politics. 

   

 Kevin  Rudd  in  2007  promised  that  he  would  offer  a  new  

 approach  to  government,  and  engage  young  people.  Young  

 Australia was promised a voice, a representative, and someone 

 they  could  relate  to  in  a  Prime  Minister.  They  were  sorely  

 disappointed with the results.  

   

 Young  voters  became  disillusioned  with  a  Kevin  Rudd  who  

 told  Australians  that  climate  change  was  the  greatest  moral  

 challenge  of  our  time,  and  then  proceeded  to  dump  the  policy  

 after it became politically difficult to sell.  

   

                                                               

 They  became  disillusioned  when  Kevin  Rudd  showed  his  

 distrust  of  Australian  young  people  by  considering  raising  the  

 drinking age to 21. 25[25]   

   

 They  became  distrustful  when  Kevin  Rudd  increased  the  

 alcopop  tax  as  a  way  of  addressing  excessive  alcohol  

 consumption by the young.  The policy, arguably, did not work.  

 A  Victorian  Government  Report  released  last  year  found  that  

 the  increase  in  tax  had  little  impact  on  alcohol  preferences  or  

 consumption. The report states: 

   

 There  was  also  no  change  in  preferences  for  beers  or  

 spirits, the data also suggests that the tax increase did not 

 cause students to switch their beverage preferences.26[26] 

   

 The  Liberal  Party  would  not  treat  young  Australians  with  the  

 same blanket contempt.  

   

 Education, not restriction, is the key to curbing this behaviour, 

 but in all cases it is the individual that must be empowered to 

 make decisions about their own life.  

   

                                                               

  

 This  is  what  differentiates  the  Liberal  Party  from  the  Labor  

 Party.  

   

 The  Labor  Party  wants  to  control  the  behaviour  of  young  

 people by imposing state based controls. Whether it be a filter 

 on the internet or a tax on alcopops the heavy hand of more tax 

 and more regulation in the absence of any sense of personal or 

 even parental responsibility is an affront. 

   

 The  Liberal  Party  wants  individuals  to  be  in  control  of  their  

 own  life,  and  to  have  sovereignty  over  their  own  decisions.  

 This is why  for example, I so vigorously opposed the view of 

 Kevin Rudd in raising the drinking age to 21. It is an inherent 

 issue of trust.   

   

 If  young  people  are  old  enough  to  own  a  gun,  fight  in  our  

 armed forces, drive a car, get married and beget children, then 

 they  are  old  enough  to  freely  engage  in  society  without  age  

 based restrictions.  

   

 Young  people  should  be  made  aware  of  life  risks  without  the  

 Government  immediately  defaulting  to  regulation  and  control  

 of behaviour. 

   

 For  example  young  people  should  be  made  aware  of  the  fact  

 that words or photos posted on the internet will be there forever 

 and  can  be  accessed  by  future  employers,  law  enforcement  

 agencies and friends and family. 

   

 Of  course  many  of  the  photos  of  my  University  days  have  

 thankfully  faded  or  have  been  forensically  destroyed.  For  my  

 friends  and  family  that  is  a  good  thing.  A  Joe  Hockey  in  red  

 1980s budgie smugglers is best left unseen. 

   

   

 Young People in Politics 

   

 In politics young people are initially attracted to what claim to 

 be  ‘issue  based’  organisations  like  GetUp  or  various  

 environmental  organisations.  However,  young  Australians  

 quickly  lose  interest  once  they  realize  that  so  many  of  these  

 organisations  are  not  the  non-partisan  issues-focused  groups  

 they claim. Rather, they bear the same characteristics that drove 

 young voters away from allegiances to either of the two major 

 parties in the first place.  

   

 Political  parties  must  take  action  to  bring  these  voters  to  the  

 table,  rather  than  assume  they  have  the  same  motivations  as  

 older Australians, families, pensioners or other Australians. The 

 beauty  of  our  compulsory  voting  system  is  that  it  means  that  

 almost  everyone  regardless  of  age  has  to  think  about  their  

 future at least once every three years. Therefore political parties 

 have  a  strong  incentive  to  engage  the  2.6  million  Australians  

 under thirty on the electoral roll.27[27]  

   

 Sadly,  there  remain  over  1  million  Australians,  most  of  them  

 young  Australians,  that  have  either  never  enrolled  or  have  

 found themselves not correctly enrolled to vote.28[28]  

   

 Personally, I am a strong advocate for automatic enrolment of 

 young Australians on the electoral roll through the high school 

 system with provisional enrolment starting at 16 rather than 17.  

 We  have  already  started  automatic  enrolment  on  a  state  level,  

 but  the  Commonwealth  Electoral  Act  prohibits  the  AEC  from  

 using  details  from  state  enrolments  to  enrol  people.  29[29] 

 Perhaps it is time for this to change. 

   

 Often  that  ‘little  nudge’  is  all  that  is  needed  to  push  young  

 people  towards  active  and  sustained  involvement  in  the  

 political sphere.  

   

                                                               

  

  

 But  this  engagement  will  need  to  be  coupled  by  a  change  in  

 attitude of community leaders.  

   

 For me, as a legislator and hopefully one day as Treasurer, the 

 most  respect  I  can  show  you  is  to  leave  the  country  in  better  

 shape  than  the  day  I  first  walked  into  the  House  of  

 Representatives.  In  particular  it  means  repaying  Government  

 debt  and  ensuring  our  quality  of  life  is  not  ‘borrowed’  from  

 future generations.  

   

 In  2014-15  our  interest  payments  on  government  debt  will  

 amount to $7.5 billion a year- that is the equivalent of building 

 7 world-class hospitals or nearly 30 high schools a year. 30[30]   

   

 It is my hope that our decisions today in regards to borrowing 

 money  to  fund  our  current  expenditure  will  not  leave  your  

 generation with a large debt to pay off and a decreased quality 

 of life. Labor’s debt will need to be serviced. In addition your 

 generation  will  have  some  heavy  lifting  to  do  with  low  

 population  growth  and  an  aging  population.  Only  productivity  

 growth  can  ease  that  burden  but  sadly  that  discussion  is  for  a  

 later day. 

   

                                                               

 It is the job of Government to lay the foundations and remove 

 the  obstacles  to  innovation  so  that young people can seize the 

 opportunity of modern times. 

   

 Big tax and big regulation inhibits the freedom of individuals. 

   

 Now  more  than  ever  -  the  bigger  the  government  the  smaller  

 the people! 

 The  Liberal  Party  is  a  political  movement  with  values  that  

 endure  the  test  of  time.  In  previous  speeches  In  Defence  of  

 Liberty  and  In  Defence  of  Opportunity  I  have  talked  of  these  

 liberal values. In Defence of God and In Defence of Enterprise 

 I have talked about my own core beliefs. 

   

 My  Party  embraces  diversity  and  diversity  of  opinion.  Even  

 more importantly it delivers real action to match its values. 

   

 On Thursday 26 October 2010 a 20 year old rose to his feet in 

 the House of Representatives to deliver his maiden speech.31[31] 

 He  was  2  years  younger  than  the  previous  youngest  ever  

 member. 

   

 Before  he  had  uttered  a  word  that  day  Wyatt  Roy  and  the  

 people of Longman proved that Australia has come of age. His                                                                

 very presence proved that the Liberal Party practices the values 

 that it preaches. 

   

 Instead of shunning the ideas of young Australia we have taken 

 the proactive step of including them in our Party Room.  

   

 It  is  this  respect  for  diversity  that  has  meant  that  the  Liberal  

 Party  delivered  the  youngest  member  (Wyatt  Roy),  the  first  

 woman (Dame Enid Lyons), and the first indigenous Australian 

 (Ken Wyatt) to the House of Representatives.  

   

 Young people want to be talked to honestly, with integrity, and 

 not  be  pigeon  holed  into  one  particular  party.  They  become  

 engaged in politics because of issues, not ideology, but it is the 

 ideology  of  the  classical  liberal  that  rings  true  in  so  many  of  

 their hearts. 

   

 In my time in government, especially as a Minister at the age of 

 32, some of the most creative ideas came from young members 

 of  our  community,  or  from  young  people  working  in  my  

 Departments.  They  were  not  always  the  most  senior,  but  they  

 brought a fresh approach to public service and the problems we 

 faced.  

   

 Given that my father changed the destiny of my own family by 

 coming to Australia at the age of 21, I have never seen wisdom 

 and foresight as the exclusive domain of the old. 

   

 If he had not left a war torn Middle East in 1948 then my fate 

 and those of my children would have been so very different. 

   

 Each generation must do some heavy lifting so  that  those  that  

 follow may have a better life. 

   

 If  your  generation  is  not  better,  more  advanced  and  more  

 prosperous  than  my  generation  then  it  is  as  much  a  reflection  

 on  our  stewardship  of  Australia  as  it  is  on  your  actions  as  

 young Australians.  

   

 Young  Australians  have  the  capacity  to  be  leaders  right  now.  

 You do not need to wait for the future.  

   

 Your  creativity  must  not  be  unfairly  restricted  by  government  

 regulation and tax.  

   

 Your aspirations must not be limited to time and chance. 

   

 You  are  not  ‘youth’  leaders,  but  you  are  leaders  in  your  own   right.     

 Age should not be a factor. Destiny must be your only guide. 

   

 [END] 

  

