---
title: "Government strengthens Settlement Grants Program"
date: "2011-12-15"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211367570
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1309530%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 SENATOR KATE LUNDY 

 PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE PRIME MINISTER  PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 15 December 2011 

 GOVERNMENT STRENGTHENS SETTLEMENT GRANTS  PROGRAM   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Parliamentary Secretary  for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced the opening  of the 2012-13 Settlement Grants Program (SGP) funding round at Sydney’s Cabramatta  Community Centre.    

 The Gillard Government will refocus settlement funding to invest in the long-term future of  Australia’s settlement services and assist ethno-specific communities.   

 “We are strengthening the Settlement Grants Program to support community organisations  assist new migrants to fully participate in Australian society as soon as possible after they  arrive in Australia,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “In recognition of the ongoing nature of settlement services, SGP grants in 2012-13 will  primarily focus on the delivery of refugee and migrant settlement services, and providing  support for ethno-specific communities.” 

 

 Senator Lundy said the changes will build the capacity of the settlement sector to support  newly arrived refugees and migrants.   

 “Under the former settlement grant program, funding for ad hoc projects was prioritised over  core community services,” Senator Lundy said.   

 “The changes announced today reflect a decision by the Government to reinvest in long term  programs that will help new Australians adapt to life in Australia.   

 “Australia has a proud history of investing in settlement services and these changes will  ensure the outcomes of settlement services are aligned with social participation and  connection to the Australian community.”   

 The revised service types under SGP include casework, coordination and delivery of services,  community coordination and development, youth settlement services, and support for ethno-specific organisations.  

 

 Applications must be lodged by 5pm AEDST on 1 February 2012. Applications received after  this date will not be considered. Funding will commence on 1 July 2012 and may be offered  for periods of one, two or three years.    

 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will hold information sessions on the 

 grants, which applicants are strongly encouraged to attend before completing and lodging  their application.   

 For further information in relation to information session dates and locations, or to access the  online application form and view the application information booklet visit the DIAC website:  www.immi.gov.au/living-in-australia/delivering-assistance/settlement-grants/   

 Applicants can also contact the SGP Helpdesk for more information on 1800 453 004 between  9am and 5pm AEDST Monday to Friday (excluding ACT public holidays).   Media Contacts: Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 / Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen)  Jessica Hill 0407 926 077 (Lundy)   

