---
title: "Character test changes passed by Parliament,"
date: "2011-07-05"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211356943
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/899232%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 5 July 2011 

 CHARACTER TEST CHANGES PASSED BY PARLIAMENT   

 Changes to the Migration Act that toughen the penalties for criminal behaviour in immigration  detention have been passed by the Parliament, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Chris Bowen MP, said today.   

 Mr Bowen welcomed the Government’s amendments being passed by the Senate overnight,  and said the changes would create a significant disincentive for destructive and criminal  behaviour in Australia’s immigration detention facilities.   

 “The Government’s changes, including strengthening the character test, send a clear  message that the kind of behaviour we saw earlier this year at the Christmas Island and  Villawood detention centres will not be tolerated,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Anyone considering engaging in destructive and criminal behaviour in detention must now  face the reality that such action will significantly increase their chances of not being granted a  permanent visa.”   

 Under the Government’s changes to the Migration Act a person would fail the character test  should they be convicted of any offence committed while in immigration detention, while the  maximum penalty for the manufacture, possession, use or distribution of weapons by  immigration detainees has also increased from three to five years’ imprisonment.    

 Mr Bowen said the changes to the Migration Act had passed through Parliament without the  Coalition’s ill-considered amendments.   

 “In typical form, the Coalition argued simultaneously that the changes to the character test  were unnecessary and also that they did not go far enough,” he said.   

 “Despite their bluster and hot air, they ended up supporting the legislation.”   

 The Government’s amendments apply to all people in immigration detention, whether they  are onshore or offshore arrivals, asylum seekers, or otherwise.   

 “These changes to toughen the character test and the penalties relating to the destructive  behaviour we have seen recently is about punishing serious crimes committed in immigration  detention,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “The vast majority of people in detention who do not partake in these actions and are not  convicted for any crimes have nothing to fear and will not be affected by these changes.”  Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

