---
title: "Joint statement with the President Of Lebanon"
date: "2012-04-10"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371103
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1569668%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER 

  

 JOINT STATEMENT WITH THE PRESIDENT OF LEBANON    Prime Minister Gillard today warmly welcomed President Sleiman and his  accompanying delegation to Australia, the first visit to Australia by a President of  Lebanon.   

 Prime Minister Gillard and President Sleiman acknowledged the strength of people  to people links between Australia and Lebanon and the foundation for a strong,  productive and long-standing bilateral relationship.   

 They discussed the significant contribution to all aspects of Australian society by  Australians of Lebanese descent.   

 President Sleiman told Prime Minister Gillard that he looked forward to conferring on  NSW Governor, Professor Marie Bashir the National Order of the Cedar in  recognition of her contribution to enhancing friendship and cooperation between 

 Lebanon and Australia.   

 The two Leaders welcomed the recent establishment of the Australia Lebanon  Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Melbourne, which they believed would  complement the Australian Lebanese Chamber of Commerce in Sydney and serve  to stimulate increased bilateral trade and investment.   

 The leaders discussed a number of significant regional issues including events in  Syria, the need for constructive talks between P5+1 and the Middle East peace  process.    

 They urged the immediate and full implementation of UN-Arab League Joint Special  Envoy Annan’s six-point peace plan.   

 Leaders welcomed enhanced cooperation in defence matters, including through the  offering of places to members of the Lebanese Armed Forces in joint training  courses in Australia.   

 Prime Minister Gillard reiterated Australia’s support for de-mining activities in  Lebanon and announced an additional $1 million contribution to accelerate the return  of land free of mines to the people of South Lebanon.   

 President Sleiman and Prime Minister Gillard discussed the important work of the  United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA).   Australia’s financial assistance to UNRWA includes support for the valuable help  UNRWA provides to Palestinian refugees in Lebanon.   

 President Sleiman welcomed the Prime Minister’s announcement that Australia  would provide funding to support a Visiting National Professionals Program at the  Special Tribunal for Lebanon. 

 

 

 CANBERRA  10 APRIL 2012   

 PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744     

