---
title: "Qubayr massacre"
date: "2012-06-08"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374678
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1713419%22
---

 

 FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT TONY WINDSOR MP 0427 668868   

 TAMWORTH OFFICE  SHOP 5, 259 PEEL STREET, TAMWORTH 2340  PH:  02 6761 3080 OR TOLL FREE 1300 301 839  FAX:  02 6761 3380  INVERELL OFFICE  88 OTHO STREET, INVERELL 2360  PH:  02 6721 0144  FAX:  02 6721 0288  ALL MAIL  PO BOX 963, TAMWORTH  NSW  2340  EMAIL:  Tony.Windsor.MP@aph.gov.au  WEB:  www.tonywindsor.com.au 

 

 TONY WINDSOR B.Ec MP  INDEPENDENT   FEDERAL MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND   

 PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES   

 Media Release  8th June 2012  Namoi Councils Water Working Group work shows way forward on the Murray Darling Basin  The Namoi Councils Water Working Group is leading the way in developing an objective modelling process for planning  for  the  water  use  future  and  impact  purposes  according  to  the  Independent  Member  for  New  England,  Tony Windsor.    Mr Windsor said the latest Namoi Councils Water Working Group work is on top of the Namoi CMA’s work into the spatial risk assessment in terms of the Namoi Valley impacts of the coal seam gas and coal mining.    Mr  Windsor  congratulated  the  Namoi  Councils  Water  Working  Group  and  thanked  them  for  their  continuing  contribution to a very complex and current issue.  “I  congratulate  the  Namoi  Councils  Water  Working  Group  chaired  by  Namoi  CMA  CEO,  Bruce  Brown  and  his  team for having the vision to look beyond the day to day politics and look at a model.    “This model will be extremely valuable in terms of the Regional Australia Committee revisiting parts of the MDB Authority Plan.   “The highlighting of Menindee Lakes and how it can impact on the northern river system, ie the Darling system above Menindee and the requirements for it under the plan to make a contribution to the total system is critical.  “This  would  include  modernising  the  management  of  the  entire  northern  system  including  a  proper  engineered  examination of efficient water delivery to identified environmental sites.   “The reintroduction of the Menindee Lakes into the debate highlights what the Committee is actually looking for - that is works and measures that can deliver outcomes that won’t require anybody’s individual water entitlements to be cut.   “This is exactly what the Committee is looking for and I would encourage the Murray Darling Basin Authority and the  various  irrigator  interests  in  the  northern  system  particularly  to  make  submissions  urgently  to  the  Regional  Australia Committee so we can look at this sort of issue.    “We  are  looking  at  where  you  can  actually  reduce  the  number  that  was  indicated  in  the  basin  plan  for  cuts  by  inventive  and  engineering  works  that  actually  create  water  by  reducing  evaporation  and  hence  have  an  overall  impact on the total system, so this is a very good example at a very good time to introduce this modelling into the debate.    “This is objective modelling and should be welcomed,” Mr Windsor said.  Mr Windsor believes that even though there are a number of assumptions in the model, that happens with every model and you can’t get away from that.  “The model does indicate and put a value on water whether it be through water loss, climate change, drought or policy change and there again will be a valuable piece of information to go forward.                     ../2 

 

 FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT TONY WINDSOR MP 0427 668868   

 TAMWORTH OFFICE  SHOP 5, 259 PEEL STREET, TAMWORTH 2340  PH:  02 6761 3080 OR TOLL FREE 1300 301 839  FAX:  02 6761 3380  INVERELL OFFICE  88 OTHO STREET, INVERELL 2360  PH:  02 6721 0144  FAX:  02 6721 0288  ALL MAIL  PO BOX 963, TAMWORTH  NSW  2340  EMAIL:  Tony.Windsor.MP@aph.gov.au  WEB:  www.tonywindsor.com.au 

 .. 2 .. 

 

 “I  am  confident  that  the  contribution  of  the  Northern  System  to  the  Murray  Darling  System  itself,  quite  a  lot  of   which is called insystem water to make the rivers run, can in fact be found without any reduction in the entitlement.     

 “Nowhere in the proposed plan is there any indication of enforced water entitlement reduction.   

 “The  modelling  that’s  been  done  by  the  Namoi  Councils  Water  Working  Group  provides  a  way  of  making  a   contribution  to  reduced  evaporative  water  from  Menindee  lakes  -  with  an  investment  you  can  create  water  in  a   practical sense.   

 “Money is not an issue in relation to why Menindee has not been redeveloped in the past.   

 “That money has been provided and has been available from the Commonwealth to NSW for many years.   

 “The  blockage  in  the  system  is  in  fact  the  NSW  Government  -  not  just  the  new  Government  but  the  former   Government too - and it resides squarely on the laps of some of the senior water administrators in the NSW Office  of Water.   

 “They  are  intransigent  in  terms  of  this  issue  and  they  continue  to  ignore  what  is  an  outstanding  opportunity  to   reduce evaporation and hence create water to offset the 80 gigalitres that Bruce Brown is talking about.   

 “There is no need for an 80 gigalitre reduction as identified in this scenario when you’ve got the Menindee Lakes  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  system  and  other  smaller  scale  Menindee  Lakes  infrastructural  works  and  measures   environmentally and on-farm works that can be used to address this issues,” Mr Windsor said.   

 Below are the terms of reference for the Inquiry and also how to make a submission. 

 Terms of Reference 

 The Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities, the Hon Tony Bourke MP has asked the 

 Committee to inquire into:  

 1. Progress to date in water recovery towards bridging the gap by 2019 through both irrigation infrastructure investments 

 and water purchase,  

 2. The potential role that new environmental works and measures projects could play in partially offsetting SDL reductions 

 under the Basin Plan,  

 focussing particularly on prospective project proposals identified by state governments and community interests.  

 3. The groundwater sustainable diversion limits (SDLs) for Basin in the revised proposed Basin Plan  

 Inquiry into certain matters relating to the proposed  Murray-Darling Basin plan  On 29 May 2012, the Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities, The Hon Tony Bourke 

 MP, asked the Committee to inquire into and report on certain matters relating to the proposed Murray-Darling Basin plan.  

 The Committee welcomes submissions by stakeholders addressing the terms of reference by 15 June 2012. Please refer to 

 our brochure called preparing a submission for more information.  

 In order to facilitate electronic publishing of submissions, the Committee would prefer them to be emailed to 

 mdb.reps@aph.gov.au or sent on disk or CD-ROM to the Committee Secretariat in Microsoft Word® or Portable Document 

 Format (PDF).  

