---
title: "Labor's story on latest boat arrival doesn't stack up"
date: "2012-06-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374709
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736713%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR'S STORY ON LATEST BOAT ARRIVAL  DOESN'T STACK UP

 June 10, 2012

 Labor must clarify the circumstances surrounding the latest boat to arrive in Australian waters, with reports it was wrecked on a  reef and passengers were forced to swim to safety, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The statement issued by the Government this evening says this latest vessel, the tenth to arrive in as many days, was  intercepted by the AFP near Keeling Island. However, the AFP do not have maritime assets in that region capable of such an  interception and reports from locals in the region are there was no vessel to intercept, as it had been wrecked on a reef with the  passengers forced to swim to safety where they were later rescued.

 “This is just another example of a Government that just can't be up front with people. Why misrepresent what has occurred in this  situation, when the truth will do? This follows the Government's continued refusal through Minister Bowen to answer questions  about what he knew about 'Captain Emad' and when he learned he had given an alleged people smuggler a permanent protection  visa. Minister Bowen must come out of hiding and answer these questions. 

 “The Government has been more intent to engage the politics, putting out statements blaming and attacking the Opposition,  rather than fulfilling their responsibilities to inform Australians accurately about what has happened on their watch.

 “The Government must immediately clarify what has occurred with this vessel and the 32 passengers who were board. They must  also clarify the origin of these passengers, and their point of embarkation as, if Sri Lankans are coming on boats again, and are  leaving from India as has been suggested, then Labor's border failures have gone to a whole new level. 

 “With the civil war in Sri Lanka over for several years, boats seeking to come are highly likely to be economic refugees responding  to the perception that Australia's borders are open to all comers. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Australia cannot afford this ongoing free for all at our borders. The Australian Federal Police are not equipped to  intercept illegal boat arrivals. 

 "There is no possible way Border Protection Command can continue to deal with this number of illegal vessels in such a short  amount of time. 

 "Questions must be answered about the ability of the patrol boat fleet to operate at this tempo, given the evidence given at Senate  Estimates about the maintenance issues arising from current high usage.

 "The Labor Government cannot expect our border protection forces to deal with this ongoing chronic failure. 

 "The system is broken and only the Government can fix it.

 "It is in their power to reinstate the policies they destroyed upon coming to office - this is the only way to stop people smuggling,"  Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR'S STORY ON LATEST BOAT ARRIVAL DOESN'T STACK UP > Michae...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

