---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 31 October 2012: AsiaBound; immigration"
date: "2012-10-31"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
  - "AsiaBound"
  - "immigration"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384430
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2016838%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON CHRIS EVANS  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research   

 TRANSCRIPT 

 Doorstop  Wednesday 31 October 2012   

 Subjects:  AsiaBound, immigration   

 SENATOR CHRIS EVANS: Thanks for coming this morning. I just wanted to speak about  the Government's AsiaBound response to the Asian Century White Paper. We've announced  that we'll be supporting around 10,000 students to go to Asia as part of university schemes  that will either provide for exchange or for short-term experiences.    

 We know that international study helps broaden the mind and broaden awareness of culture  and helps build long-term friendships. We're keen to grow the number of Australian students  who get that experience.    

 Our students are the future of this country. They're the people who will be our business  leaders, will be in our professions. Having an opportunity to study in Asia means they  become more Asian literate, they build networks, they build familiarity.    

 We think it's a good educational experience, a good cultural experience. It's good for the  student, it's good for the university and it's good for the country.   

 We've traditionally had a focus where students have gone to the Americas and to Europe.  That's been a cultural context where they're more familiar with English-speaking countries  and/or Europe, given the connections Australia's had historically.   

 What we're trying to do is shift that focus. Less than 40 per cent of our students have gone  into Asia in the past, and we're encouraging the universities to grow some existing programs  which are really good. This is about the Government really investing in supporting the  universities and the students.   

 We will see about 10,000 extra students going to Asia under this scheme.    

 It's a scheme I hope to grow as we build on the experience and the success. This is a huge  extra financial commitment by the Government to provide a real stimulus for this focus on  Asia for university study and exchange.   

 An important thing to say is that there's a language element to this which is supporting the  students in terms of getting some language skills. One of the weaknesses in the system  currently is that there's a sense that you have to do a degree in a language before you feel  you're able to travel and study in Asia.    

 Many of the Asian universities offer English-speaking classes. Many people are able to get  by with a little big of language skills in a whole range of contexts. 

 

 We're going to support training in colloquial language, enough to get students to really get  the benefit out of the experience, which we think will help spark a greater interest in more  detailed language education.   

 We're not just looking for students who are highly skilled in the language; we're not just  looking at the scholarship students - the scholarships programs are very large and will  remain on foot. This is about saying to all Australian students - be they in nursing, be they in  engineering, be they in design, be they in the social sciences - there's value for you and  there's value for Australia in you having an educational experience in Asia.   

 The focus of the program is about encouraging that development, but also saying to the  students, this isn't a holiday, this about you getting a real experience that'll benefit you;  benefit your education and, long-term, will have benefits for the country.    

 So the focus is on Government investment, on a university investment, and a student  investment. Too many Australian students only know about Bintang and beaches in terms of  Asia. They actually need to understand much more deeply how Asia works and the  countries' perspectives on the world.   

 The other thing this program will do is encourage engagement with industry. There are a lot  of Australian businesses working in Asia. We're interested in programs that allow work  placements, that allow those companies to host students, that will help them build those  contacts and help those companies grow their Asian businesses.   

 We're not being prescriptive about the programs. It might be a nurse doing eight weeks  placement in a regional Indonesian hospital. It might be about a design student working in a  Hong Kong design business. It might be about a lawyer working in Shanghai with an  Australian legal firm. It might be about students doing international development working in a  refugee camp in Malaysia.    

 We want to grow the opportunities, which will vary by country and vary by discipline, and we  want to encourage the universities to be innovative.    

 I think it's a really exciting scheme. It's a really serious response a requirement to have a  cultural shift in the way our young people think about Asia and the opportunities we give  them.   

 I've got Stephen Parker who's the Vice-Chancellor of Canberra University with me and a  group of his students who've either been on programs or about to go on programs that the  Canberra University already runs. As I say, there's lots of great existing programs that we're  going to invest in and help grow, but perhaps I might hand over to Stephen to make some  comments about why Canberra University's involved in this; why they think it's important  educationally.  

 

 Then I'm happy to offer-up the students either to this forum or individually if you'll have a  chat to them, rather than subjecting them to the pack. Either way I'm sure they'll do well.   

 VICE CHANCELLOR STEPHEN PARKER: I really welcome these AsiaBound initiatives. I  do so on behalf of the University of Canberra, but I'm sure I speak for the whole university  sector.   

 There's a real interest amongst students in going to Asia as part of their studies. The  numbers in my university have grown by over 50 per cent in the last year. But it's hardship 

 for students as well. So these extra grants and the extension of the OS-HELP Loan Scheme  will really help students do that.    

 Examples at the university are… we had a group of students go to Hong Kong - Graphic  Design students trying to get inside a different aesthetic than the one that they work in, we  have Education students that go to China as part of the global teacher initiative, learning  about different teaching methods, but also bringing western teaching methods there, we  have a group of students going to Bollywood for four weeks, Film and Media students,  learning about what is an extraordinary media community, and there are many more  examples.   

 I am particularly interested in these grants because they help people from less privileged  backgrounds, and I would not want a system where the more affluent students have better  opportunities to study abroad than those from less well off backgrounds.   

 So from a university perspective, these are exactly the kinds of things that we think the  Government should be doing and promoting. And I am sure that the students will respond  and that universities will too.   

 I know my academic colleagues will be very excited about new opportunities to take parties  of students abroad, as part of their studies, and that is an important thing to emphasise.   

 CHRIS EVANS: I think I've talked the students into the fact that you don't look all that  threatening, and they're happy to come and say a few words.   

 STUDENT (MARK): I am studying International Business at the University of Canberra. My  name is Mark. I am looking forward to going to Japan next year, hopefully to build some long  term relationships.   

 I think the greatest thing about these grants and scholarships is there are a lot of short term  language courses available throughout Japan and China. And the problem for us, me  personally as a student, is that I am giving up my job to go overseas and that is going to cost  me financially, when I am exposed to, sort of, economic conditions. And I think just that the  support that the Government is offering us here is fantastic.   

 REPORTER: Have you been learning Japanese, leading up to your trip?   

 STUDENT: Yes, I have studied some Japanese at the University of Canberra. It's got a  great program going there.   

 REPORTER: I'm sure you're keen to learn a bit more while you're on the ground over there?   

 STUDENT: Yeah. I think immersing myself, especially with regards to things like kanji, things  that really require time, dedication and experience, yeah, I'm - it's going to be awesome.   

 STUDENT (JESSICA) I am studying a Bachelor of Graphic Design at the University of  Canberra. My name is Jessica. I went over to China on an exchange program. It was a really  great experience. I was awarded a scholarship there. And it was just fantastic to get  immersed in the culture. There are so many opportunities over in Asia these days and there  are so many Australians that are working over there. Especially for design, there's great  opportunities to work in professional offices over there. Just immersing ourselves in the  culture was fantastic.   

 REPORTER: What made you pick Asia? I suppose a lot of students would think of Europe  and America first. So what made you pick - to go to China? 

 

 STUDENT: I love China. Actually, I wasn't given the chance to pick. It was an opportunity  that we could go or not. So I chose to go there because I really wanted to see China  because I thought that it would be a great experience, something different. It's not a western  culture. It's something that's got a lot of different opportunities, a completely different culture  over there and it was just fantastic, so…   

 CHRIS EVANS: Thanks very much. I am happy to take any questions or the students will be  available if you want to have a chat to them about their experiences.   

 REPORTER: Senator, can I just ask you about the requirements, in terms of the grants and  how the process of students applying for them goes?   

 CHRIS EVANS: What we're going to do is have the universities apply for support for the  programs. The support will go to the students. But we want to make sure the programs are  of high quality so there'll be a sort of accreditation process, whereby the department will  assess the program.    

 As I say, we want to make sure it is serious, and we also want to make sure that it is of  quality, but we also don't want to put artificial barriers on what universities come up with. The  bureaucracy can be very good at setting regulations which [indistinct] people fall outside of,  even though they have got a good proposition.   

 We want to allow that innovation to occur. We will approve the programs, but we have  indicated we want to provide and support innovation.   

 One of the things we are doing is freeing up the OS-HELP scheme, which is the loans  scheme, to provide greater focus for Asia, providing greater loan capacity, but also some  support for intensive language training. The student might make a contribution to that effort  as well.   

 We obviously want to signal that it is a benefit to the students. So we're going to invest. The  universities know it's good for the education of their students and for their job prospects, and  I think the students will take those opportunities.   

 The students will be the individual applicant, but the universities will, if you like, provide the  administrative support and a proper program that supports those students while they are  overseas.   

 REPORTER: Do you think there's 10,000 - enough keen students? Is Asia somewhere that's  got a - you know, a list of students 10,000 long to - keen to go?   

 CHRIS EVANS: We worked with the universities on the design of this program. It hasn't  been me or the bureaucracy telling them how it works. It's been saying, well, what works  currently and what would allow you to grow the programs and make them more successful?    

 The scheme has been designed around that advice. It is going to be flexible, it is going to  free up the OS-HELP, which has been very bureaucratic. Most students don't know that it  exists. They don't know those opportunities are there.   

 We do have to get the cultural shift going. There is no doubt students, like all Australians,  tend to think when they go on holidays, if it wasn't for maybe the price competitiveness, the  United States and Europe. We've got to actually change the focus.   

 If we run good programs, we say they're available, they understand they're available,  students will come. They have come. You've heard from some of them today. And so we are  are-directing our support and a making huge investment in that support to go into Asia.   

 REPORTER: Senator, if you wouldn't mind if I just asked, if you put on your past Immigration  Minister hat and the - Labor has this morning introduced the migration excise. Is it - the  Coalition argues it's hypocritical. Is it, given that you didn't support it, all those years ago?   

 CHRIS EVANS: Well, look, I think the reality is that we said we'd adopt the report of the  Houston committee and accept all their recommendations. This was one of their  recommendations. There were tough decisions in that for the Labor Party, given our tradition  and our history on some of these issues, but, if you like, we bit the bullet and said, well this is  an expert panel, this is what they have recommended and we can't pick and choose which  ones we like.    

 We accepted the advice that said you need to implement all of this, it's a package. And so  this is another part of that package.   

 The Labor Party has been prepared to accept that advice, to try and find a solution to what  we're confronting at the moment in terms of boat arrivals. It’s just about responding to the  Houston report, accepting that advice, and being clear about it.   

 I mean, one of the issues that is not focused on enough here is that you don't want to  provide an incentive for people to sail past Christmas Island to get to the mainland. That is  more days at sea, it is more dangerous and more risk to them. And we saw, during the  previous peak in activity under the Howard Government, that a lot of people sought to come  to the mainland. I think it's a reasonable practical response, but it's very much a part of our  commitment to implement the Houston report.   

 ENDS   

