---
title: "Minister to visit Nauru and Papua New Guinea"
date: "2012-10-02"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382895
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1954114%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 2 October 2012 

 

 Minister To Visit Nauru And Papua New Guinea   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, leaves for Nauru and Papua  New Guinea (PNG) tomorrow morning to take a first-hand look at how regional processing  arrangements are progressing.   

 “This timely visit provides an opportunity for me to assess how our regional operations are  proceeding and reaffirm in person Australia’s appreciation of Nauru and Papua New Guinea’s  commitment to hosting these centres,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Regional processing on Nauru and PNG is vital to addressing irregular migration in our  region, and is a key recommendation of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.”   

 Mr Bowen said he would consult with a range of local stakeholders in both countries to  assess and receive feedback on the progress of the arrangements.   

 The minister will meet with the President of Nauru, Sprent Dabwido, and members of his  government, as well as inspect the regional processing centre, and meet with service  providers and Australian Defence Force (ADF) personnel on the island.   

 In Papua New Guinea, the ministerial delegation will meet with Prime Minister, Peter O’Neill,  his Attorney-General, Minister for Defence and other members of the PNG Government.   

 “Australia is committed to making these arrangements work through close cooperation with  both the Nauru and Papua New Guinea governments and key stakeholders there,” Mr Bowen  said.   

 “We are determined to expose the people smugglers’ business model for what is: a ruthless  con. There is no visa awaiting boat arrivals, no speedy outcome and no special treatment.”   

 The Government has completed five transfers to Nauru, with 148 people currently  accommodated in the temporary facility. Meanwhile, ADF works in PNG are well underway to  reinstate the facility on Manus Island.   

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769 

