---
title: "Boat arrivals double in 2012 as 255 more"
date: "2012-04-23"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371692
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2078404%22
---

 BOAT ARRIVALS DOUBLE IN 2012 AS 255 MORE  PEOPLE ARRIVE

 Posted on Wednesday, 11 April, 2012

 The arrival of 255 people overnight on two illegal boats means boat arrivals are up more than 100% so  far in 2012, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Labor  have  removed  every  brick  in  the  wall  of  border  protection  they  inherited  from  the  Howard   Government,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Since Labor capitulated to the Greens in late November last year, and introduced their ‘let them in, let  them  out  policy’  of   mainstream  community  release,  with  bridging  visas  and  work  rights  for  single   males, the number of boat arrivals to Australia has surged,” he said.

 “So far this year, 1,818 people have arrived on 23 boats, compared to 857 people on 14 boats over the  same period in 2011. This is an average of more than 550 people per month.

 “At this rate, we can expect this year’s illegal boat arrivals to return to the record levels experienced in  2010.

 “Asylum seekers are well aware of the latest softening in border policy by Labor, as was confirmed in  media  reports  of  comments  by  asylum  seekers  in  Indonesia  rescued  from  a  vessel  on  their  way  to   Australia this week.

 “Labor refuses to accept responsibility for their border protection failures and remains in denial about  the need to restore the proven measures of the Coalition. 

 “Instead  they  continue  to  soften  border  policy  and  attempt  to  cover  their  tracks  by  blaming  the   Opposition.  

 “Blaming the Opposition for the Government’s own border failures is not a policy, it is just another lame  excuse from a Government that has given up on border protection,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “People smugglers would have made $2.5 million over the past 24 hours on the back  of Labor's failed border protection policies.

 “With such large amounts of money at stake they will not quit until they understand that Australia has  an administration that will do what it takes to close them down.

 “They have tested Labor and prevailed on every single occasion.

 “They continue to be emboldened by Labor's continued failure as evidenced by the latest two illegal  arrivals carrying more than 250 people.

 “As the boats continue to stream through our borders at such a rapid rate, the hard working men and  women of the Border Protection Command will  receive no break as they  continue to face increased  strain and lack of resources to deal with Labor’s border protection crisis.

 “When you strip resources from the vital frontline agencies, like Labor has, then you open our borders  up to penetration from the people smuggling syndicates.

 “Sadly excuse after excuse is all Labor has to offer the Australian people as they refuse to reinstate  the  Coalition’s  proven  policies  of  offshore  processing  on  Nauru,  Temporary  Protection  Visas  and   turning the boats around when it is safe to do so,” Mr Keenan said.

 Page 1 of 1 BOAT ARRIVALS DOUBLE IN 2012 AS 255 MORE PEOPLE ARRIVE > Michael...

 30/11/2012 http://www.keenan.net.au/Media/PortfolioMediaReleases/tabid/80/articleType/Article...

