---
title: "Transcript of the joint press conference interview with Senator Chris Evans: Canberra: 02 April 2012: Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival, Canberra"
date: "2012-04-02"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages"
  - "poll"
  - "boat arrival, Canberra"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370862
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1691128%22
---

 Search this site 

  Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

 Links

 

 

 Skilled American workers to fill labour  shortages; poll; boat arrival Monday, 02 April 2012

 Joint Press Conference with Senator Chris Evans  on US work visa arrangement

 Senator Chris Evans: Thanks everyone for coming today. I'm  here with US Ambassador Jeff Bleich and my Ministerial colleague  Chris Bowen, the Minister for Immigration, to make an  announcement regarding streamlining processes to facilitate more  skilled United States workers coming to Australia in the next few  years to support the skills needs we will have, particularly in the  heavy civil engineering areas.

 Currently the temporary migration program has attracted  reasonable numbers of United States citizens with particular skills,  but mainly in the professional areas, and there's been some  interest for awhile now among US companies and large Australian  employers, in attracting some skilled labour from the United States.

 You'd be aware that recently the United States economy has been  in a difficult period and there has been reasonable numbers of  unemployed in the United States, including in their construction  trades areas, and we've been discussing with the Ambassador and  American companies for some time whether or not we could do  better at attracting some of that labour to meet the emerging skills  needs in the Australian economy.

 We're talking about temporary skills needs. People would be aware  that the large amount of construction occurring in Australia in  developing mines, railways and ports, which is putting a huge  demand on our existing civil engineering workforce.  The reality is projections have our workforce going from about 30  or 35 000 currently to perhaps 75 000 or more workers required in  those fields.

 There's going to be a spike in our civil construction workforce that  we're going to have to meet. We're obviously very committed to  training more Australians as the first response and we've invested  heavily in training and giving opportunities to Australians to pick up  skills. They include not only the traditional training methods, but  the National Workforce Development Fund, providing support for  mature age apprentices, a whole range of measures designed to  meet those skills needs.

 But the reality is we will have a peak in the workforce demands.  Quite frankly you wouldn't want to train for the peak because that  will just leave you with people who will be unable to find work when  the peak subsided. So the Minister for Immigration and I have  been working on plans to try and allow us to meet the skills needs  of the Australian economy during that peak period.

 One of the things we've found is that we haven't been attracting  trades from the United States of America because of a range of  barriers, if you like, to successfully bring those people in to meet 

 those temporary skills needs and two of the measures we are  announcing today will facilitate and improve the flow. The first thing  is that, under my portfolio, we will be ensuring that tradespeople in  America can get their trades recognised there so that when they  come to Australia, or supported by an employer, they know they'll  be able to work in that trade in Australia. We haven't had strong 

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 recognition arrangements with the United States of America and  this will allow us to have American tradespeople have their trades  recognised there before seeking to come to Australia.

 This will mean an employer will know if they seek to bring  someone in that they have the trades skills that are recognised in  Australia, particularly important for trades like plumbers and  electricians where they will need to be licensed. Currently they  would have to come to Australia, not sure if they would get that  licence and it may take some months to get that licence awarded  to them so these changes will allow for recognition in the United  States which will provide confidence for the employer and the  worker that they will be able to bring them in temporality for  employment.

 Minister Bowen also has a measure relating to Skills Fairs and  attracting labour from the United States and I'll get him to talk to  you about that and I'll ask the US Ambassador to make some  remarks about his government's view of these measures.

 Can I just say though, this is very much about a temporary  migration measure to meet skill shortages that we know will be  particularly in the civil engineering area. We know there are good  quality tradespeople in the United States which we haven't  attracted before. The American contribution to temporary migration  is growing, but largely in the professional areas, and this is an  attempt to make sure we can source some of those high quality,  skilled tradespeople to assist us in that peak period, which is likely  to come to a head about year 2014-15.

 I'll hand over to Minister Bowen.

 Minister Chris Bowen: Thank you very much Chris. Well of  course, as you know, in Australia we have no trouble attracting  skilled migrants. The real challenge is ensuring we attract the skills 

 needed in Australia with our booming economy. Now of course,  there are economies in countries around the world which are  facing very difficult, and different, circumstances to ours and what's  appropriate is that we work together with those countries to ensure  that skilled workers who are looking for work have the capacity to  fill some of those gaps that we are facing in Australia.

 In addition to the measures announced by Minister Evans today,  my department will be running, for the first time, a skills expo in the  United States. These are successful events that we've held in  Europe, most particularly in Greece and Ireland, where we ensure  that employers who are looking for workers, particularly as Minister  Evans said, temporary workers, are put in touch with those skilled  workers who are very interested in exploring the opportunity of  coming and working in Australia.

 Because we are particularly focusing on the resources sector and  resources employment, the first skills expo will be held in Houston  on the 19th and 20th of May.

 These are, as I say, good opportunities for us to explain the  various mechanisms for skilled migration to Australia.

 The three clear mechanisms - independent skilled migration where  people have the appropriate number of points and are able to have  independent migration to Australia, employer nominated migration,  where an employer has a vacancy and nominates a particular  individual to fill it, and of course 457s.

 Now the United States is already our third largest source of 457  migration to Australia but we need to make sure that every  opportunity is taken up. So this is a modest step but nevertheless I  think a necessary step and one that works in the best interest of  the United States and Australia.

 The biggest risk to some of our resources projects being  completed in Australia is actually getting the necessary skills, the  highly specialised skills in many cases, which go to the 

 Page 2 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 construction of large resources projects and of course, that has  flow on effects throughout the construction sector, to ensure that  we have the right mix of skills available.

 This is actually a measure to create Australian jobs. When you  have economic activity, when you have such big projects being  undertaken, it is vital that we have the access to the labour  necessary to ensure that those projects proceed and to ensure that  jobs are created, in the best interest of the Australian economy,  Australian workers and of course in the best interest of those that  come and work here and create wealth while they're here.

 Ambassador.

 Ambassador Jeff Bleich: Well first I'd like to thank Minister Evans  and Minister Bowen for their leadership on this important initiative.  This is a real win-win for both of our nations. It matches highly  skilled American workers who are available with a temporary skills  shortage here in Australia to make sure that the progress, and  growth, and economic vitality continues, particularly in Western  Australia and in other parts of Australia, and at the same time we  take advantage of these highly skilled American workers who are  looking to contribute.

 One of the great things about US migration here is, as Minister  Bowen said, they're mostly 457 visas so we're talking about people  who speak the same language, come fully skilled and then leave,  so no job will be taken away from Australians, and in fact that's the 

 goal here - to create prosperity that will employ more Australians  down the road. The evidence of how strongly supported this is, not  only in the US but also in Australia, is that we have endorsements  from the Business Council of Australia, the Australia Industries  Group, the American Chamber and the US Chamber of  Commerce. This will create an opportunity for labour unions and  trades to exchange skills and to build upon an already strong  relationship.

 I think finally I'd like to mention that there is an opportunity here as  well for highly skilled veterans to pursue opportunities to work with  Australian companies in the coming months. We have a GI bill  which provides for training so that no one would arrive here who  isn't already fully skilled and we also have people who have  worked in arduous circumstances, away from home and in difficult  environments away from their family and so they are fully prepared  to go out to the Pilbara and up to Karratha and some of the more  remote regions where these jobs are mostly in demand.

 So again, on behalf of the United States, I'd want to thank the  Australian Government for its leadership on this initiative and we  think it's going to benefit both of our countries and long term, the  economic growth of Australia.

 Reporter: Minister Bowen or Evans, how many skilled American  workers are you looking to attract to Australia under these  measures?

 Minister Bowen: Well the market will determine that, supply and  demand will determine that. It's important that we as a government  provide maximum opportunities for employers who need workers  and for employees who are interested. So we are not setting a  target, or a cap, or a limit; we are simply making the connections.  Now, I expect demand and interest to be strong in the United  States, as it has been in Europe, a lot of interest in coming and  working in Australia,  but, as I say, the important thing is the fit - making sure the that  people who we bring to Australia actually fit the skills required in  Australia. That's the challenge, not attracting actual individuals,  making sure that the skills that they possess are the  ones that we need, but I do expect strong demand.

 Reporter: Minister, Australia was at the wrong end of the'brain  drain' for a couple of decades, possibly longer. Now that a lot of 

 Page 3 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 the western world is in the slump of economic misfortune, wouldn't  it be the best time to actually correct that 'brain drain' that went for  decades and actually encourage these people to stay in Australia?

 Minister Bowen: Well again, that will be up to the individuals and  their employers to determine. We have temporary skills needs in  Australia. We also find that when people come to Australia, work in  Australia, like it here and their employer is happy with them, then  there is an opportunity for them to apply for permanent migration.  That's a very common feature, but of course that has to be a win-win; it has to be good for the individual and good for the employer  and, therefore, good for the economy.

 Reporter: But we heard from the Ambassador that there is  sensitivity about foreigners, like the Irish and Americans, taking  Australian jobs, but if they are going to be better for the economy,  how can you assure these people that there will be an opportunity  to stay?

 Minister Bowen: Well because if they are able to stay, ie there's a  vacancy for them, their employer is happy with them and it's not a  position that's able to be filled by domestic Australian labour, then  they can apply through our normal permanent migration scheme,  most particularly through the employer nominated permanent  migration scheme and you do find a lot of our permanent migration  is based on exactly that experience - people try it out, they find  they like it in Australia and their employer is very happy with their  work, and that's an opportunity for them.

 Minister Evans: Can I just make a point on there though in  answer to your question, we're particularly focussed on civil and  heavy engineering trades. What we've got is a peak of activity in  building mines, ports, rail. If we were actually to train to the peak,  we'd end up with an unemployment problem as we come down the  other side of the peak, so this is very much about trying to meet  the demand of the market for a temporary increase. The overall  activity has increased, we are training more Australians in the  construction trades and heavy engineering trades, but it is also the  reality that if we train too many, we'll then be left with a problem at  the end of it.

 This is about trying to manage, in a national economy, the balance  between training and giving Australians the first opportunity, and  managing that peak that we know is occurring particularly in the  resources area. So we think the American skill base, similar  occupation and health and safety standards, English language, all  of those things, make for a good fit so we're going to encourage  that.

 As you know we are getting record numbers from Ireland at the  moment for much the same reasons. Their economy has been  suffering; a large number of tradespeople are looking for work. So  if you wander around Perth at the moment you run into a lot of Irish  accents but they are all finding jobs quickly and meeting skills  needs so it's a good match. Now, most of those Irish will go home  when the economy picks up and maybe the jobs dry up a little bit in  Australia, but the good ones who want to stay will be able to apply  for permanent migration.

 Reporter: Minister Evans, how do the wages compare in these  industries between US and Australia and can I ask the  Ambassador, do you know what the unemployment rate is in these  industries in the US?

 Ambassador: Well, the overall unemployment rate in the United  States if 8.3 per cent, trending towards 8.2 and there has been a  steady decrease in unemployment over the last 22 months and so  it's moving in a positive direction. Nevertheless there are still  terrifically well skilled workers, particularly in the construction  industry, who are looking for work in the United States and so,  again, it is the perfect fit here, people speaking the same  language, mostly, and with skills.

 Page 4 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 Reporter: [inaudible]

 Ambassador: My guess is that there are probably a higher  number in those industries, in construction industries.

 Reporter: [inaudible]

 Ambassador: Again, you're talking about some very specialised,  highly skilled work here. Particularly the type of plumbing,  electrician and other work that would be required here for these  large LNG facilities and others would be somewhat different from  the traditional housing market. So I think you may be comparing  some apples and oranges in terms of what they've traditionally  been paid. But they do know this work and again, in order to be  eligible to come out here they would be pre-assessed back in the  States by Australia to make sure that they have the proper skills.

 Reporter: [inaudible]

 Minister Evans: I suppose the key point to make is that workers  coming into the resources industry in Australia at the moment will  be among the best paid workers in the world. The reality is there's  strong demand and therefore labour is getting rewarded well. So I  don't think attracting people because of the wages will be an issue  for us. I think there will be issues about people wanting to travel  this far, about working away from home, as we know a lot of 

 Australian workers don't want to do the fly-in, fly-out conditions.  That's a personal decision people have to take.

 But I think the wages and conditions will be attractive and I think  these workers will be attractive to both American employers  working in Australia and to Australian employers because they've  had similar training, experience in heavy industrial situations,  occupational health and safety training, common language and, as  I say, under this initiative, they will be assessed in the United  States of America to make sure they meet Australian trade  standards so people will know when they bring somebody across  they can go straight into a working environment.

 Reporter: Minister, I'm told Colin Barnett tried to set up an  agreement with the Irish Government and the Federal Government  didn't support it. I'm just interested in how this one's different and if  you're working on agreements with other countries?

 Minister Evans: Well, look, I'll let Minister Bowen answer that, but  quite frankly that's just not true. It's factually wrong and if you look  at the figures for Irish migration to Australia, temporary migration,  skilled migration - I'll let Minister Bowen take you through that -  but the reality is there is strong migration to Western Australia,  strong encouragement from the Federal Government and the state  government wandering around making up figures of'We need  150,000 people tomorrow, all out of Ireland, can you agree to it?' is  quite frankly a nonsense. We're seeing strong growth, the current  system is delivering, but I'm straying into Minister Bowen's area so  he can deal with that.

 Minister Bowen: Not at all, not at all.

 Minister Evans: Just as a West Australian, I felt tempted to  respond to nonsense.

 Minister Bowen: But you're right on the money, you're right on the  money. That suggestion is just completely incorrect. Now, can I  just say something about Perth. Obviously, we do recognise very  much the skills needs and labour shortages in Perth. Hence last  year we designated Perth as a regional city for the purposes of the  Regional Skilled Migration Scheme. Hence we've worked very  closely to ensure with businesses in Perth, obviously a large bulk  of our growth in 457 visas goes to Western Australia as it does to  Queensland.

 Now, in relation to the West Australian Government, they are  perfectly entitled to do their job. If they want to go to Ireland and 

 Page 5 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 suggest a Memorandum of Understanding with Ireland, that's a  matter for them. If that then falls down because the Irish  Government says no and they haven't consulted with the Federal  Government about that MoU, that is also a matter for them. That is  entirely a matter for them.

 Now, we have a very good relationship with the Irish Government. I  met with the Irish Ambassador and the visiting Irish Minister just  last week to discuss this issue. And I would note that for the first  time since the 1970s, Ireland is now in our top 10 source countries  for permanent migration to Australia. So that shows that the  system is working.

 Now, the West Australian Government really needs to check its  facts and not make allegations which aren't backed up by the facts  in skilled migration.

 How about we go to Paul and then back over here, because you  had a go.

 Reporter: Ambassador, just on the degree of difficulty working in  the two countries, the United States and Australia, do you think it's  tougher to be a government leader as an Afro-American than as a  childless atheist in Australia?

 Ambassador: I don't make those sort of comparisons. It sounds  like, you know, the rock is as heavy as the rope is long. So I'd just  leave it at that.

 Reporter: Minister Bowen, your colleague Robert McClelland said  this morning in response to Labor's dire poll numbers that the  carbon tax [inaudible] had affected Labor's sense of legitimacy  [inaudible]. Did he have a point?

 Minister Bowen: Look, I'm simply going to say obviously that  comment is in reference to polls. Obviously, we have a challenge  to communicate. Every single Minister and every Member of  Parliament, I'm sure, will be putting every ounce of energy we have  to communicate that message because the challenge and the  decision facing the Australian people in about 18 months time is a  very real one with a very stark difference of approach between us  and the alternative government.

 Reporter: Minister, do you think that poll would be as bad if Kevin  Rudd won the leadership?

 Minister Bowen: That matter was resolved in March and of course  we're all working to ensure the re-election of a Labor Government.

 Reporter: Minister, on this announcement, why not try this option  to be open to all other countries and aren't you concerned about  whether this is going to be seen, particularly in Australia's regions,  as discriminatory? Because given that you have spoken, quite  rightly, to -

 Minister Evans: Look, perhaps I could deal with that. I mean, what  these measures do is try to remove some barriers - artificial  barriers - to people recruiting US workers with these particular  skills. The reality is we already have in place these sorts of  arrangements in places like the Philippines and India and a range  of other countries.

 Effectively, those measures were first implemented as a sort of risk  management technique when employers were complaining that  perhaps we had people arriving who didn't have the skill set that  was required. So we put in place these overseas assessments to  make sure that when an employer brought someone into Australia  they were confident they had the skills.

 Now, traditionally, say with the UK market, Australian employers  have a pretty good understanding of the skill set, the training,  etcetera, but in newer markets they didn't have the same  understanding. Well, in the United States we didn't have those 

 Page 6 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 measures in place; we haven't traditionally drawn a lot of  tradespeople from the United States. This measure is allowing that  facilitation.

 We don't discriminate on the basis of race. We do have language  standards as a very important occupational health and safety  measure to ensure that people can understand communication;  these are heavy duty sites with large risks associated with them so  we have insisted on reasonable English standards.

 But as you know, we have workers from all over the world working  in these industries. So it has nothing to do with discrimination, it's  about removing a couple of barriers to facilitation of temporary  trades labour from the United States, and as I say, currently people  when they seek to get a licence in Australia might arrive, might not  be successful in getting the licence and they would be  disappointed and wasted investment, and secondly, might have to  wait months for that licence to come through so this allows  facilitation. But the immigration system remains totally non-  discriminatory, as it has been for many years.

 Reporter: Will any priority be given to appropriately skilled US  applicants over people from other countries with equivalent skills?

 Minister Evans: Well, this is effectively the decision for the  employer. The 457 system, which we anticipate to be the major  source of this temporary labour, has a requirement for employers 

 to nominate those persons, so the employers search the world for  the appropriate skills and they make the decisions about where  they bring those workers from.

 This allows us to remove a barrier to them recruiting United States  labour. It is something that US companies has supported and  some Australian companies have supported, because they think  there's a pool of workers there they could use. But equally, those  companies can bring workers from Britain, India, China, wherever  they choose to sponsor those workers from, provided they meet to  Minister Bowen's requirements and they've got the trades  qualifications.

 Reporter: Minister Bowen, do these visas have a time limit? Are  they six months, 12 months?

 Minister Bowen: Sorry, just Karen and then back to The West. In  relation to 457s, yes they are time limited, but that varies from  employer to employer and the department will approve, say, one  year or up to four years.

 Reporter: And like [inaudible] number. You say the market will  drive it but how many people? Hundreds? Thousands?

 Minister Bowen: Well, the 457 program is responsive to demand.  The limit is not set by me sitting in my office in Canberra, it is set  by the economy. We currently have around 80 000 457 workers in  Australia, across the board, from around the world. Obviously, the 

 numbers that come out of this program will depend on the interest  of Australian employers and the skill set available and the interest  in the United States.

 Reporter: Can I ask the Ambassador what he'd say to Americans  seeking to come and work in the north-west of WA? It is obviously  hot, unpleasant sometimes, a long way from the US; how would  you sell it?

 Minister Bowen: He's hard on the west [laughs] very hard on the  west.

 Ambassador: I've been out to Karratha 14 times now, I've been  out to the Pilbara, I've been out to WA, it is beautiful country over  there and we have a lot of American workers already there. I think  the physical amenities are terrific: beautiful ocean, plenty of land  and really wonderful people to work with so I don't think that this  will be a tough sell in that sense.

 Page 7 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

 I think for people who are looking to settle in Perth, one of the  challenges will be housing and we're trying to work with companies  to make sure that there is access to that, but these are high-class  problems to have. It is a wonderful place to work and I think  Americans will be excited about the opportunity to proceed careers  for some temporary period of time out here in Australia.

 Reporter: Minister Bowen, any comment on the latest boat arrival?

 Minister Bowen: Well, yes, we have had a boat arrival. This is the  13th boat arrival since the Opposition indicated that it would not  support the legislation to allow for offshore processing and for the  government of the day to be able to implement its policies. Now,  very clearly it is important for the government of the day to be able  to implement its policy to have a deterrent to the dangerous boat  journey to Australia. Now, the Opposition wants to have it both 

 ways: they want to stop the government being able to have that  deterrent in place and then they want to complain that boats  continue to arrive. Mr Abbott can't have it both ways. Either he  supports offshore processing or he does not, and if he supports it  he should vote for it.

 REORTER: And on Paul Bongiorno's question, Ministers, do you  agree that Julia Gillard does have a tough job to do as an  unmarried atheist female Prime Minister?

 Minister Evans: I think that was a comment made in jest and I  think Julia Gillard has a tough job, but the tough job is managing  the economy, managing the growth in the Australian economy  while there's structural adjustment occurring and ensuring that we  continue to give Australians the best opportunities in terms of  education and health and employment, and I think that's what  she's focused on. But a little light humour, I think, was used to  compare her challenges with those of President Obama.

 Reporter: Can I ask about Gina Rinehart, what discussions you've  had with her or her company with regards to bringing out workers  [inaudible] and what her demands have been and what your  response has been?

 Minister Bowen: I'll answer that question in the general. Of  course, I've announced Enterprise Migration Agreements would be  the main mechanism for ensuring that the very large resources  projects with capital expenditure of more than  $2 billion and more than 1500 employees at peak have the  opportunity to attract the necessary skilled labour. Now, they will 

 apply across the board for those very large projects. I'm not going  to get into which projects are at which stage of negotiation and the  details of those discussions. When we've signed one, I'll announce  it.

 Reporter: But discussions about paying migrant workers less  [inaudible]?

 Minister Bowen: The requirements of the Enterprise Migration  Agreements are very clear in relation to the compliance with  Australian industrial conditions and they've all been publicised and  they'll be met.

 Thank you.

 See: Index of Speeches

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm  Last update: Monday, 02 April 2012 at 17:41 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 8 of 8 Skilled American workers to fill labour shortages; poll; boat arrival

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb185197.htm

