---
title: "HR Commissioner's comments discredit offshore processing regime"
date: "2012-11-07"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384791
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2029760%22
---

 AUSTRALIAN GREENS MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 7 November 2012   

 HR Commissioner’s comments discredit  offshore processing regime    

 The Human Rights Commissioner’s comments regarding offshore processing on Nauru have  shown just how unacceptable the situation there is, the Australian Greens said.    

 “The top expert on human rights in Australia has recognised that the human rights breaches  that are happening on Nauru are totally unacceptable,” Greens’ spokesperson for immigration,  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “I will be writing to the Immigration Minister’s office, requesting access to the Nauru detention  centre, because it is essential that the conditions there be understood for what they are.    

 “Professor Gillian Triggs has added her voice to the chorus of experts who are lining up to  criticise the Government’s offshore detention regime, but it seems the Government is not  listening.   

 "Last time Labor put a freeze on processing it was a humanitarian disaster; people were hurt  and the system crumbled.   

 “It was a bad decision then, and it is a terrible policy now.    

 “Professor Triggs understands that refugees have a legal right to have their claims for asylum  assessed without being arbitrarily detained, so why doesn’t the Government?    

 “A freeze on the processing of asylum claims is unacceptable; it breaches international asylum  laws, it flies in the face of Australia’s fair go beliefs and it serves to increase the mental strain on  the already vulnerable people who are locked up offshore.    

 “Professor Triggs has asked to meet with Minister Bowen as quickly as possible, and the  Government must listen to the advice of the person they appointed as the Australian Human  Rights Commissioner.”    

 Australian Greens Leader, Senator Christine Milne, said:    

 “Trying to hide what the Australian Government is doing in Nauru is wrong and will rightly draw  scrutiny and criticism when Australia takes up its position on the UN Security Council unless the  Government reverses its decision and provides access for the Human Rights Commissioner.    

 “Prime Minister Gillard and Minister Kate Lundy will have misled both houses of parliament if  they try to pretend that Australia’s actions in sending people to indefinite detention is in any  way consistent with our international obligations. 

 

 “Changing the law in Australia to excise human rights doesn’t excise them from our  international and moral obligations.”   

 Media Contact: Alex Lamb - 0437 587 562   Noah Schultz-Byard - 0427 604 760   

