---
title: "Cross-party briefing At 10.30am on Angus Houston Report"
date: "2012-08-13"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROBERT, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211379539
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1845661%22
---

    

  

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 13 August 2012 

 CROSS-PARTY BRIEFING AT 10.30AM ON ANGUS HOUSTON REPORT 

 BEFORE attending this morning’s briefing from the Expert Panel led by former Chief of the  Defence Force Angus Houston, Independent Lyne MP Rob Oakeshott said he looked forward  to the Parliament addressing the unfinished business of people smuggling, people trafficking  and loss of life at sea. 

 “If the recommendations fall within the broad principles of the Bali Process, and if the  recommendations can find passage through both the House of Representatives and the  Senate, then it will have been a worthwhile exercise,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 The Independent MP, whose compromise Private Members Bill was defeated in the Senate  in late June, has urged the Liberal and National parties to participate in finding a solution, or  to at least put their own proposals in detail before the House. 

 “We seem to be starting exactly where we finished in June with the LNP claiming they have  a bill on the notice paper regarding asylum seekers, when the official processes of the  Parliament seem to confirm they don’t,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 “At the end of the last sitting week, I went to the Table Office of the Parliament to ask for  the LNP bill they said they had before the House of Representatives.  There was no Bill. 

 “The Opposition spokesman for Immigration, Scott Morrison, is reported in today’s edition of  The Australia as saying ‘If it is something other than that we’d look at it in the usual way.   That could include the Coalition’s bill already on the notice paper’. 

 “Mr Morrison has either been misquoted or he is misleading the public. 

 “Either way, as at 10am this morning, there was no LNP Bill available.  This is important as  the LNP has been incredibly fluid in its position, and pinning them down on the detail of  what exactly they would do can be answered by a detailed Bill before the House.   

 “Currently, as best as I can find, the Opposition has no Bill, despite what is reported in the  media,” Mr Oakeshott said. 

 ENDS        

 Media contact: Sharon Fuller - 0429 787320 

