---
title: "Australian abducted in Sri Lanka: Greens to call on Carr to take quick action"
date: "2012-04-09"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371082
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1556268%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  9 April 2012   

 Australian abducted in Sri Lanka: Greens call on Carr to take quick action   

 Australian Greens Senator Lee Rhiannon has called on Foreign Minister Bob Carr to make urgent  representations to the Sri Lankan government to find Australian citizen, Mr Premakumara  Gunarathnam, feared abducted in Colombo.   

 "I share the concerns of Mr Gunarathnam's family and friends that his life is in danger and that the  Australian government should provide every assistance through the High Commissioner in Sri Lanka  and directly by Minister Carr taking up this case with his counterparts in Sri Lanka," Senator  Rhiannon said.   

 "When I spoke today to Dr Somaratna, Mr Gunarathnam's wife, she said how terrified she feels for  his safety and well being.   

 "Speaking from her Sydney home Dr Somaratna requested that the Australian government do  everything possible to find her husband.   

 "Reports from Sri Lanka suggest that Mr Gunarathnam could be the latest victim of the ‘white van’  abductions that have been linked with local death squads and the Sri Lankan government.   

 “I find it extremely worrying that it is being reported that President Rajapakse's brother Gotabhaya  Rajapakse has given the order to arrest and kill Mr. Gunarathnam.   

 "Kidnappings and killings have been used by the Sri Lankan government since the 1980s.   

 "I understand that Mr Gunarathnam had been visiting Colombo and working with Sri Lankan  activists.   

 "Some members of his family had already been detained by the Sri Lanka authorities. When his wife  Dr Somaratna visited Sri Lanka with her children in December last year, they were followed by these  sinister ‘white vans’ and when they arrived at the airport to depart they were detained for 18 hours  with their young children separated from their mother.   

 "I have received reports that there have been 29 disappearances between February and March this  year and a total of 56 over the last six months.   

 "For too long Australia has taken a softly softly approach with the Sri Lanka government in order to  retain the Rajapakse regime's assistance in stopping asylum seekers leaving by boat for Australia.   

 “This is not the first time that Australian citizens have been in danger in Sri Lanka because of their  political views.   

 "Now every effort should be made by our Government to swiftly locate this missing Australian man,"  Senator Rhiannon said.   

 For more information - 0487 350 880   

