---
title: "Chief of Navy - NT News Armidale Class Patrol Boat claims"
date: "2012-11-05"
creators:
  - "Dept of Defence"
source: "DEPT OF DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384690
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2027722%22
---

 

 

 5 November 2012  

 Chief of Navy - NT News Armidale Class Patrol  Boat claims 

 On Monday 5 November 2012, the NT News published an article  (Flaws in patrol fleet await design solution) which claimed that a  structural review was launched into the Armidale Class Patrol Boat  (ACPB) Fleet because the newspaper had reported that the ACPB fleet  was in urgent need of repair. This is inaccurate and misleading. 

 I initiated a review of ACPB maintenance in February this year which  resulted in a remediation program which is still ongoing. On the issue  of cracking, other vessels were inspected following the discovery of  the cracking in HMAS Armidale - this was not due to media reporting. 

 Additionally, the allegation that half the patrol boat fleet has been  “out of order for months” is incorrect. For the record, this is what  Navy provided to the NT Ne0ws when one of the paper’s journalists  requested an update on the review late last week: 

 The structured analysis is complete and under review. The solution  will involve additional strengthening where cracking was experienced  in HMAS Armidale and is expected to be approved in November. 

 Following the initial discovery of the cracking in HMAS Armidale, all  other vessels in the fleet were inspected. Two other boats were found  to have minor cracking in a similar location. 

 Repairs have been completed on HMAS Armidale that allow the ship to  return to unrestricted operations. There has not been a need to apply  operational limitations to any other boats. This has been agreed by  independent third party assessments. 

 Nonetheless, additional strengthening will be installed in all boats  once the final design solution has been confirmed. 

 The nature of operations at sea will inevitably see defects arise. For  this reason, thorough technical and operational risk assessments are  conducted to ensure the safety of both ship and crew. These reviews 

 are carried out routinely - not because a newspaper tells us to. 

 The Navy continues to meet the key operational objectives of  interception of unauthorised boat arrivals. 

 R.J Griggs  Vice Admiral  Chief of Navy   

