---
title: "Victoria celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375014
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134845%22
---

 

 

 Victoria celebrates Refugee Week 2012  June 16, 2012  

 People in Victoria will celebrate the valuable contribution of refugees to the community  during Refugee Week 2012, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP,  and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on Wednesday,  20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events across the nation in  recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have established in Australia. 

 “Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian tradition,” Mr  Bowen said. 

 “Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per capita  than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who have suffered  persecution.” 

 Senator Lundy said Australia’s settlement support services are among the best in the world,  helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 “Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom and  opportunities this nation has to offer,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and Refugee  Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our community, economy and  culture.” 

 At 1pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia, including Melbourne, will walk in  unity to celebrate different paths people have taken to become Australian, as part of the Walk  Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival celebrating cultural diversity. 

 On 17 June, Multicultural Arts Victoria will launch Melbourne’s annual Emerge Festival  with an all-day block party on Fitzroy’s Napier Street. Now in its ninth year, the event will  showcase new and emerging ethnic talent, world music and a cultural marketplace, supported  through Multicultural Arts Victoria’s music mentorship project. 

 Melbourne’s Multicultural Hub will launch Refugee Week in the capital on 18 June, with a Q  & A session with Melbourne Heart A-League trial player Golgol Mebrahtu led by young  people from refugee backgrounds, reflections on the theme Restoring Hope by former  refugees and a student art display. 

 Senator Lundy will welcome 55 new citizens from countries including Myanmar, Sudan,  Ethiopia and Burundi at a citizenship ceremony on 23 June at the Western Bulldogs Football  Club in Melbourne’s Footscray. The new Australian citizens and their guests will then be  invited to attend the Bulldogs versus BrisbaneAFLgame at Etihad Stadium. 

 Australia’s contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues this  year, with 13,750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775,000 refugees and other people in humanitarian need since  the end of World War II. 

 

