---
title: "1500 + arrivals since Nauru decision as navy goes back to running water taxi service"
date: "2012-09-06"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381574
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733091%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 1500 + ARRIVALS SINCE NAURU DECISION  AS NAVY GOES BACK TO RUNNING WATER  TAXI SERVICE September 06, 2012

 The arrival of another 146 people on two more boats means more than 1,500 people have now arrived before Nauru is even  open,  while  our  Navy  is  back  running  a  water  taxi  service  for  rescued  asylum  seekers,  Shadow  Minister  for Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 "It took the Howard Government just 19 days to get Nauru up and running. During that time 542 people turned up on three boats, and they all went to Nauru," Mr Morrison said. 

 "It has now been 24 days since Julia Gillard was dragged kicking and screaming to agree to reopen Nauru. In that time more than 1,500 people have turned up on 27 boats, including these latest arrivals, which exceeds the expected capacity on Nauru. 

 "The  longer  it  takes  to  get  Nauru  open,  the  more  problems  Labor  will  continue  to  create  for  themselves,  with  lawyers circling every boat that arrives. 

 "The number of those to have arrived to date means it will be impossible that all those who turn up before Nauru is open will be sent there. 

 "Despite the delays in getting temporary accommodation up and running, the Government also still has no legal authority to send people to Nauru, due to their failure to get the Parliament to green light Nauru two weeks ago. 

 "In addition, our Navy is also now back running their water taxi service again for these latest arrivals. 

 "The Government’s failure to reach an agreement this week for asylum seekers to be returned to Indonesia where they are picked up in the Indonesia search and rescue zone, means people getting on boats will continue to expect to be taken to Australia by our Navy if they get into distress. 

 "This  is  a  dangerous  precedent  that  the  Government  continues  to  allow  to  stand  and  will  continue  to  provide  a  further reason for someone to get on a boat," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "In the past week there have been seven boats intercepted carrying over 420 people, plus almost one hundred more lives lost at sea, on this treacherous journey to Australia - further evidence that this trade in human misery  must be stopped. 

 "Labor has allowed over 24,000 people to flood across Australia’s borders since they came to office - but even with these  ever increasing record breaking numbers they still refuse to return to the full suite of Howard Government policies. 

 "The  people  smugglers  are  challenging  this  Government’s  resolve  and  the  only  answer  they  have  is  a  Youtube  video campaign and further delays to establishing offshore processing on Nauru. 

 "We do not need further time wasting and more indecisive dawdling; we need a comprehensive suite of border protection  policies to stop the boats from coming," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 1500 + ARRIVALS SINCE NAURU DECISION AS NAVY GOES BACK TO RUN...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

