---
title: "Abbott's turn-backs to Indonesia in tatters"
date: "2012-10-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383552
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1981858%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 16 October 2012 

 

 ABBOTT’S TURN-BACKS TO INDONESIA IN TATTERS   

 Tony Abbott has astoundingly failed yet again to raise ‘turning back the boats’ with  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, leaving the Coalition’s much-maligned  key policy in tatters, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said  today.   

 “Tony Abbott is all tough talk and bluster on home turf, but time and time again he has  proven he just doesn’t have the courage to actually raise the issue of turn-backs with  President Yudhoyono,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “Mr Abbott talks ad nauseam about a Jakarta-focused policy, but he has now repeatedly  failed to raise with Jakarta the pillar of his border protection policy - a tow-backs policy  frequently rejected by senior Indonesian politicians and officials.   

 “He went to Indonesia to tell them he would conduct a ‘no surprises’ and consultative  approach to policy that affected Jakarta - well what went wrong with turn-backs?   

 “Is it Tony Abbott’s intention to turn back boats to Indonesia without that country’s  agreement or cooperation? Mr Abbott's Jakarta-focused foreign policy is already a  mess.”   

 In a speech to the Institute of Public Affairs in April this year, the Opposition leader said  this:   

 “I would, of course, politely explain to the Indonesian government that we take as dim a  view of Indonesian boats disgorging illegal arrivals in Australia as they take of  Australians importing drugs into Bali.”  (Address to the Institute of Public Affairs,  Melbourne, 27 April 2012)   

 Mr Bowen said Tony Abbott liked the big talk but demonstrated a distinct lack of  courage of his convictions.   

 “Mr Abbott has again been exposed as all sound bite and no substance. He is usually all  talk on asylum seekers and boats, now he’s not even that,” he said.   

 “To have failed to raise it the first time may have been an error of judgement, but to go  all the way to Indonesia with a cavalcade of shadow ministers and fail to raise it with  the President again, shows what a mess this unworkable policy is.”  

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769  UNCLASSIFIED 

 

