---
title: "Australia hosts UNHCR resettlement services meeting"
date: "2012-02-22"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211433862
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1439017%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 SENATOR KATE LUNDY 

 PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION  AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 22 February 2012 

 AUSTRALIA HOSTS UNHCR RESETTLEMENT SERVICES  MEETING   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today welcomed experts from  across the globe who are in Australia as part of discussions on international refugee resettlement  services.   

 Mr Bowen this morning delivered the welcome address at the United Nations High Commissioner  for Refugees’ (UNHCR) Working Group on Resettlement (WGR), meeting in Melbourne this week.   

 “This important meeting provides Australia - which consistently ranks among the top three  refugee resettlement countries in the world - another opportunity to share our settlement  experiences and exchange best practice on supporting refugees with other countries,” Mr Bowen  said.   

 “Earlier this month during his visit to Australia UN High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio  Guterres himself remarked on the excellent standard of settlement services provided to new  arrivals in this country.   

 “Australia has been an active participant in these international meetings on refugee resettlement  since the 1990s. They are usually staged in Geneva, but with Australia assuming the chair of the  working group, we are proud to play host to such an important gathering of international experts  in this field.”   

 The WGR is a forum for countries that resettle refugees, the non-government organisations  which assist in the process, and the UNHCR. Participants at this WGR include representatives of  13 resettlement states, representatives from non-government organisations who assist in refugee  selection and resettlement, and representatives from UNHCR.   

 The theme for this year’s meeting is One refugee resettled, many lives protected, reflecting the  importance of every resettlement place that governments can provide. Discussions being covered  include the challenges of the global displacement of millions of refugees and others in  humanitarian need.   

 As part of his address, Mr Bowen also announced the trial of a new approach to the settlement of  unaccompanied humanitarian minors (UHMs) in the community.    

 “The new Refugee Youth Support Pilot recognises the ability of some older UHMs to live more  independently in the community, rather than the department providing 24-hour care under the 

 current model,” he said.   

 Ms Lundy said the 12-month pilot would focus on assisting these older refugee youths to  successfully transition to adulthood and contributing to their communities through tailored, youth  specific settlement services, without round-the-clock care.   

 “These young people will receive youth-specific programs with a strong focus on accommodation,  the development of life skills, education and employment support, while helping to create a sense  of belonging within the Australian community,” Ms Lundy said.   

 Three organisations in three states will conduct the pilot: the Centre for Multicultural Youth in  Victoria, Multicultural Development Association in Queensland and Multicultural Youth South  Australia, with about 20-40 youths to be settled through the pilot in each of the states.  Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen) 

 Jessica Hill 0407 926 077 (Lundy) 

 

