---
title: "First transfer to Papua New Guinea"
date: "2012-11-21"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385570
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2060960%22
---

 

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 21 November 2012 

 

 FIRST TRANSFER TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced the  first transfer of irregular maritime arrivals - made up entirely of family groups - to  Manus Island in Papua New Guinea (PNG).   

 A group of seven families, including 15 adults and four children of Sri Lankan and  Iranian nationalities, departed Christmas Island late yesterday on a charter aircraft  and arrived at Manus Island early this morning.   

 They were accompanied by Australian Federal Police, Immigration staff, interpreters,  children’s services and medical staff.   

 “The first transfer to Manus Island has now taken place - and will be the first of  many - sending the clear message that people arriving by boat risk being sent to a  regional processing centre in either Nauru or Papua New Guinea,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “To those contemplating the dangerous journey to Australia by boat: people  smugglers are lying to you, don’t waste your money and don’t risk your life - it’s just  not worth it.   

 “There is no visa on arrival, there will be no special treatment, no speedy outcome  and certainly no advantage given to those who come by boat.”   

 On arrival in PNG, the group has undergone local immigration clearance processes  before being moved into the regional processing centre at Manus Island, which is  currently a combination of temporary and refurbished structures.   

 Operations at the centre will be overseen by both the Australian and PNG  governments, with welfare services provided by the Salvation Army, health services  by IHMS and operational support services by G4S. Local Manus Island residents have  also been employed at the processing centre.   

 The Minister also announced that specialised children’s services on Manus Island  would be provided by Save the Children, including child protection and education  activities.   

 “The Government is committed implementing the recommendations of the Expert  Panel on Asylum Seekers, to break the people smuggling trade and prevent people  from taking these dangerous boats to Australia,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “We will continue to regularly transfer people to Nauru and now to Manus Island.”   

 The Minister has made arrangements for an Interim Joint Advisory Committee to play  an initial oversight role for the Nauru centre, as well as provide advice to both  Governments on the make-up of an independent permanent oversight committee.   

 Chaired by DIAC Deputy Secretary Dr Wendy Southern and Nauru MP Mathew  Batsiua, the interim Joint Advisory Committee includes Nauruan Justice Secretary  Lisa Lo Piccolo, Expert Panel member Paris Aristotle, and Minister's Council on  Asylum Seekers and Detention (MCASD) members Professor Nicholas Procter,  Associate Professor Mary Anne Kenny and Dr Maryanne Loughry.   

 Meanwhile, Mr Bowen said preliminary interviews for the processing of people at the  Nauru centre will begin shortly.   

 “Interviews to capture comprehensive biographical information will commence in the  coming weeks,” he said.   

 “The Government continues to work closely with Nauru regarding commencement of  processing in that country. It is expected that assessment of claims will fully  commence in early 2013.”   

 A contract has also been signed for work on the permanent facilities at Nauru.  

 “Earlier this month, following a tender process, Canstruct was contracted by my  department to undertake construction services at the Nauru regional processing  centre. Preliminary surveying has already begun with site works to begin shortly,” Mr  Bowen said.   

 Canstruct is in the process of procuring buildings, materials, plant and equipment  and organising air and sea freight. A large number of the construction staff is  expected to be locally engaged Nauruans. 

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 

 

