---
title: "Multicultural mentoring project for Perth's south gets $50 000"
date: "2012-04-23"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371709
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2134891%22
---

 

 

 Multicultural mentoring project for Perth’s  south gets $50 000  April 23, 2012  

 A $50 000 grant from the Australian Government will create closer links between African,  Indigenous and other ethnic communities in Perth’s southern suburbs, the Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, announced today. 

 The Fremantle Multicultural Centre has received the funding to address social isolation in the  Rockingham, Kwinana and Peel districts and to enhance community cohesion. 

 The Multicultural Mentoring project is part of the latest round of funding under the Diversity  and Social Cohesion Program (DSCP) and will help build the capacity of the African  community’s leaders. 

 “Through this project, mentoring support will be provided to African leaders by various  communities and organisations to assist them develop their organising and engagement  skills,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “It provides a wonderful opportunity for the leaders to form links and connections within  their community and to enable them to grow in experience and confidence. 

 “I hope that through their experiences they will have a strong and unified voice to inspire and  lead their communities.” 

 Projects funded under theDSCPhelp to build and promote an inclusive and diverse Australian  society. The Fremantle Multicultural Centre has been funded under the department’s  Settlement Grants Program since 1999. 

 “The centre is in a great position to facilitate this project, as they have been providing  services to migrants and refugees from a diverse range of cultural and linguistic backgrounds  for some time,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “I look forward to seeing new and positive outcomes delivered through mentoring in their  multicultural community.” 

 Further information about the DSCPis available on the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship’s website www.immi.gov.au. 

 

