---
title: "Greens repeat call for changes to ASIO Act"
date: "2012-03-02"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434368
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1470457%22
---

   Friday, 2 March 2012   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Greens repeat call for changes to ASIO Act   

 

 The Greens believe the ASIO Act must be changed to stop the indefinite detention of nearly  50 people who have been found to be refugees in need of protection, including a one year old  child and his brother and sister.   

 “The government must bring basic procedural fairness to the way these ASIO assessments  operate,” Greens’ immigration and human rights spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young, said  today.   

 “No one should be subjected to indefinite incarceration which cannot be challenged or even  be given knowledge of the reasons why. This is especially appalling when these are people  whom Australia has offered protection by determining they are refugees.   

 “The current Parliamentary Inquiry into Australia's Immigration Detention Network heard  evidence and received submissions on the damage negative ASIO assessments have on  individual refugees and their children.    

 “The overwhelming evidence obtained by the detention inquiry is that something needs to  change,” Sen. Hanson-Young, Deputy Chair of the Joint Parliamentary committee running  the inquiry, said.    

 “Australian courts should be allowed to examine decisions involving non-citizens and hear  ASIO's reasons for refusing to clear people.   

 “The Greens support calls for a system of independent merits review of ASIO decisions and  appointment of a special advocate to conduct reviews while maintaining confidentiality of  sensitive material relevant to each case.   

 “The Greens support efforts to alert the UN Human Rights Committee about those refugees  who have been denied security clearance by ASIO. Most of these desperate people have been  incarcerated for two years.   

 “We do not believe ASIO should be doing security checks on minors and repeat our call for a  freeze of these checks. These have already resulted in the government detaining children and  minors potentially for the rest of their lives.   

 “Attorney-General Roxon must fix the law because every person has a right to know why  ASIO is refusing their release, and to have their lawyer see that information.”   

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760     

