---
title: "Another boat arrives as failed asylum seekers double dip under Labor"
date: "2012-05-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373440
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1642956%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Another boat arrives as failed asylum seekers double dip under Labor  

 18/05/12  

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 68 people on board, comes on the same day  as official revelations that asylum seekers are double dipping under Labor’s soft  policies after being rejected by the Howard Government, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “The Ombudsman reports reveal case after case of people who arrived on illegal  boats and were returned under the Howard Government, coming back on illegal  boats under Labor’s soft border protection policies for a double dip,” Mr Morrison  said. 

 “Labor has no idea of how widespread this double dipping practice is, as  Departmental advice admits that four out five people arriving on illegal boats have no  documentation,” he said. 

 “Some of those coming back for a second attempt previously held temporary  protection visas and went home after their refugee claims were no longer valid. Now  that the Gillard Government is offering permanent visas, denied by the Howard  Government, they have returned.  

 “Labor just doesn’t understand that if you leave the door open on our border, then  people will understandably seek to walk through it and take advantage. 

 “Over 800 people have arrived on illegal boats in less than two weeks and over  6,000 this financial year, blowing out the government’s estimate of 450 people  arriving every month under their let them in let them out policy and granny flat  solution. 

 “There is nothing happening on our borders that an election won’t fix. Minister Bowen  and Labor have given up on border protection and only the Coalition will restore the  policies necessary to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The interception of the sixth vessel in the last week is a clear sign  of the unrelenting wave of illegal boat arrivals that will continue to take advantage of  Labor’s catastrophic bungling of Australia’s border protection policies. 

 “To say we have a crisis at our borders is an understatement as over 20 times more  people have arrived illegally by boat this year alone then in the last six years of the  Howard Government. 

 “Labor has made it so easy for people to enter our country illegally on boats, that  many asylum seekers are trying their luck more than once - not only placing their  lives in danger but lining the pockets of the people smugglers at the same time. 

 “Unless the Gillard Government embraces the proven policies of the previous  Howard Government then an election and a Coalition Government is the only  solution to the crisis facing Australia’s borders,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

