---
title: "Daly service continues as another illegal boat arrives"
date: "2012-08-04"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376430
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2734851%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling DAILY SERVICE CONTINUES AS ANOTHER  ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVES August 04, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 68 people on board, is the continued consequence of Labor’s refusal to restore  the proven border protection policies they abolished, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "People smugglers are once again running a daily service, with another illegal boat arrival today," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Labor have  never admitted  they got it wrong  when  they abolished the Howard Government’s proven  border protection  policies, have never acknowledged that those policies worked and refuse to act to restore those policies that stopped the boats. 

 "The Australian people know that a Coalition Government will implement the Coalition’s policies that stopped the boats,  and so do the people smugglers. To stop the boats, we don’t need another committee, we need another election. 

 "There  is  nothing  preventing  the  government  from  implementing  the  Coalition’s  proven  policies  aside  from  their  own   stubborn pride. If the government claims it needs legislation it can  pass the  Coalition’s Bill already on  the  notice paper  when  parliament  resumes  to  have  offshore  processing  in  any  of  the  148  countries  that  have  signed  the  refugee convention," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr  Keenan  said:  "Over  2000  people  have  now  arrived  in  the  first  few  weeks  of  this  financial  year  alone  and  yet  this Government still refuses to take the necessary action to fix the chaos at Australia’s borders. 

 "Labor has made it so easy for anyone to just jump on a boat and come to Australia that that is exactly what is happening at an increasingly alarming rate. 

 "People smugglers continue to make millions of the back of Labor’s policy failures and inability to fulfil the role of the  Commonwealth and protect our borders. The Government’s own stubbornness and pride is the only thing standing in the  way of solving this issue - the Coalition’s proven border protection policies will stop the boats from coming," Mr Keenan  said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 DAILY SERVICE CONTINUES AS ANOTHER ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVES > Mic...

 19/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

