---
title: "International Women's Day 2012"
date: "2012-03-08"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434722
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1486059%22
---

 

 

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. JULIE BISHOP MHR, DEPUTER LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SENATOR MICHAELIA CASH, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  IMMIGRATION AND THE STATUS OF WOMEN 

 

 INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY 2012   

 International Women’s Day provides the opportunity to celebrate the economic, political and social  achievements of women and to recommit ourselves to policies that provide hope, reward and opportunity for  Australian women.   

 The advancement of women has long been linked to economic opportunity.   

 After narrowing through much of the Howard years, the gender wage gap in Australia has increased again  under Labor and is currently the widest it has been in a quarter of a century.   

 This is one of the reasons why the Coalition is fully committed to introducing a comprehensive and  equitable paid parental leave scheme.     

 As a nation, we do not pay sick leave, carers leave, holiday leave or long service leave at the minimum wage  and nor should we do so with parental leave.  The Coalition’s Paid Parental Leave scheme will provide a  replacement wage for 26 weeks up to a maximum of $75,000.   

 According to the Productivity Commission’s Report on Paid Parental Leave, there were at least 37 nations  around the world who had introduced a paid parental leave scheme prior to the launch of Labor’s minimum  wage scheme and of those schemes 35 were based on full or part replacement wage.  Australia is the only  country with a paid parental leave scheme that is entirely based on a minimum wage.     

 Paid parental leave should not be an afterthought, it is an essential ingredient in lifting female participation  rates, and creating greater opportunity for Australian women to fully participate in work and family life if  they choose.   

 This International Women’s Day, the Coalition recommits Australia to making women at risk a high priority  in our nation’s refugee and humanitarian resettlement programme.     

 Our announcement today to provide a minimum 1,000 places in Australia’s refugee and humanitarian intake  for women at risk and their dependents is recognition that our humanitarian programme should be refocused  to offer that opportunity to those we can help most and those who are most in need.   

 Our policies contrast with the Government’s record that has seen a fall in the growth rate of real wages of  women, less accessible and less affordable child care and virtually no new jobs created in 2011.   

 We are proud of the Coalition’s record in creating economic opportunity for Australian women and our  plans for the future will continue this work.   

 

 8 March 2012 

