---
title: "Another arrivals as Labor continues inaction on our borders"
date: "2012-07-08"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211427959
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736688%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER ARRIVAL AS LABOR CONTINUES  INACTION ON OUR BORDERS July 08, 2012

 Another illegal boat arrival, with 28 people on board, is the second boat to arrive in two days and continues the trend of  boats arriving at Cocos (Keeling) Island as Labor inaction on our borders draws more people from further afield, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Yet another arrival off Cocos Island comes as Labor continues to refuse to restore the policies they abandoned and are  too stubborn to admit worked, meaning more boat arrivals with more people putting their lives at risk," Mr Morrison said. 

 "More people are arriving by illegal boat than ever before and they are once again coming from more locations including  as far as Sri Lanka and even India, further increasing the risk of tragedies at sea," he said. 

 "Still Labor refuses to act, preferring their 'committee solution' to follow their failed Malaysia people swap and East Timor  farce, rather than simply restore the policies that worked. 

 "The Government's continued policy of blaming the Coalition for its own border failures will not stop the boats, it ’s just  another excuse by Labor to do nothing," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Australia has become the joke of the region with the people smugglers more emboldened than ever  sending record numbers of boats to Australia. 

 "Our men and women of Border Protection Command have been reduced to an elite taxi service by this Labor  Government as they work all hours to keep up with the deluge of illegal boats taking advantage of an incompetent  government. 

 "We are only half way through the year yet there has already been six more boats than arrived in the whole of 2011 - a  total of 69 boats carrying 4730 people arrived in 2011 and there has already been 75 boats this year carrying over 5,500  people. 

 "Considering over 13,600 people have now arrived under Prime Minister Gillard, exceeding the amount of people that  arrived under the Howard government, Labor need to immediately adopt the Coalition's proven policies to stop the boats  or ensure Border Protection Command have the resources they need to cope with this influx," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER ARRIVAL AS LABOR CONTINUES INACTION ON OUR BORDERS...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

