---
title: "Three more boats as financial year arrivals highest on record"
date: "2012-05-07"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372599
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1622266%22
---

 Scott Morrison 

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 Three more boats as financial year arrivals highest on record  

 07/05/12  

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat with 68 people on board is the third in 24 hours  and means this is the biggest financial year for arrivals on illegal boats on record,  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice and Customs, Michael Keenan, said today. 

 "This financial year 2011-2012, is the biggest ever for arrivals on illegal boats with  over 5,600 people arriving with five weeks still to go," Mr Morrison said. 

 "This means more blow outs are on their way in tomorrow's failed Labor budget  which funded the department for an average of only 450 arrivals a month. The  average this year so far is over 600 and last month alone was almost 1,000.  

 “More people have turned up on illegal boats in the last 24 hours, than in the last six  years of the Howard Government. These three boats are yet another milestone of  border protection failure under Julia Gillard," he said. 

 "People smugglers continue to react to Labor's 'let them in, let them out policy, and  now their “granny flat” solution. Over 300 people have arrived in a day and all Labor  can do is blame someone else for this policy failure. 

 "One year ago today Julia Gillard and Chris Bowen lauded their five for one people  swap as the solution but this flawed and ill conceived proposal was just yet another  Labor failure just like East Timor. 

 "Only the Coalition will implement proven policies to stop the boats and stop the  budget blow outs on boats which have reached $3.9 billion and counting under this  failed Labor government," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The people smugglers are intent on reminding this Labor  Government that they are in charge of Australia’s borders, with the arrival of the 3rd  boat in 24 hours, bringing a total of 304 people illegally into our country in one day.  

 “This latest wave of boat arrivals is a timely reminder to this Labor Government  about the consequences of having no semblance of a border protection policy yet  they still offer only excuses not solutions. 

 “It will also make the almost $4 billion budget blow out worse at a time when Labor  continue to attack our frontline border protection agencies in the search for savings. 

 “Labor Ministers continue in their childlike insistence that “it wasn’t me” every time  another boat arrives and refuse to take responsibility for the border protection crisis  that has occurred as a direct result of their failed policies. 

 “This situation cannot continue but only a change in government will see it resolved,”  Mr Keenan said. 

  

