---
title: "More boat arrivals returned to Sri Lanka"
date: "2012-09-29"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382836
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1952228%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 29 September 2012 

 

 MORE BOAT ARRIVALS RETURNED TO SRI LANKA   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today announced that  another group of Sri Lankan men were returning home voluntarily after choosing not to  pursue their asylum claims.   

 The group of 28 men consists of people who arrived both before and after new regional  processing arrangements were announced on 13 August, and came out of detention  facilities on Nauru, Christmas Island and the mainland.   

 Mr Bowen said the Sri Lankans were removed on a charter flight from Christmas Island to  Colombo today that departed at 8.34am local time (11.34am AEST).   

 “These individuals have chosen not to pursue asylum claims and therefore are no longer  seeking to engage Australia’s protection obligations,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “The majority of this group were in the post-13 August cohort and faced transfer to a  regional processing centre in Nauru or Papua New Guinea - they have instead chosen to  return home voluntarily.”   

 Mr Bowen said two more transfers of boat arrivals to Nauru were completed this week and  more would follow in the coming days and weeks.   

 “People who pay smugglers to risk their lives on a dangerous sea journey are throwing their  money away - there is no visa awaiting them, no speedy outcome, no special treatment,”  he said.   

 “Regular transfers to Nauru and more Sri Lankans returning home is further proof that  people smugglers only sell lies and make false promises about what awaits people in  Australia.   

 “This Government is determined to break the people smuggling trade and stop people  getting on those dangerous boats.”   

 The group of Sri Lankan men included two from Nauru, 20 from Christmas Island and six  from mainland facilities including Villawood and Yongah Hill. 

 

 People in immigration detention can request their removal from Australia at any point in  time. Those who choose to depart voluntarily can be provided with individual reintegration  support to assist with their sustainable return, through the International Organization for  Migration.    

 Reintegration packages are determined on a case-by-case basis depending on need and  eligibility.   

 Media Contact: Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

