---
title: "Refugee sponsorship pilot underway next year"
date: "2012-12-15"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387207
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2113180%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  MEDIA RELEASE  15 December 2012 

 

 Refugee sponsorship pilot underway next year   

 Community groups will soon be able to sponsor people in humanitarian need around the world to  find safety and new lives in Australia, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP,  announced today. 

 Mr Bowen said the new pilot private sponsorship program would fit within Australia’s 2012-13  humanitarian program, and was expected to begin early next year. 

 “There has been considerable community and sector support for a private sponsorship scheme as a  way of reuniting families and providing another safe pathway for refugees to start a new life in  Australia,” Mr Bowen said.  

 “In line with the recommendation of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers, earlier this year I  announced that the humanitarian program would be increased by 45 per cent to 20,000 places, up  from 13,750. 

 “The private sponsorship pilot will be part of that increased program and will build on community  goodwill by enabling community organisations and individuals to play a role in resettling refugees.  

 “This scheme also provides another avenue for humanitarian entrants with existing community ties  to come to Australia, while minimising the cost to taxpayers. 

 “If the pilot is a success, I would hope to introduce a fully-fledged ongoing sponsorship program in  future years.” 

 The Government consulted widely with stakeholders and in the wider community when developing  the pilot. Up to 500 places within Australia’s refugee program could go to people nominated through  this sponsorship. 

 Subject to the Governor-General's agreement to necessary regulation changes, the scheme is  expected to come into effect in early 2013.  

 Sponsors would be subject to a two-stage visa application charge between $20,000 and $30,000,  depending on family composition, as well as airfares and medical screening costs. They would also  be required provide humanitarian settlement support for up to 12 months. 

 Australia has resettled around 775,000 refugees and people in humanitarian need since the end of  World War II, and resettles more refugees per capita than any other nation. 

 “I am very pleased that we have been able to carry on Australia’s proud tradition of refugee  resettlement with the biggest increase to the humanitarian program in 30 years and now this  innovative sponsorship program,” Mr Bowen said.  

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802   

