---
title: "Hartsuyker welcomes offshore processing as a first step"
date: "2012-08-15"
creators:
  - "Hartsuyker, Luke"
source: "Office of HARTSUYKER, LUKE, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380271
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1851972%22
---

 

 

 Media Contact: Greg Pierce      Coffs Harbour: 02 6652 6233      Canberra: 02 6277 4447      Mobile: 0408 532 785       

 Email:  greg.pierce@aph.gov.au   

 

 15 August, 2012 

 Hartsuyker welcomes passage of legislation to allow  offshore processing as a first step  Federal Member for Cowper Luke Hartsuyker said today the passage of legislation  through the House of Representatives to allow offshore processing at Nauru was a  welcome step in restoring policies that work on our borders. 

 “This is a welcome first step to strengthening Australia’s borders - but more action  will be required if we are to stop the boats and end the needless deaths at sea”, Mr  Hartsuyker said. 

 “I believe the only way we can be fully confident of stopping the boats is to return to  the complete policies of the last Coalition government when it comes to border  protection.   

 “The fact is you can't get Howard government policy outcomes on border protection -  a 99 per cent reduction in boat arrivals - if you don't implement the full Howard  government policies. 

 “Offshore processing at Nauru is one part of the solution. The other parts of the  solution are the reintroduction of temporary protection visas (TPVs) and turning back  the boats where safe to do so. 

 “These policies work together and when combined, entirely destroy the people  smuggler model.   

 “Australians want confidence that the borders are secure, they want confidence that  government policies are working and they want an end to the uncertainty that has  accompanied the four years of failure on our borders. 

 “Labor cannot be trusted to implement policies on our borders that they do not  believe in and have been dragged kicking and screaming to adopt. Only the Coalition  has the proven record of standing for and successfully implementing polices that stop  the boats.” 

 Mr Hartsuyker said North Coast residents would welcome the change in policy by the  Gillard Government on its position on offshore processing at Nauru, but they would  be right to ask, why it took the Gillard Government four years to admit it got it so  wrong on border protection. 

 “Four years ago, the Rudd-Gillard government overturned proven policies that work.   Since then we have had 22,000 illegal arrivals, 1,000 deaths at sea, a battering of  Australia’s international reputation and a $4.7 billion budget blowout.  This was all so  avoidable.” 

 ENDS 

