---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in the Northern Territory"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264700%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  the Northern Territory  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced three new projects in the  Northern Territory will be funded in 2012-13 under the Settlement Grants Program  (SGP) to assist newly arrived migrants and refugees settle in the community. 

 From 1 July 2012, Northern Territory settlement agencies will receive a total of $592  785 in additional funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals become  self-reliant and build a new life in Australia. 

 As part of the funding allocated to the Northern Territory this coming financial year,  Anglicare will receive a grant to provide casework, referrals and groups information  sessions to assist new migrants and refugees to settle in the community. 

 'Promoting social inclusion for newly arrived migrants and refugees is an important  focus of Anglicare's program to help new migrants successfully transition to their new  life in Australia,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'The Multicultural Council of the Northern Territory is also the recipient of SGP  funding which will enable it to continue delivery of services such as its Passport to  Drive Homework service.' 

 Announcing the Northern Territory grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian  Government reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into  their new communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'These grants help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'Whether it is improving people's ability to gain access to mainstream services,  housing assistance or the community legal education support, these services are all  activities that empower new arrivals by helping them connect with local communities,  develop greater independence and improve their life skills. 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in the Northern Territory for their contribution to the  successful settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

