---
title: "Labor must act in national interest and pass Coalition TPV bill"
date: "2012-11-25"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386003
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731233%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR MUST ACT IN NATIONAL INTEREST  AND PASS COALITION TPV BILL November 25, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat reinforces the need for Labor to back the Coalition's bill in the Parliament this week which  will finally restore Temporary Protection Visas to take the people smugglers' product of permanent residency off the table,  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “This latest boat means for the fifth consecutive time over 2,000 people have arrived illegally in a month as people  smugglers continue to send record boats under Labor's half hearted border policies,” Mr Morrison said.

 “This week Labor have the chance to vote for stronger borders by supporting the Coalition's bill which will bring back  Temporary Protection Visas for illegal boat arrivals to deny the lure of permanent residency in Australia.

 “Labor must end their stubborn opposition to restoring Temporary Protection Visas and the farce of their bridge to permanent  residence visa and finally take the people smugglers’ product of permanent residence off the table.

 “Julia Gillard and Labor have for years offered a one way visa path to guaranteed permanent residence for those arriving on  illegal boats. The last Parliamentary sitting week of the year gives them the chance to change this by supporting the  Coalition's bill.

 “Labor ignored the lessons of the Howard Government on illegal boats when they abolished the proven measures that had  smashed the people smugglers' model and instead became that model.

 “No amount of half hearted policies and half hearted resolve will put this right. Labor must act in the national interest and  back TPVs,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: "More than 2000 people have arrived on Australia’s shores this month, amid revelations that our borders  are so overwhelmed by the boats, that thousands of arrivals are set to be released into the community on welfare.

 “This is not ideal for the people affected by this or for the Australian taxpayer.

 “Labor’s latest kowtow to the people smugglers is just another example of the lack of resolve that they demonstrate every  time they are challenged on border protection.

 “Over 30,000 people have arrived on illegal boats under this failed government and more than 25% of these have arrived  since Labor announced offshore processing on Nauru.

 “This Government cannot stop the boats and they never will.

 “Only a change of Government will stop this huge influx of boats at our borders,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR MUST ACT IN NATIONAL INTEREST AND PASS COALITION TPV BI...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

