---
title: "Abbott says 'Yes' to another boat and 'No' to offshore processing"
date: "2012-05-15"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373148
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275382%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Abbott says 'Yes' to another boat and 'No' to  offshore processing  Tuesday, 15 May 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Jason Clare MP - Minister for Home Affairs, Minister for  Justice and Minister for Defence Materiel. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said another asylum seeker boat was intercepted last  night - the 32nd since Tony Abbott rejected the government's offer to work together  to implement offshore processing. 

 'The Coalition's consistent refusal to support offshore processing legislation is a  significant factor in asylum seeker arrivals,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Mr Abbott's cheap slogans won't stop the boats, but offshore processing will help to  stop people taking these dangerous boat journeys and prevent more deaths at sea. 

 'Yet the Coalition continues to give the green light to people smugglers because  they've cynically calculated it's in their own political interest for boats to keep  coming.' 

 The latest boat comes as Indonesia yet again made clear its opposition to Tony  Abbott's plan to 'turn back the boats', with Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa  reported as saying it was not a solution to the people smuggling issue in The  Australian today. 

 'Tony Abbott remains in denial - his tow-backs policy is dangerous and ignores all  the expert advice, including from our Navy which says it is dangerous and risk lives,'  Mr Bowen said. 

 Mr Clare said it was time for the Coalition to stop being negative and allow for  offshore processing to proceed. 

 'Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation to  introduce offshore processing,' Mr Clare said. 

 'If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and pass  our legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore in Malaysia and  Nauru.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb186659.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 15 May 2012 at 11:04 AEST 

