---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 16 October 2012: with Abbott's turn back policy, asylum seeker processing, adverse security assessments and regional processing"
date: "2012-10-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "with Abbott's turn back policy"
  - "asylum seeker processing"
  - "adverse security assessments and regional processing"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383611
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2277683%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Abbott's turn back policy, asylum seeker  processing, adverse security assessments and  regional processing  Tuesday, 16 October 2012 

 Doorstop interview, Sydney 

 Chris Bowen: Thanks for coming, everybody. 

 I wanted to make a few brief remarks. 

 Of course, we saw yesterday the Leader of the Opposition meet with President  Yudhoyono. It's quite apparent that the Leader of the Opposition did not raise the  matter of turning back the boats with President Yudhoyono. This is a very significant  failure by Tony Abbott. He said he believes in a policy of 'no surprises' when it  comes to relations with Indonesia. Well, the only surprise is that he didn't bother to  raise the issue of turning back the boats with the President of Indonesia. 

 Now, Tony Abbott has taken many various policy positions here. He said that he'll  turn back the boats, regardless of what Indonesia says. And then he says he'll  workshop everything with Indonesia. But he didn't bother to workshop what is - he  says - the centrepiece of his policy with the President of Indonesia. 

 Now, this is just clearly unacceptable. Tony Abbott is normally all talk when it comes  to asylum seekers. Now he's not even that. He didn't even talk to the President of  Indonesia about the centrepiece of his policy. Now, it's quite clear why he didn't. He  didn't because he didn't want it known that the President of Indonesia had said no.  The government of Indonesia has made it crystal clear what they think about this  policy. They've made it crystal clear that they will not cooperate with the policy, and  yet Tony Abbott didn't even raise it with the President of Indonesia because he  wouldn't like the answer. 

 Now, I see Mr Morrison saying that he's had private discussions with Mr Natalegawa  and he's not going to reveal what was in them. Well, that's unusually retiring for Mr  Morrison. It's not like the Liberal Party not to shout from the rooftops their views  about these issues. They've engaged in megaphone diplomacy on this issue now for  months and months. They've said that this is Indonesia's problem, Indonesian boats  disgorging people, Indonesian-flagged vessels disgorging people onto Australian  shores. 

 So I think this underlines that this turn back the boat policy lies in tatters. This turn  back the boat policy lies in tatters because Tony Abbott didn't even have the guts to  raise it with President Yudhoyono. 

 Happy to take questions. 

 Journalist: Minister, we've seen 4500 boats arrive since Labor reinstituted offshore  processing. Does that show that your policy is the one that really isn't working? 

 Bowen: Well, very clearly, we need to implement every recommendation of the  Houston Report. Very clearly, that will take time to work. Very clearly, we have said  for some time, for example, that the key to deterring boat arrivals would be the  implementation of the Malaysia agreement. 

 So it's quite unusual to see Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison jumping up and down, saying,  'Look, Nauru and Manus Island aren't working.' Well, we are implementing Nauru  and Manus Island, but we're also implementing all of the recommendations of the  panel, and I'll be providing regular updates on that, as I have done up to this point. 

 Journalist: But the nation's most senior judges knocked back Malaysia, the High  Court. 

 Bowen: Well, the High Court interpreted the Migration Act and we've since amended  the Migration Act. 

 Journalist: Minister, you say Tony Abbott should have raised his tow back policy  with the Indonesian President, but it was raised by Scott Morrison with the  Indonesian Foreign Minister. What's the difference? 

 Bowen: Well, Mr Abbott is the alternative Prime Minister. Mr Yudhoyono is the  President of Indonesia. It is a complete cop out for Mr Abbott not to raise what he  says is the centrepiece of his policy. And then Mr Morrison says he had a private  meeting with Mr Natalegawa. Well, it's simply not good enough to say, 'Well, Tony  Abbott didn't raise it with Mr Yudhoyono but I raised it with Mr Natalegawa, but I'm  not going to tell you what I said or what he said.' That is simply a cop out. 

 Journalist: Minister Bowen, when does the government plan to start processing the  4600 asylum seekers asylum seekers who have arrived since 13 August? 

 Bowen: Look, our policies are being very clearly implemented. We've had a number  of transfers to Nauru and we will progress the establishment of Manus Island. I'll be  providing further updates on progress in terms of all the recommendations and how  we're handling the situation in due course. 

 Journalist: Is it purely for domestic consumption, Mr Abbott's policy? 

 Bowen: Absolutely, absolutely. He talks tough in Canberra but doesn't talk at all in  Jakarta. He's a lion in Canberra and a mouse in Indonesia. He is simply not willing to  try and talk to the President of Indonesia about this policy, which he beats his chest  about whenever he's got TV cameras in front of him in Australia, but won't even raise  it with the people who are the key to making it work. 

 Journalist: Mr Bowen, given that the number of asylum seekers that have arrived  since mid-August is about double the capacity of the new processing areas we've set 

 up in Manus Island and Nauru, does the government accept that some of those  people will be processed in Australia? 

 Bowen: Well, the law is that people who arrive in Australia by boat are then  transferred to offshore processing places, that is the law at it stands. Now, of course,  as I say, I freely acknowledge there are, of course, real challenges in terms of  implementing all the policies with the number of arrivals.  I will make further statements about that in due course, but let's be very clear: those  people smugglers who are out there saying, 'Don't worry about it, you won't be sent  to Nauru' are wrong. The law is very clear and we will be implementing the law in  relation to offshore processing and regular transfers to offshore processing  countries. 

 Journalist: Minister, the government has announced plans for an independent  review system to look at cases where ASIO has found asylum seekers who are a  security threat. Is Australia lagging behind a lot of other countries like the UK? 

 Bowen: No, I think this is a good development which I support and I've worked very  closely with the Attorney-General on, and I certainly welcome her announcement. I  think, very clearly, national security always comes first, but we also need to ensure  that people who are having decisions made about them have an opportunity to put  their case and to put their case in a review. And I think this is a good development  which will see these cases being dealt with in a very considered way, which is an  appropriate way, which the Attorney-General and I - particularly the Attorney-General  - have been working on for some time. 

 Journalist: The Opposition are planning to go to Sri Lanka to hold meetings with  government representatives. Isn't that a clear indication that foreign governments are  taking the Opposition seriously? 

 Bowen: Oh, no, look, it's very common for shadow ministers and leaders of the  Opposition to visit other countries and to be treated with courtesy and respect. 

 But in relation to Sri Lanka, let me say a couple of things. I've been to Sri Lanka, I've  met with very senior Sri Lankan Government officials and we have good cooperation  with them. But they are going to talk to Sri Lanka about implementing their turn back  the boats policy to Sri Lanka; one they didn't bother to raise with the head of the  Indonesian Government. 

 Secondly, their policy is to turn back boats to Sri Lanka, which is not a signatory to  the Refugee Convention. So they say, 'It's okay to turn boats back to Sri Lanka,  which is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention; it's okay to turn back boats to  Indonesia, which is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention; but we couldn't  possibly approve an agreement with Malaysia where there are protections  negotiated and written down because it is not a signatory to the Refugee  Convention.' 

 And in relation to Sri Lanka, they are returning people directly to the country that  they're leaving, which is a clear breach, a clear breach of the Refugee Convention.  There is no way of arguing otherwise, and for them to then use the Refugee 

 Convention as an excuse for opposing the implementation of the Malaysia  agreement shows how hypocritical their position has become. 

 Journalist: What firm guarantees, though, have you got from the Malaysian  Government that asylum seekers would be treated humanely there? 

 Bowen: Well, we've been around this track a few times. With respect, we have an  agreement in writing with the Malaysian Government in relation to non-refoulement -  the fundamental principle of the Refugee Convention - and people being treated with  dignity and respect. Much more - where is the agreement with Indonesia? Where's  the agreement with Sri Lanka that the Opposition has negotiated that they say would  allow them to turn back boats? 

 Journalist: Given that there's been no real slowdown in [inaudible] arriving since the  Manus Island and Nauru policies have been announced, when do you expect the  public can see the results of the offshore processing policies? 

 Bowen: Well, look, obviously we are working to implement this policy. It takes time  to work; no question about that. I'm not going to provide sort of a regular running  commentary on what we see in intelligence reports or what we're seeing in terms of  the impact, other than to say I think it is clearly being noticed around the region. 

 But we are in a real battle with people smugglers who are saying, 'This policy won't  be implemented, you won't be taken to Nauru; if you're taken to Nauru you'll only be  there for a short time.' That is a challenge for us in terms of communicating the  government's resolve but it is not a challenge that we are walking away from. 

 Journalist: Minister, the Refugee and Migration Review Tribunal says its caseload  has jumped by more than 50 per cent in the first three months of the financial year.  Does the tribunal need more government funding to be able to do its job effectively? 

 Bowen: Well, we've increased the resources to the tribunals and we've increased  the number of tribunal members quite substantially over the last few years. I meet  regularly with the head of the tribunals and talk to her about the challenges. There  has been an increase, which goes to a whole range of issues, including students  then appealing migration decisions when their student visa has run out, etcetera. I  believe, obviously, that we're working closely with the new chair who I've appointed,  the new Principal Member of the Migration and Refugee Tribunals on all those  questions.  I appointed, of course, the Honourable Michael Lavarch to review work processes  and resourcing issues. He didn't recommend any substantial increase in resourcing,  so we are implementing the Lavarch recommendations, but I continue to talk to the  Principal Member about all those issues.  Last question. 

 Journalist: Why has the government appointed G4S - the same company that  botched Olympic security in London - to run Manus Island processing centre? 

 Bowen: Well, we are in the process of talking to a range of companies about a  range of service provisions in Nauru and Manus Island. It's well known that we've got 

 a letter of intent with one particular provider. We have a particularly strong contract  management regime in place for those, to ensure that the services that we require to  be delivered would be delivered. When we've signed a contract, then I will say  further about that at that point. 

 Thank you very much, cheers. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb190754.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 16 October 2012 at 14:38 AEST  

