---
title: "Labor lacks Howard Government resolve on boats as another arrives"
date: "2012-08-17"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380377
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1861151%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 Labor lacks Howard Government resolve on boats as another arrives 

 17/08/12  

 Labor may have agreed to reopen Nauru, but if they don’t want the latest arrival of  63 people to be just another of many more they must embrace the Howard  Government’s strong resolve and full suite of policies, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.    

 “Labor was dragged kicking and screaming to reopen Nauru, a policy they don’t  believe in and vowed never to restore,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “If Labor want to be effective in stopping the boats and getting the Howard  Government’s outcomes on our borders, they will need to adopt not only the full suite  of the Howard Government’s policies, but also the Howard Government resolve that  was so critical in achieving those results,” he said    

 “Labor have stopped well short of what the Coalition believes will be necessary to be  truly effective on our borders.    

 “The soft response by Labor to what occurred on the MV Parsifal this week is a clear  example of Labor’s wilting attitude when it comes to doing what is necessary to send  an uncompromising message on our borders.    

 “Just as they have done from the Oceanic Viking stand-off to every water taxi they  have despatched to bring asylum seekers to Australia, Labor’s instinctive first  response to people smugglers is to appease rather than oppose.    

 “Almost 11 years to the day that John Howard acted decisively to deter boat arrivals  on the Tampa who were intent on holding our country to ransom, Julia Gillard  capitulated to such demands.    

 "Labor just doesn’t have the instinct required to be tough on border protection. They  don't have the belief or the resolve needed on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “It is unfortunate that the Prime Minister did not take the opportunity  this week to show some practical follow-through in sending a strong message to the  people smugglers that Australia is not a soft touch destination any longer.    

 “This latest boat arrival proves that the people smugglers know this Labor 

 Government lacks conviction and will not implement the full suite of Coalition policies  that would actually put a plug on their insidious trade in human misery.    

 “This week the Government missed an opportunity to send a strong message that  Australia will not tolerate threats of violence and intimidation when asylum seekers  demand to be brought to Australia.    

 “It is unfortunate that it has come to a point where the people smugglers no longer  take the word of this Government seriously, at every turn they have failed to protect  Australia’s borders and the people smugglers have only increased their profits,” Mr  Keenan said. 

