---
title: "Reports of immigration fraud demand answers from Minister Bowen"
date: "2012-05-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372411
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1610083%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Reports of immigration fraud demand answers from Minister Bowen  

 03/05/12  

 Reports of immigration fraud of the family reunion and humanitarian programme  revealed on the ABC's 7.30 Report demand clear answers and explanations from  Immigration Minister Bowen, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison said today. 

 “Reports of fraudulent visa applications, including for children, refugees and carers  from Islamabad were acknowledged by Department officials in the report. In addition,  even where abuses are being picked up by immigration officers, decisions are being 

 overturned by the Government's over generous Migration Review Tribunal in  Australia,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Once again, the job of explaining these alleged abuses and fraud, and yet another  Labor failure in immigration, was left to the Minister's bureaucrats, rather than the  Minister himself,” he said. 

 “If the Government is aware of the problem as Department officials claim, the  Minister will be able to answer the following questions: 

 How many visas involving the mission in Islamabad have been cancelled or refused  because of fraud? 

 How many of these family reunion applications have involved sponsors in Australia  who have arrived by boat as Irregular Maritime Arrivals? 

 How many applications have been reviewed as a result of the discovery of fraud and  abuse on other applications? 

 What grade of risk has been assigned to the post as a result of any audits  undertaken, and whether any audits have been undertaken and how many  convictions have been recorded. 

 In relation to the migration of children, whether the Minister is now demanding  additional identity checks to be undertaken to prove a family relationship, including  DNA testing, and if not, why not? 

 How many cases have been referred to the Australian Federal Police for further  investigation, how many charges have been laid, how many prosecutions have been  undertaken and how many convictions have been recorded? 

 Given the applications will involve sponsors already in Australia on visas, what action  has the Minister initiated to review and potentially cancel visas for those believed to  be participating in these frauds? 

 Given that some of these cases allegedly involve matters that have gone before the  Migration Review Tribunal, how many of these cases and the individuals involved in  these applications that were the subject of these cases are now being reopened and  investigated? 

 What integrity reviews has the Minister initiated into practices and staff in Islamabad  and what changes have been initiated to procedures? 

 Why the Minister has not chosen to suspend assessment of applications from  Islamabad while the risk of frauds and abuse may be unacceptably high 

 “These are just some of the issues the Minister for Immigration must be able to  answer in relation to the allegations reported on the ABC's 7.30 program, if we are to  have confidence that appropriate action is being taken in relation to these alleged 

 abuses. 

 “Public confidence in the Gillard Government's ability to run our immigration program  is already at rock bottom. Minister Bowen must front up to answer the serious  questions that are raised by these reports of fraud and abuse. 

 “Failure to demonstrate that the Government has already taken substantive action on  these issues will be yet further evidence of why Labor can't be trusted on  immigration,” Mr Morrison said.  

  

