---
title: "Migration and women at risk"
date: "2012-03-08"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "Office of ABBOTT, TONY, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434652
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2153652%22
---

 

 

 JOINT PRESS RELEASE 

 THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MR SCOTT MORRISON MHR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  CITIZENSHIP   SENATOR MICHAELIA CASH, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  

 IMMIGRATION AND THE STATUS OF WOMEN   

 

 MIGRATION AND WOMEN AT RISK 

 

 

 The Coalition will re-focus Australia’s refugee and humanitarian program and give priority to genuine  refugees and offshore women at risk.     

 A Coalition Government will provide a guaranteed minimum of 1,000 places for women at risk and their  dependents within Australia’s annual humanitarian intake.    

 We will ensure that Australia’s refugee and humanitarian resettlement programme provides places to those  we can help most and those who are most in need.     

 Women at risk and their dependents waiting in camps and other desperate places offshore are among the  most vulnerable of all who seek a better life in Australia. They have neither the means nor the opportunity to  escape their circumstances.    

 This group will be given a very high priority by a Coalition government in Australia’s refugee and  humanitarian programme.     

 In recent years, the annual intakes in the women at risk category have steadily fallen from 995 visas in 2005-06 to 759 visas in 2010-11.     

 This reflects the downward trend that has seen fewer places made available to poorer and more vulnerable  offshore refugees, including those in the women at risk category. This is a direct consequence of Labor’s  decision to abolish the Coalition’s proven border protection policies.   

 Currently the number of places available for offshore refugee and humanitarian entrants has fallen to fewer  than 9,000 places.  The Coalition will reserve a minimum of 11,000 places available in the 13,750 place  Refugee and Humanitarian programme for offshore applicants.  Of these 11,000 places, a minimum of 1,000  Woman at Risk visas will be allocated.   

 A Coalition government will ensure that appropriate settlement services are provided to women at risk once  they arrive in Australia.   

 Our policies will ensure Australia’s refugee and humanitarian resettlement programme provides hope to the  most vulnerable.   

 

 8 March 2012   

