---
title: "Strong sense of belonging key to social cohesion"
date: "2012-10-26"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384175
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2116889%22
---

 

 Strong sense of belonging key to social cohesion  October 26, 2012  

 Over 95 per cent of Australians have a strong sense of belonging and pride in our way of life  according to new research released by the Scanlon Foundation. 

 Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy today launched the Mapping Social  Cohesion surveys for 2012 which examines people’s attitudes on a range of topics from  social harmony, immigration, asylum seekers, intolerance and trust in government. 

 Senator Lundy said the report confirmed the strength of Australian multiculturalism and  highlighted how Australia’s settlement services foster social harmony and form the  cornerstone of our program to help new migrants successfully settle in Australia. 

 “The report affirms the Gillard Government’s policy framework for multiculturalism and  demonstrates how our settlement serves have built and sustained participation in our  community,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “The Scanlon Foundation and its partners, the Australian Multicultural Foundation and  Monash University, have been making a valuable contribution to the field of social cohesion  since the first survey was undertaken in 2007. 

 “In a multicultural country such as ours, made up of people from many backgrounds, policies  and programs that are aimed at enhancing social cohesion are critically important to harness  the strength of our diversity. 

 “We know that immigration enriches and energises our communities, but it also presents  challenges and opportunities. 

 “I am very pleased to note the survey showed Australians continue to have a strong sense of  belonging and a sense of pride in the Australian way of life, and that this is true for both those  born in Australia and those who have come to Australia as migrants. 

 “All of us can be very proud of our nation’s capacity and generosity in welcoming  newcomers to Australia. 

 “I congratulate Peter Scanlon, the Chair of the Scanlon Foundation for his foresight and  enterprise in establishing the foundation and his ongoing commitment to providing research  and an evidence base for a socially cohesive society,” Senator Lundy said. 

 To view the 2012 report and fact sheets online visit the Monash University  website http://arts.monash.edu/mapping-population/scanlon-foundation-surveys.php 

 

