---
title: "Labor's long weekend of illegal boat arrivals"
date: "2012-06-11"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374739
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736711%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR'S LONG WEEKEND OF ILLEGAL BOAT  ARRIVALS

 June 11, 2012

 More people have arrived on illegal boats over the long weekend than in the last six years of the Howard Government, after two  more arrivals we're announced this afternoon, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison, and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Five boats have arrived over the long weekend carrying 311 people. This is more than arrived in the last six years of the Howard  Government. 

 “It is clear that under Labor's failed policies that people smugglers can't afford to take public holidays; business is just too good.

 “These latest two arrivals follow the confusion over the previous vessel reported to have run aground near Keeling Island, with the  Government claiming the vessel has been 'intercepted'.  The arrival of a vessel in this area, reportedly carrying Sri Lankan  passengers indicates the Government's problem has risen to a whole new level.  The Government must clarify what occurred,  rather than their autopilot first response of pathetically blaming the Opposition for their own failures.  

 “Not only are these outlying islands not equipped to either intercept or assist vessels in distress, they are also not well equipped to  accommodate arrivals prior to transfer to Christmas Island or the mainland.  This will not only prove a major inconvenience for  locals, but place Australian officials and others involved in 'interceptions', transfers and rescues at risk.

 “Illegal boat arrivals are occurring at record rates under Labor's failed policies.  More than 700 people have turned up so far in  June, which is even faster than the record set in May.

 “It is clear it is not just Labor's failed policies that are the problem. Labor themselves are now the problem. It is increasingly  unlikely that this Government could implement any set of policies to stop the boats coming to Australia, due to their reputation of  incompetence and being a soft touch. 

 “Only a change of Government can now fix this mess,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “The 5th boat arrival in 3 days brings the total to 11 illegal boat arrivals this month alone - a clear sign of the  catastrophic state of Australia’s borders under a Labor Government.

 “When illegal boat arrivals are pouring in at such a rapid rate it is nearly impossible for our Border Protection Command to cope  with this workload, especially given the harsh cuts Labor made to their funding and staffing levels in their previous budgets.

 “I am concerned of the toll this is taking on the hard working men and women of our Border Protection Command, who are on the  frontline of Labor’s border protection crisis.

 “The Minister for Home Affairs needs to stop his finger pointing and constant excuses and start delivering the funding needed for  the frontline border protection agencies for which he is responsible,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR'S LONG WEEKEND OF ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS > Michael Keenan ...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

