---
title: "No holiday for people smuggler under Labor's border failures"
date: "2012-12-14"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387186
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731209%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling NO HOLIDAY FOR PEOPLE SMUGGLERS  UNDER LABOR’S BORDER FAILURES December 14, 2012

 The arrival of the fourth illegal boat in three days, this time with 32 people on board, shows people smugglers won’t be  taking a holiday under Labor’s half hearted border protection policies, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “As Australians begin to wind down for the Christmas/New Year period and prepare family holidays, people smugglers will  continue to be hard at work sending yet more illegal boats to Australia, cashing in on Labor’s half hearted policies and  resolve on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Even the deteriorating conditions of the monsoon season have so far proved to be little deterrent under Labor’s watch.  

 “Labor remain as big a drawcard for people seeking passage to Australia on illegal boats as ever and so long as Labor  stay in office people smugglers won’t be taking a holiday from their record profits.

 “The Coalition is determined to give the people smugglers a permanent holiday by smashing their business model with the  full suite of proven policies and necessary resolve to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “More people have arrived illegally by boat in the first two weeks of this month than in the last six years of  the Howard Government.

 “The rate of boat arrivals is only increasing, yet the funding and staffing levels for our frontline border protection agencies  our continually reduced by Labor.

 “Since coming to office Labor has slashed 750 Customs jobs and $64 million in funding - yet Customs border protection  workload has massively increased thanks to Labor’s border protection policy failures. 

 “Given that the Government refuses to implement the proven border protection policies of the Coalition, they should at  least adequately resource those agencies that are tasked with cleaning up the crisis at our borders.

 “Labor’s spin machine cannot save them from the facts - 535 boats carrying well over 31,000 people is a clear indication  that this Government has no plan for our borders and no policies to stop the boats from coming,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 NO HOLIDAY FOR PEOPLE SMUGGLERS UNDER LABOR’S BORDER FAILU...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

