---
title: "Immigration paves our way into the Asian Century"
date: "2012-03-09"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211434749
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1486085%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 OPINION - THE AUSTRALIAN 

 

 9 March 2012 

 

 IMMIGRATION PAVES OUR WAY INTO THE ASIAN  CENTURY   

 Something big happened in the history of immigration last year. It didn’t get any  headlines. It had nothing to do with boats or asylum seekers. It wasn’t debated in  Parliament.   

 But it is probably the most important development in immigration in years. Last year, for  the first time in the history of Australia, the United Kingdom was not our largest source  of permanent migrants. For the first time ever, more people moved to Australia from  China than any other country.    

 As we talk of Australia’s role in the Asian Century, there is a lot of focus on trade and  resources, naturally enough. But it is immigration - and skilled migration in particular -  that is the greatest cross-cultural and economic development program of them all. 

 Skilled and business migrants from Asia increase our trade links, our understanding of  the region and our national language skills. And it’s not just China we’re talking about,  of course. Putting aside New Zealand, which has separate migration arrangements with  Australia, India and the Philippines are our third and fourth largest sources of new  residents.   

 All of this has occurred with very little public criticism. The days of John Howard or  Pauline Hanson warning of the social upheaval caused by Asian migration seem like an  eon ago.   

 Skilled migration is vital to Australia’s economy. Without migration, Australia’s labour  force is expected to contract by 2050. Australia simply won’t have enough people to  keep our economy growing - even with the Government’s strong investment in skills  and education, participation and social inclusion, and productive capacity. We need  migrants for future growth and prosperity.    

 We are no longer victims of the tyranny of distance. Indeed, we have been blessed by  geography. But let’s be clear, the opportunities the Asian Century presents Australia  aren’t purely down to chance.    

 Australia is now a highly open economy, open to significant flows of people. More than a  quarter of our people were born overseas and migrants add more to Australia’s  population each year than natural increase.    

 The potential then offered by six million migrants, a third of them born in Asian  countries, is extraordinary. Think also about the hundreds of thousands of Australian  residents fluent in Mandarin, Cantonese, Vietnamese, Hindi, Punjabi, Indonesian,  Tagalog and Japanese.   

 Asian migration to Australia is very much driven by a mutually beneficial emphasis on  skills. Well over 60 per cent of migrants to Australia come under our skilled migration  program, and this applies particularly to migrants from Asia.    

 Perhaps the most reassuring element of the shift in emphasis towards Asian migration is  that we don’t need to tweak the system to tap into these skills, because the skilled  migration system we have developed has the flexibility to automatically respond to shifts  in the world’s economic activity.   

 Of equal importance to Australia’s economic future are temporary migrants, such as  students.    

 Students from Asia currently comprise 68 per cent of all student visitors - which has  already equated to 100,000 visas granted in the last seven months.   

 The importance of international education for the bottom line of our universities is well  understood, as is the economic activity of the students and their families who regularly  visit them. Less discussed is the importance of international education to the nation’s  long term strategic interests.    

 Having large numbers of Asia’s future leaders who’ve had a positive education  experience in Australia is of incalculable benefit to our long term diplomatic engagement  in the region. Every international student becomes another ambassador for Australia,  another advocate for our interests in the region. And those advocates often end up in  some pretty important roles.    

 When I travel through the region, I’m often struck by the number of senior players in  government who studied here or who have children who study here and therefore have  a heightened appreciation and positive disposition towards Australia.    

 Singapore’s first directly elected President, Ong Teng Cheong, and Indonesia’s Minister  for Foreign Affairs, Marty Natalagawa, were both Australian university alumni. Australian  university alumni are littered across the region, particularly in China, India, Malaysia and  Singapore.   

 The reforms Chris Evans and I have announced, based on the recommendations of  former Olympics Minister, Michael Knight, are very focused on encouraging more  genuine students, particularly from Asia, to have the Australian education experience.    

 We will provide post-study work rights of two years for Bachelor Degree graduates and  up to four-year work rights for PhD graduates. We are also streamlining the process for  assessing genuine students to make it easier for people who want to study in Australia.    

 The rise of Asia brings new and exciting for opportunities for Australia. Solid economic  fundamentals and geography mean we’re well placed to act. Dwindling domestic labour  force growth and the need to shore up our economic future mean we must act.  

 

 If we get it right, the potential is profound.    

