---
title: "20,000 boat arrivals under Julia Gillard"
date: "2012-10-11"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383401
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731325%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 20,000 BOAT ARRIVALS UNDER JULIA  GILLARD October 11, 2012

 The arrival of two illegal boats yesterday, with a total of 79 people on board, has marked another milestone of failure on  our borders on Julia Gillard’s watch, with over 20,000 people now having arrived illegally by boat under her Prime  Ministership, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs 

 and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "The staggering level of failure on our borders under Prime Minister Gillard has eclipsed all records and continues to grow  as boats arrive daily under her half-hearted policies, with 20,000 arrivals already on her watch," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Since Julia Gillard was appointed Prime Minister over two years ago, an average of almost 750 people have arrived on  illegal boats every month. 

 "Almost 4,100 people have arrived since Labor’s backflip on Nauru and still less than 5% of them have been sent to Nauru  under the asylum lottery. 

 "Meanwhile the continued arrival of Sri Lankans on boats continues to occur while the government stands mute in  response, despite Sri Lanka proactively intercepting them," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Over 250 people on four boats have been successfully smuggled illegally across Australia’s borders in  the last two days alone - another example of the people smugglers’ intent to continually test this Government’s resolve as  the Parliament passes legislation to commence offshore processing on Manus Island. 

 "When the Labor Party undid the robust border protection system they failed to understand the consequences of what  they had done and how much it would reinvigorate the people smuggling trade. 

 "Since that time this Government has had failure after failure in trying to provide some semblance of border protection for  our country. 

 "They do not have the backbone necessary to fully implement and follow through with the tough border protection policies  needed to stop the people smuggling trade. 

 "Creating the problem and then failing to fix it is not governing - it is a fundamental failure to accept the responsibility that  Government requires," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 20,000 BOAT ARRIVALS UNDER JULIA GILLARD > Michael Keenan MP

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

