---
title: "Victorian council wins local government award"
date: "2012-04-19"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371513
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2137942%22
---

 

 

 Victorian council wins local government award 

 April 19, 2012  

 Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy today congratulated Moreland City  Council for winning the Strength in Diversity category of the national awards for local  government. 

 Sponsored by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, this category recognises local  initiatives that promote the benefits of, and respond to, challenges arising from migrant  settlement and Australia’s cultural, religious and linguistic diversity. 

 “Moreland City Council was recognised for its innovative response to the challenge of  engaging with its diverse community through its CALDCOM [Culturally and Linguistically  Diverse Communication] project,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Each of Moreland City Council’s CALDCOM storyboards is carefully crafted to convey  messages to new migrants and refugees about living and participating in Australia. 

 “They cover everything from how to vote, caring for the elderly, maternity and children’s  health services, responsible pet ownership, problem gambling, and strategies to use during an  Australian heatwave.” 

 Senator Lundy also congratulated the Cardinia Shire Council which was commended for its  Building Harmony Project that focuses on building a cohesive community and preventing  crime, based on race and diversity. 

 “Cardinia Shire Council has proactively planned for forecasted population growth, in  anticipation of an increase in culturally diverse residents settling in the shire,” Senator Lundy  said.  

 “By engaging schools, Monash University, and a number of other partners in laying the  groundwork, Cardinia Shire Council is planning a community which is accepting and  cohesive. 

 “Both Moreland City Council and Cardinia Shire Council are also to be commended for  ensuring that their projects and creative ideas are transferable and can be adopted by other  councils.” 

 Senator Lundy said the Department of Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and  Sports national awards for local government highlighted the excellent and innovative work  being undertaken by local government in communities across Australia. 

 

