---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 24 January 2012: Correspondence with the Opposition, offshore processing, Malaysia arrangement, Opposition’s policies of Nauru, Temporary Protection Visas and turning back boats"
date: "2012-01-24"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Correspondence with the Opposition"
  - "offshore processing"
  - "Malaysia arrangement"
  - "Opposition’s policies of Nauru"
  - "Temporary Protection Visas and turning back boats"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211368574
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1369878%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT* 

 

 

 DOORSTOP, SYDNEY  

 TUESDAY, 24 JANUARY 2012 

 

 SUBJECTS: Correspondence with the Opposition, offshore processing,  Malaysia arrangement, Opposition’s policies of Nauru, Temporary  Protection Visas and turning back boats. 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN: Well, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, last year the Prime  Minister wrote to the Leader of the Opposition before the tragic accident in  Indonesia and suggested that the two political parties in Australia who support  offshore processing, the Government and the Opposition, should meet to  determine a way to see that legislation pass the Parliament.  

 The Opposition, of course, said that they would not participate in discussions  unless the Government made a proposal in writing, so we did. We made that  proposal in good faith. And as a result of the discussions that were held, the  Government made a series of proposals to the Opposition to meet their alleged 

 concerns. Most notably, given the fact that the Opposition says that they regard  a detention centre at Nauru as an important deterrent to making the boat  journey to Australia, the Government said we would be willing to open a  detention centre on Nauru as a complement to the agreement with Malaysia.  And I’ll be having more to say about the detention centre at Nauru in a few  minutes.  

 In addition, the Opposition indicated that they regard Temporary Protection Visas  as an important deterrent to boats travelling to Australia. Now, the Government  disagrees, based on the experience of the last decade when we saw the number  of people arriving in Australia by boat increase after the introduction of  Temporary Protection Visas. But to find a way through this, the Government 

 offered to commission an inquiry into the effectiveness of Temporary Protection  Visas as a deterrent. We offered to mutually agree the terms of reference with  the Opposition. We offered to mutually agree who should conduct this inquiry,  which eminent Australian should conduct this inquiry with the Opposition. The  Opposition have rejected this out of hand. I think the Australian people are  entitled to conclude that the only reason the Opposition would reject an inquiry 

 into the effectiveness of Temporary Protection Visas is because they fear that  that inquiry would find that Temporary Protection Visas were not and would not  be a deterrent to coming to Australia by boat to claim asylum.  

 Now, to deal with the Opposition’s alleged concerns about protections in  Malaysia, the Government offered to deliver an enhanced monitoring role for the  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to work cooperatively with  the Malaysian Government to ensure that would occur. The Opposition has  rejected this out of hand. Now, the Opposition says it can’t and won’t support  the Government’s legislation for offshore processing because apparently they 

 have a long and deeply held view that people should only be sent to countries  which are a signatory to the Refugee Convention. Now, there’s two problems  with this argument. Firstly, as you all know, the Liberal Party sent people to  Nauru when it was not a signatory to the Refugee Convention. Even more  tellingly, we’ve seen the Opposition over recent days elaborate on their policy of  turning back boats, turning back boats on the high seas to Indonesia; not a  signatory to the Refugee Convention, no protections negotiated, no guarantees  of non-refoulement, no guarantees about education for children, no guarantees  of access to processing, not a jot.  

 This underlines the Opposition’s hypocrisy and it shows that Tony Abbott’s  alleged concerns for the human rights of asylum seekers are nothing but a fig  leaf. Very clearly, Mr Abbott has made the political conclusion that boat arrivals  in Australia are in his political best interest and he won’t work with the  Government of the day to ensure that offshore processing can be implemented.  

 Now, it wasn’t always this way. When John Howard needed to implement  offshore processing, he needed the support of the Labor Party to do so, to  ensure the passage of the legislation. Kim Beazley provided that support. Kim  Beazley acted in the national interest. Kim Beazley did the right thing by  Australia, even though it wasn’t in his own political interest. Mr Abbott is not  prepared to do the right thing by Australia in this instance.  

 Now, I just want to make a few more comments about recent developments.  We’ve seen the latest iteration of the Opposition’s turn back the boats policy.  Originally, of course, we had the boat phone, where Mr Abbott would sit in  Kirribilli House and personally decide which boats were turned back and which  ones weren’t. Then the Opposition walked away from that and said it would be a  decision for naval commanders, an operational decision for them. Now, in recent  days, we’ve seen a further development where the Opposition have said that  every boat would be turned back, presumably regardless of the circumstances.  Now, this has been condemned by the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees. Indonesia has made it very clear consistently that they would not  cooperate with this policy and it would endanger the cooperation that we already 

 have with Indonesia on people smuggling issues. There is not one person who  has come out to support this policy as being a sensible one. We’ve seen the  former head of the Australian Defence Force outline its dangers, its perils and its  risks. The ultimate responsibility of an Australian Prime Minister, the most serious  responsibility of an Australian Prime Minister is to ensure that the lives of our 

 Defence personnel are not unduly put at risk. Mr Abbott has shown he is not up  to that responsibility.  

 Now I just also want to make a few comments about a possible detention centre  on Nauru. As I said, the Government has consistently made it clear that a  detention centre on Nauru - which is just a processing centre which sees people 

 being resettled in Australia; if you like, a Christmas Island but further away - is  not a deterrent to people making the boat journey to Australia.  

 Now, in the course of these discussions the Opposition admitted that they could  not nominate a country that would or might even may be willing to accept  refugees off Nauru. Very clearly, the result would be, just as it was last time,  that the vast majority of people processed on Nauru found to be refugees would  be resettled to Australia. That is not an effective deterrent.  

 But of course, as a result of the Government’s willingness to compromise,  considerable work has been commissioned on a potential detention centre at  Nauru, and in the interest of public transparency I’m providing further  information about that. The Department of Immigration, at my request, sent a  team to Nauru to assess the state of the infrastructure. The advice to me is that  it would take at least three months to see a detention centre established on  Nauru. In addition, the capacity, given the state of the infrastructure and the  land envelope that is available, would initially be 400 people, rising to a  maximum of 750 people.  

 Having had the opportunity to assess the state of the infrastructure on Nauru,  the advice to me is that the Department of Immigration have increased their  estimate of the operational cost of a detention centre at Nauru. Previous advice  is that it would cost $979 million - almost $1 billion - over the forward  estimates. That has now been increased to $1.7 billion over the forward 

 estimates. That is $1.7 billion for a detention centre that could cater for 750  people. In addition, the capital costs of re-establishing the centre, given it has  been rundown and very effectively dismantled, would be $316 million. Now if this  remains the policy of the Opposition, of course they will need to account for this  cost in addition to their existing budget black hole.  

 So the Government will continue to work with countries in our region, under the  Bali Framework, to discourage people from arriving in Australia by boat. We’ll  continue to actively pursue any options available. However, given that the 

 Opposition have indicated that they will vote with the Greens to defeat our  legislation in the Senate, that does mean that unless that changes the practical  and legal result is onshore processing, and offshore processing, the Government  and the Opposition both agree, is the most effective deterrent to people making  the boat journey to Australia.  

 Now there is a chance for the Opposition to reflect: they can reflect on the fact  that people’s lives are at stake here, they can reflect on the fact that previous  oppositions have worked with governments of the day, put aside partisan self  interest and acted in the national interest. Mr Abbott has the chance to reflect on  that. In the meantime, the Government will continue to do what it can to provide 

 as much deterrence as possible for people risking their lives at sea. It would be  more effective - it would be in the national interest - for the Opposition to join  us in those endeavours.  

 Happy to take some questions. Kirsty?  

 JOURNALIST: What kind of deterrence can the Government offer? Where can  you go from here now the boats are still coming?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, we’ll continue to work with Indonesia and other countries in  relation to law enforcement, and of course we’ll continue to pursue opportunities  there. But when you’re dealing with law enforcement, you are dealing with the  symptoms of the problem. By the sorts of measures that we were embracing and  pursuing and continue to pursue, you’re not dealing with the symptoms, you’re  dealing with the cause: you can break the people smugglers’ business model,  you can provide a disincentive to actually get on the boat. When you’re dealing  with law enforcement, that does have a role and can have some effect, but it is  not as effective as actually taking away the product that people smugglers sell.  

 JOURNALIST: There’s been concern that, regardless of your political stripes on  either side, that the Australian public will see this as a failure of politics,  essentially.  

 BOWEN: I think the Australian people have had a gutful of the politics; I think  they look to both parties to compromise. The Government has compromised: the  Government’s put a very significant package to the Opposition, not without  political risk for the Government. How far has the Opposition moved? Not a  millimetre, not a millimetre: not one constructive proposal, not one change, not  one indication that they were prepared to accept a compromise. The Australian  people can make their judgement about that.  

 JOURNALIST: Did you think the Opposition were ever going to come to the  table, considering the political game?  

 BOWEN: Well, look, people can draw their own conclusions about that. I  thought it was worth a go, I thought it was worth the attempt to talk to Mr  Abbott and Mr Morrison in the national interest. I still believe it was worth a go.  I’m still happy to talk to Mr Morrison, but they’ll need to provide a more  constructive approach than they have up until now.  

 JOURNALIST: So you’re saying - just to reiterate - you’re saying if Tony Abbott  votes with the Greens that’ll mean onshore processing?  

 BOWEN: Well that’s the result: offshore processing is not lawful in any effective,  meaningful way under the High Court’s interpretation of the Migration Act,  contrary to the common understanding before the High Court ruling. Mr Maley?  

 JOURNALIST: Assuming you don’t get any cooperation from the Coalition at all,  can we expect any new policy initiatives from the Government or will it be, from  this point onwards, ad hoc, that you try to manage, as you say, the symptoms?  

 BOWEN: We’ll continue to work with countries in our region, but we need to  comply with Australian law as it is interpreted by the High Court. That means,  and there’s plenty of legal advice publicly out there to say that that would make 

 offshore processing, in effect, impractical. That’s the reality, I’m being honest  about that, that’s the reality. We’ll continue to work with countries in our region  and where we have the opportunity to improve cooperation on matters of law  enforcement, for example, then we’ll continue to do that, but it is not as effective 

 as taking away the people smugglers’ business model.  

 JOURNALIST: Just to be clear, there’s no intention on the part of the  Government to reopen Nauru in the absence of a corresponding commitment  from the Coalition?  

 BOWEN: No. Why would we spend two billion dollars on something that we  believe, in the absence of a proper regional framework and the types of results  delivered by the Malaysia agreement - which takes away the people smugglers’  business model, at much less cost to the Australian taxpayer, by the way - why  would you do that? I could not justify to the Australian people why we would  spend that money on a policy which we do not believe, based on all the expert  advice to us, would not be effective.  

 JOURNALIST: And what about the inquiry into TPVs? What’s the harm in that?  

 BOWEN: Well, we were prepared to do that. All the advice to us remains that it  would not be an effective deterrent. To put all the issues on the table in an open  and transparent way, we were happy to have those issues explored. The  Opposition’s just rejected that out of hand.  

 JOURNALIST: The fact there’s updated advice about the cost of Nauru, doesn’t  that suggest then that the Government at least considered the option?  

 BOWEN: Yes, we considered and agreed to open a detention centre at Nauru if  it was a complement to the agreement with Malaysia and the passage of the  Government’s legislation. Only then would it provide any effect. Remember, the  Government’s position here is that we believe there’s a place for an offshore  processing centre. We pursued and gained the agreement of Papua New Guinea  to that centre. That would not be lawful without the passage of the legislation,  nor in our view would a centre at Nauru. Now, we were prepared to say, we  believe the Malaysia agreement is the key to breaking the people smugglers’  business model, we believe an offshore processing centre can be an effective  complement to that, and we were prepared, in addition to our detention centre  at Papua New Guinea, to have a detention centre at Nauru as a complement.  The Opposition were so convinced that Nauru would work; we were prepared to  open a centre at Nauru, but they have indicated no willingness to compromise at  all.  

 JOURNALIST: Why has the cost of Nauru blown out by so much?  

 BOWEN: There’s a number of issues, Kirsty: the effective dismantling of the old  detention centre there, it’s been moved into government offices and a school;  there is considerable challenge in relation to the supply of water and the advice  to me was that a considerable investment would be needed in terms of  improving the water infrastructure. In addition, the land envelope available  would mean that the capacity would be much less if it were to be run in an  effective way and the accommodation available for staff at the detention centre  would be an enormous challenge. I must say that that costing does not include  any aid or development which Nauru might insist upon as a part of an  agreement, as it was last time. You recall when the Howard Government entered 

 into an agreement with Nauru, they provided an aid package. That costing does  not include any aid or supplementation to the Government of Nauru.  

 JOURNALIST: Were preliminary discussions about aid and what might be  wanted held with the Nauruan Government when the delegation went over?  

 BOWEN: No, no. It was a delegation of officials to inspect infrastructure, it was  not a political discussion at the government level.  

 JOURNALIST: Just on that point, does anyone in the Government have any  concerns about, I suppose, the financial integrity of the new Government in  Nauru? I understand there’s some concern among Opposition ranks in Nauru 

 about budgetary practices and a few other things.  

 BOWEN: Well, look, that’s a matter for the Nauruan Government and the  Nauruan Parliament. We would be prepared to work with the Nauruan  Government, just as we work with the Papua New Guinea Government, the  Malaysian Government, the Indonesian Government. Matters of internal politics  are a matter for Nauru. Obviously, if we did enter into an agreement with Nauru,  we would have ensured that there was appropriate auditing and appropriate  measures in place to ensure Australian taxpayers’ dollars were spent  appropriately.  

 JOURNALIST: You talk about transparency in advice from the department on  the cost of Nauru, the updated cost of Nauru. In that vein, would you consider  making that advice publicly available?  

 BOWEN: Yeah, in due course. In due course, I would be happy to make more  information available.  

 JOURNALIST: When you say in due course -  

 BOWEN: Well, look, I’m releasing the costings today, the figures and the  department’s views on capacity. If there’s a wish to see more information, I’d be  happy to have a look and see what more can be released in terms of the  department’s advice.  

 JOURNALIST: You indicated there are areas where you can tweak the Malaysia  agreement: offering a hotline for UNHCR staff to ring Malaysian Home Affairs  officials. So does that indicate that the Australian Government was involved in  further discussions with the Malaysian Government and they were prepared to  compromise further?  

 BOWEN: We did, of course, update the Malaysian Government on the status of  the discussions with the Opposition. We indicated the sorts of things that we  were talking to the Opposition about. The Malaysian Government is very keen to  see this agreement implemented and have indicated to us that they would be  obviously prepared to work further with the Government to deliver that.  

 But that’s a matter that is obviously hypothetical, given the Opposition’s rejection  out of hand because of their apparent long and deeply held views of the human  rights of asylum seekers who they’re going to turn back on the high seas.  

 JOURNALIST: Did you broach with the Malaysians that the core Opposition  concern, as stated in those letters, and that is that the protections - committees,  hotlines and all the rest of it - are no substitute for protections that are  enshrined in law?  

 BOWEN: Well, no, we’ve been through that with the Malaysian Government  very substantially over a period of months, as you recall, Paul. We had extensive  discussions with them about the protections in place. We don’t want to change  Malaysian law. It’s not the role of the Australian Government or the Australian 

 Opposition to lecture Malaysia about their law. The Malaysian Government has  indicated a substantial change in approach to these things, in relation to the  treatment of refugees across the board and I was happy to work with the  Malaysian Government in terms of the agreement with us. I must say Malaysia is 

 a first-class friend of Australia and they’ve indicated an enormous willingness to  work with Australia to break the people smugglers’ business model.  

 There’s three essential differences, if I could put it this way, between our  approach with Malaysia and the Opposition’s approach with Indonesia in turning  back the boats. One, Malaysia has agreed to accept asylum seekers, Indonesia  has not; two, Malaysia has agreed to protections, Indonesia has not; three, the  Malaysia agreement could be implemented without risk to the life of Australian  naval personnel, Indonesian turn backs could not. Okay, last question Paul.  

 JOURNALIST: In terms of the projections of boat traffic, I suppose, I mean,  now that things have fallen over pretty decisively, I think we can all assume that,  what can we expect by way of boat traffic [inaudible]?  

 BOWEN: Well, I don’t comment on intelligence. Obviously, you saw a big  increase in boat arrivals when it was announced that the legislation would fail  the Parliament last time. We’ve seen some changes this year, I think, as a result  of various factors. You can assume that without an effective deterrent in offshore  processing, high levels of boat arrivals would continue.  

 Thank you very much.  

 Ends  

 

