---
title: "Labor's border protection cuts lead to catastrophic failure"
date: "2012-06-05"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374422
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1691197%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection  

 Michael Keenan 

 Labor's border protection cuts lead to catastrophic failure  

 05/06/12  

 Revelations that people smugglers and their families have been granted refugee  status in Australia represents a complete systematic failure of Labor’s ability to  protect our borders, Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection  Michael Keenan said. 

 “The ABC Four Corners program revealed that Labor’s breakdown of Australia’s  border protection system has allowed the people smugglers to run their criminal  business from within our own community - something that our authorities were  unable to detect due to savage funding and personnel cuts by the Gillard  Government. 

 “The Australian Federal Police are tasked with combating people smuggling yet this  Government have continually cut their staff and funding, forcing them to work beyond  operational capacity.  

  “In the 2012-13 Budget alone, Labor slashed $133 million from the AFP’s overall  budget and cut a further 25 staff, which has no doubt had a bearing on their impact  to detect these people smuggling operations.  

 “ASIO is under constant pressure from the Government to push through security  checks at a fast pace - despite these demands Labor cut $42 million in funding from  ASIO in their recent Budget, once again hindering their ability to their job thoroughly  and effectively. 

 “Labor actually cut the budget of ASIO to perform security checks on asylum seekers  leading to a “tick and flick” approach that has clearly failed.  

 “It is beyond belief that an ABC Four Corners crew have been able to uncover what  Government resources should have been able to track down. 

 “Reports indicate that Indonesia is now questioning Australia’s resolve to tackle  people smuggling in the region, which does nothing to install confidence in the  current Government’s ability to protect our borders. 

 “The people smuggling trade began to flourish under this Labor Government when  they reversed the Coalition’s successful border protection policies. 

 “Only when they reinstate these proven policies will we be able to stop this evil  trade,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

