---
title: "Boat budget blown in less than three months as daily arrivals continue"
date: "2012-09-23"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382466
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733041%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling BOAT BUDGET BLOWN IN LESS THAN  THREE MONTHS AS DAILY ARRIVALS  CONTINUE September 23, 2012

 The arrival of two more illegal boats, with a total of over 230 people on board, means more people have arrived on illegal boats less than a quarter of the way through this financial year than the government budgeted for the entire financial year, as boats continue  to  arrive  daily under Labor’s half hearted  border protection policies, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Wayne Swan based his budget on 5,400 people arriving on illegal boats this financial year but less than a quarter of the way in and 5,470 people have already arrived, meaning more budget blow outs are on the way as boats continue to arrive daily under Labor’s half hearted policies," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Boats  have  continued  to  arrive  daily  for  the  last  three  months  including  under  Labor’s  less  than  half  measures  on  our  borders. 

 "Since July there have been more than 85 boats in 85 days, with 25 boats in the 23 days of this month alone carrying 1,673 people. 

 "As long as Labor continues in denial and refuses to implement the full Howard Government measures to stop the boats then they can't expect the same results," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr  Keenan  said:  "Three  boat  arrivals  have  come  in  less  than  24  hours  as  the  people  smugglers  continue  to  control Australia's borders. 

 "46  boats  have  arrived  illegally  in  Australia  since  Labor  back  flipped  and  announced  that  they  would  reopen  offshore processing on Nauru. 

 "When a Government has to be dragged kicking and screaming to implement a policy that they have argued against for years it is clear to both the Australian people and the people smugglers that their heart is not really in it. 

 "The people smugglers will not easily give up their million dollar business and instead will continue to test the resolve of this Labor Government - a test that they have failed time and time again. 

 "In order to send a strong message about Australia’s tough new stance on border protection the Government must  implement the full suite of proven Coalition policies - until they do that the people smugglers will continue their lucrative  trade in human misery," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 BOAT BUDGET BLOWN IN LESS THAN THREE MONTHS AS DAILY ARRIV...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

