---
title: "Labor must bring on Malaysia vote or back proven coalition solution"
date: "2012-05-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374047
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742651%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR MUST BRING ON MALAYSIA VOTE  OR BACK PROVEN COALITION SOLUTION May 30, 2012

 The latest illegal boat to arrive, with 40 people on board, comes as Labor is faced with yet another test on whether they will  insist  on  support  for  their  failed  Malaysia  solution  from  the  Greens  for  a  vote  tomorrow  or  support  the  Coalition’s  proven  policies,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “This latest arrival means 14 boats with 1,195 people on board have arrived in May, a record number of arrivals in a single month under Labor and yet the government continues to run from a vote in the Parliament on their failed Malaysia people swap,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The  Prime  Minister  should  be  calling  Christine  Milne  into  her  office  tonight  to  demand  her  coalition  partner  pass  her Malaysia  legislation  as  a  matter  of  confidence,  or  admit  they  are  using  their  failed  Malaysian  people  swap  as  a  lame excuse to do nothing,” he said.

 “Julia Gillard demanded that every member of the Opposition record their names in a vote on the Malaysia people swap but  has  run  from  a  vote  at  every  opportunity  including  on  Rob  Oakeshott’s  proxy  bill  which  was  due  for  a  vote  last   Thursday.

 “Faced with the choice between implementing the strong border protection policies of the Coalition and capitulating to the Greens through community release of boat arrivals, this Prime Minister continues to choose the Greens as every new boat arrives.

 “Since  Labor  announced  community  release  over  4,500  people  have  arrived  as  people  smugglers  sell  an  increasingly attractive business model presented to them by this failed government.

 “The Australian people know that while Labor might run from a vote on their failed Malaysia people swap they can’t hide  from their failure on our borders. That failure will only end with a change of government,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “It is unacceptable that the protection of Australia’s borders relies on a single AFP officer in an inflatable  boat to intercept 40 unauthorised arrivals.

 “In just over two weeks the AFP have had to take on the role of the Border Protection Command because they are so  severely overstretched due to Labor’s severe budgetary cuts to all frontline agencies.

 “Senate Estimates hearings this week revealed that Border Protection Command’s vessels have been under severe strain  and are often out of action for maintenance.

 “The Government must clarify exactly what has occurred  today and  why the AFP have  been placed in  this position yet again.

 “Specifically they must address the following -

 ·         What type of vessel was used?

 Page 1 of 2 LABOR MUST BRING ON MALAYSIA VOTE OR BACK PROVEN COALITION...

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

 ·         When and how did the AFP officer become aware that the vessel was in the area?

 ·         Why was the AFP officer forced to undertake this task and not Border Protection Command?

 ·         What health and safety risks this poses to both the AFP officer and the asylum seekers?

 ·         How long will it take to transfer the asylum seekers to Christmas Island and what protocols are in place to manage them until that time?

 “It is disgraceful that this situation has been allowed to happen more than once. 

 “This latest arrival just re-confirms to the Australian people that the Gillard Government’s lack of a border protection policy  is placing lives at risk,” Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 2 of 2 LABOR MUST BRING ON MALAYSIA VOTE OR BACK PROVEN COALITION...

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

