---
title: "Queensland celebrates Refugee Week 2012"
date: "2012-06-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375013
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264847%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Queensland celebrates Refugee Week 2012  Saturday, 16 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 People in Queensland will celebrate the valuable contribution of refugees to the  community during Refugee Week 2012, Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen, and Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy, said today. 

 Refugee Week is being celebrated from 17-23 June, with World Refugee Day on  Wednesday, 20 June. As part of the celebrations, there will be more than 100 events  across the nation in recognition of the plight of refugees and the new lives they have  established in Australia. 

 'Australia welcomes people from many lands and has a generous humanitarian  tradition,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'Australians can be rightly proud of the fact that Australia resettles more refugees per  capita than any other nation and provides much needed protection to people who  have suffered persecution.' 

 Senator Lundy said Australia's settlement support services are among the best in the  world, helping refugees to rebuild their lives here. 

 'Resettlement in Australia provides a chance for refugees to enjoy all the freedom  and opportunities this nation has to offer,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Refugees in Australia have overcome hardship to live, study and work here, and  Refugee Week is a time to reflect on the contribution they have made to our  community, economy and culture.' 

 At 1 pm on 23 June, thousands of people across Australia, including Rockhampton,  will walk in unity to celebrate the different paths people have taken to become  Australian, as part of the Walk Together initiative. Each walk will finish with a festival  celebrating cultural diversity. 

 In Brisbane, the 'Through their eyes' art exhibition will be staged at the city's Wesley  House until 17 June. The exhibition is a celebration and representation of the many  benefits people from a refugee background give to the city, including artistic talent. 

 A special citizenship ceremony will be held at 3 pm on 24 June at the Multicultural  Development Association's multicultural festival in South Brisbane. Nearly 60 people  from countries including Sudan, Iraq, Eritrea, China, Sierra Leone, Kenya, Thailand 

 and Pakistan will make the pledge to become Australian citizens. The free festival  will be a vibrant, family-friendly event celebrating new and emerging refugee  communities across South East Queensland. 

 Australia's contribution to international protection and humanitarian efforts continues  this year, with 13 750 places offered under the humanitarian program in 2012-13. 

 Australia has resettled around 775 000 refugees and other people in humanitarian  need since the end of World War II. 

 

