---
title: "Talks with Indonesia leave dangerous incentive in place to get on boats"
date: "2012-09-05"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381523
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1897619%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Productivity & Population, Immigration & Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 Talks with Indonesia leave dangerous incentive in place to get on boats 

 05/09/12  

 The Coalition welcomes the fact that the Government has responded to our call for  talks with Indonesia on search and rescue issues and welcomes the many practical  measures so far agreed, however we remain concerned at the Government's failure  to remove the incentive that exists for people rescued believing they will be taken to  Australia by our Navy operating as a water taxi service.    

 More than two months ago the Coalition called for talks between Indonesia and  Australia to discuss search and rescue protocols and any additional assistance and  support, following the tragedy that occurred in June. In an opinion article on June 25  we stated:    

 "This latest incident indicates that urgent bilateral discussions with Indonesia are  required to clarify expectations of our respective responses to incidents within  Indonesia's search-and-rescue zone and whether protocols need to be refreshed ...  Such protocols should include when assets should and will be deployed for  interception or assistance and where people would be taken. These discussions  could also canvass whether additional resources are required by the Indonesian  authorities to support these arrangements."    

 Clarifying where rescued asylum seekers are taken is critical to removing the  expectation that anyone rescued will be brought to Australia by water taxi. Failure to  clarify these issues leaves a dangerous incentive in place for people to get on boats  and is putting them at risk.    

 While we welcome the positive and practical measures agreed in the talks, the  failure so far to address the issue of where people rescued are taken is a major  concern. It appears that the issue was not even on the table.    

 Under international law, the primary responsibility for receiving people rescued at  sea rests with the country in whose search and rescue zone people were picked up.  The vast majority of these incidents occur in the Indonesian search and rescue zone.    

 These principles are not overridden by whether people claim to be seeking asylum or  not. They are supposed to be taken to the nearest place of practicable safety, a  place that can be determined by the master of the vessel, not the receiving country,  where that country has signed the relevant conventions.    

 So long as the Australian Government continues to allow asylum seekers seeking to  come to Australia on illegal boats to expect that if they get into distress or issue a  distress call in the Indonesian search and rescue zone they will be taken to Australia  by our Navy operating a water taxi service, they leave a dangerous incentive in place  for people to get on boats.    

 While there are many positive measures in the package agreed with Indonesia, the  failure to apparently address this critical issue of where people are taken if rescued  is very disappointing. 

