---
title: "More illegal boat arrivals this year than entire Howard Government"
date: "2012-11-01"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384552
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731312%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS THIS  YEAR THAN ENTIRE HOWARD  GOVERNMENT November 01, 2012

 More people have arrived on illegal boats this year under Labor’s failed border protection policies than arrived in the entire  11 and a half years of the Howard Government, an astonishing level of failure thanks to Julia Gillard, Shadow Minister for  immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael 

 Keenan said today. 

 "This is a record of failure which is unprecedented. This is the stain that sits on this government’s character over their  failure to protect our borders and that stain is one of cost, chaos and tragedy that has followed the decisions of this  government to abolish the measures that worked and their continued refusal to restore those policies," Mr Morrison said. 

 "The only thing that will now send a clear message to the people smugglers is a change of government," he said. 

 "October was the biggest month for illegal boats on record, with 43 and more people have turned up on boats in the first  four months of the financial year, the year in which the government says it’s going to deliver a surplus, than in the entire  financial year of 2011/12. 

 "With arrivals this financial year occurring at three times the rate of last financial year, Labor’s surplus is going to go out on  a boat," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "More people have arrived illegally by boat this year than in the entire 11 and a half years of the Howard  Government. 

 "This is not only yet another shameful record achieved by Labor but is a clear indication that the people smugglers  continue to feel emboldened by this Government’s lack of resolve and ability to protect Australia’s borders. 

 "Every month continues to break the record of the one before, with 43 boats arriving in October - meanwhile Border  Protection Command are still left with an ever increasing workload but less and less resources thanks to the harsh budget  cuts made by Labor. 

 "The hard working men and women of our Border Protection Command cannot continue to cope with this unrelenting  surge in boat arrivals, which is seeing them used as a daily water taxi service for the people smugglers. 

 "Unlike Labor, the Coalition will always prioritise protecting Australia’s borders and adequately resource the frontline  agencies that are tasked with this vital role," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 MORE ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS THIS YEAR THAN ENTIRE HOWARD GO...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

