---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in Tasmania"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375236
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264703%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  Tasmania  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced three new projects will be  funded in 2012-13 under the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to assist newly  arrived migrants and refugees settle in Tasmania. 

 From 1 July 2012, Tasmania settlement agencies will receive $912 169 in additional  funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals become self reliant and  acquire skills and knowledge to fully participate in the community. 

 As part of the funding allocated to Tasmania this coming financial year, Northern  Tasmania Migrant Resource Centre will receive a grant to deliver settlement services  and provide migrants and refugees in the area with tenancy information and support. 

 'This funding will ensure the Northern Tasmania Migrant Resource Centre can  continue to provide a range of successful settlement programs and augment their  suite of services to support eligible people locate and secure affordable housing and  work with mainstream housing services to provide effective tenancy services,' Mr  Bowen said. 

 'It is important to provide young, new arrivals with information about tenancy rights  and support for suitable accommodation, particularly with the Government's focus on  reducing homelessness through the White Paper report.' 

 'Being able to live independently is a basic desire for any individual and it is  important we provide our newly arrived refugees and migrants with the tools and the  support necessary to make them successful in living independently in the  community.' 

 Announcing the Tasmanian grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian Government  reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into their new  communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'These grants help people to make the transition into Australian life by building on  their existing skills and, at the same time, help them to learn valuable new ones,'  Senator Lundy said. 

 'These services provide practical support which assists the settlement process,  building confidence and support networks. Whether it is improving people's ability to  gain access to mainstream services, housing assistance or the community legal  education support, these services are all activities that empower new arrivals by  helping them connect with local communities, develop greater independence and  improve their life skills. 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in Tasmania for their contribution to the successful  settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

