---
title: "Morrison exposes coalition hypocrisy on refugee convention"
date: "2012-07-16"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428711
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2262525%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Morrison exposes coalition hypocrisy on refugee  convention  Monday, 16 July 2012 

 The Opposition's flip-flop on the Refugee Convention yet again exposes Tony  Abbott's relentless negativity on asylum seeker issues, the Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said today. 

 Opposition spokesman Scott Morrison said in The Australian today that the Refugee  Convention 'no longer reflects the practical reality' - clearly questioning the validity of  the international agreement that is the pillar of the Coalition's offshore processing  legislation. 

 'This is astounding hypocrisy from Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'On the one hand the Opposition vote down legislation because they only want  offshore processing in Refugee Convention signatory countries, while on the other  Mr Morrison questions the practicality and relevance of that same agreement. 

 'And all this comes while more boats arrive and people are risking their lives and  dying at sea.' 

 'Unfortunately this is the way Tony Abbott's Opposition works - they are saying 'no'  because that's what they always do, and certainly not because of the Refugee  Convention. The real reason for opposing the Malaysia Arrangement is because they  know it will work.' 

 Mr Bowen said the Opposition's policies were hypocritical and contradictory. 

 'Australians have had quite enough of the Coalition's cheap politics,' he said. 

 'Tony Abbott needs to drop his destructive negativity, work with the expert panel, the  Government and the Parliament to come up with a genuine solution that will stop  people making these dangerous journeys to Australia.' 

 

