---
title: "100 boats since Labor introduced their "let them in - let them out" community release policy"
date: "2012-07-20"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211430110
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736677%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 100 BOATS SINCE LABOR INTRODUCED  THEIR “LET THEM IN - LET THEM OUT”  COMMUNITY RELEASE POLICY July 20, 2012

 More than 7300 people have turned up on 100 illegal boats since Labor introduced their mainstream community release  program in November last year, where asylum seekers are released into community detention or given Bridging Visas with  access to work rights, welfare payments, housing, household start up packages and Homestay accommodation, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Labor’s response to each crisis that arises because of their failed and weak border policies is to further soften their  policies and further compromise our borders. 

 "After the humiliating rejection of their abominable five for one Malaysia people swap, Labor responded by adopting the  Green’s let them in, let them out policy of mainstream community release rather than restoring the Coalition's proven  policies of offshore processing at Nauru, temporary visas and turning boats back where it is safe to do so. 

 "Since Labor issued their community release invitation, they have supercharged the people smugglers product with more  than 7300 people taking up the invitation of these softer policies by turning up on 100 boats in less than eight months. 

 "Every time this Labor Government has to choose between the proven policies of the Coalition and the failed policies of  the Greens, they choose the policies of the Greens which have led to a rapid escalation in the number of boats attempting  a dangerous sea voyage and an increasing number of asylum seekers putting further pressure on our detention network  and our courts. 

 "That’s how we got community release of asylum seekers; that’s how we got open-ended appeals through Australia’s legal  system funded by the taxpayer and that’s how we got a record number of arrivals with no solution and no end in sight," Mr  Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "494 people have now arrived illegally in the last 6 days - this exceeds Labor’s budget predictions of 450  a month and ensures their border protection failures will continue to erode their fiscal position. 

 "Labors open borders policy has to led to a situation that has spiraled out of control but yet still continues to deteriorate.  Labor must acknowledge that there is limit to the pressure they can place on our border protection forces to effectively  deal with this unprecedented influx. 

 "BPC is already pushed beyond their limits trying to cope with this steady stream of boat arrivals - the Gillard Government  must find a solution, not another failed policy," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 100 BOATS SINCE LABOR INTRODUCED THEIR “LET THEM IN - LET THEM...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

