---
title: "Syrian Crisis"
date: "2012-08-03"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376403
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1822490%22
---

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 Senator the Hon. Bob Carr  August 3, 2012 

 Syrian Crisis 

 Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Bob Carr today called on the world community to acknowledge the  massive burden on Jordan as a result of the unresolved crisis in Syria. 

 Speaking following talks with Jordan’s King Abdullah II and Foreign Minister Judeh in Amman today,  Senator Carr said more than 145,000 Syrian refugees had now fled to Jordan, with up to half a million  more on the move inside Syria. 

 “I appeal to the world to take notice, not just of the crisis in Syria, but of the burden to Jordan that this  crisis represents,” Senator Carr said. 

 “Jordan is one of the ten poorest countries in the world in terms of water supplies.  

 “It already houses 450,000 Iraqi and up to 2 million Palestinian refugees.  

 “And with more than a thousand Syrians a day fleeing across the border to Jordan, hospitals, shelter and  water supplies are severely stretched. 

 “Around three quarters of these new refugees are women and children, some with gunshot wounds  after being fired on by Syrian border guards. 

 “While the Security Council fails to act on Syria, the problem is spilling over into Jordan, Lebanon and  Turkey. 

 “Jordan is a moderate country with a record of religious tolerance. The stresses on this country must be  counted as yet another cost of the world community’s failure to settle on effective action.” 

 Senator Carr said Australians would also be disappointed at the resignation of Joint Special Envoy Kofi  Annan, who has cited disunity on the Security Council and the intransigence of the Assad regime as the  reasons for his departure.  

 Australian aid for Syrian refugees currently stands at $16 million, and has contributed to food and health  care for around 350,000 Syrians since the conflict began, and the medical evacuation of around 500  seriously wounded civilians to hospitals in Lebanon. 

 Minister’s Office: 0435 658 623  

 

