---
title: "50 boat arrivals, 50 Labor excuses"
date: "2012-06-07"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374548
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742644%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling 50 BOAT ARRIVALS, 50 LABOR EXCUSES June 07, 2012

 The latest illegal boat arrival, with 25 people on board, is the 50th boat of the year and the sixth in six days as arrivals continue  to  accelerate  under  Labor’s  border  protection  failure,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "So far this year 50 boats have arrived with over 3,800 people on board, and this year is continuing to trend as a record for illegal boat arrivals on the back of Labor’s ‘let them in, let them out’ policy for boat arrivals," Mr Morrison said. 

 "Six boats in six days this month means arrivals for June are already outstripping those of last month which was a record under Labor with more than 1,100 people arriving," he said. 

 "This latest arrival comes as the Prime Minister refuses to call coalition partner Christine Milne into her office and demand support for her Malaysia people swap as a matter of confidence, or restore the proven policies of John Howard that Labor abolished. 

 "If Christine Milne does not accept, then Julia Gillard should stop making excuses and stop blaming others for her failure to act and immediately adopt and implement the Coalition’s proven border protection policies. 

 "Julia  Gillard’s  failure  to  take  action  exposes  her  Malaysian  people  swap  as  nothing  but  a  lame  excuse  to  blame  the Coalition as the boats continue to arrive," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Border Protection Command have been left to intercept another illegal boat arrival as they struggle to cope with the deepening crisis at our borders. 

 "Labor’s soft policies have seen 50 boats arrive illegally this year alone and there is no sign of this rapid influx slowing  down. 

 "How much more Australian taxpayer money is the Gillard Government going to waste on their border protection failures? 

 "Since the Government have made it clear that they are not interested in solving the border control problem they created,  it will take an election and a Coalition Government to stop the boats from coming," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 50 BOAT ARRIVALS, 50 LABOR EXCUSES > Michael Keenan MP

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

