---
title: "Gillard sets record with double ton of boats and $1.2 billion budget blowout"
date: "2012-10-24"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384036
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2000984%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  

 Scott Morrison 

 Gillard sets record with double ton of boats and $1.2 billion budget blowout 

 24/10/12 

 A record 201 boats have illegally arrived in Australia so far in 2012, following three more arrivals  yesterday with 96 people on board, and the announcement this week of a further border budget  blowout of $1.2 billion, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “This year is breaking all records for illegal boats and Labor still refuses to reinstate the full suite of  proven Coalition border protection policies to stop them.  More than 200 boats, a double ton, have  arrived so far this year and the Government has been forced to announce a border budget blowout  of $1.2 billion for 2012/13, which is more than the original $1.1 billion budgeted for illegal boat  arrivals in the first place,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “So far in 2012 over 13,200 people have arrived on 201 boats, and boats have been turning up at the  rate of more than one per day since June. Labor’s border chaos just keeps going from bad to worse.  

 “As daily arrivals from Sri Lanka continue, Labor must confirm whether any of the boats coming  include the alleged pirates involved in the violent incident off the southern coast of Sri Lanka who  are reportedly on their way to Australia. 

 “This vessel carrying alleged pirates should not be permitted to enter Australian waters. Nor should  they be allowed to enter on the quiet. The vessel should be intercepted outside our waters, with  those on board sent straight back to Sri Lanka to face the music for their alleged crimes. 

 “It’s bad enough Labor are running a water taxi service for people smugglers, but even this soft  touch Labor Government should draw a line at running a water taxi service for alleged pirates.  Failure to do so will continue to lure economic migrants from Sri Lanka in record numbers, at a time  when legitimate refugees from Sri Lanka are returning home under UNHCR supervision, and will  potentially only encourage other acts of violence on the high seas. 

 “Every day this failed Labor government continues, our borders remain exposed to their half hearted  approach, which will only mean more cost and more chaos,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

