---
title: "Estimates reveal more blow outs on way as boat arrivals exceed 18,000 under Labor"
date: "2012-05-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, INTEGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211373526
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1650118%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan 

 Estimates reveal more blow outs on way as boat arrivals exceed 18,000 under  Labor  

 21/05/12  

 The arrival of two more boats, with over 80 people, means more than 18,000 people  have arrived under Labor and over 1,000 so far this month alone, a new monthly  record, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said  today. 

 “Labor’s record failure on our borders continues to get worse as every new boat  arrives. More than 18,000 have now arrived since Labor abolished the Coalition’s  proven border protection measures and more than 1,000 people have now arrived  this month, the biggest number of people to arrive in a single month under Labor,” Mr  Morrison said.  

 “These latest arrivals underscore the budget blow out on boats that taxpayers will  have to pay under Labor’s failed policies. In the last 12 months Labor’s budget has  blown out by $1.7 billion and evidence provided at Senate Estimates today reveals  further blowouts are likely, as once again the Government continues to  underestimate the cost of their failures,” he said. 

 “Senate Estimates confirmed today that Labor’s budget is still based on just 450  people turning up every month. Yet in the past two months more than 2,000 people  have arrived, with an average of over 700 a month since Labor introduced their  community release policy last November.  

 “Senate Estimates today also revealed that the Government believes there will be  8,400 people who arrived on illegal boats in the system next year, either in detention  or in the community. That is almost 2,700 more than they estimated just a few  months ago, with community detention and bridging visa estimates more than double  the Government’s original forecast. 

 “These increases are also based on no increase in boat arrivals.  

 “Any claimed saving from the government’s community release policy is now being  swallowed by the increased numbers that are arriving due to the pull factors of  Labor’s let them in, let them out approach. This is policy that is eating its own tail, not  just chasing it.      

 “This is a policy that is guaranteeing more boat arrivals and more budget blow outs.  Labor’s loss of control of our borders is complete,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Three illegal boat arrivals in under 24 hours, bringing over 1,000  people across our borders this month alone has confirmed that 2012 is set to be a  record year for the people smugglers under the Gillard Government. 

 “Under Labor 18,000 people have arrived illegally since they abolished the proven  border protection policies of the Howard Government - this is no longer a border  protection crisis it is a complete and utter collapse of the Commonwealth’s ability to  control our borders. 

 “Illegal boat arrivals are streaming across our borders at such a rapid rate that the  hard working men and women of our Border Protection Command are placed under  severe strain and pressure yet Labor’s only response is to cut their staffing numbers 

 by a further 750 people. 

 “This is a Government whose consistent inaction to stop people smuggling and  control who is coming to Australia shows that they are not capable of doing the  things that are required of people who put up their hands for these positions of  national responsibility. 

 “Only a change in Government will see a change in policy and some resolve to drive  people smugglers out of business,” Mr Keenan said. 

  

