---
title: "4 illegal boats in one day of Labor's border chaos"
date: "2012-10-15"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383557
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731318%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling FOUR ILLEGAL BOATS IN ONE DAY OF  LABOR'S BORDER CHAOS October 15, 2012

 Four boat arrivals with a total of over 300 people on board, including 34 people on a boat picked up by a merchant vessel earlier last week and transferred to Cocos (Keeling) Islands on the weekend, marked another day of chaos on our borders under Labor, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Labor's half hearted attitude to border protection is exposed with every new boat and the daily chaos on our borders,” Mr  Morrison said.

 “People smugglers are sending boats at will in record numbers because they know Labor’s heart is just not in it as they fail  to show the resolve and restore the full suite of proven policies necessary to smash their trade, as was done under the Howard Government.

 “Labor's half hearted approach does not go far enough. The full suite of Coalition policies, including temporary protection visas and turning boats back where safe, must be enacted to get the job done. Yet this is a job Labor is not able and not willing to do. They simply don't believe in it, and the people smugglers know it.

 “Just two months since Labor's backflip on Nauru over 70 boats have arrived with more than 4,600 people on board, or more than double the combined capacities of Nauru and Manus Island.

 “People smugglers have already overwhelmed Labor's half hearted measures resulting in an asylum lottery that is stacked firmly in their favour. In the battle of resolve on illegal boats, Labor has ensured it is the smugglers that are holding all the aces,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “While Prime Minister Gillard and her ministers play politics and continue to sling mud rather than govern the country, three more boats have arrived on our shores, totalling five boat arrivals on the weekend and seven in the past three days.

 “Boat  arrivals  under  Labor  have  reached  27,192  people,  which  is  now  over  twice  as  many  as  arrived  under  the  whole period of the Howard Government.

 “This recent flood of illegal boat arrivals is alarming as it shows the people smugglers simply don't take the Gillard Labor Government seriously.

 “With  over  500  people  having  arrived  over  the  last  few  days,  the  Australian  people  deserve  to  have  answers  from  the Prime  Minister  on  when  the  boats  will  stop  as  they  deserve  a  government  that  can  be  trusted  to  protect  Australia's borders,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 FOUR ILLEGAL BOATS IN ONE DAY OF LABOR'S BORDER CHAOS > Michae...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

