---
title: "Negative coalition prefer boat arrivals"
date: "2012-05-10"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372922
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1624877%22
---

 

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE  MINISTER FOR DEFENCE MATERIEL 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 10 May 2012 

 

 Negative coalition prefer boat arrivals   

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home  Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said another asylum seeker boat was intercepted overnight, the  29th since Tony Abbott rejected the Government’s offer to implement offshore  processing.   

 Mr Bowen said as long as Tony Abbott continued to oppose offshore processing, asylum  seeker costs would continue to rise and people’s lives would be put at risk at sea.   

 “The Coalition can't have it both ways. They want to deny the Government the ability to  limit boat arrivals and at the same time attack the Government for the boats and their  impact on the budget,” Mr Bowen said.   

 “As things stand, without legislation, offshore processing is not possible - whether it’s  for Malaysia or Nauru. Scott Morrison’s smoke and mirrors cannot change the fact that  the Coalition walked away from deal with the Government to guarantee the future of  offshore processing, including re-establishing a facility on Nauru.   

 “As long as the Coalition continue to put political interest ahead of the national interest,  people have every right to assume they prefer more boats to arrive.”   

 Mr Clare said the time had come for Tony Abbott and the Coalition to allow for offshore  processing to proceed. 

 

 “Working together we can help stop people dying at sea. We can pass legislation to  introduce offshore processing,” Mr Clare said.   

 “If Mr Abbott is serious about stopping the boats he must stop saying no and pass our  legislation to allow asylum seekers to be processed offshore in Malaysia and Nauru.”   

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769  (Bowen)   Korena Flanagan 0418 251 316 (Clare)  UNCLASSIFIED 

 

