---
title: "Gillard on track to reach 400 boats and 25,000 people by new year"
date: "2012-12-11"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387002
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2103225%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Gillard on track to reach 400 boats and 25,000 people by  new year 

 11/12/12 

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 59 people on board, has Julia Gillard on track to reach a  shameful record of 400 illegal boats, or 400 policy failures under her Prime Ministership, by the end  of this year, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister  for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Illegal boats continue to arrive in record numbers under Julia Gillard, even with the onset of the  monsoon season where conditions are perilous and the risk of taking boat journeys to Australia  intensifies,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Since Julia Gillard was appointed Prime Minister with the solemn promise of smashing the people  smugglers’ business model, 392 illegal boats and over 24,500 people have arrived, resulting in  unprecedented cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders. 

 “Julia Gillard has utterly failed in her task to stop the boats and will face the Australian people next  year with the worst record on border protection of any Prime Minister in our history. Labor’s record  is clear - Australians cannot trust them to stop the boats. 

 “More than 2,000 people are currently arriving every month under Labor’s surrender to people  smugglers through their new bridging visas to permanent residency policy for illegal arrivals. As long  as Julia Gillard and her government remain in office, this crisis will just get worse and the cost to  taxpayers will spiral past the already $6.6 billion blow out on our borders on their watch. 

 “Only the election of a Coalition Government will see the implementation of the full suite of proven  policies and necessary resolve to stop the boats,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Border Protection Command have again been tasked with intercepting yet another  illegal boat arrival - the 260th for the year. 

 “Border Protection Command has had a colossal year trying to cope with this huge influx of illegal  arrivals despite having limited resources and fewer personnel thanks to the Government’s budget  cuts. 

 “The situation at our borders has deteriorated so much so that millions of dollars are spent every  month on flying asylum seekers around the country on chartered flights, Royal Australian Navy  warships are being used as water taxis for people smugglers, patrol vessels are literally cracking  under the pressure and our detention network is so overflowing that hundreds of asylum seekers  have been released into the community. 

 “Under Labor, there is no border protection system in place - there are just bandaid solutions and  weak policies,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

