---
title: "Wage Connect delivering new jobs for new Australians"
date: "2012-03-26"
creators:
  - "Ellis, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT PARTICIPATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370417
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1527387%22
---

 THE HON KATE ELLIS MP  Minister for Employment Participation  

 

 SENATOR THE HON KATE LUNDY  Minister for Multicultural Affairs   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 26 March 2012  

 Wage Connect delivering new jobs for new  Australians 

 523 Australians from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, who  have been unemployed for more than two years, are among the beneficiaries  of the Government’s new Wage Connect subsidy. 

 

 The Wage Connect subsidy of around $5700 helps offset wage and training  costs for an employer during the first 6 months after they take on a person  who is very long term unemployed.   

 Minister for Employment Participation, Kate Ellis said that Wage Connect was  achieving positive outcomes for people from culturally and linguistically  diverse communities.   

 “Current figures show that around one in five of the thousands of Australians  who have already benefited from this new program, are from culturally and  linguistically diverse backgrounds,” Ms Ellis said.   

 “For migrants to our country, a job also brings with it a critical sense of social  connectedness to the Australian community.   

 "Without access to paid employment, the very long term unemployed - and  most particularly those for who English is a second language - risk life on the  margins of our community." 

 "Wage Connect provides job seekers the opportunity to become financially  stable and also to gain the confidence, dignity and self respect that come with  paid employment."   

 Among the 523 new employees, is a man who has come to Australia as a  refugee from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.     

 With the help of a Job Services Australia provider, he has obtained his drivers’  licence, completed a Certificate II level qualification in resource processing  and with assistance from Wage Connect has gained full-time employment in a  resources company.   

 Senator Lundy said that the Government has a strong record of delivering  programs to ensure new migrants are job ready.  

 

 “Job seekers from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds may face  barriers to employment including help developing their language skills, or  advice about how to have their existing qualifications recognised,” Senator  Lundy said.   

 “The Government understands the importance of having a job and invests in a  range of settlement services to ensure new migrants have the skills they need  to find employment.”   

 Wage Connect is part of a suite of services the Government has put in place  to help job seekers from culturally and linguistically diverse background into  employment.    

 The Australian Government will invest almost $95 million over the next four  years in Wage Connect and $8.5 billion in broader employment services. Job  seekers interested in participating in Wage Connect should speak to their  employment services provider.    

 Interested employers who would like to learn more about Wage Connect can  visit www.deewr.gov.au/wageconnectsubsidy or contact a local employment  services provider on 13 17 15.   

 Minister Ellis’ media contact: Jamila Rizvi 0438 644 603  Minister Lundy’s media contact: Jessica Hill 0407 926 077  DEEWR Media: media@deewr.gov.au   Non-media enquiries: 1300 363  079   

