---
title: "Transcript of press conference: 14 November 2012: AUSMIN talks held in Perth"
date: "2012-11-14"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211385224
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2774299%22
---

 

 

 Press conference about the AUSMIN talks held in Perth 

 Transcript, E&OE, proof only 

 14 November 2012 

 BOB CARR: Well, ladies and gentlemen, it was Dr Johnson who said keep your friendships in  good repair. And in that spirit, AUSMIN concluded its meeting today very much in a spirit of  business as usual, steady as she goes, no new strategic content or announcements but a  matter of consolidation. 

 If I draw your attention to page seven of the communiqué, you will see reference to the  implementation of decisions that were announced last year. 

 The US force posture initiatives in Australia that were welcomed by president - Prime  Minister Gillard when President Obama announced them in 2011. We welcome the success  of the first rotation of US Marine Corps personnel to Northern Australia, and look forward to  the next rotation in 2013. 

 The deepening of our Defence cooperation through these initiatives is, as we see it, a  natural evolution of our existing longstanding cooperation, and it's aimed at supporting  long-term peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific. 

 We discussed potential opportunities for additional naval cooperation in a range of  locations including HMAS Stirling. All of these possible areas of cooperation would require  substantial further study and additional decisions by both capitals. 

 We spoke about the South China Sea, and you can see references to that in the  communiqué. We're united in seeking a peaceful resolution of the territorial disputes. We  share a common interest with other members of the international community in the  maintenance of peace and stability, respect for international law, freedom of navigation,  and unimpeded lawful commerce. We don't take sides on the competing territorial claims. 

 We make comment to China's rise. We want to continue to build positive, cooperative and  comprehensive relations with China, and that means through strong economic engagement  and encouraging progress on human rights. 

 There is no language of containment in this, but we both welcome China's role as a  responsible member of the international community. 

 I thank again our US colleagues for their engagement in East Asia; for their involvement in  the East Asia Summit; for their involvement in South East Asia through the ASEAN Regional  Forum. We thank them for the number of visits they're giving the region they focus - the  focus they are bringing on the region in which Australia exists and prospers. 

 Thank you. 

 HILLARY CLINTON: Well let me begin by thanking Foreign Minister Carr and Defence  Minister Smith for hosting these productive sessions today and last night here in Perth. We  couldn't ask for better partners. 

 Our alliance is an anchor of peace and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific and around the world;  forged in war but flourishing in peace. And it has bipartisan support in both our countries,  under Democrats and Republicans, Liberals and Laborites. 

 We hold these four-way meetings every year because our diplomatic, economic and security  relationships are inseparable. That approach drives America's engagement across the Asia-Pacific and Australia's strategy as well, as laid out in the Government's new white paper. 

 But if you look at what we're doing, and Minister Carr gave a brief overview, it's quite  extensive. From the Indian Ocean to the Pacific Islands, American and Australian navies  protect the sea lanes through which much of the world's trade passes and, increasingly, our  cybersecurity experts collaborate to keep our networks safe and online commerce flowing  freely. 

 Our diplomats work side-by-side at regional organisations to address shared security  challenges and hammer out new economic agreements, and we congratulate Australia upon  becoming a new non-permanent member of the Security Council. 

 Our growing trade across the region, including our work together to finalise the Trans-Pacific Partnership, binds our countries together, increases stability and promotes security. 

 Today Secretary Panetta and I congratulated our counterparts on a major new achievement  that exemplifies this integrated approach; Parliament approving the new US-Australian  Defense Trade Cooperation Treaty, and we will move forward together to implement it. This  agreement will boost trade, help our companies collaborate more closely and spur  innovation. It's a definite win-win. 

 We touched on many issues of regional and global importance. 

 On Iran, we agreed on maintaining unity in the international community to prevent Tehran  from obtaining nuclear weapons. I commended Australia's efforts to implement tough  sanctions on Iran. 

 And, secondly, Syria; we agreed today that the formation of the new Syrian Opposition  Coalition is an important step forward and will help us better target our assistance. Today  I'm pleased to announce that the United States is providing an additional $30 million in  humanitarian assistance to help get much needed food to hungry people inside Syria and to  refugees who have fled to Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq, which brings our total  humanitarian assistance to $200 million. 

 Third, in Afghanistan we honour the service and sacrifice of our Australian allies. We are on  track to transition full responsibility for security to the Afghan Government in 2014, and we  are also focused on the economic and political transitions. 

 Fourth, we are preparing for the upcoming East Asia Summit, working together on a shared  regional agenda including supporting the process that ASEAN and China have begun on  developing a comprehensive code of conduct for the South China Sea; supporting continued  reforms in Burma; and pushing for the peaceful, verifiable denuclearisation of the Korean  Peninsula. 

 So, as you can see, there is a lot to do but we could not be doing it with partners in whom  we have more trust and confidence. The length of our agenda reflects the strength of our  alliance, our partnership and friendship. 

 So, again, let me thank the Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister for their hospitality  and partnership. 

 STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I've been very pleased to join with Foreign Minister Carr to welcome  Secretary of State Clinton and Defense Secretary Panetta to Australia, and obviously  particularly pleased to welcome both secretaries to Perth. 

 In addition to very productive conversations last night and today, both secretaries have had  the opportunity to see the delights of Perth; the University of Western Australia, Matilda  Bay, Kings Park, and subsequently later this afternoon Cottesloe. And Leon and I also had  the opportunity yesterday of visiting the SAS Regiment in Swanbourne, to pay our respects  and regards to the very find work done by the SAS, not just in Afghanistan but over a long  period of time. 

 As Foreign Minister Carr has said, this is very much a consolidation AUSMIN, a business as  usual AUSMIN. In terms of the global force posture review initiatives that we have been  dealing with the United States since the Melbourne AUSMIN in 2010. We've been very  pleased with the progress and assessment of the 250 Marine rotation through the Northern  Territory. That went very well this year, including the potential for regional humanitarian 

 assistance and disaster relief exercises, particularly warmly welcomed by Indonesian  President SBY Yudhoyono. 

 We'll have the same number in rotation next year, and we've commissioned an economic  and social assessment study to see the potential to raise to 1100 over the year 2014, with  the ultimate ambition of 2500 over the next five to six years. 

 We've started a conversation on enhanced aviation or aerial access to our Northern  Territory airfields; that conversation has begun. 

 And we've also started a conversation on the potential for enhanced naval access to HMAS  Stirling, our Indian Ocean port, but also to other naval ports. We've commissioned a study, a  joint study. But, as I've made the point publicly in recent days, we see that very much as  third cab off the rank and a number of years away. The importance of HMAS Stirling as an  Indian Ocean port will rise and increase as India rises in strategic influence and the Indian  Ocean and Indian Ocean Rim also rises. 

 There are a couple of announcements so far as our cooperation on space is concerned. We  first began a conversation about space as early, from memory, as the 2008 AUSMIN, 2010  AUSMIN in Melbourne. Secretary Gates and I signed a memorandum of understanding to  work together on space surveillance. We drew attention then to the particular problem of  space debris. Satellite communications are very important, not just from a national security  point of view but also fundamentally from a commercial and social point of view. 

 There is now so much debris in space that being acutely aware of space debris is very  important to all nation states, and we're announcing today that the United States will  transfer a C-Band radar from the - from Antigua, from memory, to Australia. We'll set that  up in the north-west of Western Australia at our Exmouth facility, and that will add  considerably to the surveillance of space debris in our part of the world. 

 We're also in discussions about the possibility of transferring from New Mexico to Australia  a space surveillance telescope for use for the same purpose, and we're in discussion about  the best location of that. But, again, the expectation is that that would be in Western  Australia to the mid-west or the north-west. 

 That, I think, reflects the fact that we're meeting in the modern Perth, the modern Western  Australia which has benefited from very substantial United States investment so far as  minerals and petroleum resources are concerned. Australia's analysis continues to be that  the alliance has served us very well for over 60 years, that the presence of the United States  in the Asia-Pacific has been a force for stability, prosperity and investment, and we see that  continuing. And the focus as we've seen on the Indian Ocean and the Indian Ocean Rim also  adds to the importance of viewing our part of the world not just as the Asia Pacific but also  the Indo-Pacific. 

 We're also dealing now under the alliance with modern issues: cyber, very important; space,  I've referred to that. These are the modern challenges and the modern issues which we now  deal with on a regular basis, in AUSMIN on an annual basis. 

 Secretary Panetta and I have also had conversations about Afghanistan and the post-2014  transition presence in Afghanistan. And I again very much welcome and appreciate his very  strong and kind remarks about the contribution which Australian Defence Force personnel  have made in Afghanistan, consistent with the fine tradition of the Australian Defence Force  working closely with the United States counterpart since World War Two. 

 Thank you. 

 LEON PANETTA: I too would like to join Secretary Clinton in thanking our two excellent  hosts, Minister Carr and Minister Smith, for their hospitality here in Perth. 

 Minister Smith is not only the Defence Minister for Australia, he's also the head of the  Chamber of Commerce for Perth. 

 [Laughter] 

 I truly enjoy the trip here. 

 The range of discussions that we've engaged in have discussed global, regional and alliance  issues, and it once again confirms for me that the United States has no closer ally than  Australia. 

 That reality has been demonstrated again and again and again on distant battlefields of  Afghanistan where Australian troops have fought and bled alongside American troops for  more than a decade. 

 On behalf of a very grateful nation, I want to express again my deepest appreciation to the  Australian Government and to the Australian people for the sacrifices that they have made  in our joint efforts in Afghanistan. When one of your own is killed in the battlefield, I make it  a point to pick up the phone and call the Defence Minister to indicate my deepest  sympathies for that loss because your loss is our loss as well. 

 The important steps we have agreed to here in Perth to increase the cooperation between  our two nations will do much to ensure that this very strong alliance remains an instrument  of peace and prosperity for Americans, for Australians, and for all people who reside in this  important region of the world. 

 To that end, the memorandum of understanding that we signed to relocate the C-Band  radar to Australia, and the discussions that we've had on relocating an advanced space  surveillance telescope, and a combined communications gateway that will bring together  terminals that will provide information - additional information on space issues, all of that 

 represents a major leap forward in bilateral space cooperation and an important new  frontier in the United States' rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region. 

 We also took stock of the successful deployment of the first US Marine Corps detachment to  Darwin, as well as increased US Air Force rotations throughout northern Australia. We  agreed to continue to build on that success, and we will. And we also agreed to move  forward with all due deliberate speed in the further implementation of this important  initiative that fosters great cooperation between our forces. 

 As all of you know, part of our new Defense strategy, we've made clear that one of our key  focuses is to rebalance to the Pacific. We simply would not be able to do that effectively  without allies like Australia. 

 So let me once again thank our Australian hosts for a very successful series of meetings and  for their generous hospitality. I am confident that the alliance that we share between the  United States and Australia will usher in a more secure and a more prosperous future. 

 Thank you. 

 BOB CARR: Thank you Secretary of Defense Panetta. 

 The first question is from Ian McPhedran of News Limited. 

 QUESTION: [Indistinct] would you like to see an ongoing role for Australian Special Forces in  Afghanistan beyond 2014 and, if so, what might that role be? 

 And part B of my question, were defence budget cuts discussed during your meetings today,  and are you concerned at the sharp cuts in both your country and ours may slow down the  [indistinct] timetable? 

 LEON PANETTA: First of all, Minister Smith did indicate an interest in the potential for a  Special Forces presence in the - what we call the enduring presence in the post-2014 period  in Afghanistan. And I believe that that is worth considering. 

 One of the missions that we're going to have to deal with in the post-2014 Afghanistan is  the counterterrorism mission; the ability to continue to target al-Qaeda, to target those that  would continue to try to conduct terrorism against that country. And therefore, I think, as  we design that post-2014 presence, I think we ought to consider the role of not only  Australia but other countries in providing the kind of Special Forces capability that I think  would be very important to the future security of Afghanistan. 

 With regards to budget issues, obviously both of our countries are facing budget  constrictions and there's no question that we have to take those into consideration as we  design what the future is with regards to our defence forces. We're certainly doing that in  the United States and I know that Minister Smith is doing that with regards to Australia. 

 We understand the constrictions we're dealing with but I remain fully confident that, in light  of what we're confronting, that we have the capability to maintain a strong national defence  for both of our countries, and that we will be able to meet the threats that confront us not  only in this part of the world but elsewhere as well. 

 BOB CARR: Question from Bob Burns, Associated Press. 

 QUESTION: Secretary Panetta, I have a question for you about the General Allen matter.  And if I could direct the last bit of it toward Secretary Clinton, if I might. 

 Mr Secretary, in the last day or so there have been suggestions that you may have  overreacted to this matter based on what so far has been quite vague descriptions. For  example, overreacted by holding his nomination and also by launching the IG investigation.  For example, the Defense Department has said that his emails may have been  inappropriate. Can you explain what inappropriate means in this case? 

 And for Secretary Clinton, you mentioned in your opening remarks that the situation in  Afghanistan is on track. Could you offer any thoughts on whether this matter, the Allen  matter, could damage US credibility in Afghanistan. 

 Thank you. 

 LEON PANETTA: As you know, after receiving information from the FBI on Sunday regarding  the emails, I felt it was important, in my responsibility as Secretary of Defense, to refer the  matter on General Allen to the Department's Inspector General so that the Inspector  General could determine the facts here. 

 No-one should leap to any conclusions, no-one should leap to any conclusions here. General  Allen is doing an excellent job at ISAF in leading those forces. He certainly has my continued  confidence to lead our forces and to continue the fight. 

 But his nomination has been put on hold as a prudent measure until we determine what the  facts are, and we will. 

 HILLARY CLINTON: General Allen is a distinguished Marine and Commander who has been  an important part of the NATO-ISAF mission in Afghanistan. I don't have anything to add to  what Secretary Panetta has said about how this matter is being addressed. 

 We have been in touch with our NATO-ISAF allies. The course in Afghanistan is set. We know  what the transition requires of us. We are proceeding with that transition and we'll do so on  time. 

 QUESTION: [Inaudible question] 

 HILLARY CLINTON: There has been a lot of conversation, as you might expect, Bob, but no  concern whatsoever being expressed to us because the mission has been set forth, it is  being carried out. 

 BOB CARR: Ashleigh Gillon, Sky News. 

 QUESTION: Secretary Clinton, on China, you've written in this communiqué that you'd like  to see China exhibit greater military transparency and will encourage that. How will that  happen? And, considering Chinese state media reacted negatively to the Northern Territory  troop announcement, do you expect China will be uncomfortable with the United States  having an increased presence in the Indian Ocean? And, on that front, what exactly is  America's wish-list when it comes to HMAS Stirling, other ports, and increased access to  those northern air bases? Do you have a timeframe on that? 

 HILLARY CLINTON: Well, first, let me state the obvious; that the United States and Australia  have been close allies and friends for decades, and we have not only security ties but  commercial ties, personal ties, cultural ties. And our relationship between the two of us is  among the strongest of any two countries in the world. 

 By the same token, we both recognise that increased cooperation with China is mutually  beneficial, so this is not a zero sum competition, rather it is up to the United States and  Australia to lead the way in demonstrating that the strong relationship between us can also  help foster strong healthy relations with China because the entire region will benefit from a  peaceful rise of China. And, as I've said many times, we welcome a strong and prosperous  China that plays a constructive and greater role in world affairs. 

 But we also want to see China act in fair and transparent ways that respect international  norms and standards, follows international law, protects the fundamental freedoms and  human rights of its people and all people. And the Pacific is big enough for all of us, and we  stand to benefit from increased cooperation across the Asia-Pacific region as long as there is  a level playing field and everybody knows what the rules are and everybody is held to the  same standards. 

 With respect to specific questions, I think that the ministers particularly, Minister Smith and  Minister Panetta, have addressed those questions. But we are very comfortable that our  relationship is a positive one that should contribute to greater peace and prosperity in the  region and we want all nations to be part of that. 

 BOB CARR: I'd just add that there's no news in this communiqué that would surprise China  or any other nation in the region. 

 Next question, David Brunnstrom, Reuters. 

 QUESTION: For Secretary Clinton please. On Syria, I just wondered if there is any point at  which the United States could follow France in fully recognising the Syrian Coalition, and  also perhaps in the future to provide lethal aid? Are there any conditions on that? 

 And on Burma, I wonder if I could ask whether concerns have eased to the extent that the  United States can consider lifting more sanctions or are there still worries, for example,  about links with North Korea? 

 And also on the Rohingyan issue, where there are reports that there have been organised  killings of Rohingyans. 

 Thank you. 

 HILLARY CLINTON: First, with respect to Syria, we congratulate and welcome the new Syrian  opposition coalition on the progress that they have made in Doha to broaden and unify the  opposition leadership, to make it a more effective representative body that will truly reflect  the aspirations of the Syrian people and have credibility with those inside Syria who are  doing the fighting and demonstrating, the dying, and dealing with the continuing assault  from the Assad regime. 

 We have long called for this kind of organisation and the United States was deeply involved  in the work that went on leading up to and at Doha. 

 Now we want to see that momentum maintained. Specifically we urge them to finalise the  organisational arrangements to support the commitments that they made in Doha and to  begin influencing events on the ground in Syria. As the Syrian opposition takes these steps  and demonstrates its effectiveness in advancing the cause of a unified democratic pluralistic  Syria, we will be prepared to work with them to deliver assistance to the Syrian people. 

 So good beginning, highly welcomed by us and others, and we want to see the steps taken  that have been promised. And we stand ready to assist this new Opposition in standing itself  up and representing the Syrian people to the regime and the international community. 

 Regarding Burma, I very much look forward to returning with President Obama. When I first  visited Naypyidaw and Rangoon last December, we pledged that the United States would  respond to positive reform steps that were taken by the Government with steps of our own.  And the President's visit next week speaks to how far we have come in this action-for-action  approach that we outlined. We have matched the reforms taken by having full diplomatic  relations, exchanging ambassadors, allowing new US investment in Burma, as well as the  export of US financial services, and supporting assistance from the international financial  institutions. 

 And let me say that Australia has been indispensible and a strong partner in this process. 

 The reforms have a long way to go. The future is not certain but we are making progress and  we want to see that progress continue. 

 The President will have the opportunity to discuss the path forward in detail. And of course  one of the items on the agenda will be the ongoing conflict in Rakhine state. We have  condemned that violence. We have called for calm and a meaningful dialogue to address  the legitimate needs that are at the base of these underlying issues. And certainly we expect  the Burmese authorities to ensure the security and safety of all the people in the area and  to act expeditiously both to stop violence and investigate it, and bring those responsible to  justice. 

 So we have a lot to talk about when we visit with the President, and we're looking forward  to it. 

 BOB CARR: Thank you ladies and gentlemen. 

 Media enquiries 

  Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584 

  DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555 

 

