---
title: "Proud to be Newcastle"
date: "2012-07-18"
creators:
  - "Grierson, Sharon"
source: "Office of GRIERSON, SHARON, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211429427
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1786482%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 MEDIA STATEMENT   

 18 JULY 2012   

 PROUD TO BE NEWCASTLE 

 

 Today I have informed the people of Newcastle that due to family and personal reasons I intend  to retire at the 2013 federal election and will not nominate in the forthcoming preselections to be  Labor’s candidate for the Federal seat of Newcastle.   

 This has been a difficult decision. There is no greater privilege or honour than to represent the  people of this great city in the Australian Parliament.   

 But it is time for me to plan for the future at the personal and the political level. As I have  explained to the electorate my aged parents are confronting mesothelioma - an asbestos related  cancer - and my children would benefit from more of my attention. They have given me their  selfless support. It is time for me to repay their sacrifice.   

 At the political level I am confident that local branch members will choose a worthy Labor  candidate for Newcastle now that a rank and file preselection has been assured.    

 I am also confident that under the policies of a Federal Labor government Newcastle has a great  future. By working together we have achieved good things for our city - a strong and diverse  economy, leading in clean energy and medical innovation, staying ahead of the nation in  manufacturing and winning over $2 billion in federal funding to create new facilities, opportunities  and more jobs for our city and its people.   

 In making this decision I have had the understanding and support of the Prime Minister,   Julia Gillard, and place on the record my gratitude for the Prime Minster’s ongoing belief in  Newcastle and her determination to get the job of government done in the face of much political  adversity. Under her leadership and Labor’s policies Australia has the strongest economy of any  OECD nation, is the most equitable nation in the world according to the United Nations, has low  unemployment, low interest rates and less people on welfare.      

 I remain proud to be a part of a government that is determined that all Australians benefit fairly  from the wealth of this nation, that has a clear social agenda for those with special need and is  taking the hard decisions to ensure a more efficient and sustainable energy future.   

 I look forward to continuing to work with the people of Newcastle over the next year and thank  them for their ongoing support.    

 MEDIA CONFERENCE TO BE HELD TODAY @ 10.30AM  OFFICE OF SHARON GRIERSON MP, 427 HUNTER STREET, NEWCASTLE   

 NICK RIPPON 0431 050 145   

 

  \

  Sharon Grierson MP Federal Member for Newcastle

  Dear constituent

  With preselections due to be called for the 2013 Federal election, I write to inform you that I have decided to retire at the end of this parliament and will not be seeking to be the Labor candidate for Newcastle.

  This has been a difficult decision as it has been a personal privilege and honour to represent you for over ten years,

  There is no electorate in Australia quite like Newcastle. Collectively, we are resilient and real, creative and innovative, fair minded and generous. We have the courage to think big, work together and get the job done. We value our lifestyle and have a great connection to our environment, our history and our community. My parliamentary colleagues marvel at our ongoing success and our strong identity.

  By working together, we have achieved good things for Newcastle - a strong and diverse economy, leading in clean energy and medical innovation, staying ahead of the nation in manufacturing and winning over $2 billion in Federal funding to create new facilities, opportunities and more jobs for our city and its people.

  Building a successful agenda to make Newcastle a leading centre for sustainability and energy efficiency has been a personal highlight ofthe past decade.

  But at the personal level, it is time for me to take a different direction.

  My aged parents are dealing with mesothelioma and my adult daughters are facing the pressures of balancing worK parenting and study. My family has given me their selfless support and it is now time I repaid their sacrifice. It is also time I heeded my Doctor's advice to address some personal health issues before they become health problems.

  Always'Proud to be Newcastle', I have enjoyed trumpeting the success of so many Novocastrians to the parliament and people of Australia.

  Newcastle

  427 Hunter Street NEWCASTLE NSW 2 3OO Ph: 02 +925 1555 Fax: 02 +926 1895 www. sharongrier son. com

  Canberra House of Representatives PO Box 6A22 Parliament House CANBERRA ACT 25OA Phr 02 6277 4221 Fax: 02 6277 8+61

  ...1 2

  Together we have defended our righb and our community life in Newcastle - supporting victims of the 2005 Bali bombing at the time of their greatest need, holding the insurance industry to its responsibilities after the 2007 Pasha Bulker storm, standing up against a large corporation to protect local GPs and rallying together for many causes including opposition to the Iraq war, the mistreatment of refugees, the off-shoring of Herald jobs and always defending our rights at work.

  My staff and I have endeavoured to give dedicated service to tens of thousands of constituents. Through your involvement I have presented awards to hundreds of generous community volunteers and successful sportsmen and women. I have also presented 'Sharon Grierson'leadership prizes and scholarships to many amazing and talented young

  students.

  In parliament I have led reform on some important issues, influenced and spoken on much legislative change and participated in many valuable inquiries around the nation. Chairing the Public Accounts and Audit Commiftee was a particular privilege.

  I step aside knowing that a democratic rank and file preselection will be held for the federal seat of Newcastle. I believe local Labor members will choose a candidate who can provide strong and fearless representation and dedicated service to the people of Newcastle.

  Looking ahead, I also believe that the people of Newcastle will see past the headlines and hype and judge the Federal Labor government on iB achievements in delivering a strong and adaptable economy, an Australia where everyone benefits fairly from the nation's wealth and a clear social agenda for those of special need.

  Until the 2013 election, there remains much to be done - supporting households and business as they transition to a clean energy future, advocating for a share of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, preparing for the National Broadband Network and attracting funding for a new University campus in the CBD.

  I give you my assurance that I will continue to'provide determined and strong representation for Newcastle so that the potential of our city is realised, without sacrificing our wonderful environment or unique quality of community life.'

  I thank you in anticipation for your understanding and ongoing support.

  Yours sincerely

  fu4*Sharon Grierson MPFederal Member for Newcastle212

