---
title: "Coalition choose mistruths and cheap politics over solutions"
date: "2012-12-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386921
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2101274%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 STATEMENT 

 

 10 December 2012 

 

 COALITION CHOOSE MISTRUTHS AND CHEAP POLITICS  OVER SOLUTIONS   

 Scott Morrison has shown yet again that Tony Abbott and the Coalition are more concerned  about gaining cheap political points than stopping the flow of boats and saving lives.   

 Mr Morrison and Mr Abbott’s misrepresentation of the Immigration Department’s airplane  charter costs expose the Coalition’s cold calculation that it’s in their political interest that the  boats keep coming.   

 They can't have it both ways. If the Opposition truly supports offshore processing, they  should quit complaining about how much it costs, drop their disingenuous resistance to the  Malaysia Arrangement and allow the Government to implement its policy.   

 No one should doubt our resolve to break the people smuggling trade and prevent  dangerous journeys to save lives at sea.   

 In the past two months this Government has forcibly returned more people to Sri Lanka  than the Howard Government did in more than 11 years. We have also moved around 500  people to regional processing centres offshore in Nauru and Papua New Guinea.    

 As Mr Morrison well knows, this does not come for free. Offshore processing does not come  for free.    

 If the Opposition thinks they could send people overseas for nothing, they are living in fairy  land - perhaps the same fairy land where Mr Morrison once thought he could reopen Nauru  for just $10 million.   

 Is Mr Morrison suggesting that we should not be returning people who do not engage  Australia’s international obligations - should we stop removing people to Sri Lanka?   

 The department’s charter costs cover both international and domestic transfers, including to  Nauru and Manus Island, and returns to Sri Lanka.   

 The only way to reduce costs is to have fewer people arriving by boat. The Government is  committed to implementing the recommendations of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers -  including the Malaysia Arrangement - it’s time for the Coalition to stop standing in the way.    

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769   

