---
title: "New services to help migrants and refugees in South Australia"
date: "2012-06-20"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375235
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2264702%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 New services to help migrants and refugees in  South Australia  Wednesday, 20 June 2012 

 Joint media release with Chris Bowen MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, today announced six new projects will be  funded in 2012-13 the Settlement Grants Program (SGP) to assist newly arrived  migrants and refugees settle in South Australia. 

 From 1 July 2012, South Australian settlement agencies will receive a total of $1.5  million in additional funding to deliver new services that will help new arrivals  become self-reliant and acquire skills and knowledge to fully participate in the  community. 

 As part of the funding allocated to South Australia this coming financial year, the  Australian Refugee Association will receive a grant to continue its range of  successful settlement programs and develop a volunteer mentoring program. 

 'A mentoring program to further technical knowledge is just one example of the  important work being carried out by South Australian agencies funded under the  Settlement Grants Program to practically assist newly arrived refugees transition to  their new life in Australia,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'This mentoring program will be part of a formal leadership and governance training  program for new and emerging community management committees. 

 'The Australian Refugee Association has been funded to continue its range of  successful settlement programs and the grant will allow them to provide ongoing  support to ethnic committee members to develop technical knowledge on community  governance.' 

 Announcing the South Australian grants, Senator Lundy said the Australian  Government reaffirmed its commitment to helping refugees and migrants settle into  their new communities through the Settlement Grants Program. 

 'Whether it is improving people's ability to gain access to mainstream services,  housing assistance or the community legal education support, these services are all  activities that empower new arrivals by helping them connect with local communities,  develop greater independence and improve their life skills,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'The community sector plays a vital role in supporting newly arrived refugees and I  commend all organisations in South Australia for their contribution to the successful  settlement of migrants and humanitarian entrants.' 

 The Australian Government will spend $39 million in 2012-13 to deliver services to  humanitarian entrants and new migrants to acquire skills and knowledge to fully  participate in the community as soon as possible after arrival. 

 A list of successful applicants in the 2012-13 funding round is available on the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship website.  See: Settlement Grants Program 2012-13 Grant Recipients 

