---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: 2 August 2012"
date: "2012-08-02"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211433577
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1820365%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE and TRANSCRIPT    

 Thursday 2 August 2012     

 Leader of the Australian Greens Senator Christine Milne, Greens Immigration and Human Rights  spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young and Pamela Curr, campaign coordinator at the Asylum  Seeker Resource Centre held a press conference in Melbourne today to launch a new video featuring  Afghan refugee Najeeba Wazefadost.    

 They commented on the Greens’ and the refugee sector’s push for safer pathways for refugees  ahead of the Expert Panel handing down their recommendations next week, and called on the  government to compromise on their obsession with deterrents and punishment.    

 The Greens Senators were also launching a new video featuring Afghan refugee Najeeba.  Najeeba  and her family came to Australia by boat after their lives were threatened by the Taliban  because they felt they had no other option.   

 

 ABRIDGED TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE     

 Christine Milne:               The Australian Greens have long taken the view that we need to recognise  that a lot of people around the world in desperate situations are going to flee appalling regimes and  seek asylum in our country.     

 Deterrence has never worked and is not working now.    

 The Australian Greens approach this issue by saying that we need to make sure that desperate  people are not punished any more than they are already suffering and that instead we create safe  pathways so that they can resume a normal life and engage in society in a really productive and  fruitful way.   

 We want to make sure that people seeking asylum are supported and helped and offered the kind of  response that any compassionate person would give in a country which prides itself as being the  country of the fair go, of decency.    

 We’ve always prioritised making people as safe as they possibly can be and that’s why we’ve  prioritised issues like trying to increase our intake in Australia so that people aren’t forced into the  desperate situation of having to make choices about getting onto rickety boats. We’ve also said that  we need to codify safety of lives at sea obligations so that we rescue people as soon as we are aware  that they are in trouble. The Australian Greens have worked hard, my colleague Sarah Hanson-Young  has worked with refugee advocates like Pamela Curr for a very long time to try to make sure that we  offer the most humanitarian and decent policies when it comes to desperate people seeking asylum  in our country    

 To that end we have cooperated with the government. In fact we advocated a multi-party  committee with experts to try to find a way that provides safer pathways for people seeking asylum  so that they don’t find themselves in ever more desperate situations. And to that end we have been  working to produce materials so that people get a better understanding of the issues facing  desperate people as they wait in Indonesia and Malaysia    

 Sarah Hanson-Young:     The video that we’re launching today tells the story of Najeeba - a young  Afghan woman who arrived on the Tampa as a child and was detained in Nauru. She tells a very  powerful story about how, for her and her family, it was between life and death that decision to  board a boat to come to Australia.    

 There was no other safe option available to her and that is precisely the story I was told when I went  to Indonesia only several weeks ago. It is precisely the story that refugees who are currently in  Australian detention centres tell advocates like Pam and others over and over again that they don’t  want to have to take that dangerous boat journey. They don’t want to have to engage people  smugglers but while there is no other safe option, that is the only avenue that is available to them.    

 It is time for the Government to start compromising on delivering a humanitarian solution. Julia  Gillard has taken the route of following Tony Abbott down the dark tunnel to the bottom of the  barrel on asylum seekers. The only options that the Government and Opposition are putting on the  table are political solutions for political parties. They are not solutions for people and they are not  solutions to save refugees’ lives. It is about pushing people anywhere but here -out of sight, out of  mind; away from Australia as soon as possible. That is not the essence of the Refugee Convention  and it is not showing leadership and the courage to do the right thing when people like Najeeba and  many others come to Australia because they are fleeing some of the worse, oppressive, nasty, brutal  regimes in the world.    

 Najeeba said to me when I first met her ‘Sarah, if Australia wants to stop asylum seekers from  coming to Australia then you’d have to be nastier than the Taliban.’    

 The expert panel is handing down their findings next week. The Greens have put forward our  submission, outlining our third option, a third way for providing a new regional action plan and real  options for saving the lives of refugees. Many many refugee advocates around the country have also  put in their submissions.    

 Pamela Curr:                      I am here today speaking for the human rights sector. We support the  Greens’ position because we want to see lives saved. We are talking to the people who are in  Indonesia and we know the refugees who have made it here, their experiences, we don’t want to  see those continue. That is why the human rights sector put in submissions and we called for life  saving measures and they were indeed to increase the humanitarian intake but to increase it  particularly from our region because we know that there are a couple of thousand people in  Indonesia who are waiting. There’s 1200 people waiting who have been found to be refugees by  UNHCR. If they do not get a settlement place they will be on boats risking their lives. It’s for that  reason that the human rights sector is supporting the Greens’ position which is about saving lives.    

 I attended two of the sessions in Melbourne with the expert panel, both with the sector and also  with independent people and I can tell you that there was no enthusiasm for either Nauru or  Malaysia. Both require that asylum seekers get into dangerous boats, put their lives at risk before  those sorts of solutions can be enacted and they’re not solutions. We know from last time people sat  on Nauru until they went mad.    

 Malaysia- who would want to go to Malaysia with their human rights record? We’ve got to find  another way.     

 

 Media contact:           Kelly Farrow 0427 604 760   

