---
title: "Greens take proposal for safer pathways to cross-party meeting on refugees"
date: "2012-06-27"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375671
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1740445%22
---

 Wednesday, 27 June 2012    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Greens take proposal for safer pathways to cross-party meeting on refugees     

 After consultations with experts in refugee law and protection from the Asia-Pacific region, the  Greens will this morning work with concerned parliamentarians to begin negotiating a way through  the current impasse on immigration policy. 

 

 "The Greens approach these talks with ideas we've gathered from our discussions with refugee  experts from across the region including Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia," Greens' immigration  spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said.    

 “In talks with Asia-Pacific humanitarian and refugee agencies yesterday representatives urged  Australia to uphold our obligations to the Refugee Convention and international law.     

 “The experts insisted that working collectively with our regional neighbours to strengthen  protections for asylum seekers in Malaysia and Indonesia, while their claims are assessed by the  UNHCR, is the only way to reduce the need for people to board boats.      

 “They asked Australia to work directly with their countries’ officials towards safer options and safe  pathways for people seeking asylum.     

 "There is a serious concern from those working on refugee protection issues that Australia’s push for  offshore processing actually undermines their efforts, as it leads to other countries not giving asylum  seekers protection. This ultimately leads to desperation, uncertainty and more people getting onto  dangerous boats.    

 “Earmarked funding to the UNHCR to improve assessments of asylum claims throughout the region,  and the establishment of an Australian Ambassador for Refugee Protection to manage high-level  diplomacy to achieve regional response and co-operation, are among the specific things they have  asked Australia to do urgently.     

 “The Greens are prepared to work hard with other Australian politicians to develop new and safe  pathways for asylum seekers in line with what Amnesty International, the UNHCR and the refugee  protection organisations from our region say is needed.     

 "We need a regional response which involves our neighbours because, without them, there will be  no long-term answers or humane options for desperate men, women and children.    

 "Yesterday the Greens announced we would help create a multi-party committee on asylum policy  based on a commitment to human rights law and the 1951 Refugee Convention.    

 "Today we approach the group of concerned parliamentarians in a spirit of goodwill with suggestions  from experts in Southeast Asia that we hope will be adopted by all parties."    

 MEDIA CONTACT: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760   

   27 June 2012/page 1 

 Safe Pathways for Asylum Seekers and Refugees   Possibilities for a Regional Solution   

 SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG   

 The Greens are seeking a humane and effective system of regional cooperation on refugee issues. 

 A regional solution would be an interconnected arrangement between three categories of nations:  countries of origin, countries of first asylum and countries of resettlement.  

 We've drawn on the advice of refugee and human rights experts in Australia and consulted with  NGOs from Asia-Pacific nations. 

 Australia needs to establish a regional solution with neighbouring governments which has: 

  A central emphasis on human rights for refugees and asylum seekers in line with  international law and our Refugee Convention obligations 

  Safety within, and safe pathways from, transit countries so that desperate people no longer  believe that their only option is to board a risky boat  

  Consistent standards of reception, assessment and protection  across the region 

  Fair and consistent refugee assessments in each country, including independent monitoring  and judicial review of decisions 

  Assessments within a reasonable timeframe by the UNHCR.  

 Australia should: 

  Take a lead role in forging a multilateral agreement to make the regional solution a success 

  Establish an Australian Ambassador for Refugee Protection to assist the government with  high-level advocacy in the region 

  Increase Australia's humanitarian intake to show good faith and leadership in our region 

  Resettle significantly more refugees from Indonesia and Malaysia (we only take 60 per year  on average at present) 

  Generate better intelligence and cooperation to stop people boarding boats in the first place  - e.g. working with Indonesian airport, police and military 

  Demonstrate best practice in assisting asylum seekers, which would mean continuing on-shore processing of people who make a claim once in Australia, legislating time limits on  detention and urgently improving other aspects of immigration detention in Australia 

  Set up a parallel NGO process to the Bali Process to foster the engagement of NGOs across  the region in refugee protection issues. 

 Australia is a safe, prosperous and generous country. Our community has already been enriched by  generations of immigrants and refugees who have made Australia their home. 

  As one of the key nations in the region who has signed the Refugee Convention it makes sense for  Australia to lead the way and set the standard when it comes to resolving the humanitarian crisis on  our doorstep. 

   27 June 2012/page 2 

 What would a Regional Solution need? 

 In countries of origin 

  More resettlement directly from refugee producing countries 

  Increased diplomatic efforts to address asylum and displacement issues in refugee producing  countries. 

 

 In countries of first asylum 

  Make sure clear and trustworthy information is available to asylum seekers about the  processes of application and resettlement, which mean people will be less likely to believe  they have no option except boarding a boat 

  Humane conditions of reception and protection, including services to sustain an adequate  standard of living, and protection against refoulement 

  Directly fund civil society groups and NGOs to provide education, training, health services  and capacity building initiatives in countries which lack formal refugee rights to provide  genuine protection while asylum seekers wait 

  Use safeguards and oversight to ensure that repatriation is genuinely voluntary and enables  people to return home with dignity. 

 

 In countries of resettlement 

  Clear commitments to ensure that responsibility for refugee protection is shared equitably  by resettlement states, including commitment to resettlement quotas. Resettlement states  could include industrialized countries from outside our region 

  Continue to expand on regional structures and developments through the Bali Process and  the UNHCR Working Group on Resettlement 

  Investment in lobbying participating countries to sign the Refugee Convention and develop  domestic legislation in accordance with human rights obligations. 

 

