---
title: "UN role an exciting opportunity to put safe climate, caring for people and controlling weapons at top of global security agenda"
date: "2012-10-19"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383784
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1994736%22
---

 

 

   Christine Milne 

 Australian Senate  Australian Greens Leader 

 media release

  Friday 19 October 2012  UN role an exciting opportunity to put safe climate, caring for people and controlling weapons at top of global security agenda  Long-time supporters of the United Nations and multilateralism, the Australian Greens welcome Australia’s elevation to the United Nations Security Council and congratulate all those who have worked hard for this outcome.  “With the spotlight now on us, I hope the Government will step up to this role not only as an opportunity but also to show responsibility and accountability on the global stage,” Australian Greens Leader, Senator Christine Milne, said.  “The Greens would love to see Australia use this opportunity to put addressing global warming, caring for people and controlling weapons at the top of the global security agenda.  “In terms of responsibility and accountability, Labor should review its decision to delay its promise to commit 0.5% of GNI to overseas development assistance and work towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Lifting people out of extreme poverty is central to building a more secure world for all of us.  “Australia received strong support from countries in the Caribbean, the Pacific Islands and Africa; no doubt they will be looking closely at Australia through the UN climate negotiations to lift our level of ambition and to drive fairer support for developing nations in both cutting pollution and adapting to the changing climate.  “As a responsible member of the international community, we will face greater scrutiny for our failure to meet the standards set by the UNHCR for our treatment of asylum seekers and refugees. I hope that the government will reconsider its poor human rights record in this area.  “Our Security Council role also presents an opportunity to step up and show we have an independent foreign policy agenda, representing our own national interest and global objectives independent of any other nation.  “The debate on the climate and security in the Security Council last year urgently needs follow up. The Security Council also needs to fulfil its task set under article 26 of the UN Charter to establish a system for the regulation of the arms trade. These are two areas Australia can play a lead on.  “I hope that we will embrace this opportunity over the next two years to engage members of the Security Council to work with communities, civil society groups, non-governmental organisations and women, for a more democratic, participatory council, bringing together the knowledge and expertise of communities around the world, in the interest of a world that cares for people and protects our climate.”  Contact Alexandra Lamb on 0437 587 562 

