---
title: "Indonesia confirms what Abbott refused to admit"
date: "2012-07-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211428031
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2262526%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Indonesia confirms what Abbott refused to admit  Tuesday, 10 July 2012 

 The Indonesian Government last night confirmed what Tony Abbott has repeatedly  refused to confess, which is that the asylum seeker issue was not discussed in a  meeting with the president, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris  Bowen MP, said today. 

 'Tony Abbott is usually happy to beat his chest and boast about turning back  'Indonesian flagged, Indonesian crewed, Indonesian home-ported vessels', but in a  meeting with that country's president, he just didn't have the nerve to raise it,' Mr  Bowen said. 

 'The confirmation from Indonesia last night that he did not raise the asylum seeker  issue in their meeting demonstrates an ineptitude that threatens our strong  relationship with Indonesia and will put Navy personnel in harm's way.' 

 Mr Bowen also questioned why Tony Abbott had not released the transcript of his  ABC Insiders interview last Sunday, where he embarrassingly refused to discuss  whether he had brought up 'turn-backs' with the Indonesian president. 

 In that same interview, Mr Abbott admitted that turning back boats was 'dangerous  work' for Australian Navy personnel. 

 'Mr Abbott has been told by current and former senior members of the Navy that the  Coalition's turn-backs policy puts personnel in danger. He himself admitted on the  weekend that this work is dangerous - but he has failed to release that transcript,' Mr  Bowen said. 

 'This is yet more hypocrisy from Tony Abbott, when his own Liberal Party chief Brian  Loughnane in January this year criticised the Prime Minister for not releasing every  single transcript promptly online.' 

 Mr Bowen said it was telling that Mr Abbott would put Australian Navy personnel in  danger to defend a slogan when he did not have the courage to raise his policy  directly with the Indonesian President in a face to face meeting. 

 'Tony Abbott needs to drop his destructive negativity, drop the turn-backs policy and  work with the expert panel, the government and the parliament to come up with a  genuine solution that will stop people making these dangerous journeys to Australia,'  he said. 

 The transcript from ABC Insiders that Tony Abbott is yet to release is attached.  See: Tony Abbott's Interview with Barrie Cassidy, ABC Insiders - Transcript (39KB  PDF file) 

 

 

