---
title: "Over 16,000 arrivals on 290 illegal boats and Labor still not listening"
date: "2012-04-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370789
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2085046%22
---

 OVER 16,000 ARRIVALS ON 290 ILLEGAL BOATS AND  LABOR STILL NOT LISTENING

 Posted on Monday, 2 April, 2012

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 45 people on board, means more than 16,000 people have now  arrived  on  290  illegal  boats  under  Labor’s  failed  border  protection  policies,  Shadow  Minister  for   Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border   Protection, Michael Keenan said. 

 "Just  like  on  the  carbon  tax,  Labor  remains  locked  in  a  severe  state  of  policy  denial  on  its  border   protection failures and are still not listening to the Australian people," Mr Morrison said. 

 "The  only  difference  between  Anna  Bligh  and  Julia  Gillard  is  that,  by  comparison,  Queenslanders   actually liked Anna Bligh," he said. 

 "Labor have received successive drubbings at the NSW and Queensland state elections because of  their deceit, spin and incompetence. Australians are sending Labor a message that they simply won’t  put up with this type of Government but it’s falling on deaf ears. 

 "This  is  no  truer  than  with  Labor’s  failures  on  border  protection,  as  yet  another  boat  arrival   demonstrates, with Labor crashing through the 16,000 arrival barrier, yielding more than $150 million  for people smugglers. 

 "The  government  refuses  to  implement  the  policies  that  worked  and  boats  continue  to  arrive  as  a   result. 

 "This  government  can’t  be  trusted  when  it  comes  to  border  protection.  They  are  engaged  in  deep   policy envy because they have no proven policies of their own, only a litany of failure to their name. 

 "The  government  could  restore  any  of  the  Coalition’s  measures  today  and  yet  they  are  engaged  in   stubborn denial just as they are with the Queensland election results. 

 "Whether  it  is  on  border  protection,  the  carbon  tax  or  their  waste  or  mismanagement,  Labor  simply   don’t  get  it.  You  can’t  lie  to  the  Australian  people  and  fail  to  protect  our  borders  and  expect  the   Australian people to give you a tick," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Labor and their Ministers seem incapable of taking responsibility for the border crisis  they created. 

 "Their response now to every boat arrival is to finger point at others rather than accept it is actually the  job of the Government to address these issues," he said. 

 "Labor are unable and ill equipped to govern and are more at home as a perpetual opposition than in  taking decisions that are required by the national interest. 

 "It is of concern that the latest arrival was intercepted just off the Northern Territory coastline which is  an indicator that Border Protection are struggling to do their job in light of the starvation of resources  from the Labor Party. 

 "Boats  arriving  so  close  to  Australian  territory  is  bad  for  Australia  but  also  dangerous  for  asylum   seekers themselves. 

 "How can Labor justify ripping resources from our border protection agencies at a time when their  policies have left those same agencies so overstretched?" Mr Keenan said. 

 Page 1 of 1 OVER 16,000 ARRIVALS ON 290 ILLEGAL BOATS AND LABOR STILL NOT L...

 3/12/2012 http://www.keenan.net.au/Media/PortfolioMediaReleases/tabid/80/articleType/Article...

