---
title: "Another arrival as Labor shuts down debate and refuse to act"
date: "2012-06-29"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211375809
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736695%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER ARRIVAL AS LABOR SHUTS  DOWN DEBATE AND REFUSES TO ACT June 29, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 100 people on board, comes just hours after the government voted to disallow debate  on  a  Coalition  bill  which  sought  to  find  common  ground  in  the  Parliament  on  restoring  offshore  processing  with protections, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "Boat arrivals continue to escalate under Labor’s failed policies as the Prime Minister continues to refuse to restore the policies that worked to stop the boats," Mr Morrison said. 

 "We don’t need more committees, we need to restore the policies that worked," he said. 

 "This  week  the  Coalition  endeavoured  to  gain  support  for  the  common  ground  that  existed  in  the  parliament  to  provide legislation to support offshore processing in 148 countries around the world that have signed the refugee Convention. 

 "These proposals were rejected by the Greens, Independent MPs Rob Oakeshott and Tony Windsor and of course the government. 

 "The Coalition still has a bill on the table that puts offshore processing for refugee convention countries beyond any legal doubt. This bill can still be supported by the government, despite the fact they voted early this morning to shut down this bill being considered by the Parliament, before rising for the winter recess. 

 "What matters now is what happens next. The Government can restore the Howard Government measures they abolished today, without any change to legislation. 

 "The  Prime  Minister  should  not  be  abrogating  her  responsibility  to  govern.  There  are  options  available  that  this  Prime Minister should take. 

 "While the Coalition respects the members of the panel appointed by the Prime Minister the Australian people are more interested in action that needs to be taken now including reopening Nauru which can be done today as can reinstating temporary protection visas and issuing new instructions to the navy," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "In the last two days over 240 people have been smuggled across Australia’s borders making a total of  1,600 illegal arrivals for the month of June alone. 

 "More than 8,000 people on 110 boats have risked their lives on the dangerous journey to reach Australia this financial year. 

 "The Government’s failure to reach common ground has opened the flood gates for boat arrivals as the people smugglers have received the message loud and clear that this Government will not put a stop to their evil trade. 

 "Labor had an opportunity this week to pass the Coalition’s amendment to the Migration Act, which would have restored  offshore processing with protections and would have been the right step to stopping the boats from coming," Mr Keenan  said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER ARRIVAL AS LABOR SHUTS DOWN DEBATE AND REFUSES TO ...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

