---
title: "Sri Lankans returned from the Cocos Islands"
date: "2012-10-27"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384210
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2260280%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Sri Lankans returned from the Cocos Islands  Saturday, 27 October 2012 

 Today 14 Sri Lankan nationals were returned to Sri Lanka from the Cocos Islands on  a charter flight that departed earlier this afternoon AEST. 

 The group was detected and intercepted north-west of the Cocos Islands by ACV  Hervey Bay, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, late on  Thursday. 

 There were 15 people on board the vessel named Chejan, which was the subject of  an alleged incident in Sri Lankan waters on 13 October this year. 

 The individuals were advised of their status and that they were subject to removal  from Australia. They made no claims for protection nor raised any issues that  engaged Australia's international obligations. 

 They did not hold visas and consequently had no legal right to enter or remain in  Australia. 

 One person was not removed from Australia. He was not able to return to Sri Lanka  today and we will continue to assess his availability for removal over the coming  days. 

 This Government is committed to breaking the evil people smuggling trade and  preventing people from taking dangerous boats. 

 People who pay smugglers are risking their lives and throwing their money away -  because there is no visa awaiting them, no speedy outcome, and no special  treatment. 

 We will continue to regularly transfer people to Nauru and shortly to Manus Island. 

 We have also seen a number of Sri Lankans returning home, which is further proof  that people smugglers only sell lies and make false promises about what awaits  people in Australia. 

 

