---
title: "New UNHCR figures show Australia takes only 3% world total of asylum seekers: Greens"
date: "2012-03-27"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211370480
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1529441%22
---

   Tuesday 27 March 2012   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 New UNHCR figures show Australia takes only 3%  world total of asylum seekers: Greens   

 The UNHCR’S latest asylum trends in industrialised countries report shows despite the hysterical tone  of the political debate in Australia, we accept less of the world’s asylum seekers than tiny  Switzerland, the Australian Greens said today.   

 “While there was a 20 percent jump worldwide in the amount of people seeking protection last year,  Australia took just 3 percent of the world’s most desperate people,” Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young. 

 

 “This report shows a 9 percent drop in the number of people seeking asylum in Australia in 2011, the  first fall in six years.   

 “As the UNHCR said in October, more people crossed the Mediterranean to Italy in one weekend in  August than Australia took in six months last year.   

 “This report exposes the myth that Australia receives too many asylum seekers and cannot manage the  number of people who arrive by boat.   

 “The UNHCR says if protection conditions are improved in transit countries and people are provided  with safety, they won’t need to risk their lives on boats to try reaching Australia.   

 “The Greens repeat our call for Australia to lift its humanitarian intake to 20-25,000 people a year and  resettle more people directly from Malaysia and Indonesia to undercut asylum seekers’ reliance on  people smugglers.   

 “The Prime Minister has said she wants the facts on the table - well, the facts show Australia takes  very few asylum seekers, and those that come are among the world’s most desperate.   

 “While the Immigration Minister insists the Malaysia people swap deal is necessary to deter arrivals,  these figures show this policy is unnecessary and will simply costs lives and taxpayers hundreds of  millions of dollars.   

 “Australia should not be expelling asylum seekers because we can handle the relative handful of  people who arrive seeking our help.   

 “The Greens will never support legislation to expel people to Malaysia, Nauru or anywhere else.”   

 MEDIA CONTACT:  Paris Lord 0427 604 760   

