---
title: "Group of Sri Lankans removed from Australia"
date: "2012-11-02"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211384555
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2018981%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 STATEMENT 

 2 November 2012 

 Group of Sri Lankans removed from Australia   

 A group of 26 Sri Lankan nationals has been returned to Sri Lanka on a charter flight that left from  Christmas Island late yesterday. 

 The single adult males, who arrived by boat at Christmas Island and Cocos Islands earlier this week,  were advised of their status and that they were subject to removal from Australia.  

 They raised no issues that engaged Australia’s international obligations.  

 Without a valid visa they had no legal right to remain in Australia and were removed at the earliest  opportunity. 

 This Government is committed to breaking the evil people smuggling trade and preventing people  from taking dangerous boats. 

 People who pay smugglers are risking their lives and throwing their money away. There is no visa  awaiting them on arrival, no speedy outcome, and no special treatment. 

 We will continue to regularly transfer people to Nauru and shortly to Manus Island, and seek to  return them where appropriate. 

 The final member of the group of 15 Sri Lankans who arrived on vessel Chejan (subject of an alleged  incident in Sri Lankan waters on 13 October) has also been returned. This man raised no issues that  engaged Australia’s international obligations. 

 As with the particular case of those people returned to Sri Lanka last week, there are powers  available to the Government to return people where they do not engage Australia's international  obligations - and when appropriate we certainly intend to use them. 

 We have seen 116 Sri Lankans returned home - voluntarily and involuntarily - since 13 August, as  people realise that these smugglers only sell lies and false promises about what awaits people in  Australia. 

 Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802  UNCLASSIFIED 

