---
title: "Two more boats as Carr must grantee practical support for Sri Lanka to stop illegal arrivals"
date: "2012-12-14"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387187
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2731207%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling TWO MORE BOATS AS CARR MUST  GUARANTEE PRACTICAL SUPPORT FOR SRI  LANKA TO STOP ILLEGAL ARRIVALS December 14, 2012

 Two more illegal boats, with a total of 115 people on board, arrive as Foreign Minister Bob Carr must use his Sri Lanka visit to  secure  a  deal  to  provide  practical  support  to  the  Sri  Lankan  government  aimed  at  stopping  illegal  boats  leaving  that  country,   Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Minister Carr has been shamed by the Opposition into visiting Sri Lanka to discuss his government’s failed border protection  policies which opened up new markets for people smugglers resulting in more than 4,000 Sri Lankans arriving on illegal boats so  far this year,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Anything short of offering practical support to Sri Lanka’s efforts at preventing illegal boats leaving for Australia will expose Mr  Carr’s trip as purely an exercise in spin.

 “The Coalition has been calling for Labor to secure a deal with the Sri Lankan government since Sri Lankans began arriving en  masse  on  illegal  boats  earlier  this  year.  Labor  has  refused  this  point  blank.  Not  only  have  they  so  far  failed  to  offer  practical  support to the Sri Lankan government as part of any possible deal, they have also failed to prevent these illegal boats entering  Australian waters.

 “Together with Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Julie Bishop and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection,  Michael  Keenan,  I  will  be  visiting  Sri  Lanka  next  month  to  see  first  hand  how  they  are  dealing  with  Labor’s  failed  border  protection policies.

 “These  latest  arrivals  also  show  that  while  Australians  are  preparing  to  take  time  off  over  the  Christmas  holiday  period,  the   people smugglers never rest under this government.

 “Even during the monsoon  season, the  most  dangerous time of  the year for  boat  arrivals,  Labor’s  failed  policies have  people  smugglers continuing to send boats at will,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “These two latest boat arrivals, carrying a total of 115 people, are two more to add to Federal Labor’s litany of  failures.

 “This  financial  year  alone  we  have  witnessed  192  boats  carrying  11,291  people,  a  massive  strain  on  Border  Protection   Command (BPC). 

 “This comes as they were dealt additional severe cuts at the start of the financial year - over $7 million cut from civil maritime  surveillance and response.

 “The calendar year is rolling to a close and we are yet to hear from the Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare MP on how he  intends to ensure BPC are adequately resourced to cope with this constant influx of illegal boat arrivals,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 TWO MORE BOATS AS CARR MUST GUARANTEE PRACTICAL SUPPORT F...

 17/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

