---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Canberra: 19 October 2012: Successful United Nations Security Council bid; Houston review into asylum seekers; Foreign aid budget"
date: "2012-10-19"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Successful United Nations Security Council bid"
  - "Houston review into asylum seekers"
  - "Foreign aid budget"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383810
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1994804%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE  CANBERRA  19 OCTOBER 2012 

 

 Subjects:      Successful United Nations Security Council bid; Houston review  into asylum seekers; Foreign aid budget   

 PM: I’m joined by the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr Emerson. This is a great  day for Australia. We have succeeded in our bid for the Security Council.    

 It has been 27 years since Australia served on the Security Council and that is far  too long for a nation of our status and our contribution to the United Nations.    

 We were a founding member of the United Nations and we have been involved  in UN activities around the world, including peace-building and including alleviating  poverty around the world.    

 I am delighted that Australia's campaign for the Security Council has succeeded.    

 What it shows is that our reputation is high. It also shows that our bilateral  relationships are in good repair.    

 The UN is important to us because it is the body globally that builds the rules-based  order under which we seek to live, and consequently it is a force for peace and  stability.    

 The UN will be particularly important to us over the coming two years.    

 So as we are on the Security Council, we will be dealing with issues of importance to  our nation, including the UN engagement with the mission in Afghanistan, and the  future of that mission beyond 2014; the UN engagement with East Timor and what  that holds for the future; the UN's approach to sanctions regimes to deal with the  scourge of proliferation in our world, and particularly the circumstances in Iran and  North Korea.    

 The continued fight against global terror will also be on the agenda of the Security  Council over the coming two years.    

 And it is the Security Council which will have to continue to wrestle with the violence  in Syria and the way in which that violence can be brought to an end.    

 So, this is a proud day for Australia with a lot of people to thank for having got  this tremendous result overnight in New York.    

 I would like to thank the former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd for having the foresight to  launch Australia on this campaign for election to the Security Council, and for all the 

 work he did as Foreign Minister to pursue that campaign and to pursue our election  to the Security Council.    

 I would like to thank Stephen Smith, who in his time as Minister for Foreign Affairs,  was also a tireless advocate of this campaign.    

 I would like to thank Bob Carr who has travelled endlessly and has put his shoulder  to the wheel in the closing stages of this campaign, including in New York this week.  He has been a very firm advocate for Australia's interests and done a lot of hard  work.    

 I would like to thank Dr Emerson in his capacity as Minister for Trade who has  managed to advocate for Australia's election to the Security Council, even in  the context of discussions that were supposedly about something else.    

 I would also like to thank Parliamentary Secretary Marles who has done  a tremendous job in our region of the world in the Pacific and beyond to represent  Australia in this campaign.    

 I would like to thank the large number of special envoys that we sent around the  world to advocate for Australia.    

 And I would also like to thank those from our diplomatic corps who have gone above  and beyond for this campaign, particularly Dennis Richardson for his leadership at  DFAT, Gillian Bird for her leadership of the bid at the Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade here.    

 They've both put in remarkable efforts and I've had the opportunity to thank the two  of them personally during the course of the morning, as I thanked the departmental  staff generally for their efforts.    

 I would like to particularly mention the efforts of Gary Quinlan, our Ambassador  to the United Nations. He has been truly magnificent.    

 Running a UN campaigns requires a lot of work, a lot of skill, a lot of fortitude, there  is a lot of tension involved and Gary has been absolutely tremendous through that.    

 I would also like to thank Caroline Millar who has been an indispensable part of this  campaign and without her hard work alongside Gary, I cannot see us having  succeeded in this campaign.    

 I would also like generally to pay tribute to Australian diplomats here and around the  world.    

 This is a victory for Australian diplomacy and our staff here in Canberra but in  missions and posts around the world have all been central to our effort in this  campaign to holding the reputation of Australia up high.    

 I would also like to thank the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, a  key reason why Australia has such a high reputation around the world is because of  the work the ADF does.    

 I would like to thank our aid workers. They, too, working in the poorest and most  difficult regions of the world, help build a perception of our nation and help build our  name as Australians.    

 And I would like to thank the men and women of the Australian Federal Police who  go around the world and do policing work and police training work.    

 Once again, we send them often to very difficult, sometimes dangerous places, but  they too build Australia's reputation.    

 This is a victory for all of those people. This is a great victory for our nation. It is a  very exciting day and I'm very proud to be here and able to speak about it. I will take  some questions now.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your speech to the General Assembly, you singled  out inaction of the Security Council over Syria.    

 Will a priority of our membership be to back the United States and UK in  pressuring the Chinese and the Russians to take a more active or interventionist  approach to the Assad regime?    

 PM: During our two years on the Security Council, we will take an Australian voice,  an Australian accent into the Security Council, and in our Australian voice we will say  the same things in the Security Council that we have said beyond it.    

 We do believe that there needs to be action to address the violence in Syria, and so  we will certainly advocate for that.    

 Our active advocacy will start from the start of next year. The term formally starts at  the start of next year.    

 We will, from the start of November, 1 November, start to attend Security Council  meetings for the purpose of observing, that's the way of working your way into the  agenda, and then our active role starts from 1 January next year.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we're told that nations who sit on the Security Council  bring their own strategies for that two-year term. What's Australia's broad strategy for  the Security Council?    

 PM: Well, our strategy is the same as our strategy for Australian diplomacy  generally. We, as a Labor government, are very proud of Labor's track record in the  United Nations.    

 It was Labor that took our nation into being a founding member in the United  Nations. It's Labor that has held those values up high, of multilateral engagement 

 through the UN. So we will take our philosophy about foreign affairs into the Security  Council.    

 It as a philosophy about seeking to strengthen the global rules-based order. It is  a philosophy about being prepared to be engaged in peace-making and peace-building, understanding that that is a pre-condition for development and the true  alleviation of poverty.    

 It is a philosophy about being prepared to take your energies and efforts into the  humanitarian realm, that you don't stand by when disaster strikes and you  don't stand by when there are pressing circumstances of poverty, famine and the  like.    

 We've got a proud track record around the world of taking a humanitarian  perspective, a fair-go perspective.    

 And then of course on the security front, we have been strong supporters of  sanctions against regimes that would seek to proliferate nuclear weapons.    

 We've been strong combatants in the fight against global terror and that fight is also  engaged in, in the UN Security Council through the work it does in Afghanistan and  the work it does on sanctions regimes for individuals associated with al-Qaeda, and  other agencies of global terror.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Rupert Murdoch has tweeted, "Big deal. No  Aussies care."    

 Could you give us your response to that comment, and also, average Australians  might be thinking this is all a bit esoteric, why should we care. Why should they?    

 PM: Well, Mr Murdoch is entitled to his view. Obviously I don't share it.    

 Why should Australians care? Well, I think Australians care about our soldiers  in Afghanistan. They care about the mission there and they care about its future and  that will be on the table at the UN Security Council.    

 I think Australians care desperately about the future of East Timor, particularly our  veterans care desperately about the future of East Timor.    

 If you want a discussion about East Timor, take yourself to an RSL. And part of the  future of East Timor will be worked through at the Security Council.    

 We are people of peace. Australians care about living on a planet that is a peaceful  planet, and that relates to the work of the Security Council.    

 Australians are concerned about nuclear weapons being in the wrong hands, in the  hands of a regime like North Korea, in the hands of a regime like Iran.    

 These issues concern us, as they concern the peoples of the world, and they are  dealt with at the Security Council.  

 

 Australians are big-hearted people. We care about humanitarian disasters; we  care about the fight against global poverty. This is the work of the UN.    

 And Australians, I think, too, understand that in an increasingly  interconnected planet, the way in which we can make our way in the world  is increasingly defined by the circumstances of the world generally.    

 It's never been true that you can be just your own island and a fortress.    

 We've always had to engage with the world, but that is more true today than it has  ever been in the history in the planet on which we live, and that's why the Security  Council is important.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's often said that at some point Australia will have to  choose between America and China. Is it likely that on the Security Council  that choice will actually be crystallised and are we ready to make that decision?    

 PM: I think that analysis is infantile. I know that it's pursued in the media from time to  time but I think it's infantile and in the face of the facts.    

 Here we stand today with a strong defence alliance with the United States of  America which is understood and known in our region.    

 We didn't sneak up on anybody with this defence alliance.    

 It's been there for decades and decades and decades and known in the region for  decades and decades and decades, so we have a strong defence alliance with the  US, and we have a robust relationship with China.    

 And I know that it's fashionable in some parts of the media to talk this relationship  down. That analysis is infantile.    

 We are engaged with China deeply at every level. Strongly economically,  government to government links, people to people links, military to military  links, academic to academic links, and the list goes on.    

 So let's not create a world of silly analysis and false choices. That's not the world we  live in.    

 JOURNALIST: You've come back from a highly successful state visit to India and  you now have this diplomatic triumph. Do you regret or have you moved on from  your earlier statement that you do not have a passion for foreign affairs?    

 PM: What I said then I absolutely stand by because I was describing the things  that motivated to me to get into politics and what's truly closest to my heart and,  yes, what got me into politics and truly closest to my heart is creating opportunity and  making sure that we get every child in every school a great education.    

 That was true when I was 20 at Adelaide University. It’s true as a 51-year-old Prime  Minister. And if I get the opportunity to live to 80 or 90 it will be true then.   

 That shouldn't be interpreted to say that I don't have an enthusiasm for working in  other areas.    

 For example, as a minister, workplace relations, where the men and women of the  press gallery would be able to say I showed a great deal of enthusiasm and as Prime  Minister on Australia’s reputation in the world.    

 I’m a fiercely proud Australian and I'm proud of Australia today. This is good for us  and we should be proud of it.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask your attitude towards the Opposition's  statements about the bid, particularly given there is an election next year and it's  possible that there could be a Coalition government during our position on  the Security Council?    

 PM: We're elected to the Security Council now for two years, so full stop on  that sentence.    

 I think it is disappointing that the Opposition today hasn't had the generosity of spirit  to say that this is a great day for Australia. It is.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in relation to the Middle East, there was  some discussion about how we would vote in relation to Israel and Palestine during  the year. Will Australia be taking into the Security Council its traditional position on  Israel?    

 And secondly, just on a personnel matter, would Mr Quinlan be expected to  continue through the full appointment to our Security Council?    

 PM: Well, if I can take them in the reverse order, I think provided he is willing to  continue to serve - this is a big and stressful job - but provided he is willing to  continue to serve, I think Gary Quinlan is the right person to continue to  represent our nation in New York.   

 And having done so much to ensure that this campaign was successful, I think it's  well and truly fitting and appropriate that Mr Quinlan gets to represent our nation  on the Security Council. So, that's the answer to your second question.    

 On your first question, we are long, historic friends of Israel and we will continue to  be friends of Israel. We are not friends who never criticise. We obviously talk to  Israel, as we talk to the Palestinian Authorities about the pathway to peace.    

 We would all want to see a durable peace in the Middle East, but we will take with us  into the Security Council everything that has always been known about the position  of Labor and the Government on Israel.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, further to the question on the Opposition. They've had  a gripe about the costs. What do you say to people who say it's just too expensive,  the whole thing?    

 PM: Well, there have been around $25 million devoted to this campaign. Of course  the work of DFAT has had to be geared towards the campaign as well, but $25  million spent on the campaign.    

 To hold Australia's reputation up high and to have us on a body of such importance  to the world, I consider that money well spent, and as a proud Australian, I think  people do want to see Australia having its own voice, an Australian voice, in  the main decision-making bodies of the world, and that is what we've secured.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a number of foreign aid commitments have been  made in the years leading up to this bid, are they all going to be honoured and is  there going to be any change to the foreign aid budget when you do the mid-year budget?    

 PM: We've shown a strong commitment on foreign aid and you should expect us  to continue to show that strong commitment and we work around the world with a  focus on poverty alleviation, on gender equality, because gender equality matters so  much to development.    

 We obviously work on education around the world.    

 We are very focused on the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in  nations that are struggling to achieve those goals about maternal mortality, kids in  school, lifting people out of absolute poverty, and we've got a lot of work to continue  to do in our region and around the world to achieve those goals.    

 JOURNALIST: Is the aid budget safe from the mid-year update?    

 PM: Well, for all the obvious reasons, I don't get into what is a slippery slope here  where you put one part of the budget to me and then 50 questions later you've gone  through every other line item in the budget, so I would direct you to the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook when it's delivered.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe the position on the Security Council  opens doors, in terms of bilateral talks with more countries - people come knocking  on Australia's door for not only talking to us not only about Security Council  issues, but also trade issues and so on, would that be a spin-off?    

 PM: I think the fact that we have succeeded shows that our bilateral relationships are  in good repair, that Australia around the world is valued as an international player, so  I think it shows our bilateral relationship are in good repair.    

 Being on the Security Council is not a piece on the economic table as we go  around trade discussions. It doesn't play that role, and we wouldn't seek to have it  play that role.    

 But clearly nations will be wanting to talk to us about matters that are on the  agenda at the Security Council, and that's a good thing.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about offshore processing.  The Coalition has suggested that asylum seekers could stay on Nauru or Manus  Island for five years. Is that an acceptable period of time, and how does that  compare to Labor's no-advantage policy?    

 PM: Well, we are implementing the recommendations of the Houston Review. I  would remind that that review was delivered by Angus Houston, former Chief of our  Defence Force, by Paris Aristotle, a well-known refugee advocate, and by  Michael L'Estrange, an expert in foreign policy.    

 They are the authors of the no-advantage test and we have adopted it  as government policy, so we will continue to do what we've promised which is  implement the recommendation of the Houston Review - or the recommendations, I  should say - implement the recommendations of the Houston Review.    

 The Houston review doesn’t invite people to make stuff up as they go along. It  invites people to deliver an integrated set of policy measures that will deal with the  question of people smuggling and asylum seekers, so we're not making stuff  up along, as we go, the way the Opposition is.    

 We are determined to implement the full recommendations of the Houston Review.    

 JOURNALIST: Well, how (inaudible) is it no-advantage then?    

 PM: Well, the Houston Review gave guidance on how to determine this question,  and said it should be done in discussions with UNHCR.    

 The idea is to define what is the period of time someone would have waited if they  had not moved but had stayed where they were for processing by the United Nations  High Commission for Refugees.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, further to Lauren's question, with regards to offshore  processing, on current arrivals and arrivals since 14 August you've only got about a  40% chance of being sent to an offshore place.    

 Don't you need to sort this problem out because you're going to have a system  that's already overflowing, and a system that can't cope with the processing threat  that your Government has?    

 PM: Well, you are focused on Nauru and PNG, and I can understand that, but  I would remind you that is part but not all of the recommendations of the  Houston Review, and we will be implementing or seeking to implement the rest of  the recommendations.   

 And we will, through the existence of processing on Manus and Nauru, be continuing  to send a very strong message that getting on a boat, risking your life does not get  you an outcome in Australia, because of this no-advantage test.  

 

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) this is the point. You've got over 4700 or thereabouts,  about 2100 maximum offshore. The other people who aren't sent there are going  to be processed here, I take it, and when it that going to start?    

 PM: Well, the aim here is to be true to the Houston Review and we will continue  to make and announce decisions which are true to that review    

 JOURNALIST: Given what the review said, has the Government made any progress  in the further discussions with Malaysia?    

 PM: We are continuing those discussions. Minister Bowen would be in the  best position to give you a very detailed update, but those discussions following  my conversation with the Prime Minister were to keep occurring at the level of  Minister Bowen to his counterpart, Minister Hishamuddin.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think Tony Abbott hates his wife and  daughters, as a misogynist?    

 PM: I gave a speech about this in Parliament as you might be aware and I said what  I wanted to say about sexism and misogyny.    

 I stand by every word of that speech and as I indicated in that speech, when I see  sexism or misogyny, call it for what it is.    

 Thank you.   

 [ENDS]   

