---
title: "Over 3,000 arrivals since Labor embraced Greens solution"
date: "2012-04-13"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211371324
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1569703%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Over 3,000 arrivals since Labor embraced Greens solution  

 13/04/12  

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 77 people on board, means more than 3,000  people have now arrived since Labor embraced the Greens solution of community  release and bridging visas last November, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “We have had more than 3,000 arrivals since Labor embraced the Greens solution  last November of community release and bridging visas, and the message has  gotten out,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “No wonder Mr Brown is retiring, he has got everything he’s ever wanted out of  Labor,” he said. 

 “Asylum policy has been a one way street between the Greens and Labor, with  Labor completely capitulating to all of Bob Brown’s demands. 

 “We have had more people turn up in the last week than in last six years of the  Howard Government, yet Labor continues to opt for the Greens policies on asylum  seekers rather than the proven polices of John Howard that they abolished. 

 “This is a problem of the Government’s own making. It’s clear Labor are not  prepared to stand up to the Greens and have adopted the political tactic of trying to  blame the Opposition for their failures, as a way to cover over their weakness. 

 “Labor’s embrace of the Greens policies on asylum seekers has supercharged the  people smugglers’ business model, increasing people smugglers profits, increasing  the risk to people making the dangerous boat journey to Australia and further  undermining the integrity of our humanitarian program. 

 “Meanwhile reports on the ongoing search for a suspected asylum seeker vessel  reportedly missing off Indonesia are of great concern and a terrible reminder about  the risks associated with these terrible boat journeys and why we need to return to  policies that work. 

 “Our thoughts today are with everyone involved in the rescue. As this occurred in  Indonesian waters, we are supportive of any assistance provided by the Australian  Government to assist the Indonesian Government,” Mr Morrison said. 

  

