---
title: "Labor should follow Kiwi lead on TPVS as boat 302 arrives"
date: "2012-05-01"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372259
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742694%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling LABOR SHOULD FOLLOW KIWI LEAD ON  TPVS AS BOAT 302 ARRIVES May 01, 2012

 The illegal arrival of 13 boats and almost 1,000 people in April, including another overnight comes at the same time as the  New Zealand Government has announced it will introduce temporary protection visas, Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said  today.

 “The New Zealand Prime Minister has seen the wisdom of introducing TPVs after just one boat sought to make its way to  New Zealand and decided to stay in Darwin. Prime Minister Gillard refuses to restore TPVs after 302 boats have turned up as a result of Labor’s soft border policies,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Illegal boat arrivals carrying 971 people in April were the second highest on record for this Government. The record was  set only last December when 991 people turned up on illegal boats,” he said.

 “We have now had our two highest levels of monthly arrivals on record under this Government since they announced their  'let them in, let them out' policy of community release and bridging visas last November.

 “Rather than restore the policies that worked, Labor continue to make excuses and blame others for their failures. If the  New Zealand Government can introduce TPVs then Prime Minister Gillard has no excuse for not doing the same,” Mr  Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “As the 30th boat of 2012 arrives carrying 27 people, bringing the total number of illegal arrivals under  Labor to almost 17,000, it is clear to all Australians that under a Gillard Government there is no semblance of a border  protection regime.

 “This rapid rate of arrivals is a direct response to a Labor Government that is once again too busy dealing with its own  internal scandals and leadership problems to effectively control the crisis that is occurring at our borders.

 “The Prime Minister and her Cabinet may continue to use smoke and mirrors tricks but at the end of the day these  extraordinarily high numbers speak loud and clear about the state of Australia’s borders.

 “Labor has no intention of offering any viable solutions to stop people smuggling - only an election and a Coalition  Government will restore order and control to our Border Protection Command,” Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 LABOR SHOULD FOLLOW KIWI LEAD ON TPVS AS BOAT 302 ARRIVES > ...

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

