---
title: "Shepparton University in line for cuts to staff and courses"
date: "2012-07-26"
creators:
  - "Stone, Sharman"
source: "Office of STONE, SHARMAN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211432747
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1806542%22
---

 

 

 THE HON DR SHARMAN STONE MP  Federal Member for Murray   

 

 Thursday 26 July 2012 

 

 Shepparton University in line for cuts to staff and courses   

 On June 20, La Trobe University released a consultation paper outlining cost cutting measures and a  restructure of its Arts Program at its campuses, including Shepparton.    

 Federal Member for Murray, Dr Sharman Stone says “the Humanities and Social Sciences Faculty states  the changes will arrest a decline in student enrolment and retention, address financial challenges and  ensure course offerings better meet student demand.”     

 None of these problems or issues relate to the Shepparton La Trobe Campus.   

 “We are so pleased that La Trobe has built an award winning campus in Shepparton. What we don’t want  to see is Shepparton getting caught up in the troubles of the other campuses.” Sharman Stone said.   

 “The Faculty says they are losing money. Indications are Shepparton is making money.    

 “The Faculty says more than half of their losses are attributed to lower than expected enrolments.  Shepparton’s enrolments have been steadily growing over the past 3 years.    

 “The Faculty states they have a trend of low retention rates. Shepparton has a higher than average  retention rate.   

 “A reduction in the number of Bachelor of Arts is also of great concern. Students wishing to pursue a  teaching career or further study may go elsewhere.   

 “We have been waiting a long time for Shepparton Campus to evolve. It should be able to create more  courses and shouldn’t be contracting existing ones. Staff levels likewise should be increasing and not  decreasing.   

 “Shepparton’s University Campus is vital to the town and district. Shepparton has a high level of students  that may not be able to attend University if it wasn’t locally situated, such as our mature age, indigenous,  ethnic and refugee residents. Travelling to another campus is very expensive.    

 “Shepparton Campus’ Bachelor of Arts has produced a high number of teachers who are now working in  local schools.    

 “Time is nigh, as consultation ends next Monday, July 30” Dr Stone said. “I would urge everyone to get  behind the Shepparton Campus to ensure its high standard is maintained.”   

 

 

 

 Media enquiries, Graham Munson: 0417 148 110. 

 M E D I A     R E L E A S E  

