---
title: "Abbott records 'No' vote against offshore processing"
date: "2012-06-01"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374194
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2275332%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship   

 Abbott records 'No' vote against offshore  processing  Thursday, 31 May 2012 

 The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today welcomed the  House of Representatives voting offshore processing legislation through to the next  stage of consideration, and called on Tony Abbott to reverse his 'no' vote and work in  the national interest when the legislation returns to the Parliament. 

 Mr Bowen said Rob Oakeshott had put forward his legislation in the spirit of  compromise and in an attempt to break the political impasse over offshore  processing. 

 'We acknowledge the spirit in which the Member for Lyne has brought this legislation  forward, which today saw the House of Representatives vote for the private  member's bill to be debated in detail,' Mr Bowen said. 

 'It would have been nice if Tony Abbott had put away his destructive negativity and  brought the same constructive attitude as Mr Oakeshott to the offshore processing  debate.' 

 'For weeks, the coalition has been calling for this legislation to be brought on, only to  vote against it today - as we knew they would.' 

 Mr Bowen said while the bill was not the preferred mechanism to re-establish the  legal basis for offshore processing, it was a major step forward, which is why the  government voted in support. 

 'The coalition has had so many opportunities now to support offshore processing.  We gave Mr Abbott and Scott Morrison every opportunity to say 'yes' in the national  interest,' he said. 

 'Whatever the coalition may say about this bill and about offshore processing - today,  tomorrow or the next day - it will not erase the fact that their actions over the last 12  months mean that offshore processing remains impossible. 

 'Until they are prepared to allow offshore processing to occur, the Australian people  will have no choice but to conclude that the coalition prefers to see more boats arrive  because Tony Abbott believes it is in his political interest.' 

 Mr Bowen said the government had repeatedly offered to compromise and put  forward a written proposal in good faith, which was rejected out of hand. 

 'We offered them their own policy of Nauru. We offered an inquiry into Temporary  Protection Visas. But they still said 'no'. They said 'no' to the government's offshore  processing legislation, just as they said 'no' today to Rob Oakeshott's bill.' 

 

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb187202.htm  Last update: Thursday, 31 May 2012 at 16:27 AEST  

