---
title: "Record month for illegal boat arrivals as lawyers circle"
date: "2012-08-28"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211380955
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1882151%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Record month for illegal boat arrivals as lawyers circle  

 28/08/12  

 The fifth illegal boat arrival in three days means 1,857 people have arrived on illegal  boats in August, a new monthly record and yet Julia Gillard still refuses to restore the  full suite of polices successfully implemented by the Howard Government to stop the  boats, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.    

 “The number of people arriving on illegal boats rises every day and is smashing all  previous records. Yet just last week Labor refused to ask the Parliament to give itself  the green light to send people to Nauru for processing, as is required under the  legislation. This means that as things currently stand, this Government cannot send  anyone anywhere, their heart is just not in it,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “Meanwhile the lawyers will be circling around every boat that turns up, as everyone  is still coming to Australia. These arrivals will likely have very different appeal rights  to anyone sent directly to Nauru.  So far legal firms have been paid millions of dollars  by the Government to prepare appeals and provide legal advice. Those arriving now  are likely to continue to create more work for these lawyers at taxpayers expense.       

 “By contrast, when John Howard turned back the Tampa, he ensured that all those  on board were sent directly to Nauru, without setting foot on Christmas Island and  they had Nauru up and running in 19 days.  It will be at least four weeks before  anyone can be sent to Nauru, and the boats keep arriving.      

 “If the government continues to deal in less than half measures by refusing to  implement temporary protection visas and turning the boats back where it’s safe to  do, then they cannot expect to get the Howard Government’s outcomes of a 99%  reduction in boat arrivals,” Mr Morrison said. 

