---
title: "More boat arrivals since last election than during the entire Howard Government"
date: "2012-07-21"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211430891
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736674%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE BOAT ARRIVALS SINCE LAST  ELECTION THAN DURING THE ENTIRE  HOWARD GOVERNMENT July 21, 2012

 Since the last election more people have turned up on illegal boats than during the entire 11 and a half years of the  Howard Government, following the arrival of the latest boat carrying 144 passengers according to Scott Morrison, Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and Michael Keenan, Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border  Protection. 

 "Julia Gillard's record of failure on our borders eclipses all others. Since the last election13,681 people have arrived on  206 boats compared to 13,584 arrivals on 239 boats under entire period of the Howard Government, with less than 300  people arriving in the final six years. "In less than one parliamentary term, under Julia Gillard, Labor have had more  people arrive on illegal boats than under the four terms of the Howard Government. 

 "At the last election Julia Gillard rejected and ridiculed the proven policies of the Howard Government and chose to go  down her own path of unparalleled failure on our borders. The result has been the highest rate of illegal boat arrivals on  record.

 "First there was her farcical East Timor proposal that went nowhere, followed by the further failure of her abominable  Malaysian people swap, struck down by the High Court as illegal and rejected by the Parliament as unconscionable. 

 "Julia Gillard's asylum deadlock is entirely self imposed. Despite twice daily arrivals on our borders which by Julia Gillard's  own standard that represent a policy failure, the Prime Minister stubbornly refuses to embrace the Howard policies that  worked. he Prime Minister doesn't need a committee to tell her she got it wrong, she simply needs the grace to admit it,  put the national interest ahead of her own pride and restore the policies that worked," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Over 1000 people have now arrived illegally in the first 3 weeks of this financial year - more than triple  the amount that arrived at the same time last year. The people smuggling trade are making millions of dollars off of  Labor’s inability to protect Australia’s borders. 

 "The people smugglers know that whilst Labor remains in power their criminal business will continue to flourish and the  boats will continue to come. "If this Government cannot solve the crisis at our borders then they should call an election,"  Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 MORE BOAT ARRIVALS SINCE LAST ELECTION THAN DURING THE ENTI...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

