---
title: "First boat arrives since Tony Abbott said 'no'"
date: "2012-02-11"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369484
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1416894%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 JASON CLARE MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 11 February 2012 

 

 FIRST BOAT ARRIVES SINCE TONY ABBOTT SAID ‘NO’   

 The asylum seeker boat intercepted today is the first since Tony Abbott again put negativity  and his own political interest ahead of the national interest, the Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Minister for Home Affairs, Jason Clare MP, said today.   

 Mr Bowen said the latest boat arrival was a reminder of Tony Abbott’s political calculation  that more boat arrivals are in his political interest despite the risk to life, or the national  interest. 

 

 This latest arrival comes in the wake of the Coalition walking away from talks designed to find  a mutually agreeable way forward on offshore processing to deliver a genuine deterrent to  people taking these dangerous boat journeys.   

 “The Australian people have a legitimate expectation that their political leaders and parties  can come together to agree on matters that involve the national interest, including border  security, especially where there is broad agreement on the need for offshore processing,” Mr  Bowen said.   

 “The Government has been prepared to work with the Coalition in the national interest to see  its offshore processing legislation pass through the Parliament.   

 “It has done this by the Prime Minister initiating negotiations with the Coalition before  Christmas and before the Indonesia boat tragedy.   

 “It has done this by putting a written proposal to Tony Abbott.   

 “It has done this by offering to establish a centre on Nauru to complement the Malaysian  Arrangement and by offering an independent review into the effectiveness of temporary  protection visas.”   

 Mr Clare said the Government entered into discussions with the Coalition in good faith in a  genuine attempt to find a mutually acceptable outcome. But Tony Abbott said ‘no’.   

 “Remember what this is all about - 200 people died when their boat sank before Christmas.  Eleven more people died last week when a boat sank off the coast of Malaysia,” Mr Clare  said. 

 

 “By working together we can help to stop this happening. But it requires Tony Abbott to stop  saying no.    

 “The people of Australia want us to work together. They can’t understand why Tony Abbott is 

 refusing to pass legislation to implement his own policy - Nauru.”   

 Mr Bowen said every time Tony Abbott says ‘stop the boats’ at a press conference and every  time Scott Morrison issues a media release about another boat arrival, they need to answer a  simple question: Why did you say no?   

 “Why did you say no to Nauru? Why did you say no to an independent review into the  effectiveness of TPVs?,” he said.   

 “The Government has been clear on this - a failure to put in place a proper deterrent, will  mean that we will continue to see asylum seekers risk their lives and more people will arrive  by boat.” 

 

 Until Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison are prepared to have discussions in good faith on how  the nation can put in place a legal basis for offshore processing, the Australian people will  have no choice but to conclude that the Opposition prefer to see more boats arrive because  they believe that it remains in their political interests. 

 

 Media Contacts: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 (Bowen) or Korena Flanagan 0418 251  316 (Clare) 

