---
title: "Boat flow continues under Labor's half hearted solution"
date: "2012-09-18"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382203
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2733045%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling BOAT FLOW CONTINUES UNDER LABOR’S  HALF HEARTED SOLUTION September 18, 2012

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 58 people on board, shows the flow of illegal boats continues unabated under  Labor’s half hearted approach on border protection, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and  Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "So long as Labor continues to stick to their half hearted approach to border protection they can only expect a half hearted  message to be sent to people attempting to come to Australia on illegal boats," Mr Morrison said. 

 "The Labor government have become their own pull factor as a result of their constant and continued failures on our  borders that have resulted in more than 25,000 people illegally entering Australia on 428 boats. People seeking to come  to Australia on illegal boats simply don’t believe this government as too often their threats have proved to be just hollow  words. 

 "This latest arrivals also shows the taxpayer funded island hopping service from Cocos (Keeling) Islands to Christmas  Island continues. Labor has refused to engage the Sri Lanakan government on returning their nationals seeking to travel  to Australia on illegal boats and the cost of this refusal continues to mounts. 

 "Wayne Swan today again refused to tell the Parliament how much more Australians will have to pay for Labor’s failure on  our borders. Having based his budget on 5,400 arrivals for the entire financial year, almost 5,150 have arrived already,  less than a quarter of the way through. 

 "Wayne Swan refuses to come clean with the Australian people and tell them where the money is going to come from to  pay for yet another budget blowout on boats, which have already cost over $5 billion and counting since they came to  office," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "Over 25,000 people have now arrived illegally by boat since this Labor Government abolished the tough  border protection policies of the Howard Government. 

 "Even though in recent months Labor have come full circle and announced they would reinstate offshore processing on  Nauru, a further 41 illegal boats, carrying over 2,500 people have streamed across our borders. 

 "Simply opening more processing centres is unlikely to be a big enough deterrent on its own - the Government must take  away the main selling point of the people smugglers through temporary protection visas. 

 "By removing the guarantee of permanent residency in Australia it will completely undermine the people smuggling  business model. 

 "They also must turn the boats back around when it is safe to do so. 

 "Labor continues to use a series of excuses as to why this is so difficult but the truth is they are just too weak to implement  the measure they said was part of their policy prior to the 2007 election. 

 "Their own committee’s report maintained that this measure would deter people smuggling. 

 "Offshore processing alone has so far not achieved the results that Australia requires. Labor must go further and  reintroduce all of the successful policies of the Howard Government," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 BOAT FLOW CONTINUES UNDER LABOR’S HALF HEARTED SOLUTION > ...

 18/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

