---
title: "Government must fund National Children's Commissioner in next week's budget: Greens"
date: "2012-05-01"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372278
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1603689%22
---

 Tuesday, 1 May 2012 

 MEDIA RELEASE  

 Government must fund National Children's  Commissioner in next week's budget: Greens  The Gillard government's announcement that a National Children's Commissioner will be established  this year needs to be matched with adequate funding in next week's budget, the Australian Greens said  today. 

 "It's pleasing that this essential role, which was a Greens' proposal, will be operating under the  Australian Human Rights Commission by the end of this year," Greens' youth and children  spokesperson, Sen. Sarah Hanson-Young, said. 

 "But we echo the concerns of children's rights groups who worry the post may not be properly  resourced. 

 "The Greens join children's advocates in calling on the government to ensure the AHRC's funding in  the May 8 budget is boosted so the Children's Commissioner can adequately fulfill their tasks. 

 "Anything less than that will mean young Australians such as those who are homeless and others who  are at risk will continue to be neglected. 

 "Now that a Children's Commissioner is on its way, we again call on the federal government to detail  how and when it will establish the role of an independent advocate for unaccompanied asylum seeker  children. 

 "This position is needed because of the conflict of interest the Immigration Minister has in being both  their legal guardian and the person who decides where and for how long they are jailed and detained. 

 "In February the Joint Select Committee on Australia's Immigration Detention Network recommended  relevant legislation should be amended to replace the Immigration Minister as the legal guardian of  unaccompanied minors.   

 "We will continue pressing the government to fulfil this recommendation, ensure the Children's  Commissioner is properly funded and that Australia signs the United Nations' Third Optional Protocol  to the Convention on the Rights of the Child."   

 

 MEDIA RELEASE: PARIS LORD 0427 604 760 

  

