---
title: "Another boat as people smugglers thumb their noses at Labor"
date: "2012-09-07"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381679
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1906364%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Scott Morrison 

 Another Boat as People Smugglers Thumb their Noses at Labor 

 07/09/12 

 The latest illegal boat arrival, the third in 24 hours, shows people smugglers continue  to thumb their noses at a Labor Government that has failed to demonstrate their  resolve on border protection for more than four years, Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection Michael Keenan said.    

 "Over 1,600 people have now arrived on illegal boats since Julia Gillard was dragged  kicking and screaming into announcing she would open Nauru and not one person  has yet been sent there for processing," Mr Morrison said.    

 "John Howard had Nauru open 19 days after announcing that all people arriving on  illegal boats would be sent there for processing and, under John Howard, that's what  happened. With more than 1600 people already on shore in Australia, under the  Julia Gillard version, this is obviously not going to happen and will be just another  example of why Labor doesn't measure to the Howard standard.    

 “The Coalition understands governments must have the necessary resolve to stand  up to people smugglers but Labor has neither the full suite of policies nor the  demonstrated resolve needed to get the job done of stopping the boats.    

 "People smugglers continue to dispatch boats at a rate of more than one a day as  Labor drags their feet on Nauru, having failed to even give themselves the  parliamentary green light to allow people to be sent there for processing.    

 "Every day Labor fails to act is another day people smugglers continue to exploit  their weakness and lack of resolve and put more people onto leaky boats for perilous  journeys to Australia," Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “3 boats in under 24 hours as the people smugglers continue to use  merchant ships and Customs vessels as their own personal water taxi service.    

 “This latest arrival has again been intercepted off the Cocos Islands as revelations  today showed the Government is spending nearly $1 million every month on  chartering flights for asylum seekers to Christmas Island.    

 “Nothing is going to change until the message coming from the Government  unambiguously says they are prepared to use every weapon at their disposal to stop 

 people smuggling.    

 “This is a problem that can be solved but it can only be done by a Government that  shows the necessary resolve.    

 “Labor has never had the required resolve and the people smugglers know it.    

 “Only a change in Government will give Australia the break it needs to regain control  over our borders,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

