---
title: "Record 2,000 people arrive this month under Labor's half hearted solution"
date: "2012-09-28"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382802
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1952276%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Record 2,000 people arrive this month under Labor's half  hearted solution 

 28/09/12 

 A record 2,065 people have arrived by illegal boat since 1 September, the highest number of people  to arrive in a single month, following the arrival of the latest boat, with 198 people on board,  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Under John Howard’s full suite of border protection measures, which the Coalition will restore in  government, just 272 people arrived on 16 illegal boats over six years. At this rate it would have  taken John Howard almost 50 years to reach the more than 2,000 illegal arrivals by boat that have  occurred under Labor in less than a month,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Labor and Julia Gillard bear full responsibility for their astounding level of failure,” he said. 

 “Julia Gillard is now responsible for over 11,100 people arriving this year, breaking all records and  leaving a legacy of cost and failure that Australians will be left to pay for. 

 “Despite their ongoing failure, Labor continues in their bizarre and ritual denial on implementing the  full suite of Coalition border protection policies that were so successful under the Howard  Government. 

 “Labor's record failures mean they simply can’t be trusted on our borders. Their heart is just not in  it,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The interception of another huge boat load of asylum seekers, carrying 198  people, has seen over 2000 people smuggled across Australia’s borders in the month of September  alone. 

 “The people smugglers clearly feel emboldened to continue to peddle their insidious trade in human  misery - this is evident in the fact that 195 people were willing to pay for passage to Australia  knowing they still have good odds at being put in a mainland immigration detention centre. 

 “Labor has now allowed well over 11,000 people to illegally breach our borders - which is 6389  people more than the total for the whole of 2011. 

 “It is clear that the Government must implement the full suite of Coalition border protection policies  in order to send a strong message to the people smugglers that Australia’s borders are no longer  open for business,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

