---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 26 November 2012: Murray Darling Basin Plan; Temporary Protection Visas; parliamentary conduct"
date: "2012-11-26"
creators:
  - "Joyce, Barnaby"
source: "Office of JOYCE, SEN BARNABY"
subjects:
  - "Murray Darling Basin Plan"
  - "Temporary Protection Visas"
  - "parliamentary conduct"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386061
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2070067%22
---

 

 

 

 Senator Barnaby Joyce 

  Shadow Minister for Regional Development, Local Government and  Water 

 Leader of the Nationals in the Senate   

 -TRANSCRIPT - 

 SENATOR BARNABY JOYCE 

 LNP Senator for Queensland 

 Shadow Minister for Regional Development, Local Government and Water 

 Leader of the Nationals in the Senate 

 

 

 Topics: Murray Darling Basin Plan, Temporary Protection Visas, 

 parliamentary conduct 

 

 26 November 2012 

 

 Senator Joyce: Firstly, I congratulate my chief of staff Matthew Canavan for 

 getting himself pre-selected for a senate ticket. He’s now at number three and the 

 second person to leave under my tutelage, the first being Scott Buchholz. 

 It’s going to be great, he’ll add a lot to the National Party if he’s lucky enough to be 

 voted for by the people of Queensland and if they give him the great honour to 

 come into this parliament. I’m sure he’ll be an absolutely diligent and effective 

 representative and diligent and effective in his work that he has to do on behalf of 

 the people of regional Queensland. 

 It’s also the first week after the release of the Basin Plan and we’re hearing back 

 from key constituent groups and what their concerns are and they’re starting to 

 come through at the moment. Obviously there are more concerns in New South 

 Wales and I acknowledge that and we’ll have to do what we can to negotiate on 

 their behalf and make sure we alleviate their concerns. I’ve already had a meeting 

 with Mr Stoner, the deputy premier of New South Wales. He has expressed those 

 concerns to me and this is part and parcel of what we have to do. The plan was 

 only released last week and I said last week that we would have to talk to the key 

 constituent groups so everybody feels that they have some sort of ownership of 

 the process and they have been properly heard. 

 Finally, it’s the last week of parliament and the last week before we have an 

 election. It will be a crucial time where issues are tested and people’s mettle is 

 tested and as long as people keep to the facts and away from personal insults, I 

 see no problems with that. It is vital that questions that are being asked by the 

 public are properly answered by the parliament. 

 

 Journalist: In regards to asylum seekers, we’ve had Greens’ senator, Senator 

 Hanson-Young say that the last time TPVs were on the agenda the Coalition 

 weren’t particularly keen on the idea. What are your thoughts on it now? 

 

 Senator Joyce: Whenever the Greens are involved with anything, it’s more 

 throwing rocks than finding a solution. I think it’s very important that Senator 

 Hanson-Young suggests what the process is that gives some sort of security to 

 our borders. There has to be some sort of sovereignty to the borders. The 

 Australian people have a strong expectation to keep their borders secure, the soil 

 in our own hands, our own sovereignty and that they’ll be provided with basic 

 social services. All pieces of policy should be reviewed and should go to the 

 proper committee system. There is an overwhelming concern in the public that this 

 government has just lost control. Because they’ve lost control of the borders they 

 have started to question if they’ve lost control in other areas. 

 

 Journalist: How do you think the process has changed since the Coalition last 

 approached this? Is it public opinion that will sway you? Has your attitudes to this 

 changed over the years? 

 

 Senator Joyce: Well, we had the problem basically fixed but the Labor Party have 

 basically gone out with this dream-like idea. The whole thing hit the deck. We’ve 

 had something like 30,000 people arrive. 

 Of course the Australian people are not going to accept that and of course they 

 will ask for some sort of change. But if the Labor Party hadn’t stuffed it up in the 

 first place we wouldn’t be in this position to have to try and fix it up. When you fix it 

 up, sometimes it becomes stronger than you would like. That’s because the Labor 

 Party have stuffed it up in the first place. The Green’s policy would be 

 pandemonium. I think they’re policy honestly is to send a boat over, send the P&O 

 over and try to pick up as many people as they can. It would be an absolute farce, 

 ludicrous. 

 This is the sort of ludicrous, Disneyland policy objective that you get from the 

 Greens. I suppose that’s why in places like Tasmania their vote is starting to fall 

 over, because people are starting to look at their policy and say, “Look, wonderful, 

 well-meaning people but nutty as a fruitcake. 

 

 Journalist: Senator, do you still have reservations about Temporary Protection 

 Visas? 

 

 Senator Joyce: No, where we are right now is that we have to have a strong 

 policy to try and get some turnaround. We can’t just accept this. The Australian 

 people will not accept 30,000 people going through an unofficial process to arrive 

 in Australia. It just won’t work. The reason we’ve got to this position is because of 

 nutty as a fruitcake policy that the Labor Party brought in, supported by the 

 Greens. This mirrors their nutty as a fruitcake Climate Change policy. 

 Everything about this government is high farce and this is another example. 

 

 Journalist: Last week you were talking about that you were on a crusade to 

 improve standards in parliament. This is the last week of parliament; the AWU 

 scandal will reach its crescendo. Will you be advising your Coalition colleagues 

 and those on the other side of the chamber as well to tone it down a bit? 

 

 Senator Joyce: Look I think it’s very important to look at the facts on the table. If 

 you play by that we’ll have a proper debate. There are no problems whatsoever in 

 asking people the facts. The problem is when you carry with that a personal insult 

 that has nothing to do with the topic at hand. The role of parliament is to ask 

 questions and the role of parliamentarians to give their best endeavours to answer 

 them. Of course the Prime Minister if she’s asked questions that have come from 

 third party sources - the solicitor Nick Styant-Browne, he looks like a pretty 

 reasonable sort of person, asking a reasonable question. I think it’s reasonable 

 that the Prime Minister answer that. 

 

 Journalist: Do you agree that this is very complex, considering Nick Styant-Browne was involved in that particular transaction, the conveyancing. There are a 

 lot of things going here, yet no allegations. Why will the Coalition continue with this 

 line of attack? 

 

 Senator Joyce: Every question time has questions and you look for the answer. 

 That’s the purpose of question time. Every time you go to question time, you don’t 

 have to come up with a waterproof case. You ask the question and you respect 

 that the answer will come back. If the person gives a direct answer and is telling 

 the truth, than that’s where the matter ends. But if they’re evasive and give a half 

 answer or they play some sort of silly game then of course it goes on. 

 

 Journalist: Finally on the LNP in Queensland, you yourself have been reportedly 

 approached by Katter’s Australia Party in the past. Do you endorse the decision by 

 LNP colleagues to potentially move over to a party they see more in line with their 

 values? 

 

 Senator Joyce: No I don’t. I’m disappointed. Of course I’m disappointed, but they 

 still remain my friends. I’m not going to stand at the doors and start bucketing on 

 people because next weekend I’ll probably have a beer with them, say g’day to 

 them. 

 I’ve always believed that the best way to change policies is to give your best 

 endeavours to get inside a party that has the capacity and the numbers to do it. 

 There is a frustration that is palpable in regional areas and I understand that and 

 my job is to do my very best to try and express that frustration in policy change 

 within the Coalition. Another approach is to go out into your own party, but if you 

 don’t have the numbers you don’t actually achieve anything. You sound great, it 

 sounds marvellous. You can have all the theatre in the world, but you can’t 

 actually change things. I hope that in Queensland everyone works once more, like 

 down here, with respect, listens to the issues that are concerning people and 

 policy matters that are of concern get dealt with. In the end it doesn’t matter what 

 party you’re in or the manifestation of your political colours. You bring an outcome 

 to the people you represent. I think if we make that our objective, a lot of these 

 problems will be solved.  

 -ENDS -  

 

 Media enquiries: Raelene McVinish, 0428 196340 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

