---
title: "Address to the Australasian Chapter Regional Conference: The refugee convention and beyond, Melbourne"
date: "2012-02-03"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees"
  - "Refugees"
  - "UN High Commissioner for Refugees"
  - "Refugee policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211369081
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1691166%22
---

 Search this site 

  Go  

 Home

 Biographical details

 Media Centre

 Contact details

 Department

 Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

 Links

 

 

 The Refugee Convention and Beyond Friday, 03 February 2012

 Keynote address to the Australasian Chapter  Regional Conference, Melbourne

 Introduction

 Good morning ladies and gentlemen and thank you for your  introduction, Mary [Cameron, RRT Member].

 It is a privilege to speak to a room that includes so many experts  from around Australia and around the world. 

 I noted with interest that the theme of today's conference is 'The  Refugee Convention and Beyond'.

 As I see it, there are two ways of interpreting today's theme.

 The first is to say that we fully accept the Refugee Convention as  the foundation and basis for refugee protection but that, in light of  the changed nature of how people move around the globe in the  60 years since it came into force, we must look 'beyond' the  Convention, supplementing it with new and innovative approaches  to addressing the international problem of displacement.

 The second way of looking at today's topic is to argue, as some  do, that the principles behind the Convention are well-meaning but  that its terms have become outdated and that its inflexibility is  being exploited, undermining its goal of providing protection to  those most in need. The conclusion of that argument is that it's  time to look 'beyond' the Convention in another sense.

 I support the former view.

 Looking constructively 'beyond' the Convention

 It is true to say that the problems the world is facing today are quite  different to the European humanitarian crisis of the 1940s and the  harrowing experience of the St Louis, which led to the Refugee  Convention being conceived and established.

 Travel is easier, secondary movement is common and people  smuggling has become a lucrative business with clear and  extensive links to organised crime.

 This does not mean, however, that the Refugee Convention needs  to be torn up or rewritten. It needs to be implemented in a way  which reflects these modern realities.

 I disagree with those who say we should withdraw from the  Convention or should push for it to be rewritten.

 Rather, we should - and do - work with UNHCR and other  countries in our region, as well as source countries, to ensure that  asylum seekers are treated appropriately - in line with Convention  obligations - but that dangerous journeys to seek asylum are  discouraged.

 The UNHCR, to its great credit, has recognised this and has  actively worked with individual countries, and contributed to the  Bali Process, to provide useful feedback on how this should occur.

 Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 1 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 It has, for example, produced a paper in November 2010, on how  offshore processing can be implemented to deal with boat arrivals  in a way that is compliant with the Refugee Convention. This  involvement of the UNHCR has been invaluable as we tackle these  issues.

 There are two reasons we've been so driven to see a genuine  regional framework in place to deal with the complex issue of  movements of asylum seekers:

 Journeys undertaken by asylum seekers through this region  are inherently dangerous. 1. Our refugee program should be fairly calibrated to give fair 

 opportunity to refugees in protracted situations around the  world who don't have the opportunity or resources to use  people smugglers.

 2.

 The issue of danger at sea is not a hypothetical one. Just  yesterday, we saw the latest tragic example of the danger of this  travel. At least eight people died in Malaysia making their way to  Australia, via Indonesia.

 This follows the deaths of 200 people just before Christmas, the  loss of at least eight people in Indonesian waters in November  and, of course, the terrible tragedy off Christmas Island the  Christmas before last.

 In my view, any discussion of the morality of various asylum  seeker policies must recognise this point - that there is nothing  moral or humanitarian in telling people their best chance of a new  life in Australia is to risk their lives to get here.

 The policy that the Government has pursued is one that that  involves resettling more refugees in Australia.

 A policy that engages with a major refugee host country in our  region in such a way as to create momentum towards better  outcomes for the hundreds of thousands of refugees in our region  living in non-signatory countries.

 And it is a policy that involves close co-operation with the United  Nations High Commission for Refugees and the International  Organization for Migration increase the protection space in our  region.

 It is a policy entered into under the auspices of the Regional Co-operation Framework, involves countries that are not signatories to  the Refugee Convention acknowledging the need to improve  protection outcomes for refugees in our region.

 Getting agreement to this Framework at the Bali Process  Ministerial Conference - this step 'beyond' the Convention - was  no small matter.

 As High Commissioner Antonio Guterres said last week - in  relation to another part of the world:

 'There is never a humanitarian solution for humanitarian problems.  The solution is always political.'

 With the overwhelming majority of refugees in our region living in  non-signatory countries, we recognised the need to engage -  politically - with our neighbours through the Bali Process.

 Resettlement in a country like Australia will never be the answer  for all the refugees in our region - so we recognised the need to  work constructively and creatively with countries in our region to  improve conditions and protection outcomes for these 'forgotten' 

 refugees, who, in my view, receive far too little attention in the  Australian political discourse.

 Page 2 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 For these people, every small improvement in essential conditions  - a legal right to work, access to basic health care, protection from  arrest - makes an enormous difference to daily life.

 And, although it is clear that we will not be able to implement the  Arrangement with the Government of Malaysia so long as the  Opposition holds its current position on offshore processing, we  remain convinced of its importance and virtue.

 We believe the Malaysian Arrangement is the best policy  approach, both for Australia and for asylum seekers, providing, as  it does, a clear deterrence to people getting on precarious boats  and risking their lives.

 As I have said before: there is nothing humanitarian about a policy  that says your best chance of getting resettled in Australia is to risk  your life to get here.

 So we have designed a policy to remove the incentive at the end of  that boat journey, while, at the same time, ensuring that anyone  transferred to Malaysia still receives protection and access to  refugee processing, as required by the Convention, and at the  same time, having the capacity to resettle more refugees and give  more people a chance of a new life in Australia.

 'Beyond' the Convention: a negative approach

 There is, as I mentioned, another approach to the Convention,  which views looking 'beyond' it as looking around it.

 Recently, there have been some comments that represent an  approach to refugee policy that patently falls well short of its  standards.

 The proposal to ask the Australian Defence Force and border  protection authorities to 'turn the boats back' to Indonesia, for  example, is a deeply troubling one.

 It is troubling because it risks the lives of asylum seekers and our  sailors. Troubling because it is being proposed when Indonesia  has explicitly rejected this approach, and troubling because it is 

 difficult to see how it could be possible implemented in a way  consistent with our international obligations.

 As the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees' regional  representative said last week:

 UNHCR would be concerned by any policy which consisted of  pushing asylum seeker boats back at sea. Any such blanket  approach would potentially place Australia in breach of its  obligations under the Refugee Convention and other international  law obligations.

 At several media events in recent weeks, including at the National  Press Club on Tuesday, the Leader of the Opposition has stated -  curiously - that his foreign policy will 'have a Jakarta focus rather  than a Geneva one'.

 What are we to make of that?

 That the Australian Government is working too closely with  UNHCR? That we take our Convention obligations too seriously?

 Paradoxically, this comes after the Leader of the Opposition  announced to the Indonesian Government, via megaphone  diplomacy, that, regardless of what Indonesia (or the Australian  Navy, for that matter) has to say about it - and both have said  plenty - his plan is to instruct our Navy to dump asylum seekers at  the edge of Indonesian territory and sail off.

 Also this week, it has been proposed that there be a presumption  against refugee status for those who arrive without documents. 

 Page 3 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 How this would work in practice is a complete mystery, as is how it  fits with the requirements of the Refugee Convention.

 Either someone's claims are assessed to be made out or they are  not.

 Sure, the fact that an asylum seeker has destroyed or discarded  their documents can be taken into account when assessing the  credibility of their claims. But, ultimately, the decision-maker has to  decide, on the evidence available, whether a person is at risk of  persecution in their home country. That is done in the context of  the totality of their story.

 If someone meets the definition on all available evidence, of which  the circumstances by which they came to have no documents is  one part, then the fact they have no documents cannot be used to  refuse them - unless this presumption is intended to override the  Convention.

 Presumably at some point more information will be released about  this policy: what will be the discretion of decision-makers in  refugee determination cases, given the Opposition's stated policy  of a 'presumption' against refugee status?

 Will there be legislation? As is it almost certainly required to  implement such a policy. And how could it possibly be  implemented in a way that is Convention compliant?

 Whether it be 'turning back boats', dubious presumptions, or  promising greater distance from 'Genena', looking 'beyond' the  Convention in this sense is a troubling exercise.

 Looking 'beyond' the Convention today

 While the Government has endeavoured to look constructively  'beyond' the Convention in the pursuit of regional co-operative  arrangements, acting 'beyond' the Convention is, of course,  nothing new.

 For decades Australia has offered a generous resettlement  program - the highest in the world on a per capita basis - even  though, of course, the Convention imposes no requirement for us  to do so.

 We do it not because we have to; we do it because we are a  humanitarian nation.

 What we do here is important. As the world's largest resettlement  country per capita, and the third largest in absolute terms, our  resettlement program is very significant in international terms.  Apart from the US, Canada and Australia, there is very little  international resettlement to speak of.

 As you know, and as I set out at the ALP National Conference in  December, I would like to progressively increase Australia's  Humanitarian Program to 20 000 places. But we simply cannot  afford to do that so long as we are forced to devote a  disproportionate amount of resources to dealing with boat arrivals,  which is a very expensive proposition. And, unless you advocate  dropping asylum seekers at Flinders Street Station with a train  ticket and a map, it remains an expensive proposition regardless of  whether people are accommodated in detention or in the  community, since many have significant support needs.

 We have what is regarded as world-class resettlement services,  but these services do come at a considerable cost to Government.  As people in this room know, assessing refugee claims, whether in  the detention environment or in a community environment is a  resource-intensive exercise. We could settle so many more people  if those resources were dedicated to resettling people who have  already been assessed as refugees and referred to us as priority  cases by the UNHCR.

 Page 4 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 Even an orderly increase in the Humanitarian Program is  expensive. For the first four years of any increase in our  Humanitarian Program, every additional 1000 resettlement places  would cost the Australian Budget around $216 million. By  extension, an increase to 20 000 would cost the Budget around  $1.35 billion over the first four years.

 So what we have is a finite program. It is an expensive program,  providing world-leading settlement and social services, because  we think that good integration is important. But it costs money.

 A finite program and a not-unlimited budget means that, for every  visa we grant onshore, we cannot offer a visa to a parent, a child, a  cousin, an aunt, an uncle offshore.

 Consequently, the impact of the greater number of arrivals  resulting from the blocking of the Malaysia Arrangement is that this  year's Special Humanitarian Program, which is largely made up of  close family members of refugees already in Australia, will be  under very significant pressure indeed.

 Just as Australia (and almost every country in the world) has a  finite skills and family reunion component to our program, so we  have a finite refugee and humanitarian program.

 We believe our refugee program should be spread across Africa,  the Middle East and Asia; to be able to focus on women, children  and the most vulnerable; and not to be limited to those who have  the ability or opportunity to make it here by boat.

 Onshore processing

 In the meantime, we are dealing with the practical realities in  regard to the processing of asylum seekers arriving by boat, not  least the situation in our detention centre network.

 The Government remains committed to an upfront period of  mandatory detention, given that - unlike air arrivals - we generally  don't know who boat arrivals are when they get here. So we need  to do initial health, security and identity checks in order to minimise  any risk to the Australian community.

 Rather than simply opening more centres, the Government will  continue to manage the network prudently and efficiently while  making use of a range of mechanisms that have not been used in  the past.

 As you know, shortly after I became Minister, I began been moving  families and children out of 'held' detention into what are known as  'community detention' arrangements. This is 'detention' in only the  broadest and most technical of senses.

 It involves putting vulnerable people into housing in the community  and providing them with an appropriate level of care and  supervision, with the assistance of our NGO partners, led by the  Red Cross.

 The Government will continue to use community detention  arrangements to provide an alternative to held detention for  vulnerable groups of asylum seekers, given the additional support  that this program provides. In particular, unaccompanied minors  will continue to be accommodated in community detention  arrangements, given the special duty of care and guardianship  issues that they present.

 I am very proud of the way we have progressed these community  detention arrangements, meeting the target I set when I first  announced the policy in October 2010 of getting the majority of  children out of detention facilities by June 2011.

 Since then, 2959 people have been moved into community  detention arrangements and every eligible unaccompanied minor 

 Page 5 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 who arrived by boat before 18 October 2011 has been released  from detention.

 Additionally, on 25 November last year, I announced a new  approach to the management of asylum seekers who arrive by  boat. Following initial detention for health, security and identity  checks, eligible boat arrivals who are assessed to not pose risks to  the community will be progressively considered for community  placement on bridging visas while their asylum claims are  assessed.

 In recent weeks, my department has been developing the  framework and details for the issuing of these bridging visas. The  criteria for priority to be issued a bridging visa include:

 length of time in detention; • vulnerabilities, such as identified torture or trauma  experiences; • behavioural record whilst in detention; and • the ability of family or friends to provide accommodation and  support in the community. •

 People on bridging visas will be given the right to work and support  themselves but no access to Centrelink benefits. Should they be  unable to support themselves, and subject to an assessment of  their needs, they may instead have access to specific programs  that are funded directly by my Department, including the Asylum  Seeker Assistance Scheme or the Community Assistance Support  program, that provide a range of support services, including health  services.

 Those released into the community on bridging visas will have  reporting conditions and people found breaching these conditions  risk having their visas cancelled and being returned to immigration  detention.

 While it is easy to demand the faster issuing of more bridging  visas, the Government is mindful that many of the people granted  bridging visas will have significant support needs. For that reason,  it would be irresponsible and counterproductive to move too fast,  beyond the capacity that exists to support them, both in terms of  government programs and non-government support services.

 I am committed to ensuring that releases under this process are  managed in a responsible and staged way and therefore the  exercise of my ministerial power to grant a bridging visa under the  Act will be implemented on a case-by-case basis.

 Merging of refugee status determination processes

 At the same time as moving to progressively moving people out of  detention, and now that offshore processing is not feasible in the  short-term, the Government has taken the view that, in light of the  High Court's decision in M61, there is little value - and indeed  there is significant inefficiency - in maintaining two parallel refugee  status determination processes.

 So we will move to align the refugee status determination process  for offshore entry persons with the statutory process for onshore  Protection visa applicants. I see that later today you will be  addressed on efficient refugee processing. That is the  Government's aim here, the same efficient assessment process  irrespective of your mode of arrival to Australia.

 To achieve this goal, I have asked my department to develop a  framework for winding down the non-statutory Protection  Obligations Determination - or 'POD' - process, starting in coming  months. The mechanism for this will involve the use of my existing  ministerial powers to allow boat arrivals to access the onshore  process.

 Page 6 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 Complementary protection

 Another way in which the Government has chosen to look 'beyond'  the Convention is the manner in which Australia will assess its  complementary protection obligations.

 Despite the objections of the Coalition, whose Immigration  spokesman argued in Parliament that complementary protection  legislation would act as a pull factor to more 'boat people', the  Government passed legislation to enable consideration of our non-refoulement obligations as part of our refugee assessment  processes.

 In doing so, Australia caught up with many like-minded countries  by introducing a formal process for meeting our non-refoulement  obligations under:

 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; • the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman  or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; and •

 the Convention on the Rights of the Child. •

 It is true that these treaties have always been taken into account -  but only after the primary and review refugee stages had been  completed, and only by the Minister, whose benevolent discretion  was relied upon in the exercise of intervention powers.

 By permitting all claims that may engage Australia's non-refoulement obligations to be considered under one integrated  process, Australia will be able to more efficiently look 'beyond' the  Refugee Convention to other obligations and reduce the time and  anguish involved in the repeated rejections of worthy claims.

 I am pleased to advise you that, subject to the finalisation of the  necessary regulations, the new integrated complementary  protection processes will commence next month.

 Closing

 Today I have tried to set out the ways in which we, as a  Government, are looking 'beyond' the Refugee Convention.

 Complementary protection is an important change that I felt  needed making. It was indicative of the heat that exists in this area  of policy that we had to fight tooth and nail just to get those  changes, which should be fairly uncontroversial, through the  Parliament.

 But complementary protection is not a game-changer.

 Nor are the changes to our onshore refugee status determination  processes and detention arrangements are ends in themselves.  Rather, they are necessary policy adjustments. They do not do  anything to improve refugee protection in our region and they do  nothing to stop people perishing at sea on their way to Australia.

 Australia has a long and proud history of assisting refugees,  including as a founding signatory to the Convention. We have a  choice, however. We can do what the 1951 Convention demands  of us and no more. Or we can adopt a bolder, more innovative  approach to refugee protection, an approach that has the potential  to help many more refugees, and truly look 'beyond' the  Convention.

 Achieving this has not, and will not, be easy. But the benefits - in  terms of human lives improved - means that we cannot and should  not give up on the objective.

 To me, the object of our refugee program is to lift the maximum  number of human beings as possible out of persecution and  misery and to do so in a way that does not risk their lives.

 Page 7 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

 This means using the Refugee Convention as our cornerstone at  all times, but actively working beyond it in partnership with our  neighbours and the UNHCR.

 If we do so, more people will be lifted out of misery or persecution.  More people will receive better protection across our region. And  fewer people will drown in their attempts for a better life. If you ask  me, I can think of few more worthy goals.

 Thank you.

 See: Index of Speeches

 URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm  Last update: Friday, 03 February 2012 at 12:20 AEST 

 Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

 Page 8 of 8 The Refugee Convention and Beyond

 5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182299.htm

