---
title: "Another boat arrival as imported people smugglers thrive under Labor"
date: "2012-06-05"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374367
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2742645%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVAL AS IMPORTED  PEOPLE SMUGGLERS THRIVE UNDER  LABOR June 05, 2012

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with 49 people on board, comes as the government fails to explain how it managed to grant a permanent protection visa to an alleged people smuggler said to be running his operation from Canberra, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "This  latest  arrival,  the  fifth  in  five  days  means  more  than  380  people  have  arrived  so  far  this  month  and  reminds  the Prime Minister that she can either call on her coalition partner Christine Milne to demand support for her Malaysia people swap  as  a  matter  of  confidence  or  immediately  implement  the  Coalition’s  strong  border  protection  policies  to  stop  the   boats," Mr Morrison said. 

 "The  disturbing  reports  of  the  gross  failure  of  the  government  in  allowing  an  alleged  people  smuggler  into  Australia  by boat, granting him a permanent protection visa and then having a television reporter uncover it represents an end to end failure on our borders," he said. 

 "This is what happens when you abolish a border protection system that was working. People smugglers have gotten so brazen they have allegedly brought their trade to our shores along with the record number of illegal boats they have sent. 

 "This disturbing case highlights again just how the government has dropped the ball on border protection and on following through on efforts to police these matters here within our own borders. 

 "Nine out of ten people who are coming on boats are ultimately getting a permanent visa. The people smugglers are  delivering on the product they’re selling and they’re doing that with the aid of a policy of a government that’s given up on  our borders. 

 "This latest failure is an insult and a slap in the face to the Australian people yet all this government can do is trot out their tired Malaysian people swap excuse," Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: "With the interception of the fifth boat in as many days, over a staggering 18,500 people have now been successfully smuggled over Australia’s borders since Labor came to office. 

 "It is now clear that Labor’s abolition of the Howard Government’s robust border protection system and their savage and  deliberate cuts of the frontline agencies dealing with border protection have created a catastrophic failure of public policy. 

 "This failure has cost Australian taxpayers a staggering $4.7  billion  in budget blow  outs and  rising  and  will leave  tragic legacy for years to come. 

 "The  desperate  state  of  this  country’s  borders  was  recently  highlighted  by  revelations  that  senior  alleged  people smugglers and their families had been granted refugee status after arriving in Australia on the very boats that they make money from. 

 "There  is  clearly  a  systematic  failure  when  people  smugglers  have  been  able  to  run  their  criminal  trade  from  our  own backyard and right under the noses of this Labor Government. 

 "It  is  a  sad  day  for  Australian  national  security  when  an  ABC  Four  Corners  crew  have  been  able  to  uncover  what Government resources should have been able to track down but that is what happens when a Government consistently strips funding and personnel from our frontline border protection agencies," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVAL AS IMPORTED PEOPLE SMUGGLERS THRIVE U...

 23/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

