---
title: "Tackling chronic disease in Northern Tasmania"
date: "2012-10-03"
creators:
  - "Evans, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211382939
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1954222%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MINISTER FOR TERTIARY  EDUCATION, SKILLS, SCIENCE & 

 RESEARCH  MEMBER FOR BASS   

 TACKLING CHRONIC DISEASE IN NORTHERN TASMANIA    

 People in northern Tasmania now have access to a full range of integrated health  services to help manage several chronic and complex conditions.    

 Officially opened today, the Northern Integrated Care Service  in Frankland Street, Launceston, will provide accessible, customer-focused,  integrated services for people in Launceston and the surrounding region    

 It will also give patients more choice and control to self-manage their chronic  conditions through life-style modification and education programs.      

 The broad range of services includes diabetes services incorporating  endocrinologist led clinics; diabetes education; dietetics; psychology; and  podiatry; and the Tasmania Medicare Local chronic disease and mental health  and psychology services. There are refugee health clinics, cardiopulmonary  rehabilitation programs, nurse-led cardiac clinics and Active Launceston exercise  classes.    

 As well, negotiations are under way to provide respiratory, chronic pain,  musculoskeletal and neurology services in the future.    

 The Northern Integrated Care Service is funded through a National Partnership  Agreement, with $18 million of combined funding from the Australian and  Tasmania Governments, and $4.5 million from the University of Tasmania.    

 Through national health reform, my Government is building a stronger primary  health care system that promotes good health and health prevention,  and supports privately provided GP services, community health and other state  and territory government-funded services to work together.    

 We want people to be able to get the care they need, when and where they need  it - and the Northern Integrated Care Service fits the bill on all counts. 

 

 This facility is proof positive that national health reform - and, in particular,  improving primary health care for all Australians - is making a real difference in  helping Australians get the high quality services that meet their needs and the  needs of their family.    

 The new service includes the University of Tasmania’s Launceston Clinical  School, which is training medical undergraduate, postgraduate and PhD students  and conducting research into chronic disease. The clinical school development  was supported by a $3 million grant from the Federal Government's Capital  Development Program. 

 

 LAUNCESTON  3 OCTOBER 2012   

 PRESS OFFICE                              (02) 6277 7744   

 MINISTER EVANS’ OFFICE         (02) 6277 7580  GEOFF LYONS’ OFFICE               0418 595 809   

