---
title: "Two more boats shows smugglers playing Labor for mugs"
date: "2012-06-09"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374691
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2736715%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling TWO MORE BOATS SHOWS SMUGGLERS  PLAYING LABOR FOR MUGS June 09, 2012

 The arrival of two more boats today underscores the importance of introducing the tougher measures outlined by the  Coalition to improve the integrity of refugee assessments for boat arrivals to stop Australians being played for mugs by  people smugglers, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 "These latest illegal boats carrying 129 people mean that once again the Government's monthly budgeted arrivals of just  450 has been blown and we are not even ten days into June. 4,000 people have arrived already this year.

 "It also means that more than 12,000 people have turned up on illegal boats since Julia Gillard became Prime Minister  and more than 7,000 this financial year, the highest number on record for any twelve month period.

 "This self made problem for Labor has got worse under Julia Gillard, not better as she promised.

 "Labor's dismissal of the Coalition's proposals to reject asylum claims where people have thrown their documents away  and to ensure that yes decisions are fair dinkum show that even after the embarrassing debacle of 'Captain Emad",   Labor's default response is still to do nothing.

 "At the same time, Minister Bowen refuses to answer when he first learned he had issued a protection visa to a suspected  people smuggler, despite the federal police having put Captain Emad on the watch list and having him under investigation  for two years.  MInister Bowen either sat on his hands or was kept in the dark. Either way it is further evidence of a  dysfunctional government.

 “Minister Bowen has plenty of excuses but no answers when it comes to Labor's border failures. Labor's only response to  surging illegal boat arrivals is to make excuses, blame others and do nothing. Labor have given up on border protection  and given in to the Greens,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said, "This latest boat arrival sees over 7,000 people arrive here illegally this financial year, as the people  smugglers continue to send wave after wave of boats to Australia.

 "Already this month there have been more than double the amount of illegal boat arrivals carrying more than double the  amount of passengers than in June last year.

 "At this rate, 2012 is shaping up to be a glorious year for the people smugglers, with record breaking profits courtesy of  Labor's soft policies as an excuse to do nothing," Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 TWO MORE BOATS SHOWS SMUGGLERS PLAYING LABOR FOR MUGS > M...

 20/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

