---
title: "Australia's moral obligations toward people seeking asylum: address to the second annual Bishop Joseph Grech colloquium on Ethics and Migration, Melbourne Victoria"
date: "2012-08-30"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Refugees"
  - "Refugee policy"
  - "Conferences"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381045
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2277707%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Australia's moral obligations toward people  seeking asylum  Thursday, 30 August 2012 

 Address to the second annual Bishop Joseph Grech Colloquium on  Ethics and Migration, Melbourne Victoria 

 Acknowledgements 

 Thank you, and thank you to Father Pettena for the opportunity to contribute to this  important colloquium on ethics and migration. 

 Father Pettena combines passion with action. Last year, Father Pettena came to see  me to lobby for faster action in moving children into the community, out of detention.  I pointed out to the Father that one of the very real challenges is finding appropriate  housing for children and families, and that with more accommodation we could move  quickly. 

 The next day, Father Pettena called back saying that he had found a former  monastery in Canberra that could sleep plenty of unaccompanied minors and made  it available to us, an offer we accepted with alacrity. He's my kind of action-oriented  advocate. 

 Your Grace Archbishop Denis Hart, Father Pettena, Associate Vice-Chancellor Mr  Chris Sheargold, ladies and gentlemen. 

 I would like to begin by acknowledging the Wurundjeri peoples of the Kulin Nation,  the traditional owners on whose land we meet today, pay my respects to their elders  - past and present - and thank them for their stewardship of our land over the  millennia. 

 This Colloquium is a fitting tribute to the late Bishop Grech who we remember in this  colloquium tonight; his advocacy for justice for refugees and his untiring efforts in  serving and including those so at risk of exclusion, will not be forgotten. I did not  know Bishop Grech, but I know the respect with which he was held and the sense of  loss at his early passing. 

 It is appropriate that in memorial to him the Australian Catholic University and the  Australian Catholic Bishops Conference have created this opportunity for dialogue;  to provide an opportunity to rise above what can be a heated and divisive debate  and come together in goodwill and good faith. 

 If you would also allow me a note of personal remembrance tonight, I would like to  acknowledge tonight the memory of my friend Father Jerry Iverson, who passed 

 away a few months ago. Father Jerry was the parish priest of Our Lady Queen of  Peace, Greystanes in Sydney. 

 He became a warm friend and counsellor for me - a generous man to whom I would  often turn to talk through issues of moral judgement, and who was always happy to  talk issues through with his non-Catholic friend. He would have been intensely  interested in tonight's discussion and I pay tribute to him tonight. 

 I also acknowledge the practical assistance provided that the Catholic Church and  her agencies provide to refugees and asylum seekers around the world and in  Australia. I would particularly like to acknowledge the work of the Jesuit Refugee  Service under the leadership of Father Aloysius Moe. I take the opportunity to  acknowledge the contribution of Bishop Eugene Hurley and Sister Maryanne  Loughry to my Ministerial Advisory Council on Detention. 

 Introduction 

 The theme of this evening's colloquium is 'Australia's moral obligations toward  people seeking asylum'. 

 It may be tempting to suggest that looking at the asylum seeker issue from the  perspective of ethics or morality is to look at it from a new or different perspective. Or  that the only morally acceptable approach is a generous onshore processing regime  which guarantees resettlement to anyone who arrives on our shores as an asylum  seeker. 

 Some argue that we should not return people to their home country even after they  have been found not to be refugees after an exhaustive process of determination. 

 Having had to think deeply about these issues, and put in place practical policies  over the last two years, I reach a different perspective about the moral imperatives of  asylum policy. 

 I believe in an approach that is generous, that recognises the complexities of the  problem and importantly, acknowledges the desperate circumstances that cause  people to travel to seek asylum. 

 When it comes to our moral obligations towards those seeking asylum, we must  consider not just our moral obligations towards those who seek to come to our  shores but also to the millions of displaced people around the world - who equally  long for safety, peace, hope and a better future for themselves and their children. 

 Consequently, I also believe in robust measures to ensure that those who have the  means and willingness to come here by boat should not be advantaged over those  who do not. 

 I believe that asylum seekers should not be demonised and that they are simply  doing what most of us would do in similar circumstances with similar means. Even  those who do not turn out to be genuine refugees are simple seeking a better life for  their family - not something in any way to be condemned. 

 More broadly, I believe in an appropriately high migration program and that we  should promote and in celebrating the success of Australian multiculturalism. 

 Ultimately, the case for offshore processing as part of a properly constructed  regional framework which improves protection outcomes across the region can  probably be best dealt with in two parts: fairness and safety. 

 I think it was these combined moral imperatives of fairness and safety that led the  Expert Panel of Angus Houston, Michael L'Estrange and Paris Aristotle to  recommend the principle of 'no advantage' as the underlying theme of their report -  that people who arrive by boat should not receive an advantage in terms of chances  at permanent resettlement over others. 

 To argue otherwise is to argue that they should receive an advantage, not a  proposition that, to my mind, stands up to close scrutiny. 

 Let's be clear, this is not about punishment or punitive actions. Three good men  would not have put their names to a report which recommended this. Punishing  some to warn others would not, to my mind, be a justified, sustainable or morally  acceptable position. But putting all on a more even playing field when it comes to  resettlement certainly is. 

 Fairness and Equity 

 Let me deal firstly with the issue of fairness - with equity. 

 There are 42 million displaced people in the world - people who have been forced  from their homes through no fault of their own. Around 15 million of these are  recognised as refugees, having fled across national borders. 

 Australia plays a unique role in resettling some of these people, giving them a  chance of a better life. 

 Most countries, such as Germany, France and the United Kingdom, are kept busy  dealing with those arrive. So they resettle virtually no refugees from elsewhere. 

 Others, such as the United States and Canada, have very few asylum seekers  arriving on their shore and so have generous resettlement programs. 

 Australia has determined that we will help as many refugees as we can. And each  year we spend hundreds of millions of dollars helping 13 750 settle into life in  Australia - a figure we announced, last week, would lift to 20 000 - the biggest  increase in our humanitarian program in 30 years. 

 Some people argue that we should both resettle a large fixed number of refugees  from faraway places and settle all those who make it to our shores. Australia is the  only country in the world that 'links' the onshore and offshore programs, you may  hear them argue. 

 But Australia is essentially the only country in the world that both resettles large  numbers of refugees and has a significant number of asylum seekers who arrive on  our shores.  A point of pride for our Humanitarian Program - and an essential ingredient for  effective social integration - is that our settlement services are considered to be the  best in the world, a point reiterated earlier this year by UN High Commissioner for  Refugees, Antonio Guterres, during his visit to Australia. 

 But such settlement services are expensive. 

 That is why the government sets a cap on the total number of refugees we can take  each year, whether from offshore or onshore. An uncapped program would mean an  unlimited budget. Consequently, such a policy cannot be advocated by those who  have the responsibility of economic management. 

 Still, we are increasing our Humanitarian Program quota to 20 000 places - at a cost  of more than $1 billion over the next four years. 

 I note that this is not a bipartisan position and, indeed, has been heavily criticised by  some as sending 'the wrong message'. 

 But the government's view is that, in addition to removing the 'advantage' of arriving  by boat, our policies must increase refugees' prospect of resettlement in Australia  through authorised means. 

 This concept of 'no advantage' is based partly on the moral and compassionate  principle of fairness. 

 Say what you will about Australians' sense of right and wrong; one quality that is  deeply entrenched in our national psyche - including among our newest migrants -  is our sense of fairness. 

 Sitting in my Fairfield electorate office in Sydney's West, I am constantly reminded of  the inherent unfairness of a situation that rewards those who come by boat over  those who don't and can't. 

 I hear the stories of people trying desperately to get family members to safety from  Syria, where they fled from Iraq after a family member was kidnapped and after  receiving regular death threats from local fundamentalists. 

 I hear of the hardship of family members of Assyrians, Chaldeans and Mandaeans  suffering persecution back home; of Copts in Egypt whose places of worship are  shot at or burnt. 

 I talk to some of the relatives of the 1.6 million refugees in and around the Horn of  Africa who wonder if there is any chance, after years of waiting, of being reunited  with their loved ones to enjoy a new life in Australia. 

 Barely a day goes by when, as a local member, I don't hear a story like this, tearfully  told by a local resident worried about the plight of their loved ones. 

 They beg us: though we be out of sight; do not cast us out of mind. 

 This is why, in the most multicultural area of Australia, where many refugees have  made their home, there is very strong support for policies that deter boat journeys  and give more places to people sitting in desperate and prolonged circumstances  around the world. 

 The constituents I speak to every day - who came to Australia as refugees and who  still have relatives in the Middle East, Asia and Africa patiently but desperately  waiting for the chance of a new life in Australia - are to me a pretty good guide as to  whether our refugee policy is operating fairly. 

 Like them, I believe our refugee program should be calibrated to give those refugees  in protracted situations around the world - in the Middle East, in Asia and in Africa -  who don't have the opportunity or resources to use people smugglers at least the  same opportunities as those who do. 

 There simply is no moral justification for providing those with more money and more  mobility with a greater chance at a humanitarian visa and a life in Australia over  those of equal or greater humanitarian need. 

 Proximity surely cannot be the overriding moral principle, whereby we take full  responsibility for every imaginable need - including food, shelter, language skills,  occupational training, entertainment and so on - as soon as an individual makes it to  Australian jurisdiction, but absolutely no responsibility until that point. 

 So it is from people like the refugees in my electorate that I get the strongest  feedback that policies such as the Malaysia agreement, which removes the incentive  to come to Australia by boat but which gives more people the chance of resettlement  in Australia, are the right ones. 

 Safety 

 Let me turn, then, to the second moral principle underlying the Expert Panel's report:  safety - and the need to remove the perverse incentive for desperate people to risk  their lives to get to Australia. 

 There will always be a range of complex circumstances which cause people to travel  to claim asylum. But it is a fact that properly designed regional processing can save  human lives. 

 Conversely, asylum seekers are effectively encouraged to sell everything they own,  borrow whatever other money they need and risk their lives on overcrowded boats  organised by unscrupulous smugglers. And many, as we know, never make it. 

 The first time I had to deal, as Minister for Immigration, with the loss of life at sea  was the December 2010 Christmas Island tragedy. 

 The fact that there have been more tragedies since then should never mean we get  used to or accept these tragedies. Being Minister for Immigration has its challenges 

 - but nothing is harder than the too frequent phone call that informs me that more  people have drowned. 

 I challenge anyone to stand at the memorials at Christmas Island that commemorate  these losses of life - particularly the memorial to the SIEV X of 2001, in which most  of the people who died were young children - I challenge anyone to stand at those  memorials and not commit themselves to a better way. 

 Even as I speak to you this evening, efforts are continuing to find survivors of a boat  that sunk around 45 nautical miles off the coast of Java. Around 150 asylum seekers  on their way to Australia were believed to be on this boat. I have just been advised  that only 22 have been rescued so far. 

 This is the latest in a regular string of fatal voyages - and these are just the ones we  know about. 

 To the best of our knowledge, hundreds of others have boarded boats that have  disappeared in the middle of the night, with none of those aboard ever heard from  again. 

 I simply say to you: this is not a tolerable situation. 

 No-one disputes the legitimacy of the ambition of asylum seekers - or even of  economic migrants who are not refugees - to seek a better life in Australia for  themselves and their families. In their situation, I would do the same. 

 And, so long as Australia's policy settings hold out the incentive to come by boat,  that choice is a rational, if risky, one. 

 I say to you bluntly: those who argue passionately for onshore processing must  accept that this will lead to deaths at sea. 

 There is nothing moral or humanitarian about telling people that their best chance at  a new life in Australia is to risk their lives on the high seas to get here. 

 That is why it is our responsibility, as policy makers, to reconfigure our policy settings  to remove this incentive, without incorporating into our approach the immoral policy  of deflecting those who are fleeing persecution back into harm's way. 

 And this is the nuanced approach the Expert Panel has sought to achieve through its  integrated and complementary recommendations. 

 The policy changes the Expert Panel has recommended - and which the  government is implementing - are designed to discourage people from making  dangerous ocean voyages while, at the same time, providing better regular migration  pathways and continuing the work we have begun to improve conditions for the  hundreds of thousands of refugees in our region. 

 These policies must work in unison to allow asylum seekers to reach the conclusion  that there is 'no advantage' in undertaking the perilous boat journey to Australia. 

 We have moved quickly to implement the Panel's recommendations. 

 Not only to reinstate the option of offshore processing in Nauru and Manus Island -  and reduce the incentive for that boat journey - but also to increase our  Humanitarian Program to 20 000 places, giving more refugees a chance for better  lives in Australia without having to take that journey; and also funding greater work  on protection and capacity building in our region. 

 This broader package of measures is fundamental - and that is why it is incorrect to  describe the government's implementation of the Expert Panel's recommendations  as the 'Pacific Solution Mark II', as some have described it. 

 The increase in our humanitarian resettlement efforts, the commitment to working  with countries like Indonesia and Malaysia to improve protection outcomes, the  commitment to monitoring, transparency and the involvement of non-government  organisations makes our approach a very different proposition. 

 Onshore Processing and Detention 

 While the government has endorsed the Expert Panel's recommendation for offshore  processing, I also want to touch briefly on the morality of what we were doing while  we had no option but to continue with onshore processing. 

 When I first became Immigration Minister, I travelled to Christmas Island and other  parts of our detention network. On Christmas Island I saw a group of young children  - about the same age as mine - playing in a sand pit. It was one of those moments  that triggers a sense of the need for action. 

 Shortly after this visit, and about a month after becoming Immigration Minister, I  announced that we were to begin moving families and children out of 'held' detention  into community detention arrangements. Community detention is detention in only  the broadest and most technical of senses. As many of you know, it involves placing  vulnerable people into community housing and providing them with care and  supervision, with the assistance of our NGO partners, led by the Red Cross. 

 Like much of the good news in this portfolio, this has happened over the past two  years with little fanfare or acclamation. 

 But I am very proud of the way we have progressed these community detention  arrangements, including meeting the target I set when I first announced the policy in  October 2010 of getting the majority of children out of detention facilities by June  2011. 

 More recently, in November 2011, I announced that, following initial detention for  health, security and identity checks, eligible asylum seekers arriving by boat who  were assessed to not pose risks to the community would be issued with bridging  visas. 

 While on bridging visas, they are able to live in the Australian community while their  refugee claims are assessed. They are given the right to work to support themselves  and access to Medicare. 

 This was quickly followed by another initiative that I am pleased to say has  engendered community support, the Community Placement Network (CPN). 

 The CPN was an initiative of the Australian Homestay Network to make short-term  homestay style accommodation accessible to asylum seekers exiting immigration  detention on a bridging visa. 

 It offers interested Australians the opportunity to open their homes to host asylum  seekers for a six-week period. 

 Feedback from hosts and guests has already been very positive. All guests  accommodated through the CPN have found their own accommodation either prior  to, or at the end of, the six week transition period. A number of guests have also  found employment or been able to gain work experience through their host's  community networks. 

 These measures have resulted in a reduction in the average length of detention from  277 days in November 2011 to 86 days in July 2012. 

 Conclusion 

 To conclude, the ultimate answer to refugee issues, both in Australia and around the  world, is, of course, peace on earth. While there is war, tyranny and oppression,  however, there will be human misery, suffering and the search for a better life in  countries such as ours. 

 The role of any single nation state in global community, then, is similar to that of the  individual human being in their local community: to do the most we can with the finite  resources available to us to alleviate the misery and suffering of our neighbour and  contribute to the common good. 

 This, necessarily, must involve an element of justice and prudence in achieving  altruistic ends: prioritising our assistance, not based on proximity or an individual's  resources, but to those assessed to be in greatest need. 

 Unfortunately, we cannot save every man, woman and child in the world; but we can  remove the incentive for people to risk death at sea and, along the way, help more of  those who desperately need our assistance, providing them with a new home in  Australia and an opportunity to rebuild their lives in peace and hope. 

 These twin moral principles - fairness and safety - are the principles which underpin  this government's policy and my approach. 

 Thank you. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb189623.htm  Last update: Friday, 31 August  

