---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: 12 September 2012: dental care; RBA; increasing government revenue; mining royalties; superannuation; super trawler; offshore detention of asylum seekers [and] Superannuation costings"
date: "2012-09-12"
creators:
  - "Di Natale, Richard"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "and"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211381937
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1912357%22
---

 

 

 

 Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader   

 Adam Bandt   Greens spokesperson for Banking   

 Richard Di Natale   Greens spokesperson for Health   

 

 Wednesday 12 September 2012   

 Joint press conference    

 Transcript   

 Subjects: Dental care, RBA, increasing Government revenue, mining royalties, superannuation, super  trawler, offshore detention of asylum seekers 

 CHRISTINE MILNE:  What a great day for Australians when a bill is coming into the Parliament that is  Medicare funded dentistry for children across the country. That is one of the great outcomes that  we’ve been able to negotiate with the Gillard Government, it was part of our agreement following  the federal election in 2010 and of course it’s in part down to the people of Melbourne because it  was as a result of Adam Bandt’s election in Melbourne that we got balance of power in both houses,  we were able to negotiate an agreement that not only has delivered the clean energy package but  has delivered what is happening today and that is Medicare funded dentistry for kids. That has been  a terrific negotiation that has been conducted by my colleague Richard Di Natale so I will hand over  to Richard to just comment on the Denticare package. 

 RICHARD DI NATALE: Thanks Christine. As Christine said it’s really very proud day for me and for the  Greens because what we’re going to see introduced into this country is legislation that for the first  time gives access to Medicare funded dentistry for kids right across the country. We are going to  have 3 and a half million children who for the first time can go to the dentist just like they go to the  doctor. We’re going to see a cap of $1000 provided to all kids over a period of two years so the kids  can now go to their dentist and have fillings, fluoride treatment, scales and clean, all the basic stuff  that needs to happen, funded through Medicare, so it’s a terrific win for the Greens and for country.  It’s really important that we invest in kids because there are some really worrying signs that the oral  health of young children is actually getting worse. We’re seeing large groups of children whose oral 

 health is actually declining and they take that into their adulthood, causes all sorts of problems,  leads to extractions and all sorts of other health complications.  

 Now I know there are some people inside the Labor Party who don’t like us claiming credit for some  of these initiatives but they need a history lesson here. The Government on two separate occasions  tried to close down the chronic disease scheme, the Greens voted against it we said very, very  clearly if you want to abolish this scheme, something better has got to be put in its place. We got  Adam elected into the Lower House in Melbourne and with the balance of power in the Senate we  managed to negotiate a package that provides over $4 billion of investment in dental care. The  Medicare funded package for kids, huge investment in dental workforce and providing infrastructure  right across rural and regional Australia. It’s a huge win and I’d say along with the clean energy  package this dental package are one of two key achievements that has been achieved because of the  Greens through this Parliament. Something I’m very proud of, I know it’s something Christine is very  proud of and Adam and people of Melbourne should be very proud of. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Thanks Richard and we’ll come back to talking about how we might pay for it, but  I’ll just hand over to Adam to talk particularly about the Securency and Reserve Bank scandal. 

 ADAM BANDT: I’m really thrilled to be in the House today as the legislation to give free dental care,   Medicare funded dental care for kids is introduced, it was one of three key planks of the agreement  that Christine and I signed to form the current Government, along with climate change and action on  high-speed rail. It goes to show that when you have Greens in Parliament the community gets  fantastic outcomes. 

 On the Reserve Bank, Labor can no longer continue to block a full enquiry into the growing scandal  of the Reserve Bank of Australia and its subsidiaries. Last night and this morning we’ve heard  disturbing allegations that on Labor’s watch RBA and senior officials of the Reserve Bank of Australia  knew that somewhere in the order of $1 million was being paid in potentially illegal payments to an  overseas agents. When it had been told publicly that these overseas agents contract had been  terminated so they were potentially under the radar payments designed to precisely cover up the  fact that this agent was not meant to be getting any public money at. We need to get to the bottom  of this because there is a growing cloud over the Reserve Bank of Australia and this is a central  economic institution in this country that should be operating according to the highest standards of  governance and the Australian public should enjoy full confidence in the RBA’s governance. Now at  the moment that’s not there, there is a cloud over the RBA and the only way it can be lifted is by a  full enquiry. I don’t believe that further Parliamentary enquiries are going to get to the bottom of  this, we’ve been chasing this through parliamentary committees now for a couple of years, we still  haven’t got the full picture. 

  I have written to the Treasurer urging him to establish a full enquiry with the powers of the Royal  Commission into this growing scandal. I hope he now acts on it, Labor can no longer continue to hide  these allegations of potentially corrupt activity in the Reserve Bank and its subsidiaries. We need to  know who knew what when so that we can have full confidence in the Government and this  important institution. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Can I just add some remarks about how we will, have been proposing to raise  money. One of the big questions everyone is asking around the country is, well we think it’s terrific 

 that the Greens negotiated dental care, we think it’s great that people are wanting the  implementation of the Gonski review, putting billions into public education in particular, it’s long  overdue, people love the idea we’ll go with the idea of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, but  they get really disappointed when they discover that the finances are all back-ended and that not a  lot is going to happen in the first few years. The Greens are saying look, we want to raise the money  to make sure we bring forward this spending. Now there are a couple of initiatives that I’ve got in  Parliament. The first one I gave notice of yesterday was to plug the gap in the Minerals Resource  Rent Tax so that with Campbell Newman now raising in Queensland to lift coal royalties for example  the Commonwealth doesn’t suffer yet another blow to revenue stream when clearly that’s  happening virtually daily as the commodity prices fall. So we actually have to you plug that gap and  the Greens are giving the Treasury a good opportunity to back this bill, in fact the Government  should take it on and do it themselves, we suggested this amendment at the time the bill went  through pointing out this loophole, it’s now time for Wayne Swan to do it, his preferred route of  trying to take it from the GST, I don’t think it will work because he does not actually control how the  GST is distributed around the country and he’s not going to get involved in that Commonwealth  commission I don’t think. Then on the second issue, he’s saying the infrastructure grants, that’s  messy, that’s a long-term fight with the state, it’s much better to clean this up in terms of saying no  more royalty reimbursements to the companies after 1 July last year.  

 So that’s one, the second is a fairer superannuation and tax system. We want to make sure that that  people are helped to save for their retirement but we want to make sure that it is in a fair way and  so we’ve heard the Government is thinking about further changes to superannuation, so we’ve put  on the table a costed proposal that Treasury has looked at to say that we would change the tax rates  on the concessions that go into superannuation for voluntary contributions which effectively mean a  15 per cent reduction on whatever the marginal tax rate is. We’re not married to the specifics of it,  we’re prepared to negotiate but there is an opportunity there that Treasury has identified could  contribute 2.9 billion a year and that would go a long way to helping us with Denticare, with the  National Disability Insurance Scheme and with the implementation of more money into public  schools. 

 JOURNALIST: The Opposition this morning you said that they won’t be supporting the Government's  legislation to stop the super trawler, what’s your reaction to that? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well communities all around Australia will be really disappointed.  I’m not  surprised because Eric Abetz and Richard Colbeck from Tasmania have been leading the charge to  support the super trawler. I know that Australians right around the country, environmentalist and  recreational fishers alike are all saying they just  don’t want this huge vacuum cleaner of the sea  operating in Australian waters and now that the Minister has admitted that they haven’t done the  science, that they don’t know the localised depletion impacts, that the fisheries management plan is  inadequate in that regard, and so the Greens are going to continue the campaign to stop super  trawlers operating in Australian waters and if you look at what they have done in the Pacific and  West Africa you can see that regardless of what people have said about sustainability there has been  fisheries collapse where ever you’ve had super trawlers. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) job losses though? There’s meant to be 50 job losses in Tasmania. 

 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The jobs losses in fisheries will be even more acute if you bring in a super trawler  that is like a huge vacuum cleaner of the sea and ends up with a lot of local fishing communities  losing local jobs. That is the outcome in the longer term. 

 JOURNALIST: The Marine Alliance says that the laws have hastily put together and effectively the  Government is bowing to the Greens, so they’re not as supportive of these laws are they? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well the Government has made its own decision, we’ll have a look at that  legislation before it comes into the Senate, obviously they’re racing it in, the fact is that the  Government is only stalling this decision and we actually need to stop the super trawlers. What this  legislation does is simply push the decision out 12 months beyond the federal election and if you  wanted to be cynical you could just be saying the Government is trying to duck past and get this out  of the way before next year’s federal election. Well what the Greens want to see is two things -  banning super trawlers in Australian waters, but secondly reducing the quota back to what it was. I  don’t know that the community is fully across the idea that the Government actually doubled the  quota in this fishery in order to facilitate the super trawler and that doubled quota remains and the  trawler is simply stalled for two years. So whilst it’s a step in the right direction to stall it we want it  to be stopped. 

 JOURNALIST: The amendments that you announced last night that you would effectively add to the  legislation for a ban, is that contingent on your support, will you support the Government’s  legislation in both houses if that amendment isn’t accepted? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The Greens have made it clear that we want the super trawler stopped. If we  can’t succeed in stopping it we’ll certainly support it being stalled for two years but we want to  actually put the pressure on both the Coalition and the Government to think about this carefully.  The Coalition has come out with its view that it supports super trawlers. I think it’s pretty clear to the  Australian community and that will be part of the mix of how the community responds to the  Coalition coming into next year's election but if the Government won’t agree to banning super  trawlers we’ll certainly support them stalling it but we want it exposed that that’s all it is. 

 JOURNALIST: On the mining tax, Senator, have you had any talks with the Government about your  amendment to increase revenue, have you had any signal that there’s any support at all and when  do you think the vote would come on? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: No I haven’t had a chance to discuss the matter with the Government, I did  speculate whether I should have called it the Friends of Treasury Bill or the Wayne Swan Rescue  Package but effectively no I haven’t had discussions with the Treasurer. He has written to the state,  he clearly is worried about the revenue gap that’s going on here, and effectively the Greens are  offering Treasury a lifeline and I think the Government would do well to take it and when the Prime  Minister is back in her responsibilities here in the Parliament I would be taking that to her. 

 JOURNALIST: With the Coalition not supporting the super trawler legislation in the House of  Representatives, can you say now whether you will support the Government’s legislation? 

 RICHARD DI NATALE: I think Christine’s just answered that. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: We would prefer that the super trawler was banned but certainly if we can’t  succeed on the ban we would support it being stalled, yes. 

 JOURNALIST: The foreign minister of Nauru Kieren Keke is saying that he would be comfortable with  asylum seekers being sent there for five years, what do you think of that? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The Greens have argued that we ought not be sending asylum seekers offshore,  we made that very clear but we’ve also said that if the Government is insistent with the support of  the Coalition in sending people offshore, then they ought to limit the time to no more than 12  months and that takes into account all of the health research that shows that there are serious  health problems, that mental health issues in particular, the longer that people are kept in  detention. So we do not support the idea of people being locked up overseas and in an indefinite  period and we want to have the Government's explain what is a clear inconsistency between the  Prime Minister’s no advantage test which says people can be held there for as long as presumably  the average is across the region and at the same time Nauru and PNG now saying they have other  ideas. Let’s have some clarity here, I think the Government should actually do as the Greens have  requested and in fact not just the Greens, all the refugee advocacy groups, all the mental health  groups are out there saying the same, the less time you can keep people the better it is for them  emotionally and for their long-term health. 

 JOURNALIST: Isn’t less than 12 months though not disadvantaging them, the no advantage test isn’t  working then. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well the Greens have never supported this idea of advantage and no advantage,  it is a nonsense in fact. Everyone who looks at what has happened in this Parliament can only see  failure written all over it. The whole point that this legislation was raced through the Parliament was  to stop people getting on boats. The Greens said deterrence will not work, the refugees are all saying  it’s not going to work, they’re running away from persecution, what’s happening to the Hazaras in  Pakistan at the moment is horrendous, I don’t think that any deterrence is going to stop them and  we have already seen a record number of people - 2150 or more to date, already having come since  the Government introduced this legislation so it hasn’t stopped people risking their lives, all it’s done  is create this big problem for the Government and the community as more and more detention  centres are going to have to be set up across the region to facilitate an expensive and failed policy. 

 JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce has asked why if the Greens were genuinely opposed to processing on  Nauru why didn’t they march into the Prime Minister’s office and threaten to withdraw support  from the Government. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Barnaby Joyce really is a force of instability in the Coalition; I don’t think the  country would appreciate him being a force for instability for the nation.  In fact he is one of the  worries I suspect the community has thinking about what might happen after the next election. The  Greens gave an undertaking to support the Government with confidence and supply and we will  continue to do so. We have been a force for stability in this period of minority Government and it’s  because of that that we got some really good outcomes that we’re here today talking about  Denticare and the clean energy package. The Government has made its position known, the  Coalition supports the Government in this cruel attack on the rights of refugees. That is something  that they will answer in history for our position is very clear. 

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) position to be able to do something about it, Barnaby Joyce aside 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: The Greens in balance of power have always been extremely responsible and we  have said that we’ll offer confidence and supply and we have never threatened to bring down  governments on a whim, in fact we have been very clear about that it would only be in cases of  corruption and the like that we would even go down that path so we are clear about this, we are  here to support the Government with confidence and supply and we will use the floor of Parliament  to put our positions very strongly as we have. Every member of Parliament in the balance of power  parliament has power, every member can work with other members and deliver outcomes and the  thing about the Coalition and Barnaby Joyce in particular is that they haven’t been prepared to use  the power of they’ve got in the balance of power scenario to get good outcomes, they’ve only used  it to be disruptive. 

 JOURNALIST: On the trawler issue, the Coalition says that the Government’s legislation doesn’t make  sense because the same amount fish could be still plundered by more smaller boats. 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: That’s why the Greens are saying that if you’re serious about marine conservation  you should be going back and halving the quota back to what it was before the quota was doubled  to facilitate the super trawler. 

 















