---
title: "Coalition plan to ensure integrity and restore confidence in refugee assessment"
date: "2012-06-09"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211374693
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1713446%22
---

 Media Release  Senator Mathias Cormann  Shadow Assistant Treasurer  Shadow Minister for Financial Services  and Superannuation   

 12/0608/MC 8 June 2012 

 

 Labor's "unsustainable" Mining Tax must be scrapped   

 Julia Gillard and Wayne Swan should hang their heads in shame after their dodgy mining tax deal  was found to be 'ultimately unsustainable' by their own GST Review panel.   

 The GST Review panel has been examining how the Gillard version of the mining tax interacts with  State and Territory royalties.    

 The Coalition has always said that Labor's mining tax was a bad tax which came out of a bad and  highly improper process.   

 We have clearly pointed out that one of the fundamental flaws of Labor's mining tax was that it made  the Federal Budget hostage to decisions by State and Territory governments about their royalty  arrangements.   

 Instead of making our tax system simpler and fairer as we were promised, Labor's mining tax has  made it more complex, more distorting and less fair.   

 We're in this mess because Labor failed to pursue genuine tax reform through a proper process.   

 The Federal government should have engaged all stakeholders - in particular the States and  Territories on tax reform.   

 Instead Julia Gillard and Wayne Swan negotiated their dodgy mining tax deal through a highly  improper process exclusively and in secret with the three biggest mining companies only.   

 They not only excluded their competitors but also State and Territory governments from that process.   

 What Australia needs is genuine tax reform from a government that spends less so it can tax less.   

 We need genuine tax reform based on an open, transparent and inclusive process.   

 Only a Coalition can fix this mess by scrapping this bad mining tax.   

 MEDIA CONTACT:   Senator Cormann    0411 874 546 

