---
title: "Assistance for Syrian refugees"
date: "2012-08-05"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211376448
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1829829%22
---

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  Senator the Hon. Bob Carr   

 August 5, 2012 

 ASSISTANCE FOR SYRIAN REFUGEES   

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced Australia would increase its assistance  for Syria, with a further $4 million for food, blankets and medical treatment for the  more than 145,000 refugees now in camps in Jordan, Iraq, Turkey and Lebanon.   

 Speaking from the Za’atri refugee camp on the Syrian border, Senator Carr said  Senator Carr said Syria's humanitarian crisis had again escalated, with more than a  million civilians homeless and more than 10,000 killed.   

 “This is a humanitarian disaster,” Senator Carr said.   

 "Australia has taken a lead in calling for a unified international response to end the  bloodshed.    

 "And we’re also helping with medical supplies, food and shelter. This additional  funding is a step forward in helping the thousands of Syrian civilians caught up in the  struggle against the Assad regime.”    

 Senator Carr said the additional $4 million in aid would bring Australia's total  contribution to Syria to $20.5 million, making Australia the world’s fourth-largest  national contributor to the refugee crisis.   

 The additional funds would provide food and shelter in the newly constructed refugee  camps, as well as basic health checks and medical care.    

 It builds on existing Australian assistance of food and health care for nearly 500,000  people, delivery of water and sanitation services and the medical evacuation of 500  seriously wounded civilians to Lebanon.    

 Senator Carr said the refugee crisis was also placing severe burdens on water, food  and medical services in Jordan.    

 Jordan is one of the tenth poorest countries in the world in terms of water supplies.  Senator Carr said he urged the international community to renew its efforts to assist  Jordan and neighbouring countries in providing basic food and health care for Syrian  refugees.   

 Minister’s Office: 0435 658 623 

