---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea: 5 October 2012: Visit to Papua New Guinea, talks with Prime Minister Peter O'Neill"
date: "2012-10-05"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Visit to Papua New Guinea"
  - "talks with Prime Minister Peter O'Neill"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211383088
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2277695%22
---

 Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship 

 Visit to Papua New Guinea, talks with Prime  Minister Peter O'Neill  Friday, 05 October 2012 

 Press Conference, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 

 Peter O'Neill: Thank you, members of the press. I just want to take this opportunity  to welcome Minister Bowen to Papua New Guinea, leading this delegation to discuss  issues that concern both countries, particularly the issue of the establishment of the  processing centre in Manus. 

 Minister Bowen has had discussions with our Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, the  Attorney-General and other officials in regards to that matter and we are pleased to  announce that we are ready now to take on the first lot of asylum seekers to arrive in  Manus over the next few weeks. 

 We understand that the facilities on Manus are now being prepared by the Australian  Government through their Defence Force and they are ready to take on asylum  seekers as soon as possible. So that is a clear understanding that has been reached  between both Papua New Guinea and the Australian Government. The Papua New  Guinea Government supports the work that has been carried out by Minister Bowen  and his department and the Defence Force, making sure that this agreement can be  implemented as soon as possible. 

 The other matters we are also working closely with the Manus Provincial  Government; Minister Bowen again has had meetings with the Governor Charlie  Benjamin in respect to some of the services that we will be carrying out to re-establish some of the services that have been declining, particularly in health and  infrastructure. Yesterday we met with the head of AusAID, Mr Peter Baxter, and  we've agreed that we'll send a joint team to Manus to start that work as soon as  possible. 

 We also had discussions about the issues of visa arrangements between Papua  New Guinea and Australia. Minister Bowen has been kind enough to instruct his  officials and also asked the High Commissioner of Australia to PNG to accelerate  that work so that we can relax some of the visa concerns that Papua New Guineans  have raised over time. 

 So again, I want to thank Minister Bowen and the Government of Australia for their  understanding and we look forward to making those announcements in the coming  weeks.   

 Chris Bowen: Thank you, Prime Minister. Thank you for hosting us here in Papua  New Guinea and hosting my delegation. It's been an absolute pleasure to work with 

 you and your government on the progress that we've made for the Manus Island  facility. 

 This is very important, as you know, to Australia. We're doing this to save lives, to  save the lives of people who are making a journey to Australia on very dangerous  boats and too many have lost their lives. And we need to work together as a region  and we have asked for the help of countries in our region, and we've received it in  very good measure from you and your government and your nation. 

 We've worked very closely together on ensuring that the facility is ready soon and I  very much welcome your agreement and announcement that we can begin making  the first transfers in coming weeks. We have a process to go through in Australia - a  parliamentary process - which we will pursue and then we can make those transfers  in the coming weeks. 

 I'm very keen and committed, as I said to you and to Governor Benjamin of Manus  Island, that the people of Manus Island regard us as good neighbours and that we  leave a benefit and legacy on Manus Island for the people of Manus Island,  recognising that they have been very hospitable to us and I want to ensure that  there's benefit for the people of Manus Island from this project. More broadly,  Australia and Papua New Guinea have spoken regularly about visa issues and I'm  very pleased we'll be progressing further discussions on that in a very positive light. 

 We are very good friends, very close neighbours with a good transfer of people  between us and we need to make sure that the visa relations between Papua New  Guinea and Australia are first class, and we'll do that, and we'll continue to work on  those to mutual benefit. 

 So again, Prime Minister, and to the government and people of Papua New Guinea,  thank you for your cooperation and good will. It underlines not only the good  relations between our respective governments, but the ongoing good relations  between our respective nations. It's a relationship which is very, very important to  Australia indeed. So thank you. 

 O'Neill: Thank you again, Minister. Last questions. 

 Journalist: The MOU signed between the two countries enabling this processing  centre to be set up says that it will be done in accordance with the laws of PNG. But  doesn't the Constitution prevent the detention of people unless they've been charged  with a criminal offence? 

 O'Neill: It is not a detention centre, it is a processing centre. So - 

 Journalist: But people are being detained behind a fence, aren't they? 

 O'Neill: Not necessarily. I think Manus Islanders have already stated that they are  free to move around in the community as freely as possible. But you must realise  that there are processes that need to be followed and we will do our best to make  sure that they are looked after in the most humane possible manner. 

 Journalist: Minister Bowen, will children be sent to this processing centre? 

 Bowen: Well, look, we'll continue to talk to the government, both Manus Island and  Papua New Guinea, about the nature of people sent. I've made it very clear that  families and children will not be exempt from the regional processing arrangements  broadly, that it's important we don't give people smugglers a loophole. But in terms of  particular timing of transfers to Manus Island and particular natures of people, we'll  make further announcements about that in due course. 

 Journalist: All the Manus Islanders I've spoken to are very happy that this is going  ahead. It will be the biggest business on the island and they're very happy with the  package that is being developed. But they're also keen to be involved on the  business side of things. Will there be scope for Manus Islanders and Manus Island  businesses to be involved in the operation, maintenance and running of the centre? 

 Bowen: Inevitably, yes. Of course Australia will be entering into contracts and there'll  be specialised work to do. But we're very keen, as I said, to start with to ensure good  benefits for the people of Manus Island and we will need provisions of goods and  services and employees. 

 I said to the Prime Minister, an example, yesterday I was in Nauru, I met some of the  Nauruan employees of the regional processing centre there; it was the first job that  many of them had had in several years. It really is having an economic impact and I  would envisage the same happening in Manus Island. So we'll be making it clear to  our service providers and our constructors that wherever we can reasonably use  local content, that that's a good thing and should be done. 

 Journalist: How about access to the legal system for people in the processing  centre, will that be through PNG courts or will they have access to the Australian? 

 Bowen: The governments have agreed this will be conducted under Papua New  Guinean law, which means Papua New Guinean systems. 

 O'Neill: Alright, looks like no more questions. Everybody seems to be happy. I think  we'll leave it at that. Thank you very much once again. 

 Bowen: Thank you, Prime Minister. 

 O'Neill: Thank you, Minister. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb190603.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 09 October 2012 at 09:42 AEST 

 

