---
title: "Budget 2012: Budget boat comes as Labor run away from another Malaysia vote"
date: "2012-05-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211372946
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1624965%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Budget boat comes as Labor run away from another Malaysia vote  

 10/05/12  

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 60 people on board, comes on top of a fresh  $1.7 billion blow out on illegal boat arrivals in the budget and the same day Labor  has again run away from a vote on their failed Malaysia people swap legislation,  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow  Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “Over 150 boats and almost 10,000 people have arrived since the last election when  Julia Gillard promised to smash the people smugglers business model but instead  super charged it with her new ‘let them in, let them out’ and ‘granny flat solution’  policies,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Just as they did last year, Labor have again today run away from their failed  Malaysian people swap by refusing to bring on a vote on Rob Oakeshott’s proxy  Malaysia bill, which is a carbon copy of Labor’s legislation,” he said. 

 “A year ago, Labor proudly boasted as they announced their ill conceived five for one  Malaysian people swap. A year later, they are not even prepared to vote for it in the  Parliament. 

 “This week’s budget saw a latest border protection blow out from Labor of $1.7  billion, including an increase of $424 million for 2012/13 on last year’s budget  figures, that will cost taxpayers an extra $1.1 million per day. 

 “The $1.7 billion blow out since last year’s budget comes as illegal boats continue to  arrive at record levels and a record number of more than 7,000 asylum seekers are  in detention or in the community. 

 “This latest arrival, the latest budget blow outs and the failure to yet again bring on a  vote on their Malaysia people swap is more confirmation that every day the record of  Labor’s failure just gets bigger,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “Another boat arrives just as Labor have made more damaging cuts  to Customs and Border Protection in their latest budget. 

 “The latest budget cuts a further $25.9 million from Customs’ budget and another  190 personal. This is on top of significant cuts that have been made in previous  budgets. 

 “Since Labor came to office they have cut 750 jobs from Customs and at least $65  million in funding which has left our frontline border protection agencies in a dire  state and made it near impossible for them to adequately protect Australia’s borders. 

 “Labor has systematically targeted Customs since coming to office and the agency  faces a significant crisis. Customs cannot do their job of protecting Australia’s  borders in the face of these drastic cutbacks. 

 “People smugglers and criminals must wonder why Labor is so intent on making their  jobs easier,” Mr Keenan said. 

  

