---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 26 November 2012: Coalition's Private Members Bill on the regulation of registered organisations; AWU; asylum seeker debate"
date: "2012-11-26"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "Office of ABETZ, SEN ERIC"
subjects:
  - "Coalition's Private Members Bill on the regulation of registered organisations"
  - "AWU"
  - "asylum seeker debate"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211386039
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2070045%22
---

 

         - TRANSCRIPT - 

 SENATOR THE HON. ERIC ABETZ   Leader of the Opposition in the Senate   Shadow Minister for Employment & Workplace Relations   Liberal Senator for Tasmania 

 26TH November 2012 

 Comments by Senator Abetz this morning at Senate Doors regarding the Coalition’s Private  Members Bill seeking to improve protection for union members by  introducing financial disclosure  rules and stiff penalties for officers of registered organisations who engage in unlawful activities.  Senator Abetz also comments on the AWU scandal and Asylum Seekers.   

 Senator Abetz: This is the last sitting of the Parliament. This week the Coalition will  be making sure that the Government is brought to account for its whole range of  policy failure. Today in particular the Coalition is tabling a Private Members Bill to  seek to ensure that those people in trade unions that seek to rip off their membership  are brought to account with an appropriate penalty regime. That will be tabled in the  House of Representatives this morning and we as a Senate will be seeking to have  that Bill looked at by a Senate Committee over the Christmas break. This is a Bill  that is going to test the moral character of Ms Gillard and the Labor Party. Their  stance on this Bill will tell the Australian people very clearly whether or not they are  willing to take a stand to stamp out slush funds and to ensure that the hard working  members of the trade union movement will have their money protected from the sort  of scams that we have now seen in the Health Services Union, in the Australian  Workers Union and the Electrical Trades Union and the CFMEU. There are far too  many of these scams that have been exposed to allow it to go through to the keeper  with a very lame excuse that there’s just one rotten apple in the barrel. There are  now a multitude of rotten apples in the barrel and trade union members are entitled  to have their funds protected. 

 Journalist: Senator Abetz is this about the Australian people or is this just about  embarrassing the Government? 

 Senator Abetz: This is about protecting the thousands of trade union members who  on a weekly basis seek to make a contribution to the trade union movement,  basically like an insurance policy. What we have seen time and time again is certain  trade union officials ripping that money off as if it’s their personal fiefdom, as though  its their personal money to buy a waterside mansion in Sydney, to buy a house in 

 Melbourne, and so the list goes on. We know about Craig Thomson and all the  findings made by Fair Work Australia against him and how he has ripped off trade  union members’ monies. So we now have four trade unions clearly in the spotlight.  Trade union members are entitled to have themselves protected from these scams.  

 And can I say there is no moral difference between a company director ripping off  shareholders and a trade union official ripping off members. It’s the same sort of  situation and I cannot understand why there is a different penalty regime applying.  And in those circumstances the Coalition has moved this Private Members Bill. 

 Journalist: But there are changes you are proposing today in the Bill that are very  similar to what the Gillard Government introduced after the Craig Thomson affair. 

 Senator Abetz: No, absolutely not. That is what the Labor Party would try to spin to  you, but the increase in penalty would see people like Craig Thomson being fined  $6,600 for a million dollar rip off. Now can I tell you that most Australians would say  that sort of penalty regime is not appropriate to the magnitude of the offence and the  corporate affairs regime of company directors having a fiduciary duty to their  shareholders should be the same as trade union bosses to trade union members.   So if a company director rips off shareholders they should have the full force of the  law, including the possibility of a jail term applied against them, just as trade union  bosses ought to.  

 Journalist: Yet despite the campaign ratcheting up a few notches the past week or  two the NewsPoll shows both the major parties and Ms Gillard’s popularity remains  pretty steady. 

 Senator Abetz: Look the polls are bouncing around a bit, depending on which one  that you look at. The important thing for us as a Coalition and an Opposition is to  keep the Government accountable and to point out some of the major policy failures  and we regrettably for Australia’s sake have an embarrassment of riches. Be it on  border protection, be it on the surplus and be it on the trade union slush funds and  Ms Gillard’s refusal to give a full, frank and credible statement as to what her actual  involvement was. As a Lawyer I used to do conveyancing amongst other things on a  daily basis. I have been through the conveyancing file on the Victorian property, the  Melbourne property and there is no doubt that Ms Gillard’s fingerprints are  throughout that file and her denials are simply not credible. 

 Journalist: On border protection, how do comments like we are experiencing a  peaceful invasion affect the discourse that’s going on in Australia?  

 Senator Abetz: The simple fact is that most Australians are very concerned at the  lack of border protection. There is no doubt that the Government has failed. We had  a tried, trusted and true policy of border protection under the Howard Government. It  worked, it worked exceptionally well and it stopped the boats. In stopping the boats it  stopped all the drownings at sea and we have just heard about another tragedy in 

 recent times. We stopped all that. Labor deliberately dismantled our scheme and  tried to say how good they were, how clever they were. And of course but for this  collapse in our border protection, the Government might actually be on target in  delivering a budget surplus. 

 Journalist: Doesn’t that phrase demonise asylum seekers who many of them are  genuine and are fleeing persecution?  

 Senator Abetz: The issue of these boat people I’ve commented on in the past. The  simple fact is that I have been to refugee camps including one on the Thai-Burmese  border. And when you talk to somebody who has been displaced and acknowledged  as a refugee since 1994 waiting for placement - nobody has made out a credible  argument to me why that person who has been waiting since 1994 should not be  given priority over those people that seem to have a lot of money and are willing to  engage criminals to get them to Australia. The UN convention on refugees is quite  clear that refugee status is not a game of bypassing safe haven after safe haven  after safe haven until you get to the safe haven of your choice. There are literally  millions of people who have been waiting for over a decade in refugee camps in  quite squalid conditions who I think are more deserving of placement in Australia.  

 Journalist: Wouldn’t they be forced to wait even longer if the Coalition went through  with its plans to slash the migration intake? 

 Senator Abetz: Well, we have announced our policies and regrettably the  Government’s financial position is such that Australia simply does need to pull its belt  in fiscally and as a result some tough decisions need to be made. 

 Journalist: How will the Coalition leadership team be accommodating those  members of the Coalition who’ve expressed concerns about the policy? 

 Senator Abetz: The policy has been announced and it’s got overwhelming, not only  Coalition support, but overwhelming community support. It’s the right policy; it will be  a fair and reasonable policy. And once again I stress, how do you make out the  argument that people with a stack of cash who are willing to engage criminals should  somehow get priority over those people who have waited for over a decade in  squalid conditions in Africa and Asia. Why should people with money who are willing  to engage criminals get an advantage over those people? Nobody has made out a  social justice argument for that and until they have I believe the Coalition policy is the  right policy and it is the only fair and socially just policy. Indeed the Houston report  itself has said that people that engage criminals and come to Australia by boat  should not be given any advantage and, what does that mean?  - That they should  be in the same position as those people who have been waiting in an orderly fashion  in refugee camps around the World for well over a decade. 

 Journalist: Do you think its time that Bruce Wilson makes a statement? 

 Senator Abetz: I’ve heard Bruce Wilson’s comments for the weekend and whilst it  might be commendable for him to have defended Ms Gillard, can I tell you that it’s  not credible. Mr Wilson should make a full and frank disclosure. His bagging out of  Ralph Blewitt I found very interesting given that Ralph Blewitt was Bruce Wilson’s  bag man. It’s one of those bizarre situations where the pot seems to be calling the  kettle black. The simple fact is that Ms Gillard, in her own words, acknowledged that  she established a slush fund for Mr Wilson. That was in her words in the Slater and  Gordon interview. So, in those circumstances it’s very hard for Mr Wilson to give a  credible argument that Ms Gillard did not know, or didn’t have any idea, as to what  she was doing. She knew she was establishing a slush fund - How do we know that?   Because she has said so herself. And she then wrote to Corporate Affairs in Western  Australia claiming that the objects of the organisation were true and credible in  circumstances where she knew that it was a slush fund. And then of course we have  the conveyancing file where correspondence was sent directly to her - where she  made an inquiry about penalty interest rates - where she said ‘wave the fees’. Her  fingerprints were all over the conveyancing file. She was the one that established the  power of attorney - that power of attorney was specifically for one purpose - for the  purpose of purchasing a property in Victoria. So everything is triangulating to a  situation where Ms Gillard knows a lot more than she has let on in the past and  whilst we are still willing to give her the benefit of the doubt, we will only do so if she  gives a full and frank statement to the Parliament.                                      

 

 Media enquiries: David Allender - 02 6277 3019, 0457 590 881 

 www.abetz.com.au 

