---
title: "Gillard sets new record with biggest year of illegal boat arrivals"
date: "2012-07-30"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211433374
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/1813857%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection 

 Michael Keenan 

 Gillard sets new record with biggest year of illegal boat arrivals  

 30/07/12  

 Julia Gillard has eclipsed the previous record she shared with Kevin Rudd for the  highest number of people arriving on illegal boats in a year, with the latest arrival of  another 49 people, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan  said today.    

 “In an unprecedented year of policy failure on our borders, 6,899 people have arrived  on illegal boats just seven months into this year, compared with 6,889 who arrived  under Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard as Prime Minister in 2010,” Mr Morrison said.    

 “When Julia Gillard knifed Kevin Rudd she claimed his government had lost its way  and nominated border protection as his worst crime and yet over 15,000 people have  now arrived on boats on her watch,” he said.    

 “Since Julia Gillard took office she has given us the East Timor farce, the failed and  immoral Malaysian people swap, unwound the last bricks in the wall of the Howard  Government's strong measures by giving boat arrivals bridging visas, works rights  and access to endless appeals in the courts and all the while has refused to reinstate  the Coalition’s proven policies to stop the boats.    

 “Only stubborn pride has stood in the way of the Prime Minister’s refusal to reinstate  those policies and Australians are paying the price. 

 “Julia Gillard has the worst record in our history on border protection, which  combined with her other failures makes her a strong candidate for our worst Prime  Minister on record,” Mr Morrison said.    

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat arrival has made 2012 the biggest year for people  arriving illegally by boat ever - and it is only July.    

 “We have another shameful record broken by this incompetent Labor Government  who have now allowed over 1,600 people to cross our borders illegally this month  alone.    

 “These unprecedented numbers have exposed the gaping holes that Labor have  created in our border protection system and have made the job of our Border  Protection Command all the more difficult. 

 

 “Until there is a change in Canberra and an end to the Labor-Greens governing  alliance, the boats will keep coming and the records will keep breaking,” Mr Keenan  said. 

 

