---
title: "Family to be moved into community detention"
date: "2013-12-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211402986
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2912607%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection  23 December 2013 

 Family to be moved into community detention 

 Earlier today, the Department of Immigration and Border Protection reviewed the  report of an independent psychiatric assessment conducted by Professor Nicholas  Procter - a member of the Minister's Council on Asylum Seekers and Detention -  received on Friday December 20, into the case of an intellectually disabled woman  currently held in Perth with her father. Her mother and three other siblings are on  Christmas Island. 

 In response to this report my department has recommended that placing the family in  community detention is the best course of action for the care of the intellectually  disabled woman. I have agreed with this recommendation and will be issuing a  residence determination order to enable the family to be placed in the community.  Once I sign the order, arrangements will be made to reunite the family and place  them in community detention. 

 I anticipate that a community detention placement can be arranged within a fortnight  of signing the order and this process will be underway tomorrow. 

 This decision is specific to the facts of this case alone and is the product of applying  the due process my department uses in such complex cases. 

 There are no exemptions to the Government's policy of offshore processing and the  decision to place the family in community detention does not translate into a decision  regarding how or under what jurisdiction any claims they may have will be  processed. This matter will be considered at a later time. Today's decision is based  on meeting the immediate health and welfare needs of the intellectually disabled  woman. 

 The fact that a severely intellectually disabled woman was placed on a boat where  even in the event of a mild incident at sea the woman would have been at great risk,  is appalling and highlights why continued strong action is required from the  Government to remove any possible incentive for such appalling acts being  repeated. 

 

 

