---
title: "Carr pushes trade with Burma while regime still uses child soldiers"
date: "2013-05-29"
creators:
  - "Ludlam, Scott"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395017
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2484690%22
---

 Carr pushes trade with Burma while regime still uses child soldiers   

 Australian Greens Senator Scott Ludlam.    

 29 May 2013.   

 While the Australian Government pushes open slather trade with Burma, the country is  plagued by sectarian violence and the continued use of child soldiers by the Burmese  government, the Greens said today.   

 Greens spokesperson on Burma, Senator Scott Ludlam, said “the resource-rush which  appears to be driving Australian foreign policy on Burma may perversely end up  consolidating the regime’s hold on power and attendant human rights abuses.  The 

 Australian Government should urgently rethink its sanctions policy, lest ‘constructive  engagement’ end up as complicity”.     

 “The Government pushed Europe and other countries to permanently lift trade sanctions  on Burma, and has encouraged Australian companies to invest.  At the same time  violent anti-Muslim pogroms have plagued Burma, often with the complicity of  authorities, and the Burmese military continues to use child soldiers.   

 “Human Rights Watch reported today that one year into the Burma-UN action plan, the  Burmese military still includes children as young as ten.   

 "Tens of thousands of Muslim Rohingya people were forced to flee Arakan/Rakhine state  last year and 130,000 now live in refugee camps.  Today reports have emerged that a  mosque and a Muslim orphanage in Burma were burned down by extremist mobs, and  police discovered a weapons cache in a Buddhist ‘monastery’.   

 “The use of child soldiers and violence from racist gangs are just two elements of the  Burmese crisis:  The army has caused widespread destruction in its attacks on the  Kachin people, and a report has been sent to the International Labour Organisation  claiming that Rohingya women are being forced into sexual slavery by the military.   

 “The rush to open Burma for business has eroded the leverage for reform, allowing the  army to continue to dominate the political system and trample human rights.  The  Australian Government must reconsider its enthusiasm for cutting deals with a  dictatorship.”   

 

 Contact:  Giovanni Torre - 0417 174 302   

