---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne:19 July 2013: asylum seekers; Fringe Benefits Tax; election"
date: "2013-07-19"
creators:
  - "Wong, Penny"
source: "MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND DEREGULATION"
subjects:
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Fringe Benefits Tax"
  - "election"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397389
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2876891%22
---

 

 

 Transcript 

 TRANSCRIPTION: E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 DATE: 19/07/13   

 TITLE: Transcript of Interview - SKY AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert   

 SUBJECT: Asylum Seekers; Fringe Benefits Tax; Election 

 

 JAYES: Front bench Minister, Penny Wong, spoke to Kieran Gilbert on AM Agenda this  morning, and he started by asking her about the policy changes in the works at the  moment. Particularly about those asylum seekers and genuine refugees being resettled  elsewhere.  

 WONG: Look, what we do know is this is a really tough policy area. It’s a policy area  that, unfortunately, has meant we’ve seen really tragic consequences as a result of the  people smuggling trade, particularly in recent days and weeks. We also know it’s an  area where simply chanting slogans is not going to have the outcome we need. What  the Government is doing is what needs to be done, which is to work with our region, to  get a regional approach to what is a regional problem.  

 GILBERT: Now, Tony Abbott’s repeatedly said the Government needs to ‘take the  sugar off the table’. Is that what you’re doing with this plan to resettle refugees  elsewhere?  

 WONG: Well, Kieran, I’m not going to comment on the speculation that’s in the papers  this morning. But I will say this: Tony Abbott is very good at fronting up with a lot of 

 slogans which he repeats over and over again. This is a very difficult policy area. It is a  policy area that demands a much more considered approach - a much more  sophisticated approach - than simply chanting slogans in front of a camera over and  over again. There is a regional problem here and the Government will continue to work  with our region to get the answers that are needed to prevent people getting on leaky  boats. Because we all understand the tragic consequences of that.  

 GILBERT: Now, I want to ask you about another development though in this space.  The Indonesians have announced that they’re going to remove the automatic visa on  arrival for Iranian citizens. First of all, just explain to us why that’s important and  significant. 

 WONG: Well, I don’t have all the detail of that announcement, but I would say that it  really confirms the point I was making in our first discussion: you have to have a  regional approach here. You have to work collaboratively with countries of transit. You  have to work collaboratively with Indonesia, as well as Malaysia and the other nations  of our region. And that is why Tony Abbott’s policy approach is so ridiculous. I mean,  what he’s saying to you is that we will tell you we will turn back the boats, even though  the Indonesian Government has said that is not acceptable to them and they will not  countenance it. This is an extraordinary proposition from the Leader of the Opposition;  that our most populous neighbour, instead of working with them, he would actually say  ‘we’re going to engage in unilateral action, even if you don’t agree with it’.  

 GILBERT: But don’t Australians also have the right to question Mr Rudd’s credibility on  these issues - his credentials on border protection - given he was the one that made  the mistake in the first place and dismantled the system that worked? 

 WONG: I think there is a range of ways you can look at what’s occurred over the last 10  years, and what I’d suggest to you is that whatever people say about domestic policy  there are also international factors and what is happening in the people smuggling  trade. I think, as the Prime Minister and Tony Burke have said: you can’t just look at the  past and decide that policies which you put in place five or ten years ago are the right  policies.  

 This is an area where you need to look at policy changes relevant to the business  model that people smugglers adopt. And that is why you have to work with your region.  Because simply acting unilaterally - as much as Tony Abbott might like to beat his  chest - is not going to get the outcome we want, which is to prevent people getting on  boats and people purchasing the product the people smugglers sell. 

 GILBERT: On the Government’s move to rein in fringe benefits tax concessions for  salary sacrificed vehicles ... There has been quite a backlash; the automotive industry  held crisis talks yesterday. The third largest leasing company announced its standing  down more than 70 people. Did you anticipate this sort of reaction? 

 WONG: Can I start by reminding everybody what this change actually is. We’re not  abolishing the concession. What we’re saying is that if you claim a tax deduction for  work-related use of your vehicle, you actually have to use it for work. It’s the same  proposition as saying if you want a childcare rebate, you have to put your child into  childcare. I don’t think that is an unremarkable proposition.  

 As Finance Minister, I have to say any savings decision that the Government takes is  usually criticised, often vehemently by a particular group. We have to look at what is in  the national interest, and the national interest I think is served by moving to an  emissions trading scheme; a lower carbon price for households and for business, but at  the same time reaching Australia’s reduction in greenhouse gas emissions - in carbon  emissions. That’s a much better policy outcome than what is certainly being proposed  by Tony Abbott which will, as you know, just hit families. 

 GILBERT: You say it’s not an unremarkable - or not a remarkable move, I should say;  it’s not unremarkable to close a loophole. But hasn’t an industry built itself around that  particular tax treatment and then we’re seeing dozens of jobs lost as a result? 

 WONG: And this is a Government, as you know, that has always made jobs a priority  and that’s why we’ve seen the creation of over 950,000 jobs since the Government was  elected. It’s why we acted in the way did through the global financial crisis. And it’s why  we put money on the table - which the Coalition would take off the table - to support  the car industry, because we understand the importance of those jobs.  

 But, ultimately, I understand that some people find this controversial and some people  are opposed to this, but I think the proposition that if you claim a tax deduction for work,  you need to be using your vehicle for work, is a sensible one.  

 I appreciate that there are people who have built businesses up under the old system  but we have to look, as a Government, to what’s sustainable in the long term. 

 GILBERT: And finally, Senator Wong, I want to ask you about this Channel 7  ReachTEL poll. It’s got the Coalition still in front despite the Rudd bounce - your  thoughts on that? 

 WONG: Well, I don’t really need the sort of commentary on the polls to tell me what  people are telling me, and people are saying very clearly around the country that they’re  tired of the personal, aggressive, negative politics that we see on display from the  Coalition. What they do want is a vision for the future and they want people talking  about the national interest and what’s in the national interest, rather than just going the  personal attack. I think it’s a great credit to Kevin that he’s really focussed on that in the  face of the constant personal attacks that we’re seeing from the Opposition. 

 GILBERT: Finance Minister and Government Senate Leader thanks so much, Penny  Wong. I appreciate it. 

 WONG: Good to be with you. 

 ENDS 

 

