---
title: "Greens introduce bill for more and better aid"
date: "2013-06-26"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396347
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2550490%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE - 26 June 2013   

 Greens introduce bill for more and better aid   

 Greens spokesperson for overseas aid Senator Lee Rhiannon introduced into the  Senate this afternoon a private members bill that would ring-fence the aid budget from  further cuts and keep Australia on track to give more and better aid.   

 The Overseas Aid (Millennium Development Goals) Bill sets out a clear year-on-year  timeline to ensure Australia meets the global target to spend 0.7 per cent of gross  national income (GNI) on aid by 2020. The Greens bill excludes spending on onshore  processing of asylum-seekers and military objectives from this aid target and establishes  a Commissioner on Aid Effectiveness to act as an independent watchdog to ensure aid  is spent effectively.   

 “The case for increasing overseas aid is clear: aid money, spent effectively, can make a  difference to people's lives” said Senator Rhiannon.   

 “In the last year, both Labor and the Coalition have back-pedalled from a bipartisan  commitment to increase aid to 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2015. Federal Labor has sucked  over $700 million from the aid budget to pay for onshore detention and the Australian  Defence Force have been caught out misallocating $190 million in defence spending as  aid.   

 “This bill would require the Foreign Affairs Minister to report to parliament  annually on  whether that year’s target has been reached and if not the Minister must set out the  steps being taken to ensure Australia’s aid gets back on track.   

 “Costings from the Parliamentary Budget Office show that the targets in this bill would  cost $2.6 billion over the next four years.  This money could be raised if Labor included  gold in the mining tax.   

 “Australia should be able to proudly display its credentials as a generous donor willing to  pull its weight when it comes to poverty alleviation. It is shameful that our aid  contributions wallow well behind countries such as Britain, Sweden, Norway and the  Netherlands.   

 “My office has received hundreds of messages of support for this bill. The Australian  community gives generously from their own pockets and there is strong support for the  Australian government to do likewise” said Senator Rhiannon.   

 Senator Rhiannon’s second reading speech is here: http://tinyurl.com/q9pv9uu.   

 Contact: Jemma Bailey 0487 350 880   

