---
title: "Multicultural youth sport grant round opens"
date: "2013-04-04"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR SPORT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392824
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2349540%22
---

 

 Media release  Senator the Hon Kate Lundy 

 Minister for Sport, Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Minister  Assisting for Industry and Innovation 

 4 April 2013  

 Multicultural youth sport grant round opens 

 Multicultural youth from across the country can look forward to new sporting opportunities  with the third round of the Multicultural Youth Sports Partnership Program now open.  

 Minister for Sport and Multicultural Affairs Kate Lundy explained the Multicultural Youth  Sports Partnership Program provides grants to organisations of between $5,000 and  $50,000 to help youth from new and emerging communities and culturally and linguistically  diverse backgrounds to participate in sport within their local communities. 

 “Sport is an important part of Australian culture, and as a Government we want to help local  sporting organisations better connect with new and emerging communities,” Senator Lundy  said.  

 “Through this program we are helping refugees and new migrants to better understand  Australian culture through sport.” 

 Senator Lundy today joined members of the Sunshine Heights Cricket Club in Melbourne to  see how the Club is using the Multicultural Youth Sports Partnership funding they received  last year to help deliver their 'We Don't Like Cricket - We Love it!' program. 

 “The 'We Don't Like Cricket - We Love it!' program provides great opportunities for local  refugee children to participate in weekly cricketing activities in a safe and supporting  environment,” Senator Lundy said. 

 “Sport is a fabulous driver for building participation and inclusion for young Australians from  diverse backgrounds - and this is so very clear here in Sunshine.  

 “The Multicultural Youth Sports Partnership will continue to play an important role in helping  these young people to participate in their local communities through sport.” 

 Applications are now open for the next round of Multicultural Youth Sports Partnership  program. Applications close on 2 May 2013 and successful applicants will be announced in  July 2013. 

 For more information about the grants, visit ausport.gov.au  

 Media contact: Chris Owens 0409 945 476 

 

