---
title: "$172,500 boost for youth cultural program and men's shed in Logan"
date: "2013-05-09"
creators:
  - "Lundy, Kate"
source: "MINISTER FOR SPORT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435922
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2431477%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 Media release   Senator the Hon Kate Lundy Minister for Multicultural Affairs The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP Member for Rankin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9 May 2013  $172,500 boost for youth cultural program and men’s shed in Logan  ACCESS Community Services in Logan will receive $172,500 to engage the young migrant community in arts and music programs through the Australian Government’s Settlement Grants Program. The funding, which aims to help migrants and refugees settle in Australia and participate in the community, will also provide a men’s shed where Australian men, including those from multicultural backgrounds, can mentor new arrivals. Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy and Member for Rankin Craig Emerson today announced the funding boost while visiting ACCESS in Logan. Minister Lundy said ACCESS has provided support and services to newly arrived migrants and refugees in the Logan area since 1992. “I’m pleased to announce work will continue to be supported,” Senator Lundy said. Federal Member for Rankin Craig Emerson said it is important new migrants and refugees are given the support they need to settle into their new life in and around Logan. “Initiatives like these go a long way in welcoming new members of our community and helping them to feel comfortable in their new surrounds,” he said.  ACCESS chief executive Gail Ker said the programs provide the perfect mechanism to help refugees and migrants gain an understanding and acceptance of Australian culture and way of life. “Art and music are universally appealing tools to young people,” Ms Ker said.   “For the older age bracket, the men’s shed will bring local men and newly arrived refugee men together to learn practical skills in a friendly and supportive environment.” The cultural program will be extended to youth in Ipswich and Goodna in its second year of funding. The program would complement ACCESS’s youth sports activities 

 which are also funded under the settlement grants program.  

 From July 1, a total of 102 new grants delivered through more than 100 organisations  will be funded under the settlement grants program nationally. 

 The government is providing a total of $41.3 million to support new migrants and  refugees through the settlement grants program in 2013-14, including $1.39 million to  support the implementation of recommendations of the Report of the Expert Panel on  Asylum Seekers. 

 Media contact: Chris Owens 0409 945 476   

 

