---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Geelong: 9 November 2013: Coalition's failed turn back the boats policy; Australia's relationship with Indonesia; entitlements; Coalition cuts to AusAID"
date: "2013-11-09"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Coalition's failed turn back the boats policy"
  - "Australia's relationship with Indonesia"
  - "entitlements"
  - "Coalition cuts to AusAID"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400496
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2835453%22
---

 

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SATURDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2013   

 Subjects: Coalition’s failed turn back the boats policy, Australia’s  relationship with Indonesia, entitlements, Coalition cuts to AusAID.     

 Richard Marles: Well, we have learnt early today the Abbott Government has  backed down to Indonesia in accepting those people who were intercepted at sea  near Christmas Island on Thursday. This was inevitable. Anybody who voted at the  last election believing they were voting for a government that would have a firm  hand on the rudder today will be sorely disillusioned.    

 The diplomacy of the Abbott Government with Indonesia around asylum seekers has  been absolutely inept. We all know when it comes to our interactions with Indonesia  around asylum seekers they have to be based on cooperation. This is our nearest  neighbour, this is the country from which the boats come and yet what we have  seen is Tony Abbott announcing a policy of dealing with asylum seekers by buying  fishing vessels from Indonesia without even first talking to the Indonesia  Government. What we have seen is the embarrassing spectacle of the Abbott  Government seeking to dictate terms to the Indonesia Government. This is  schoolyard diplomacy backed up by half-hearted resolve and it is a sad  embarrassment.    

 We all know we need to have cooperative relationships with Indonesia. For a  Government that said that its foreign policy would be more characterised by being  based more on Jakarta than Geneva, today its foreign policy is not in great shape  and its border protection policy is in absolute tatters. We understand today why  there has been so much secrecy around operation sovereign borders. We  understand why there has been so much secrecy around tuning the boats back  because it is clear turning the boats back is a commitment this government is not  fulfilling.    

 So today, I call upon the Prime Minister and Minster Morrison to end this farce, to  end this culture of secrecy. All that we ask is this government speaks plainly and  simply to the Australian people about the progress of its border protection policy and  I also call on the Abbott Government to treat its relations with Indonesia with the  dignity that relationship deserves knowing that if we are going to make progress on  bringing to an end people smuggling that we must be dealing with Indonesia on a  cooperative basis.    

 Journalist: Mr Marles, Labor had a similar stand on the Oceanic Viking; do you  think Mr Morrison is right to not let this drag on?   

 Marles: Well what we have seen is a government which went to the election with a  policy of turning the boats back and what is absolutely clear from the events of  today is that the boats are not being turned back, indeed the boats are coming to  Christmas Island. The border protection policy which Tony Abbott took to the  election today is in tatters.    

 Journalist: Do you think this is something of a back down from the Government?    

 Marles: There is no question that what we have seen is a back down from Tony  Abbott. As I said, this is schoolyard diplomacy backed up by half-hearted resolve.  Tony Abbott has embarrassingly tried to dictate terms to Indonesia and yet the  opposite has occurred and that was always inevitable.   

 Journalist: Wouldn’t it be worse though if Tony Abbott did engage in this argument  with Indonesia? Isn’t it good that Scott Morrison acted quickly to get this over with?    

 Marles: What would be good is if this Government could demonstrate a culture of  transparency rather than secrecy. What would be good is if this Government could  treat its relationship with Indonesia with the dignity it deserves and start working  with Indonesia cooperatively when it comes to asylum seeker issues. It is simple  common sense that when we are talking about our neighbourhood, we are talking  about the country from which the boats come, that the only way we are going to  make progress on this issue is if we work cooperatively with Indonesia. That is what  we have not been seeing and that’s what we need to start seeing from this  Government.    

 Journalist: With the changes to travel entitlements, do they go far enough?    

 Marles: Well, we welcome the announcement today by the Government and the  fact the Government is now moving on this issue. We have always said that we are  willing to sit down with the Government and work cooperatively on coming up with a  program around entitlements which provides for greater transparency to the public  and a greater sense of confidence for those politicians who are using the  entitlements system. We’ll obviously look at the detail that’s being proposed but we  welcome the announcement today and are very happy to sit down with the  Government and work cooperatively on it.    

 Journalist: One thing that is missing is this independent oversight of claims, should  there be independent oversight?   

 Marles: Well there is a lot of scrutiny when it comes to entitlements and all the  entitlements that people use are of course placed on the public record as they  should be. The greatest oversight and scrutiny that occurs is obviously from you  folk. I think that -    

 Journalist: - Shouldn’t there be somebody else so it’s not up to the media to pull  politicians up on this?    

 Marles: Well, what I think matters is there is complete transparency about the way  in which politicians use their entitlements and that’s what exists. Now, it is also  important there is public confidence around what the rules are and there is a sense  of confidence on the part of politicians about how to operate within the rules. We  have made it clear we are happy to work with Government to come up with  amendments to those rules that build the confidence and we welcome the  announcement that’s been made today and we’re happy to sit down with the  Government and work through those rules in detail.    

 Journalist: So you wouldn’t be pushing for any independent oversight?    

 Marles: Well, as I said we think what is important here is there is public confidence  in this system, that there is complete transparency in this system and we will be  very happy to sit down with the Government and make sure we can build that  confidence.     

 Journalist: Do you think that it’s any clearer if you can claim for events like a  sporting event or a wedding? Is that clear? Can we still do that?    

 Marles: It is for every member of parliament to defend the basis on which they  claim an entitlement and the basis on which there entitlement has been related to  their work and parliamentary business and that’s what’s important. Making those  rules more clear is something that we are happy to sit down with the Government  around. As I say, we welcome the announcement that has been made by the  Government today in terms of trying to make those more clear but we will keep  working with the Government to build confidence in this.   

 Journalist: What about members taking VIP flights with family members, do you  think those entitlements should stay?   

 Marles: Well, again I’m not going to comment on the specifics of what has been  proposed today. We are happy to sit down with the Government and make sure that  we have total transparency around whatever the rules in relation to entitlements so  that they can be scrutinised entirely by the public so there can be a sense of  confidence from the public about how the rules operate and that politicians are  operating within them, and I might say as someone who deals with these rules that  there is a sense of confidence amongst politicians that they can operate in doing  what they do, they can operate within those rules. 

 

 Journalist: One of the recommendations out of today was to limit spouses travel.  Do you think some of your colleagues such as Bob Carr pushed the boundaries on  overseas trips?   

 Marles: I’m not going to comment in relation to that. I think that it is appropriate  on occasion that there is spousal travel which is why it forms part of the entitlement  and certainly when you’re talking about the sort of travel that foreign ministers  undertake in lots of those situations there are spouses of other foreign ministers so  there needs to be common sense applied to that. There needs to be a plain set of  rules which is why it’s important there is a bipartisan approach to this and that you  have both sides of politics working to have a clear set of rules the Australian people  can understand.    

 Journalist: If we could just turn to AusAID, the Government has cancelled AusAIDs  graduate program revoking job offers already made. Do you believe these positions  should be reinstated?   

 Marles: Well, we are certainly very concerned about the cuts to Australia’s overseas  aid program that have been put in place by this Government. They are very, very  severe cuts that breach commitments the Coalition made when in opposition, there  is no doubt about that and the announcement that we have seen today is sadly a  follow up in relation to that. Our overseas aid program is a wonderful program, a  program that Australians can have a great sense of pride about but it’s important  that it be kept up to date and that it be a quality program. It’s not just a matter of  helping people overseas, although it is very much about that, it’s also a matter of  Australia’s standing within the world and there is a huge national interest in having a  really effective overseas aid program and we are very concerned about the cuts the  Government has have put in place in terms of affecting that.      

 Journalist: If those jobs are already offered that’s a bit rough isn’t?   

 Marles: I think that revoking jobs that have been offered is rough and the cuts  that’s we’ve seen to AusAID is a real concern and this is just another step down that  path. And it is concerning that jobs that had already been offered are being cut and  it says that this Government does not have the concern about our standing in the  world that it should, and having a quality overseas aid program is about that and  that is very much in our country’s national interest.    

 ENDS                      

 

