---
title: "A picture of despair; images from Manus Island"
date: "2013-02-13"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390477
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2226678%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 13 February 2013   

 A picture of despair; images from Manus Island   

 Photographic images from within the Manus Island detention centre, exposing the harsh and  objectionable conditions there, have been released by Senator Sarah Hanson-Young’s office  today.   

 The images can be viewed and downloaded here.   

 “These images are proof that Australia must stop sending people, especially children, to the  detention centres on Manus Island and Nauru,” The Greens’ immigration spokesperson Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “Anyone can see that the conditions there are totally unacceptable for adults and it breaks my  heart to know that children are being locked up there as well.   

 “There should be no excuse for the media not being granted full access to the facilities so that  the public don’t have to rely on leaked images to see what conditions are actually like there.”   

 Speaking in Senate Estimates yesterday Professor Gillian Triggs, President of the Human Rights  Commission, voiced her concerns about the situation in Australia’s offshore detention centres  and these photos help to show why they’re so unacceptable.   

 “Australia is not a cruel country, but when I toured the PNG detention facility it was very clear  that the government is acting cruelly,” Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “As one refugee told me when I was on Manus Island, the conditions of the camp reminded of  life in the Iraq war and he was re-traumatised by the experience on Manus Island.   

 “The UNHCR has recommended that no more children be sent to Manus and we believe, after  seeing the conditions there, that no one should be forced to live in such destitution.   

 “It is time for Julia Gillard and the Labor Party to stop competing with Tony Abbott’s Liberals in a  race to the bottom and bring these people back to Australia.”   

 The images can be viewed and downloaded here.   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

