---
title: "Risk of tragedies at sea rising with records arrivals and bigger boats"
date: "2013-05-03"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719447%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RISK OF TRAGEDIES AT SEA RISING WITH  RECORD ARRIVALS AND BIGGER BOATS May 03, 2013

 The biggest illegal boat to arrive in six months, with 186 people on board, and consecutive record months for boat arrivals present a growing risk of further tragedies at sea under Labor’s border protection failures, Shadow Minister for Immigration  and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Record boat arrivals, including two successive record months, and larger numbers of people per boat elevates the risks for those  people  sent  on  a  boat to Australia by criminal  people  smugglers  under  Labor’s  border  protection  failures,”  Mr  Morrison said.

 “No one wants to see a repeat of the tragedies at sea that have occurred over the last five years. That is why it is crucial that a full suite of proven policies is implemented as a proper deterrent to break the people smugglers’ networks which  under this Labor government have spread as far as Sri Lanka and India.

 “Each new illegal boat is potentially a tragedy waiting to happen and that risk has increased dramatically this year. That’s  why  the  Coalition  will,  if  elected,  act  to  stop  the  boats  and  in  turn  save  lives  and  restore  integrity  to  our  immigration program,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “May has started badly as the biggest boat arrival of the year, carrying 186 people, was intercepted on Wednesday.

 “This reaffirms that May is set to start exactly how April finished with the Australian navy being used as a daily water taxi by the people smugglers.

 “April was the biggest month for boat arrivals ever on record with 46 boats, carrying 3369 people, being smuggled across Australia’s borders courtesy of criminal people smuggling syndicates.

 “The farce that is Labor’s border protection policies has reinvigorated people smuggling to a level previously unseen.

 “It is going to take a strong resolve to implement the necessary tough measures to put an end to this insidious trade - something only a change of government will bring,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RISK OF TRAGEDIES AT SEA RISING WITH RECORD ARRIVALS AND BIGG...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

