---
title: "Treasury warns Kevin Rudd's border blow outs to hit $15b"
date: "2013-08-13"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398730
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2662188%22
---

 

 Media Release    

 Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman 

 

 Tuesday 13 August 2013    

 Treasury warns Kevin Rudd’s border blow outs  to hit $15 billion    

 The Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook warns taxpayers could be hit with an  extra $3.5 billion blow out under Labor’s continued failure on our borders, taking  Labor’s total blow outs on their failed border protection policies to more than $15 billion  if re-elected.    

 “The PEFO clearly says that arrivals continuing as they have under Labor will cost  taxpayers an extra $3.5 billion over the next four years (Pre-Election Economic and  Fiscal Outlook 2013, p. 57), adding to the over $11.6 billion in blow outs Labor has  already run up because of their failed border protection policies,” Shadow Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.    

 “This means an extra $15 billion in higher taxes and less spending on crucial government  services under Labor’s form and record in government.    

 “Labor’s form over the past six years is higher illegal boat arrivals, policy chaos and  constant budget blow outs. That’s why Treasury backing Labor on illegal boat arrivals is  backing them against the odds.    

 “Every budget and every budget update from this government has got it wrong when it  comes to forecasting spending on illegal boat arrivals. Inevitably each budget and each  update leads to more cost blow outs.    

 “Just six weeks into the financial year almost 5,000 people have turned up on boats -  close to a third of arrivals the PEFO has forecast over the entire 13/14 financial year.  More people illegally arriving will mean further blow outs.    

 “After Labor was elected in 2007 around 7,500 people turned up on boats. After forming  Government a second time, more than 40,000 people have so far arrived. After more than  seven policy failures from East Timor to Malaysia and now the big bluff on PNG, Labor's  form just cannot be trusted.    

 “Under Labor the boats always continue and the costs always go up and up and up. This  is their form and record in government.    

 “The PEFO’s preferred figures on boat arrival spending must have been written under the  assumption of a Coalition Government implementing proven measures to stop the boats.  This is the only way Australians will see reduced costs as the boats stop, just as they last  did under the Coalition.    

 “Labor can’t implement strong border protection policies. Just as their PNG election fix  continues to unravel so too will their budget forecasts. Australians have come to realise  that Labor and Kevin Rudd are all talk when it comes to their promises on border  protection and that they will always have to pay more as a consequence.    

 “The only way for Australians to stop the boats and avoid yet another billion dollar blow  out on our borders is through the election of a Coalition Government which will once  again stop the boats and end Labor’s record of cost, chaos and tragedy,” Mr Morrison  said.    

 Media Contact: Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667    

 

