---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Werribbee [Werribee]: 22 November 2013: Scott Morrison's weekly briefing embarrassment"
date: "2013-11-22"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400989
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2861644%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE   INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPT  WERRIBBEE  FRIDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2013   

 Subjects: Scott Morrison’s weekly briefing embarrassment    

 RICHARD MARLES: Alright, well thank you for coming here this afternoon. We  have seen, this afternoon, the latest episode in Scott Morrison’s farce of secrecy.   This is no longer a set of weekly briefings; this has become a weekly  embarrassment. Scott Morrison is refusing to answer questions about the tow-back  boat which sank last Friday, he’s refusing to answer questions about the state of  cooperation with Indonesia given the circumstances of the last few days, he’s  refusing to answer questions about whether any boats have been bought in  Indonesia, he’s refusing to answer questions about how many people are on TPVs.  This has descended to a new level of secrecy, and when it comes to asylum seeker  policy, Scott Morrison is treating the Australian people on a “needs to know” basis.  This is in direct contradiction of the commitment that the Abbott Government made  before the last election to lead a Government which would be open and transparent  and that is a disgrace. 

 JOURNALIST: As far as Mr Morrison actually refusing to go through some of the  ramifications of Indonesia pulling out, do you think it’s actually warranted  considering the situation politically? 

 MARLES: I think given the circumstances of the last few days and the fact that  Indonesia has specifically said that asylum seeker cooperation would be an issue  going forward, that it is appropriate that we get at least an indication from the  Minister about where that is up to. I think we can all understand that the Minister 

 would seek to be careful with his words and that’s fair enough. But to have no words  at all is not fair enough. It is reasonable that the Australian people have some  understanding of the state of cooperation now between Australia and Indonesia  when it comes to asylum seeker policy given the circumstances of the last few days.   Let’s be clear here: when we’re talking about cooperation with Indonesia, when  we’re talking about turning boats back, when we’re talking about buying boats in  Indonesia, when we’re talking about introducing TPVs, all of these matters were  central to what the coalition committed to prior to the election. Now we have a  government which is refusing to tell us anything about the progress of any of those  policies and treating the Australian people on a “needs to know” basis, is simply not  good enough. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on SERCO and G4S, do you think they should be allowed to  continue running our detention networks considering these allegations they are  actually facing in the UK? 

 MARLES: Look, I think we need to see processes like that play out, ultimately that  is a matter for the Government, they are big decisions. But I think we need to see  each of those matters progress before we would make a comment about what the  Government ought to do and I can understand the Government wanting to be in a  position of seeing that play out.  

 JOURNALIST: Okay, as far as Mr Morrison’s meeting with them next week, what  would you like him to put to them as far as these allegations go? 

 MARLES: Well I think it is appropriate that the Minister has complete confidence in  all of those working for the Government in the prosecution of the asylum seeker  policy, of the management of facilities both onshore and offshore. And so I think it is  important that the Minister gets clear understandings from every contractor that  they are in a position to carry out the roles that the Government have asked of  them, in pursuit of the Government’s policy to the standard and the level of ethics  that an Australian government would expect. 

 JOURNALIST: Also, there’s reports that a younger asylum seeker on Manus Island  was raped, Mr Morrison says he’s happy with the officials handling it there and  investigating it there, is that enough in your opinion or should Australian officials be  sent over? 

 MARLES: Oh look, I think these are obviously, in individual cases such as that,  these are difficult matters to work through. Manus obviously has a jurisdiction of  PNG, but of course is a facility which is being funded by the Australian Government.   I think those matters need to be sensitively worked through and I would expect the  Australian Government to have a clear line of sight on how they are being managed  through, but I wouldn’t want to second guess the handling of an individual case such  as that.  

 JOURNALIST: Just also [inaudible] Mr Abbott that the ‘stop the boats’ plan can  work without Indonesia, your thoughts on that? 

 MARLES: There is no doubt that cooperation with Indonesia is central to any  progressing of the asylum seeker issue and any progressing of the campaign to  combat people smugglers, that is plain common sense. Indonesia is our neighbour,  Indonesia is the country from which these boats are coming.  The level of  cooperation that has existed between Australia and Indonesia when it comes to  dealing with people smugglers and asylum seekers has been in, almost organic, at  every level. Collaboration between our customs, cooperation between our Navy’s,  cooperation between our respective police forces, cooperation between our  immigration departments, it is deep and it is organic and it is central to being able to  make progress on this issue, so it is appropriate that we get some indication from  the Minister about how that cooperation has been affected by the circumstances of  the last few days and how the Government seeks to work through that. To suggest  that the cooperation with Indonesia is not a significant matter in dealing with this  issue is just plainly wrong.  

 Thank you very much for coming.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524   

