---
title: "Kevin 197 makes it 18 boats in 15 days since Rudd reappointed PM"
date: "2013-07-12"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397080
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719300%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling KEVIN 197 MAKES IT 18 BOATS IN 15 DAYS  SINCE RUDD REAPPOINTED PM  July 12, 2013

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, the second biggest of the year with 197 people on board, shows people smugglers  have not skipped a beat with Labor's change of leadership and are taking full advantage of Kevin Rudd’s policy free zone  on border protection, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice,  Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “The latest illegal boat, Kevin 197, with 197 people on board, shows the Prime Minister who brought people smugglers  back into business when he abolished the Howard Government’s policies, is proving to be just as strong a pull factor the  second time around," Mr Morrison said.

 “Almost 1,600 people have arrived on 18 boats in just the two weeks since Kevin Rudd returned to the Prime Ministership.  And Kevin Rudd has no plans to stop them.

 “At the National Press Club this week Rudd refused to say he could stop the boats, which is not surprising as he has no  policies to stop the boats, just more talk, telling Australians his answer is to fly to a conference that he is not organising  and which doesn’t even have a date.

 “People smugglers know how soft Kevin Rudd is on our borders. They have seen it all before and they are endorsing his  Prime Ministership with every boat arrival," Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “The latest illegal boat to be intercepted, carrying 197 people, is the second biggest boat arrival of the  year.

 “Not only are we seeing boats arrive at an increasingly rapid rate but we are also seeing an alarming trend of larger  amounts of people on these often unseaworthy vessels.

 “This trend raises concerns for both the safety of those onboard these boats but also concerns for the safety of the men  and women of our Border Protection Command who are tasked with intercepting them.

 “The Labor Government’s inability to control our borders has allowed the people smugglers free reign over how often they  send illegal boats to Australia and how many people they pack onto these boats.

 “It is vital that we regain control over our borders and put an end to the people smuggling trade - something that Labor  has failed to do time and time again,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 KEVIN 197 MAKES IT 18 BOATS IN 15 DAYS SINCE RUDD REAPPOINTED P...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

