---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 12 November 2013: Joe Hockey's $500 billion no doc debt limit; Maurice Newman's speech; the Government's culture of secrecy; Australia-Indonesia relations; asylum seekers agreements"
date: "2013-11-12"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Joe Hockey's $500 billion no doc debt limit"
  - "Maurice Newman's speech"
  - "the Government's culture of secrecy"
  - "Australia-Indonesia relations"
  - "asylum seekers agreements"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400568
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2840584%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  TUESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2013   

 SUBJECT: Joe Hockey’s $500 billion no doc debt limit, Maurice  Newman’s speech, the Government’s culture of secrecy, Australia-Indonesia relations, asylum seekers agreements.    

 CHRIS BOWEN: Well before the election Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey promised  to pay back the debt. Since the election we’re seeing a very different  Government then the one Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey promised. One of their  first acts has been to arrogantly demand a 67 per cent increase in Australia’s  debt limit. Without releasing his mini-budget, without releasing the update in the  Budget figures and the impact of all the decisions Joe Hockey has taken as  Treasurer, he has demanded that the Parliament pass this week a 67 per cent  increase in the debt limit to half a trillion dollars.    

 Joe Hockey wants Australia’s biggest ever no-doc loan and the Labor Party will  not facilitate it. The Labor Party will take a responsible and measured approach.  We recognise that an increase in the debt limit is justified. But an increase of  $200 billion dollars is simply not justified without Joe Hockey releasing his mini-budget. So when Joe Hockey moves for an increase in the debt cap in the House  of Representatives, we will move an amended to only authorise an increase to  $400 billion. We’ll also move that amendment in the Senate and I would call on  other parties and independents in the Senate to support Labor’s amendment.    

 It is a reasonable and mature and responsible thing for the Parliament to do to  approve a $100 billion increase to the debt limit. But not the $200 billion increase  this Government arrogantly has asked for in complete contradiction to all their  rhetoric before the election.   

 Happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, you know that Joe Hockey doesn’t need to, won’t  necessarily spend to $500 billion, isn’t he just making this a one step process  rather than two. And don’t we risk getting into US style politics here?    

 BOWEN: No, we don’t risk getting into US style politics because the Opposition  will always be constructive and reasonable and responsible; as is evidenced by  the fact that we are willing to authorise a $100 billion increase this week. Happy  to facilitate a passage through both Houses of Parliament very expeditiously.  We’re not going to walk away from the scrutiny required of Mr Hockey. Mr  Hockey use to beat his chest and demand fiscal updates. He’s thrown $9 million  at the Reserve Bank, he’s provided a tax break to people with more than $2  million in their super accounts and he’s refusing to update the books and that is  arrogant.    

 In relation to the first part of your question Laura, Mr Hockey is doing for him  the politically convenient and expedient thing of trying to sidestep proper  parliamentary scrutiny by having the biggest increase in our debt limit in history  and we’ll not facilitate that.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on Maurice Newman’s comments of last night. He made it  pretty clear that he didn’t support some of the measures put forward by Labor.  He said the economy couldn’t afford things such as the NDIS and also said our  wages were too high.    

 BOWEN: Well Mr Newman is Tony Abbott’s key business adviser, he’s Chairman  of the Business Advisory Council, so if this is the advice that Mr Abbott is getting  I think Australian’s have every right to be very concerned. Now, Mr Newman’s  politics are well known, it’s well known he was no fan of the previous Labor  Government. I’d point out to Mr Newman that the previous Labor Government  left Australia with three triple-A credit ratings from the major credit rating  agencies and created a million jobs in the most difficult economic circumstances  in 80 years. That’s the economic legacy of the previous Government.    

 I think that most Australian’s would recognise that DisabilityCare is a reform that  was well overdue. How we care for Australian’s who are born with or acquire a  disability during their life is an important indicator of who we are as a nation and  how we care for our disabled members of our community and the Labor  government properly and correctly budgeted for it.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on the debt limit, the Treasurer says that it’s forecast to  exceed $400 billion so is that figure that you’re putting on it going to be high  enough?   

 BOWEN: Well release his figures, he’s briefed that out to the media. The  economic statement which I and then Finance Minister Penny Wong released  which was supported by the independent figures by the Treasury and the  Department of Finance during the election campaign showed net debt peaking at  $370 billion. Now, if he’s blown out debt further, since the election, let him  release his mini-budget, let’s see the books. We are not going to organize a no-doc loan for Mr Hockey.    

 JOURNALIST: There are reports today that the Labor party pushed itself to the  brink of insolvency during the 2013 election campaign. Do you have anything to  say about that, was it worth it?   

 BOWEN: I’ve seen that report, I wasn’t at the National Executive meeting.  Political parties get regular updates on their finances, political campaigns are  expensive - they are for all sides of politics.   

 JOURNALIST: As Immigration Minister in the previous Government, you  presided over what was the failed Malaysia solution. It looks like the Government  is now looking at an Indonesia solution - is that something that you would  support?    

 BOWEN: Well what a farce we’re seeing here. We saw the spectacle of Scott  Morrison yesterday publicly wringing his hands on a radio program about  Indonesia. They were warned repeatedly that this would happen. Repeatedly  they were warned about the impacts of their policies, of attempting to turn back  the boats against the wishes of Indonesia. They have no excuses, nowhere to  hide, and we hear more from the Indonesian Government than we do from the 

 Australian Government about this. We have an Indonesia Government official  revealing this on television last night, no word from the Australian Government.    

 So Scott Morrison’s got some explaining to do. And as Immigration Minister, you  have to do difficult press conferences; you have to front up and answer difficult  questions. Every Immigration Minister has had to do that, and it’s cowardly and  arrogant not to front up and answer questions about it. Now if there’s an 

 arrangement being negotiated with Indonesia, it would draw into question the  criticisms that the Liberal Party made of any arrangements we had with Malaysia,  who they excoriated throughout the Australian political debate. But that is a  matter for them to explain exactly what the situation is with Indonesia.    

 JOURNALIST: Given that you support the Greens move to get more access to  information within 24 hours of an incident at sea?    

 BOWEN: Well, obviously we’d look at any measures but any measures through  the Parliament has it’s drawback because really, the Minister for Immigration and 

 the Minister for Home Affairs should be releasing this information on a very  regular basis, not hiding behind farcical weekly briefings. And the Parliament can  try and seek information but inevitably that will be after the event, inevitably  after the event. So we’d look at anything there and our Immigration spokesman,  Richard Marles would look at that carefully but really it shouldn’t require the  parliament.    

 The Government should get over its culture of secrecy. There is absolutely,  absolutely no operational reason for that information not to be released. It is a  complete fabrication to suggest that being upfront to the Australian people  somehow endangers operational integrity. It is a fabrication for political  purposes.    

 JOURNALIST: So Labor won’t support it until it sees the details?   

 BOWEN: Well, we’ll have a look at it but as I say, anything that Parliament does  will be inevitably not as effective as the Minister of the day being honest with the  Australian people and upfront.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879   

