---
title: "Sri Lanka test cricketers join in anti-people smuggling push"
date: "2013-02-24"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391066
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2258094%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Sunday, 24 February 2013     

 SRI LANKA TEST CRICKETERS JOIN IN ANTI-PEOPLE SMUGGLING PUSH    

 Two professional Sri Lankan cricketers have joined forces with the Gillard Government in a campaign  to discourage asylum seekers taking dangerous boat journeys to Australia, the Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O’Connor announced today.    

 The campaign “Don’t be sorry” is targeted to reach ethnic communities whose members often  encourage family to seek asylum on risky boat journeys with people smugglers.    

 High profile cricketers Lasith Malinga and Muttiah (Murali) Muralitharan signed on to the campaign,  targeting the Iranian, Iraqi, Afghan and Sri Lankan diaspora in Australia.    

 The cricketers are part of a wider campaign in six languages using ethnic press, radio, TV and online  platforms to reach the target audiences throughout Australia.    

 Malinga and Muralitharan recently completed their Big Bash League commitments in Australia, and  agreed to help the campaign because of their concerns for countrymen, women and children who  were dying at sea.    

 “If people want to consider travelling to Australia, our message is do it the right way; don’t be sorry  you didn’t tell you friends and family to do it the right way,” Malinga said in his message.    

 “In recent years, hundreds of people have lost their lives making the journey to Australia by sea. If  you want to travel, do it the right way, the safe way. Don’t be sorry,” Muralitharan said in his  message.    

 Mr O’Connor said this campaign asks diaspora communities to tell their family and friends about the  increased humanitarian visa places, about the family migration option, and the risks involved  travelling to Australia by boat.    

 “We want them to tell their family and friends the law has changed, which includes the no  advantage principle whereby new arrivals are liable to be transferred to Nauru or Papua New  Guinea, and be processed there no sooner than had they remained abroad and registered through  the UNHCR.    

 “The lawful way is the right way and the safest way into Australia,” Mr O’Connor said.    

 The Government will also be interacting at key ethnic community events, on social media and  working directly with community leaders as part of its campaign.    

 More information can be found on the DIAC website at  http://www.immi.gov.au/visas/humanitarian/dontbesorry/    

 Videos available at: www.newsroom.immi.gov.au    

 Media contact: Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604 

