---
title: "Assistance for Syria"
date: "2013-01-31"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211388345
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2199364%22
---

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr 

 Assistance for Syria 

 31 January 2013 

 Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced a further $10 million in humanitarian assistance 

 for people affected by the conflict in Syria, which has claimed more than 60,000 lives and left  two million people homeless. 

 "Nearly one in five Syrians - or around 4 million people - are now in desperate need of 

 shelter, food and health care as the fighting continues," Senator Carr said. 

 "Reports from Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq also suggest around 2,000 people a day  are fleeing to refugee camps across Syria's borders. 

 "Alongside the international community, Australia has a responsibility to assist civilian  victims of this conflict left without food, shelter or basic medical care. 

 "That's why I'm proud we can make this additional commitment in urgent humanitarian aid , 

 bringing our total contribution for the Syrian crisis to $41.5 million. 

 "This additional funding is a step forward in helping the thousands of Syrian civilians caught  up in the struggle against the Assad regime." 

 Australia's $10 million commitment would provide: 

 • $4 million to the World Food Programme (WFP) for essential food supplies to meet 

 critical shortages;  

 • $2 million will go to international organisations providing emergency health and 

 medical assistance; and  

 • $4 million to the United Nations Refugee Agency to support those fleeing to 

 temporary refugee camps.  

 The additional funding was announced at an international pledging conference on the  Syrian crisis, in Kuwait on January 30 (overnight Jan 30-31 AEDT). 

 At the conference, Australia also discussed plans to protect medical workers and ensure  safe access to Syrian hospitals in accordance with international humanitarian law. 

 The Australian plan would involve securing a commitment from all sides in the Syrian 

 conflict: 

 • Not to target medical personnel;  

 • Not to block access to doctors, hospitals or emergency care; and  

 • Not to attack medical facilities.  

 Implementation could be observed by a neutral third party such as a non-government  organisation. 

 "This is a minimalist plan to protect hospitals and health workers and help the thousands of  Syrian families cut off from basic care," Senator Carr said. 

 "The plan is a humanitarian intervention and has no political or military aspect. 

 "We believe all Syrians deserve access to medical facilities, regardless of their stance on  their country's civil war." 

 Australia's medical plan for Syria has already been positively received by US Secretary of 

 State Hillary Clinton, the Joint Special Envoy to Syria Mr Lakdar Brahimi and European and  Arab Foreign Ministers, and was brought to the attention of the UN Security Council on  January 17.  

 Media enquiries 

 • Minister's office: (02) 6277 7500  

 • DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555  

 

