---
title: "Refugee convention too important to tamper with"
date: "2013-07-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397321
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2599697%22
---

 

 

 For media enquiries, please contact:                            Caelin Worthington 0421 552 664  

 

 www.tai.org.au  

 

 Media release                                                            15 July 2013  

 

 Australians trust ABC over commercial media   

 More than half of Australians do not trust commercial media, new research by The Australia  Institute has found.   

 The new survey of more than 1400 people asked respondents to rate their trust in the ABC  and commercial media on a scale from ‘do not trust’ to ‘do trust’.   

 “Many Australians rely on information provided through the media to make important  decisions, like who to vote for,” Director of Research at The Australia Institute David Baker  said.   

 “So we thought it was important to gauge how much trust Australians put in media outlets.”   

 The results show 53 per cent of Australians do not trust commercial media, while just 10 per  cent of respondents said they do trust commercial media.   

 Meanwhile, 41 per cent of those surveyed said they trust the ABC and just 15 per cent said  they do not trust the broadcasting corporation.   

 “It’s interesting to see that more than half of Australians don’t trust commercial media, yet so  many of us still watch, read and listen to it,” Mr Baker said.   

 “With the federal election looming, it’s important that Australians feel they can trust the  media outlets providing them with information which will help them to decide how to vote.”   

 

 

 

 Note for editors:   

 The Australia Institute conducted an online survey in April 2013 with 1407 respondents.  Respondents were sourced from a reputable independent online panel provider and  received a small incentive of reward points to participate. Survey results are available at  www.tai.org.au. 

