---
title: "Boat surge in May places even further pressure on already blown budget"
date: "2013-05-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435939
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2431572%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison 

 Boat surge in May places even further pressure on already blown budget 

 Thursday 9th May 2013 

 Illegal boat arrivals continue to surge in May, with the latest two carrying over 120 people, taking the total 

 for May to almost 1,500 in just days, almost five times the same period last year, the Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border 

 Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “Just eight days into May, almost 1,500 people have turned up on 18 boats compared to just over 300 on 

 three boats for the same period last year,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “At the current rate of arrivals, this financial year could see a further 10,000 people arrive illegally by boat, 

 joining the more than 20,700 to have already arrived so far in 2012/13.  

 

 “The continued surge in arrivals makes a mockery of the Government’s asylum budget that has already 

 blown out by more than $5 billion since the last election, and will blow out by a further $5 billion over the 

 next three years, if Labor are given the opportunity to continue with their failed policies. Australians simply 

 cannot afford another three years of Labor’s failed border polices.  

 

 “Labor has the opportunity in next week’s budget to come clean by telling Australians that three more years 

 of their failed border protection policies will cost them at least $5 billion more in budget blow outs, Mr 

 Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “As the 18th boat arrives in eight days it is high time that Labor start to appropriately fund 

 and staff our frontline border protection agencies.  

 

 “The Government should start to restore some of the damaging cuts it has made to our border protection 

 agencies, including the 750 personnel cut from the Australia Customs and Border Protection Service.  

 

 “In this week alone the Labor Party has overseen its 40,000th arrival by boat since coming to office and 

 their 20,000th arrival for this financial year.  

 

 “Yet in every budget they have stripped funding and staff from the very agencies tasked with cleaning up 

 after their crisis at our borders,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

