---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 2 September 2013: asylum seeker policy; Singleton; PolitiFact Pants On Fire rating on the Coalition's boat buyback policy"
date: "2013-09-02"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "asylum seeker policy"
  - "Singleton"
  - "PolitiFact Pants On Fire rating on the Coalition's boat buyback policy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436776
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2705228%22
---

 

 

  Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION TONY BURKE  PRESS CONFERENCE   SYDNEY  2 SEPTEMBER 2013  

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Asylum seeker policy; Singleton; PolitiFact Pants On Fire rating on  the Coalition’s boat buyback policy.  _____________________________________________________________  

 

 TONY BURKE: Thanks very much everybody for joining me today. I’m wanting in  the main to be able to give you an update on progress and effectiveness of the  regional resettlement arrangements with both Papua New Guinea and Nauru and in  particular the impact that it is now clear that they have had on the people smuggling  trade in Indonesia. When the regional resettlement arrangements were first put in  place, when the agreement was signed by Prime Minister O’Neil and Prime Minister  Rudd, I made clear that the most significant part of these arrangements and what  these arrangements did, that had not occurred before, was they completely took  away the product that was being sold by people smugglers and that meant that there  would be a number of people who would test our resolve but overwhelmingly it  meant that we were in a situation where people would soon work out that there was  no point paying a people smuggler anymore.  

 

 In the past 24 hours, two boats have been intercepted. One containing 30 people,  one containing 28 people. These vessels would be capable of, in the way that we  saw some months ago, having many more people crammed on board. But while  people smugglers are in charge of whether or not the boat goes off, it’s actually the  asylum seekers in charge of whether or not they get on board. And what we have  seen for some time is the people smugglers have remained as desperate as ever to  get boats off and they have had increasing challenges in finding people who are  willing to get on board, including people who had in fact already paid. One of the  most significant things about these arrivals, isn’t simply the small numbers of people  involved, it’s that they are the first boats since last Tuesday. Since Tuesday of last  week.     

 There will be a few more operations that we are aware of that are trying to get off the  ground, some of them will get away, some of them will find a few people who are  willing to test our resolve, willing to check whether or not what the Government is  saying is true, willing to check whether or not in fact if you come by boat without a 

 visa the Government will hold its resolve and make sure that you are not settled in  Australian. But we are nearly at the end of the situation where there are people who 

 are willing to take that risk and where there are people who are willing to believe the  lies of people smugglers.     

 There have been two very substantial shocks to the system that have happened to  the people smuggling trade over the last couple weeks, one of them was the release  of the video of asylum seekers on Manus Island talking about their experience and  providing their own recommendations about what others should do, the second thing  that caused a significant shock to the people smuggling trade was when we started  to send families to Nauru. They had been peddling the line with a significant degree  of success that the Government would only apply the policy to single adult males  and that was increasingly carrying the risk that we would see more and more families  on boats and ultimately more and more families in particular children drowning at  sea.     

 The impact of those plane loads going to Nauru has been extraordinary. We are now  seeing this, not only in the fact that these two boats we have just had are smaller in  number and are the first boats since Tuesday. But if you look at the month by month  figures, the results speak for themselves. The month of July, 4236 people arrived by  boat, the month of August, 1585. Much less than half of the number of people  arriving in the first month of operation. Then we had a situation - Wednesday,  Thursday, Friday, Saturday - day after day of no boats at all until we had the two  intercepted. Whereas when I first came into the portfolio we were talking numbers of  100 to 200, we are now talking numbers of 20 to 30.     

 It is also been true that now, for the first time, we are seeing the population of  Christmas Island start to fall rather than rise. Anyone who thought there was going to  be a capacity problem, the numbers now speak for themselves that there will not be.  The impact of the policy and the communication of the policy is having the exact  impact that we believed it would and we were determined that it would have. The  people smuggling trade no longer has a product to sell and it is now fair to say that  while there will be a few more boats that will test our resolve - and that will come and  a few more people who will take the risk -  we have broken the back of the people  smuggling trade.     

 I then want to also draw attention to the role of the PolitiFact website, the  independent fact checker and the information that its provided overnight. They are  no friend to any political party, these fact checking organisations. They don’t do  favours for any political party, they hold us to account in a variety of different ways.  What we have seen over night though is, I believe, completely unprecedented. What  we have seen from PolitiFact is they have now tested independently the Coalition  policy to buy back the boats. It was one thing when I described the buy back the  boats policy as the most absurd thing that I had seen, it’s another thing when an  independent fact checker describes it as the most ridiculous of all the coalition  policies. There is some competition for that title, but buying back the boats wins it  hands down.     

 One of the things that I think we must not forget in the Coalition’s buy back policy is  when it was launched in Darwin, this is not some side issue that came out by Scott  Morrison talking on his own. This was a launch of Scott Morrison standing beside  Tony Aboott and describing this as a policy that had not been launched on the run, 

 but had been four years in the making. One of the great challenges of the Coalition  isn’t simply can they release policy, but one of the great challenges that we have  realised for them, is the more time they spend thinking about it, the worse it  becomes. There has been no policy more absurd than the concept that Australia  would fund the Indonesian boat building industry. Nothing more  ridiculous than the  concept that they would go out and start to enter a market which already involves  three quarters of a million boats and the absurdity of that, I’m glad, has been called  out and called out directly by the PolitiFact website.     

 But it’s one thing for them to offer absurd policies. But it is probably more concerning  when their policies become dangerous. There was a comment made from Scott  Morrison today that I want to draw your attention to and I want to deal with this in a  responsible way, notwithstanding there would be an irresponsible way that, if the  shoe was on the other foot, I’m sure would be how my opponent would deal with it.  Scott Morrison made a comment today which I believe is in his interest and  Australia’s interest to withdraw and withdraw quickly. He made the comment and I  have the quote here “if you come illegally by boat, the best you can ever hope for is  a temporary visa”. Can I say it is hard to imagine something more irresponsible than  this.  

 

 I do not want there to be any risk that if there is a change of government on  Saturday, that people smugglers are able to use comments by my counterpart to  resume a dangerous trade. The success that we have had, which has been a whole  range of things, including for example when I talk about the impact of this policy, it  means that proposals that we had previously floated and set aside money for such  as Singleton, we are now not going to need to go ahead with housing asylum  seekers at Singleton. There are a number of changes where there have been real  impacts as a result of this policy. But none more significant than the fact that we  have actually been able to do something about the drownings in the Indian Ocean.  But the key to it is to make sure the people smugglers don’t have a product to sell at  all. If you open temporary visas to people who come by boat, there is still a product  to sell.     

 The original reason why we had to remove work rights was because on the ground in  Sri Lanka, people smugglers were selling the chance to come to Australia and live  and work in Australia to people who had no asylum claim at all, but they knew that  there would be a market, if even there was a temporary time where you could work  in Australia. Scott Morrison in flagging that today, has created a circumstance where  if there is a change of government then on Sunday there could be a product on the  table again.     

 Now if I were to behave the way he has behaved towards our policies, I would try to  rev this up and I would try to say that’s true, I want to do the exact opposite. I don’t  believe for a moment that anyone in Australian politics wants the boat trade to  resume. I don’t believe that anyone as a serious player in Australian politics wants  the boat trade to resume. I don’t believe that anyone as a serious player in politics  wants this to be reopened after the election. I think everybody can see the numbers,  can see that we have broken the back of this trade and wants to make sure that that  remains true and so I call on Scott Morrison to stand up today and make clear that 

 regardless of who wins this weekend’s election, if you come by boat without a visa  you will not be settled in Australia.     

 That is critical. I do not want a situation where what has been achieved and what has  been seen over the last week is undone in one week’s time and that is what putting  temporary visas back on the table would do. It would send a message that people  should wait until Sunday and then temporary visas would be back on the table. I  don’t want that, it’s against the national interest, it carries grave risks for people  putting their lives at risk on the high seas, it reopens a trade that we have over the  last few weeks seen in final decline. And I call on Scott Morrison to correct the record  and take temporary visas off the table for anyone who arrives by boat. Obviously  Scott Morrison and I have a different view about what you do for people who are  already here and who arrive prior to the regional resettlement arrangements. Let him  say that that is all he was referring to, but please, the Liberal Party must not allow it  to remain on the table that if people get on a boat after Saturday, if there is a change  of government, that people smugglers will have a product to sell again.     

 I don’t believe that is what he meant, I believe it was an occasion of lack of discipline  in him providing those words and he should come out and take the opportunity that I  have given and change the position and change it quickly. It’s either an inadvertent  mistake or it’s an example of grave and dangerous irresponsibility. Either way I leave  the door open for Scott Morrison to fix it and fix it today. Happy to take any  questions.     

 JOURNALIST: Do you think it’s a bit premature to for you to be declaring victory  over the people smugglers?    

 TONY BURKE: We have broken the back of their trade. There will be more boats,  I’m not saying there won’t be more boats, they are in control over whether or not  boats come, asylum seekers are in control over whether or not they get on board. By  and large the message is now out, that if you get on a boat, you won’t be settled in  Australia. And that has caused a whole lot of movements in different directions. I was  very wary, and I think you all saw when the arrangement was first put in place. We  had the first week where people were already on the water before the announcement  was made after that we saw a significant decline and I was reluctant to read too  much into it. From all the information that I have been receiving from overseas and  from the extraordinary shift that we have been seeing now day after day after day, I  have no doubt, no doubt at all that we have broken the back of the trade. There will  be a handful of boats that still come and nobody should see when they come as it  being somehow a refutation of what I have said today. But the trade that we knew  has now gone. There are a number of people who have already paid, who are  weighing up whether or not they will take the risk. Some of them will take the risk and  then they will find out that we were serious.    

 JOURNALIST: So no more than a handful of boats? So what you are saying, is that  the boats that we will continue to see over the next few days or weeks or whatever,  (inaudible) people who have already paid and made the decision to get on a boat is  that right?  

 

 TONY BURKE: That is exactly right.  

 

 JOURNALIST: So no one else is coming into the pipeline, is that what your  intelligence is telling you?    

 TONY BURKE: Well I’m not going to refer to intelligence.    

 JOURNALIST: Well with respect, you do it all the time, you have been doing it in the  last few weeks.     

 TONY BURKE: Well Paul, one occasion is a funny definition of all the time. You  don’t get the PolitiFact checkers on you, I have to put it straight back to you. You  claim all the time the comment that I made once was with specific clearance.     

 JOURNALIST: My point is that you have certainly in the past referred to in broad  terms, I’m asking again in broad terms, are you seeing people enter the pipeline or  have people just stopped buying tickets off smugglers?    

 TONY BURKE: The information with respect, and I will answer in terms of  information because, Paul, the quality of the sort of information that you have  described, a very long process needs to go through before information of that nature  is provided publicly. But the information that we have is the visa on arrival impact has  had a very significant change to the number of people arriving from Iran. We also  need to acknowledge there, in terms of who is arriving, most people when they arrive  in Indonesia itself have been arriving on valid visas and then not actually departing  through the visa system, so you're not going to get a circumstance where nobody  from source countries is arriving because there has always been a circumstance  where people have been arriving into Indonesia who never hop on a boat and never  engage in people smuggling. But what we have is the trade and the opportunity for  fresh customers to be arriving and spending money, on the information that we have,  has come to an end. 

 

 JOURNALIST: So what happens to those people who you say are now not coming,  doesn’t that just offload the responsibility to somewhere else, to Indonesia?    

 TONY BURKE: There are a number of things that happen within the people  smuggling pipeline. It has always involved some people who do not have a valid  refugee claim at all, it's always involved some people in that circumstance. Those  people are unlikely to register with the UNHCR, those people are unlikely to do  anything that continue (inaudible) or apply through normal channels.     

 We will see, I expect, an increased number of people registering with the UNHCR  itself, we'll also see a significant number of people, a very significant number of  people adopting a wait and see approach. So people who are not willing to get on a  boat, simply because they're not willing to get on a boat yet in the hope that  Australian policy might change. Now I don't want, I genuinely don't want, regardless  of party political issues, I just don't want anyone to be in the circumstance where  they think if they wait a week and then it's going to be back on, because temporary  visas are back on the table.    

 And so for the large number of people who have adopted a wait and see approach, I  think it's important for the Liberal Party to come out today and to make clear that they  will not put temporary visas on the table for people who arrive now by boat. I think it's  critical that they make that declaration and that they put it out publicly.    

 JOURNALIST: Have you got any understanding, I guess, of the, I understand it is  early days still, of any genuine, anyone found to be genuine refugees, any genuine  asylum claims yet that have been processed so far?    

 TONY BURKE: Processing normally takes, you know, in the order of three to six  months, sometimes it can take significantly longer than that. So we've had the, the  commencement interviews have been taking place for people on Manus, I don't  believe the commencement interviews for the families that have gone to Nauru have  started yet, they may have but I certainly haven't been briefed that they have  commenced their processing yet, but that will occur.    

 But the timeline on this, and this is why when there's been a panic about, oh, do we  have the all settlement services in place yet, well, no one gets settled unless they're  found to have a valid claim, we're still some time off before we're at that point.     

 JOURNALIST: Can you give us some update on the situation on Manus Island, what  is the capacity there at the moment?    

 TONY BURKE: There's significant spare capacity at the moment because we have  the soccer field site, which takes 40 people divided into five different marquees, 80  each marquee, all with a central partition down them. So you've got 16 rooms of 40,  effectively. Now that, they've started putting people in, they've only started them in  the last couple of days, so there's some reconfiguring going on at the moment.     

 One of the things that I'm encouraging to do on Manus, encouraged my department  to be involved with, is to isolate people whenever they think that there is tensions or  problems developing among the transferee population. That was one of the issues I  was concerned about with some of the whistle blower allegations that took place a  few weeks ago, that if you don't have enough capacity to isolate people and to  reconfigure, then you can have some very significant management problems that  can result in significant harm.    

 So there may be some people who are in that old soccer field compound now, if  there are, there is very few. We're also in a situation now where, any day, we'll be  able to transfer all the staff off the permanent facility that they've been in, so most of  the staff have gone on to (inaudible), some of them have been staying in a separate  compound. Once they move to a new staff site, that opens up quite a few hundred  more.     

 So because of the configuration issues, if I can get back to you on precise numbers,  but in terms of spare capacity we have some hundreds, it would be, depending on  the timing of when the staff move across, it would be somewhere between 300 and I  expect 500 or 600 in terms of the spare capacity, but we can get precise numbers for  you.    

 JOURNALIST: And when you mention about there will be no longer any need to  build at Singleton, are you basing that just on one month’s figures?    

 TONY BURKE: No, the Singleton circumstance is based on a couple of things. The  first thing with Singleton, it was a refurbish because the facility is in fact already  there. 

 

 There were two potential pressure points with respect to Singleton. One was would  we be able to maintain those who were affected by the regional resettlement  arrangements across the three locations of Christmas Island, Nauru and Manus  Island. And there’s absolutely no doubt now that there is going to be no pressure on  the mainland network from people affected by the new policy.    

 The second issue was how quickly could we establish the bridging visas for the  centres that already had significant overcrowding, and we’ve been signing over to  bridging visas in substantial numbers, which means the pressures that had caused  us to originally think that we needed Singleton as a contingency, we’d never  determined to go ahead with it, but it was there as a contingency if required.    

 None of those circumstances now apply, and for that reason I’ve spoken to the  Treasurer, Chris Bowen, and I’ve said to him the money for Singleton is ready now to  be reallocated to whatever purpose he chooses.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on that point of money, the Coalition indicated this morning that  some of their budget savings will be based on assumptions about a decrease in the  number of boat arrivals. Given what you’ve said about  having broken the smugglers’  backs and taken away the product, I assume you would have no problem with them  in doing that, then assuming that some of the money that has been allocated for  immigration is now free to be allocated for other purposes. Is that fair and reasonable  for the Coalition to do that, should they do that when they release their costings?    

 TONY BURKE: Look on the costing issues, I’d refer to the economic ministers but I’d  simply answer in these terms. I don’t know whether the Coalition, in that, I don’t  know what their view is of the regional resettlement arrangements. I’m alarmed by  the comments made by Scott Morrison today. I don’t know whether their costings are  based on him starting to offer temporary protection visas to people who arrive by  boat or whether that was simply an error and he’s intending to send them offshore.    

 There are different costs that flow from that particular point and I’m leaving the way  open for him to clarify that. It does have an impact on costings, it has an even more  dramatic impact though on whether or not people smugglers believe they have a  product to sell.    

 And as I said with respect to Sri Lanka, that whole work rights issue when that  opened up was based on people who knew they didn’t have a valid claim, who knew  they wouldn’t be able to stay permanently in Australia, but had been told, look with  the legal processes, you’ll get to live and work there for about five years, and that  was reason enough to get on a boat. Now if the message goes out that people are  going to be given consecutive temporary protection visas and they will be able to live  and work in Australia during that time, there’s a product. 

 

 Now, it’s not a product as strong as permanent residency, but it’s a product. Be in no  doubt - and it’s a product that we’ve seen being sold even in a more limited form at  the time of the work rights debate.    

 So you know, I’m hopeful that this afternoon, Scott Morrison stands up, he’ll abuse  me in different ways, that’s what he does, that’s fine, it’s an election, and then he will  say that I’ve misconstrued his language and he’ll come out saying that the regional  resettlement arrangements will continue under them and nobody who arrives by boat  will be subject to a temporary visa.    

 I want that to happen, I think it’s in the national interest for that to happen. I think it  would be dumb beyond belief for him to do anything. He is the person who thought  buying back boats was clever, so I’m not putting anything past him, but I want to give  him that opening.    

 JOURNALIST: If they do, just to be clear, maintain settings that Labor has put in  place if they are elected next Saturday, significant savings in their own costings,  would that be fair?    

 TONY BURKE: I’m not going to offer more on the costings issue than what I’ve  (inaudible)     

  JOURNALIST: Can I ask, has there been any change to the agreement that you  have with the PNG Government?    

 TONY BURKE: It’s a Memorandum of Understanding, it’s a formal agreement  between two governments. I speak regularly with the relevant ministers of both  Papua New Guinea and Nauru, so Minister Adeang in Nauru, Minister Pato in Papua  New Guinea. And yeah, we talk regularly and make sure that different operational  matters and things like that are being sorted out. But the agreement which was  signed is the agreement that stands. 

 

 JOURNALIST: There have been some protests on Manus Island, how has that  affected the expansion of facilities there?    

 TONY BURKE: Look the, some of these protests which have received arguably  more coverage in Australia than they’ve received in Papua New Guinea, one of them  was described today, I think one of them was a protest of one person, the other one  was a protest of three, protests which if they were held in Australia, it’d be  astonishing if they received media coverage. We get protests of much bigger  numbers outside our detention facilities here.    

 So I think we can read too much into this, but for example, the laying of the gravel, or  coral, crushed coral, at the soccer field took place a couple of days later than it  otherwise would have while that was being sorted out. But you know, I don’t think we  should expect Papua New Guinea to be a nation without political debate. We’re not, I  don’t know why we should expect that of them.    

 It’s also true that a government with an absolutely massive majority in Papua New  Guinea is 100 per cent behind this agreement. And every time there has been  speculation in the Australian media, or speculation by my political opponents, that it  is anything other than that, the PNG Government has come out very quickly to  reaffirm their commitment to these arrangements.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on the boat arrivals, and you’ve said that we can expect to see a  few more boats that are, you know, (inaudible), you must have some information on  that, roughly how many boats can we expect? I think the phrase you used was a  handful, can you be a bit more specific about exactly how many we might, even a  range of how many we might expect?    

 TONY BURKE: No, I won’t go further than that. If I get to specific numbers then  there are implications for the nature of how we acquire information, I won’t go further.    

 JOURNALIST: Is it fair to say though that (inaduble) will still get on boats, is it still  fair to say that you’re still winning, that you’re winning this fight against people  smugglers and people are still going to try to get in?    

 TONY BURKE: I think the numbers speak for themselves, I think the numbers speak  for themselves, I don’t want to be glib about it because the circumstances that we  started with was awful. The number of people who were drowning, the strength of  the pipeline, the impact on our own humanitarian program.                           

 This is not something as a member of the Government for me to be bashing a table,  flag waving or celebrating. It’s simply something for me to put the numbers to you,  and describe the facts as I see them, with the information I’ve been provided.    

 JOURNALIST: You seem to be saying though that again (inaudible), that Labor has  stopped the boats. Is that the(inaudible)?    

 TONY BURKE: Well if I phrase it in those terms, then the next boat arrives and  people will say, oh there you go, he was wrong, and that will be the nature of the  conversation. But in terms of the smuggling trade, the smuggling trade as we know it  has been broken, it has been. There will be a few operators that will get a few more  boats off, there may well be, you may well find some decide to pull so that where  they were only able to get a handful, you know, 20 or 30 people, a few of them might  get together and send one boat, so there still could be a large boat for example, that  comes through.    

 But right at the beginning of this, I was very wary to read too much into the numbers,  because I was thinking, well the weather hasn’t been great, even though previously  boats have continued to come across when the weather was bad. I was conscious  that we were during a Ramadan period and perhaps during the month of Ramadan  that might have had an impact, so I was wary.    

 But you compare what we’re seeing now and what we were seeing immediately  before the regional resettlement arrangements were brought in, it’s a world apart.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you expect, the problem has been in evidence for five years, the  election is in five days, let’s assume that what you’ve saying here is entirely accurate  here, do you expect to get big political credit for it on Saturday?    

 TONY BURKE: Can I tell you on this, and I suspect except for people who know me  very well, no one will believe what I’m about to say: I don’t care, I really don’t care  about the political impact on this one. If I cared about the political impact, I would  have handled Scott Morrison’s comments this morning in the opposite fashion. 

 

 This is a problem that needed to be fixed, there was one way in my view of fixing it  and that was to make sure that we took away the product that was being sold. We’ve  done that, the impact is being felt, the smuggling trade as we knew it is over. There  will be a few more boats, there will be a political debate as a result of today saying,  oh there you go, he was wrong, even though I’ve said it, someone else will write that  I have conceded a fact, that I’ve put forward voluntarily and put forward up off the  top. That’s just life.    

 Ultimately, people were drowning on the Indian Ocean, trying to access government  policies. Government policies had said if you came by boat, there was a chance  you’d be able to live and work in Australia. We took that off the table, it’s had a  massive impact, much more than offshore processing, much more than anything  else.    

 And the Opposition then, to try to effectively outflank us, just became more and more  bizarre in what they were proposing.  You know, turn the boats, phone the boats, buy  the boats - they went through all of that. Ultimately, all that matters to me is that the  drownings that we saw become a thing of the past. There will be a few more boats, I  genuinely hope people don’t get on them, I certainly hope we won’t see any more  drownings. Either way, the people smuggling market really has been crushed.    

 JOURNALIST: I accept that, I accept that you’re reading this (inaudible),  I genuinely  accept that. But I’m curious, you are a politician, you are a western Sydney politician,  you know the area. How big an issue, with your judgement on this question and on  this score is relevant and is interesting, how big a, how decisive an issue is this  going to be on Saturday in say western Sydney? 

 

 TONY BURKE: Look, the issue in my electorate for example is different to how it  would be in some parts of the country, but the conclusions are the same.     

 So even people who have arrived by boat have had family members drown. I’ve sat  in my office with a room full of people who had had a phone call from relatives  getting on a boat and had never heard from those relatives again when they met with  me four or five weeks later. I also have many people who I’ve been talking to over  the weekend, who have family and friends in Syria, who are wanting to be able to  access the humanitarian program and want to make sure that their relatives can  apply the correct way and have a fair chance.    

 So on all of that, people want the problem to have been addressed. Now we’ve  addressed the problem and we’ve broken the trade that was causing the problem,  notwithstanding that there will be a few more boats that will get off. 

 

 But the impact on the weekend, you know I think if you get to this point and you start  telling voters what we’re going to think, I don’t think it’s a real smart thing, even for a  politician to do.     

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned Syria, might we expect to see smugglers and might  we expect to see a new sort of pipeline emerging on the back of a Syrian refugee  crisis, is that you know, on the horizon in terms of what you’re hearing and what  you’re being told by your experts?    

 TONY BURKE: When people flee, they flee immediately across a border and then  they look where’s the best place to go to next. The situation will be for anyone who  flees Syria, the next place to go to, sometimes people go across a border and when  things calm down they go back home, that’s the path for many refugees. But for  those who will not be able to go home, the best pathway for them will be to register  with the UNHCR.    

 Thank you.    

 ENDS 

 

