---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Logan, Queensland: 26 July 2013: affordable housing development; Queensland infrastructure projects; Cross River Rail; asylum seeker policy; second Sydney airport"
date: "2013-07-26"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "affordable housing development"
  - "Queensland infrastructure projects"
  - "Cross River Rail"
  - "asylum seeker policy"
  - "second Sydney airport"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397705
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2645262%22
---

 

 

 DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER    

 

 TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   LOGAN, QUEENSLAND    

 

 FRIDAY, 26 JULY 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY    

 SUBJECTS:                             Affordable housing development; Queensland  infrastructure projects; Cross River Rail; Asylum  seeker policy; Second Sydney airport 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          I’m joined by Jim Chalmers, who is the Labor candidate  for Rankin, here at the opening of an affordable housing  project in Logan Central.    

                                                       This is a part of Federal Labor’s Liveable Cities 

 program. That’s a program that acknowledges that we  need to improve the productivity, sustainability and  liveability of our major cities right around Australia. 

 

                                                       Here in Queensland, particularly south-east 

 Queensland, projects such as this and the Pacific  Motorway, the Ipswich Motorway - and of course our  commitment to the next section of the Ipswich Motorway  - to the Gateway Motorway north and the Cross River  Rail project, underline Federal Labor’s commitment to  improving productivity and lifestyle here in Brisbane. 

 

                                                       The Cross River Rail project in particular is a vital 

 project. It has been agreed to by Federal and State  Governments.  

 

                                                       We agreed to both put in $715 million and then make 

 available an availability payment on a 50-50 basis with  private sector funding to attract superannuation funds. 

 

                                                       What we know is that Brisbane will grind to a halt in 

 terms of urban congestion in 2016. We know that  because state government reports tell us that’s the case.  

 

                                                       And yet, in spite of the fact that the Queensland 

 Government have been given everything they have  asked for with this project, it’s listed on the Infrastructure  Australia national priority list as number one, and it will  help - not just people in Brisbane - but people on the  Sunshine Coast and the Gold Coast, the Queensland  Government has stalled at the barrier when it comes to  supporting this vital project.  

 

                                                       So I’d say to the Queensland Government, it’s time to 

 put politics aside. When politics are put aside, different  levels of government can achieve good outcomes.  

 

                                                       That’s what we see here with this small project that 

 has made a big difference. One block, taken, renovated  with a DA through in three weeks, with an affordable  housing project behind me that shows that you can have  good quality as well as affordable housing to help renew  communities such as here in Logan Central. 

 

                                                       So it’s an exciting approach that the council has led 

 that the Federal Government has been happy to be in  partnership with. 

 

                                                       We want to partner with local and state governments 

 right around the country to improve the productivity,  sustainability and liveability of our cities - whether it be  small projects or whether it be major public transport  projects. 

 

                                                       And we know that Tony Abbott has said that under his 

 government, if he is to be elected later this year, there  will be no funding for any public transport projects ever  under his government. 

 

                                                       We are already investing in the Gold Coast Rapid 

 Transit System. We are already investing in the Moreton  Bay Regional Rail Link. And we want to partner with  Queensland on Cross River Rail. 

 

 QUESTION:                                 The Queensland Minister says he is ready to sign up 

 to a 50-50 deal as soon as it’s on the table. Why hasn’t  there been an agreement? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          He’s got it. He has got everything that he asked for and  frankly this is nonsense.     

                                                       I’ve released the correspondence whereby he asked 

 for the Cross River Rail project to be treated the same as  funding for the Bruce Highway, the same as funding for  any other infrastructure project. 

 

                                                       If he is consistent, and he acknowledged this I 

 understand in estimates in the Queensland Parliament,  he will say that the Bruce Highway funding isn’t 80-20,  it’s only 40 per cent if he’s going to just cut in half the  funding. 

 

                                                       It’s embarrassing. I can understand Mr Emerson’s 

 embarrassment having asked for a range of agreements  to be included on the Cross River Rail project, having a  Federal Government that has said yes to everything that  was asked for, he then at the very last minute walked  away from the project.  

 

                                                       This is a project in which we had actually even agreed 

 the timing and the details of the announcement in Budget  week.  

 

 QUESTION:                                 Minister, when does the Government believe the 

 asylum boats will actually slow down coming into  Australia? Will it be weeks, will it be months? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          We said very clearly when we announced this policy that  you wouldn’t change things immediately. That there  would be ups and downs, there would be difficulties, that  the people smugglers would test our resolve.    

                                                       What we didn’t anticipate is Tony Abbott sending 

 messages to the people smugglers to try and undermine  the strategy. 

 

                                                       It really is quite extraordinary that after coming out to 

 welcome the agreement on the day that it was  announced, he has done since then everything he can to 

 undermine the agreement between Australia and Papua  New Guinea. 

 

                                                       Even to the point whereby we’ve had attempts at 

 verballing Papua New Guinea, just as we saw attempts  at verballing Indonesia. 

 

                                                       It is beyond me how the alternative government thinks 

 it will be able to negotiate with our nearest and most  important neighbours. 

 

 QUESTION:                                 If that is the case, then we’re not likely to see a 

 slowdown in boats before the election, and this mean it’s  a blow to the government and its policies. 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          This isn’t about politics. This is about policy. This is  about stopping people drowning at sea. This is about  getting a solution - a solution that is not an easy one.    

                                                       A solution however that does break the people 

 smugglers’ model. We know that already people are  saying that one, they are not getting on boats, that they  are joining the UN processes. 

 

                                                       We know also that there are people smugglers who 

 are saying that they have been put out of business. That  they have made a lot of money but the business model is  over. 

 

                                                       And the message is very clear: if you come to 

 Australia by boat without a visa, you will not be settled in  Australia. You will be treated under the UN Convention in  an appropriate way under the UN processes, but you will  not be settled in Australia. 

 

                                                       What that does is it breaks the model. That’s what we 

 need to do. Not come up with simple three word slogans,  and we had another three word slogan from Tony Abbott  yesterday with a change from a two-star to a three-star  person in charge of our border command somehow  making a huge difference.  

 

                                                       That has already been rejected by senior retired 

 defence personnel.  

 

                                                       What we have is a plan that will work. It’s about time 

 that Tony Abbott stopped playing politics and acted in the  national interest. 

 

 QUESTION:                                 You are committed to building a second airport in 

 Sydney. Where will that airport be built? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          We have proper processes to determine those issues.  Those issues are not determined politically. They are  determined by those proper processes.    

                                                       We’ve had a joint Federal-State Government review 

 in terms of the need for a second Sydney airport. What  that found is that for future jobs, economic growth and for  Sydney’s position as a global city into the future, we do  need a second airport. 

 

 QUESTION:                                 If you can’t say where it is going to be built, how can 

 you guarantee it is going to be built, or started within the  three-year time frame you promised? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          What I’ve said is very clear. Have a look at what I said,  not what you say I’ve said.    

                                                       What I have said is that it would be my intention to 

 want to see construction start on a second airport during  the next term. In order for that to happen there is a range  of processes that need to be concluded. 

 

                                                       The first is the firm identification of a site. The second 

 is, because of the former government’s legislation which  gave a right of refusal - not a right of veto but a right of  refusal - to the existing owners of Sydney Airport, there  is a notification period that has to be given to them.  

 

                                                       And what it also requires is bipartisan support. That’s 

 why we need to remove politics from this issue, because  politics has got in the way in the past. 

 

 QUESTION:                                 Concerns about the militarisation of your management  of the asylum seeker influx - putting aside the  Opposition’s plan - how do you respond to that issue?  What is the military’s role within the asylum seeker  debate? 

 

 ANTHONY ALBANESE:          When we have had issues of people seeking to come to  Australia, without a visa, on a boat, the military have  been involved.    

                                                       Naval personnel have been involved too many times 

 in recent days and weeks. And what we’ve seen when  you have a tragedy at sea, you have Naval involvement  and involvement of Customs personnel, involvement of  personnel from the Australian Maritime Safety Authority. 

 

                                                       What we need to do here is to stop people risking 

 their lives by getting on boats. That’s what we need to  do; to have orderly processes. 

 

                                                       My ideal is that no one comes on a boat to Australia 

 without a visa, therefore no one gets sent to Papua New  Guinea for processing and settlement, and Australia  takes an increased number of refugees. We now take  20,000, up from 13,750, we can take more, and we have  flagged that we would consider increasing that up to  27,000, which was the number recommended by the  Houston panel. 

 

                                                       Australia is a generous country. We can have good 

 outcomes for refugees by taking people in an orderly way  in which they do not have to risk their lives at sea. 

 

                                                       And in an orderly way that ensures that whether you 

 are in a camp in Indonesia, whether you are in a camp in  Africa, or whether you are someone who is fleeing the  very real conflict and tragedies that we see being played  out in Syria at the moment, you have an opportunity for a  safe-haven here in Australia. 

 

                                                       It’s not either or. There is nothing compassionate 

 about allowing a policy to continue that is seeing the  tragedies that we have seen. There is nothing  compassionate either about playing politics with this  issue as we’ve seen Tony Abbott do. 

 

                                                       We have the Papua New Guinea Government saying 

 they are in favour of this agreement, indeed that they  proposed to Australia this agreement. They are saying  yes, Tony Abbott says no to Papua New Guinea. 

 

                                                       The Indonesian Government have said very clearly a 

 number of times they will not accept the so-called tow-back policy. It will simply not work. And yet Tony Abbott  insists that their views are irrelevant to the  implementation of that policy, in spite of the fact that we  know from experience and from the experts that it simply  won’t work. 

 

                                                       What we need to do is move beyond politics on this 

 issue. 

 

                                                       Thanks very much. 

 

 [ENDS]   

