---
title: "Transcript of interview: Joint Press Conference Julie Bishop MP and Scott Morrison MP: 4 February 2013: Sri Lanka visit; border protection; CHOGM"
date: "2013-02-04"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Sri Lanka visit"
  - "border protection"
  - "CHOGM"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211388586
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2781943%22
---

 

  Julie Bishop MP 

 Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   

 Joint Press Conference Julie Bishop MP and Scott  Morrison MP 

 4 February 2013 

 Subjects: Sri Lanka visit; border protection; CHOGM 

 E&OE… 

 BISHOP:  I wanted to brief the media as soon as possible on our return from Sri Lanka. Last week Scott  Morrison, Michael Keenan and I visited Sri Lanka for the purposes of seeing the conditions  on the ground, meeting with a wide range of people and determining whether our policy  directions on Sri Lanka were heading in the right direction. The visit was organised in three  parts. The first part was organised by the TNA, the Tamil National Alliance, the  parliamentary party and they were encouraged to take us to places that they wanted us to see,  to meet with people they wanted us to meet with. The second part of the visit was organised  by the Australian High Commission. We met AusAID officials, we saw a number of AusAID  projects and we met with a number of NGOs, UNHCR, IOM and the like. The third part of  the visit was organised by the government. On the last day we met with the President, a  number of ministers and we concluded with a roundtable that was led by the chief of the  defence forces and included the leaders of the navy, customs, police and intelligence. 

 As a result of our visit we are satisfied that the policy positions that we have taken are the  correct ones at this time. It was not our job to visit Sri Lanka to take sides between the  Sinhalese and the Tamils, it was not our job to involve ourselves in domestic policies or  domestic politics or indeed some of the controversies but we certainly spoke to many people  about these issues. 

 We have to remember that Sri Lanka is emerging from a bloody conflict, a thirty year civil  war. The Tamil Tigers, the LTTE was in fact a proscribed terrorist organisation in a number  of places around the world. The Sri Lankan forces defeated the LTTE forces and we must  remember that the LTTE had a navy, an air force and had essentially occupied northern Sri  Lanka. Hundreds of thousands of people were displaced as a result of the conflict which  ended three years ago. 

 On the issue of reconciliation there is clearly a long way to go but we were heartened by the  steps that have been taken. Indeed, the veteran leader of the Tamil parliamentary party and  others were travelling to South Africa to talk with the ANC in South Africa about ways that  they could progress the reconciliation process under way in Sri Lanka. 

 In terms of resettlement, I mentioned that hundreds of thousands of people had been  displaced during the war. The majority of them have been returned to their homes, to their 

 homeland. A number, who were displaced because of military camps being established in the  north in the last few years of the war, have not been returned to their homes but they are  being provided with land and temporary accommodation and in some instances more  permanent accommodation pending decisions about the military withdrawal from the north. 

 We in fact saw a number of housing projects under way, the Indian Government is providing  housing, the Australian Government through AusAid is providing permanent housing and we  also saw housing that was being built by the Sri Lankan military and I'll come back to that in  a moment. 

 On the question of the rehabilitation of former LTTE, the former combatants, there is a  rehabilitation process under way. After the war clearly a number of people were detained but  we have seen evidence of the steps being taken to rehabilitate people. For example, we  visited a landmine site, the Australian Government through AusAID is supporting a private  sector organisation to de-mine agricultural areas so that it can be productive and used for  agricultural purposes once more. 

 A number of women, in particular, are being employed by this private sector organisation to  carry out the de-mining work. It's painstaking, detailed work. We had an opportunity to speak  to these women. A number of them were former Tamil Tiger combatants. Indeed one was in  the Sea Tigers and her job was to be part of an effort to send explosives in small boats to  blow up to Sri Lankan navy. She's now employed to get rid of landmines. They are paid well  and they want to finish this work and with the money that they have saved start up small  businesses. The Tamils are very enterprising, hard-working people and we were heartened by  their aspirations to set up small businesses throughout the north. 

 We visited Jaffna and Kilinochchi in the northern province which was held by the Tamil  Tigers for so many years and we were struck by the amount of reconstruction work that is  going on. Billions of rupee have been invested in major infrastructure projects, roads, and this  is all quite self-evident when you travel up to Jaffna New highways, roadworks everywhere,  water sanitation projects, electricity transmission. You have to remember much of the north  has never had electricity and now a majority of the north has electricity. There's still some  way to go. The mobile phone coverage was superb. Indeed I got better mobile phone  coverage throughout the north of Sri Lanka than I do driving through Kings Park in Western  Australia. 

 What was also heartening was the reconstruction work being carried on in schools and we  visited a school that AusAID has funded the rebuilding of it and one of the young students  told us that at the end of the war, after the schools had been closed, at the end of the war only  36 students returned to that school. Today there are 2000 young students at that school. There  are some impressive statistics about teacher/student ratios, the number of students attending  schools. Likewise in the health area, new hospitals are being built and hospitals closed during  the war have been reestablished. 

 There are, of course still concerns. The presence of the military in the north, we also visited  the eastern province where the naval command is based. In the final years of the war the Sri  Lankan military presence increased dramatically and I just want to put this in context, Sri  Lanka and Australia have roughly the same size populations. Our defence force is around  50/55,000. The estimates of the size of their defence force is anything between 200, 300,000  soldiers and defence force personnel. They are facing the challenge of decreasing the military 

 presence in the north but not having several hundred thousand young men and women trained  for defence force purposes unemployed. So in a number of instances the military have been  deployed for civilian purposes and they were involved in building houses. We in fact visited  what's called a model village where the military were building permanent housing of the  same standard that AusAID were building elsewhere in the northern and eastern provinces. 

 We saw that the navy has been deployed to build a golf course in the hoped to be tourist area  around Trincomalee. And the military who have been sent back down south are involved in  the beautification process of Colombo and that is quite evident. The city of Colombo has  improved dramatically in terms of the beautification, the heritage building restoration and the  like. 

 There is also deep concern about recent matters regarding the Chief Justice of Sri Lanka who  has been the subject of impeachment proceedings. We discussed this matter at length with a  range of people. But we should not fall into the trap of assuming that every controversy in Sri  Lanka is directly linked to the fact Tamil/Sinhalese conflict. In fact the Chief Justice was  appointed by the President. She is Sinhalese. So a whole set of different considerations apply  and I believe that separate representations should be made to the Government in relation to  that matter. 

 As a member of the Commonwealth we obviously want to ensure that Sri Lanka respects the  rule of law, the independence of the judiciary and the like. Yes, we heard grievances from  some people in the north, in particular one Tamil member of Parliament told us of his  frustration at having his office raided by the police and concerns he had about that. But I  point out that when we spoke to the Tamil parliamentary leader and asked him of instances of  violations of human rights, of physical abuse, of intimidation, harassment against Tamil MPs,  he didn't cite any examples and he particularly didn't cite this example. So again, I say we  have to ensure that other controversies in Sri Lanka are not necessarily an indication of the  ongoing conflict between the Tamils and the Sinhalese and the Sri Lankan Government. 

 From my perspective I was there to gather facts for our foreign policy positions and Scott for  border protection. We arranged to meet with the US delegation who were there, they were  focused on alleged war crimes. That is part of Sri Lanka's history that they will have to come  to terms with and we will certainly look closely at any resolution that goes before the United  Nations on that score. 

 As far as the Commonwealth heads of Government meeting later this year is concerned, I'm  satisfied that Australia should attend and should encourage other Commonwealth countries to  attend. The Sri Lankan Government is not perfect but it is making inroads into the challenges  facing the country and should be encouraged to continue to do so. 

 On the issue of border control, as it relates to Sri Lanka, I am satisfied that our policy in  relation to this is the right policy setting at this time and on that note I will ask Scott Morrison  to give you his observations on border control. 

 MORRISON:  Well thank you very much, Julie. I'm very pleased that Julie and Michael Keenan were able  to come along as part of this delegation and to have our Deputy Leader leading that  delegation was of great assistance. The Coalition is in the business of, if elected to  government later this year, of being able to hit the ground running and particularly on this 

 issue more than most. I think there is an obvious high expectation of the change in policy that  would be required if there were a change in government later this year and frankly that  expectation of change in policy was something that was often discussed with people in Sri  Lanka at all levels, both civilian, within the government and within the military. 

 A couple of figures that I think are relevant in terms of the pace of change in Sri Lanka and I  think the pace of change is something which is a key take out. If people are basing their  impressions on what policy should be right in Sri Lanka, particularly in relation to border  protection, of experiences of 18 months ago, 12 months ago, even six months ago, then they  are behind the pace. Things are changing quickly. As Julie said, that doesn't mean there's not  a long way to go and that's not to discount or diminish any grievances that exist, but the pace  of change is dramatic. GDP per capita has increased by US $1000 per person in Sri Lanka  since the end of the war. That's a 50 per cent increase, GDP is up 50 per cent since the end of  the war, visitor arrivals to Sri Lanka are now over a million which is double since the end of  the war. 20,000km of roads have been constructed in Sri Lanka, 17,000/almost 18,000, I  should say, of those roads are in rural areas, access roads. 

 Now that stands in stark contrast to a war that cost the country an estimated $200 billion,  500,000 people displaced, 100,000 dead and 4,000 child soldiers part of the ex combatants  that came out of that conflict and 45,000 widows in the north. It's hard to move around Sri  Lanka in the north and just not be struck by the change. You don't see soldiers with machine  guns on street corners in Sri anymore. The reports of midnight abductions and white vans and  the brutality of torture and so on that was a routine thing some years ago we would press  keenly in all of our meetings to be trying to understand the presence of this today. And the  reports of those things barely arose and when did, it was to events that had taken place some  time ago. There have been some arrests, particularly up in the north at the university campus,  but those arrests everyone knows where everybody is. Those people haven't disappeared.  They are being investigated for various matters that the authorities wish to investigate them  for and it's important, as Julie said, that we don't involve ourselves in the domestic politics of  Sri Lanka. Our job was to prepare ourselves if we're elected to government to implement  sound border protection policies. 

 Now the military draw down in the north is something also which I think is not perhaps being  acknowledged. There is a significant military presence in the north and they are still very  involved in the day-to-day civilian life and civilian administration and Julie's given some of  the reasons for that.   Let’s not forget this was a country at war just four years ago. 

 But of the two key areas, and I’m talking about the Kilinochchi district and the Mullaitivu  district, in Kilinochchi we’ve had a reduction we were advised from 36 to 26 battalions and  that’s a reduction of around 9000 soldiers, in the Mullaitivu district we’ve had the withdrawal  of two divisions which is almost 10,000. Now this has only taken place in the last few  months, certainly there’s a long way to go but the direction was something that we found  encouraging. 

 In terms of resettlement 97,000 families had to be resettled, 500 the figure is, have been able  to be resettled on their original lands. 80,000 homes are in the pipeline, 35,000 have been  completed and there is a need for another 30,000 and I think this is an important point for the  international community. Everyone may want to express an opinion on what’s happening in  Sri Lanka but what they need is houses and roads, bridges, hospitals, schools. 

 And I think one of the proudest parts of our trip was to see the work of AusAID. Here the  Australian people building schools and homes for people who desperately need them and I  think in terms of the soft diplomacy and the true spirit of Australians I think our commitment  has been very very well felt in these remote villages of Sri Lanka. 

 5700 people have returned from India since the end of the war. In all of our discussions with  the ION the UNHCR even the TNA we were very keen to understand, what has happened to  people who have returned from India. These were people who fled Sri Lanka and there have  been no cases presented to us, in fact there was a high level of confidence, that people have  returned from India to Sri Lanka unviolated and have been able to reengage in the community  and that is very heartening given that it is our policy to send all, without exception back to Sri  Lanka. 

 The work of the IOM in particular in managing that resettlement process to people being  returned to Sri Lanka I think is very positive and I think they have proven to be a very good  partner to the Indian and Sri Lankan governments in managing that process of resettlement  and I think there are lessons there for how we would pursue a similar policy. 

 But when you look at the situation in India where people have fled Sri Lanka can go live,  work, send their children to school, move freely, have access to permanent housing, power  and all of these things and there’s a UN agency office in Chennai and there’s health care and  the high commissioner for refugees only recently described India as a model country in terms  of how they’re looking after refugees, you have to wonder why people would take the $1m  rupee journey 3000km to Australia when India is 30km away and at low tide you could  almost walk there as was said to us. 

 The overwhelming message we got in terms of people coming to Australia came down to a  number of factors, the primary one was economic and lifestyle. Even for those who may feel  they have a case in terms of persecution the safer and more ready option available to them is  [inaudible] for a dangerous journey to Australia. What we found was the greatest threat and  risk to life, the greatest threat and risk to life to Sri Lankans in Sri Lanka was if they got on a  boat and came to Australia, not if they stayed in Sri Lanka, not if they returned to Sri Lanka. 

 And that’s why I think Julie and I and Michael Keenan can say very confidently and  comfortably that our policy of ensuring that all those who would seek to come to Australia  illegally by boat would be returned I think can be executed strongly, effectively and I think  compassionately. 

 In terms of the intelligence roundtable with the security forces and others I make a number of  points. When Senator Carr was there last year, I could not be struck by any other impression  that this was just a regurgitated stunt. The measures that were announced barely scratch the  surface and most of which were already in train anyway. There is a deficiency in the  interception capacity of the navy in Sri Lanka which needs to be attended to. There is a  deficiency in the aerial surveillance capacity which needs to be attended to. There is a  deficiency in the sharing of intelligence and other intelligence operations which needs to be  attended to and they’ll be important parts of what a Coalition government would do if we  were to be elected. Now the specifics of that we have to be very careful about discussing,  they go to operational matters and I’m not about to get into a discussion of the [inaudible]  and other things that are required to give effect to that. But they’re three areas of weakness  and we had a high level of cooperation and enthusiasm from the Sri Lankan government 

 about what we could do with them more constructively to ensure we could take the current  interception rate which is one in three to as close to three out of three as we could get it. We  would much prefer to see the vessels prevented from leaving Sri Lanka whether on land or  within a reasonable distance from their shoreline than them take that dangerous journey all  the way to Cocos Island. But if it’s necessary, it’s the Coalition policy to ensure those boats  do not cross our sea border. So our policy is to send back and it’s probably best to conclude  on this note. That is, when we asked the commander of the naval base in Trincomalee what  was the most important thing that we could do, he said send them back. Now I acknowledge  that the government’s decision that they were dragged kicking and screaming to introduce  last year in relation to Sri Lankan arrivals as the pirate boat headed toward Australia last year  and they finally saw the wisdom in sending them back, that that has had an impact on the  traffic of Singhalese. But that policy only sub standardly applies to Singhalese. You need to  apply this policy universally. You can’t be half-hearted about it, you can’t be double minded  about it. The Coalition is none of these things. The Sri Lankan government understands that  and I think if we were elected to government, we’d be able to work very constructively to  ensure that people don’t risk their lives on these boats. 

 BISHOP:  Thank you Scott, any questions? 

 QUESTION:  Just a practical one, you say that your policy is still to ensure that no boats cross our sea  border? 

 MORRISON:  Correct. 

 QUESTION:  How will you do that? 

 MORRISON:  As I said before, the most important thing to do is to beef up the capacity of Sri Lanka to  ensure they don’t get a few hundred nautical miles off Sri Lanka and there are a range of  measures and capacity building that are needed, naval, air force and intelligence and we had  very precise discussions with the Chiefs of Defence Forces and intelligence and police about  what was specifically needed there. What I’m puzzled by is why the information we’ve been  able to glean has not been included in any of our government’s announcements in terms of  what support they’re intending to provide. 

 QUESTION:  But at the moment they’re intercepting one in three boats leaving Sri Lanka and presumably  if you do win the election and take some time to fix up those aerial, naval and intelligence  sharing areas, what will you do if boats continue to leave Sri Lanka - 

 MORRISON:  They won’t cross our borders, they’ll be intercepted outside of our sea border and we’ll be  arranging for their return to Sri Lanka. 

 QUESTION:  So by Australian navy vessels outside our sea border? 

 MORRISON:  That is our policy. 

 BISHOP:  Can I also point out that on intelligence sharing, the Sri Lankan authorities are frustrated that  they’re not even told the region from which the boats are coming. I know that there are  constraints under the Refugee Convention about identifying people claiming asylum but they  are not even told the area of their coastline from where the boats are leaving. If there could be  greater intelligence sharing then I’m sure the Sri Lankan authorities can be better prepared to  intercept. 

 QUESTION:  So just to be clear if an Australian navy vessel intercepts - 

 MORRISON:  Australian Customs and Border Protection, Northern Command, yes. 

 QUESTION:  Instead of taking them to Christmas Island which often happens now, did you talk to the Sri  Lankans about taking them straight back there? 

 MORRISON:  Yes. 

 QUESTION:  And they’re happy with that? 

 MORRISON:  Yes. 

 QUESTION:  Can I just ask, what did you find out about the returnees when they were actually returned,  exactly what happens to them? 

 MORRISON:  Sri Lanka has a law which says - this isn’t so much a people smuggling law as it is an  embarkation law - which says it is illegal to leave Sri Lanka without going through a proper  process and everyone who breaks that law is interviewed on their return and that is indeed  what happens with everyone who goes back, whether it’s voluntary or forced. That is what  takes place. That is the extent of the interviewing and then they effectively move back into  the resettlement program that is being applied right across the board; finding their old lands,  hooking up with their family and working into the resettlement programs which are  extraordinarily active. To see that sort of scale of change in resettlement - there’s 300,000  people in the Menik Farm camp. That is a lot of people to get out of a camp and get back to  their homes. If other countries had achieved this in post-conflict environments, they’d all be  reaching for the Nobel Prize. 

 QUESTION:  [Inaudible] 

 MORRISON:  There’s a monitoring process that follows, which you’d expect. As I say, this is a country that  was only four years ago in civil war and they don’t want to see these things spark up again.  But the goal of that process is rehabilitation. They’ve rehabilitated thousands - 

 BISHOP:  And reconciliation. 

 MORRISON:  And reconciliation. To get people back into their normal life. I was struck by the impression -  I’m sure Julie and Michael were as well - that they want to rebuild their country. The  opportunities for Sri Lankans - all Sri Lankans - Singhalese, Tamil, Muslim - to have a  peaceful and prosperous future is extraordinary and I think we should be doing all we can to  try and encourage that. We have a great opportunity in working with the Sri Lankan  Government I think to encourage them down that path. Both Tamils and the government have  said openly to us they don’t want to see people get on boats. They don’t want to encourage  people to get on boats and they would like people to come back because they want to rebuild  their country. Now they have a series of issues they need to work through but I think there’s  some agreement on that point. 

 BISHOP:  Clearly they want the Tamil community to be strong and prosperous in the north and  encouraging the Tamil diaspora to come back to Sri Lanka, invest in Sri Lanka and help that  reconciliation process. And that was a sentiment expressed by Tamils, by the government, by  everybody that we met that, like people the world over, Sri Lankans want to live in peace and  increasing prosperity. We believe that all efforts should be made to encourage that to happen.  

 QUESTION:  [inaudible] The Tamil Diaspora have been quite politically involved, have you spoken to  them and do they agree because in the past they’ve been very concerned about - 

 BISHOP:  We’ve been in constant communication with them in fact they had input into the first part of  our visit, which was organised by the TNA. They’re not going to agree with everything we  do, not everybody will agree with all of our policies but we are satisfied, confident that what  we saw and what we have concluded represent the best policy position for Australia.  

 MORRISON:  We’re not looking to - 

 QUESTION:  [Inaudible] 

 BISHOP:  I’ll let Scott answer that but we had very specific discussions with the Senior Parliamentary  leadership of the Tamils and we concluded that they want Tamils to come back to Sri Lanka.  That’s what they’re looking for. They want to rebuild their party, they want to rebuild their  community particularly in the North. We also met, and we must point this out, we organised  to meet with a number of community and business leaders of our own volition in Colombo  and some of the most successful businessmen and women in Sri Lanka today are Tamils, and 

 we were encouraged. We had discussions about increasing two way trade. We were  encouraged by the deep involvement in the business community of a number of prominent  Tamil businessmen so the reconciliation process in the North is difficult, slow but we can see  incredible signs of improvement. The lot of Tamils elsewhere is different but we were of  course encouraged to see the involvement and the underpinning of the economy by prominent  Tamil business leaders. 

 MORRISON:  I think the linear logic that has tried to be applied by some that you are a Tamil, you live in  the north and you therefore are persecuted is not something that can be borne out. There are  Tamils who serve in the government, there are Tamils who serve in the Parliament, there are  Tamils who are ministers, there are Tamils who are working all across Sri Lanka, they live in  the south, they live in the north and the same is true of the Muslim population as well.  

 BISHOP:  What’s not widely recognised is the population of Colombo, a majority are now Muslim, then  Tamil and last Singhalese. 

 MORRISON:  So the diversity of the country and if you go to the Eastern Province, you’ll also see a similar  diversity in the population, so it’s encouraging to see that that can take place. So we can  either hold on to the conflict of the past and relive all of those disagreements or as we were  trying to do as we were there is look forward, and look forward to the type of future that is  emerging there. And what we can do to be constructive, whether it’s the aid program, the  diplomacy that Julie has talked about and also the security matters as well, and I think that  provides a way forward rather than us engaging in the politics of the Sri Lankan issue. That’s  not our job. We haven’t sought to do that. But the question was what engagement we’ve had  with groups like the Tamil Congress, which is associated with the Global Tamil Forum and  other Diaspora organisations around the world. Mr Sumanthiran who was out here, a Tamilist  MP, I met with him, as did Julie, during his visit and what I offered to him in that meeting is  we’re coming to Sri Lanka, I will give you a large part of our program, take us where you  want to take us. We met in TNA headquarters in Jaffna with all of their local authority bosses  and we were there for some period of time. We talked about a whole range of issues. The two  issues the Tamils raised in the north most significantly with us were land issues and jobs. We  visited a displaced persons camp near Jaffna, we went to another one at [inaudible] where the  military were actually building houses. We were constantly asked what is your feeling of  security in this place. Now there were no soldiers around. This was independently organised  by the TNA. They drove us there with their people. And their concern was about the  sanitation. Their concern was about the status of their living conditions, about their access to  their lands which they hadn’t gone back to. On issues of security they said no, that’s not  happening. That was in that place. So on the ground it’s important to get this understanding  removed from the global discourse about these issues. 

 QUESTION:  This assistance to the Sri Lankan navy - does that go to actual concrete issues such as  supplying boats, outfitting but mostly intelligence? 

 MORRISON:  No it goes to exactly those matters and also operational issues in terms of support. It’s one  thing to have boats, you’ve got to fuel them and maintain them as well. Sri Lanka like many 

 countries has fiscal pressures and so you can have boats but the ability for them to go out and  exercise patrols and be maintained and all these sorts of things. The people smuggling  activity in Sri Lanka is not dissimilar I suppose to what we see in Indonesia in that it is quite  sophisticated and as the weather changes and the heat comes on in parts of the country, they  will move people from one side of the country to other ports and the interceptions which have  been undertaken to date - one out of three is a pretty good strike rate with what they have,  have all been intelligence based. So these are targeted interceptions based off intelligence.  Now we want to be able to significantly ramp up not just that side of it but the second tier of  an interception strategy. 

 QUESTION:  So you’re talking about planes and fuel… 

 MORRISON:  I’m not going to go into the operational things because I think there is a range of matters that  I think will be very sensitive in this. We have been given a very clear and specific view about  what they think is needed to get from one out of three to as close to three out of three as  possible. Now we will work through that detail but those things will ultimately be  operational. 

 QUESTION:  Can you explain to us how sending all boat arrivals back without first hearing their claims for  asylum is not in breach of the UNHCR and the Refugee Convention and secondly would that  apply to all nationalities? 

 MORRISON:  Well as was found by the US Supreme Court and as is applied by the United States every  other day of the week, the Convention doesn’t have extra territorial application so that’s the  simple answer to that question. The issues - your second question was? 

 QUESTION:  Will this apply to all nationalities? 

 MORRISON:  This will apply to arrivals from Sri Lanka because we’re able to return people to Sri Lanka.  There is no obstacle to us returning people to Sri Lanka. The frustration with this government  is they’ve known that for a long, long, long time. This surge in arrivals started in May last  year and we’re now in February and they haven’t sent one patrol boat. We’ve got one AFP  officer in Sri Lanka. 

 BISHOP:  Who’s based in the High Commission anyway. 

 MORRISON:  And has a broad range of responsibilities. I mean, the government has been dragged kicking  and screaming to do something about the arrivals from Sri Lanka. It took the pirate boat to  force them into action. The pirate boat and Captain Emad, that’s who settles policy for this  government on border protection. It’s a joke. 

 QUESTION:  So just to clarify, if the boats make it into our territorial waters, we will not - 

 MORRISON:  There are different obligations and legal issues that are triggered by crossing the sea border. 

 QUESTION:  So when they’re outside the sea border, just to be clear on that point, there is no obligation on  Australia’s part to hear any asylum claim. Under what authority - 

 MORRISON:  I’m not going to give David Manne too many heads up on this. But there are a range of  options that are available to partners working together to enforce their laws. 

 QUESTION:  And you’ve got legal advice on this? 

 MORRISON:  I said, I’m not going to give any heads up to those if we were to form a government who  would seek to frustrate our policies. That’s a process issue I don’t intend to get into here. 

 QUESTION:  What about the cost issue here about in particular the assistance you want to provide to the  Sri Lankans - 

 MORRISON:  As I said, that’s what we have to work through the detail of. We have a good idea about what  they need and that’s \ something we need to go and work through. 

 QUESTION:  Are you prepared to spend more money - 

 BISHOP:  We’ll look at all of these issues post the budget when we can see the true state of the  Australian government finances. When we can see the fiscal position, we’ll be in a position to  put detailed policies together but what we were seeking to do was to determine whether our  policy direction and our policy positions were feasible, were credible and could be backed up  by what we saw and were satisfied. I don’t know if there are any more questions?  

 QUESTION:  Would it be Coalition policy to send patrol boats out into international waters to - 

 MORRISON:  I’m not going to get into - and this is where you’ll find us quite different to the government.  If we’ve got our forces involved in what are very sensitive operations, I’m not going to make  those operations more difficult. 

 QUESTION:  It’s a pretty important question though - 

 MORRISON:  I know it’s a pretty important question but how we will do this and the operational issues that  are associated with that I think frankly will be matters of national security.  

 QUESTION:  If you want to send our personnel out beyond our territorial waters, shouldn’t we be able to  ask how - 

 BISHOP:  Can I just make this point? The people smuggling trade are sophisticated criminal syndicates.  They follow what goes in Australia with deep interest, they follow every nuance in the  political debate and they adjust their operations accordingly. We have to be very careful  about giving too much away because we are just making life even harder for the Sri Lankan  navy in trying to intercept and dismantle this people smuggling trade. 

 MORRISON:  We don’t give advanced briefings on missions undertaken in war zones for very good reasons  and equally you will not find me, you will not find me ever giving out operational briefings  on how the specifics of how these things will be executed because I think that does put  people at risk and I’m not going to do that. 

 BISHOP:  If you want a description of what this is, it is a battle of wills between the Australian  government and the people smuggling syndicates and at this point the people smuggling  syndicates in Sri Lanka are winning that battle. 

 MORRISON:  That’s right. 

 QUESTION:  Can I just ask about Malaysia, you’re still opposed to sending asylum seekers back there  because of the way they would be treated. Is it a worse situation there than what you’re  seeing in Sri Lanka? 

 MORRISON:  Yes it is. I’ve been in Malaysia and I’ve been in Sri Lanka. In Sri Lanka, people have the  opportunity to reengage their life and be part of a resettlement program and move forward.  The conditions and threat to people in Malaysia is significant. Now I’m not saying that’s by  the government. I’ve been in the small little hovels they live in in Malaysia and just the  general risk they’re exposed to from gangs and crime. There is a world of difference between  these two places. Remember our problem with Malaysia has always been firstly that it’s a  dud deal. Secondly, it fails to deliver the legally binding protections that we think are  necessary and thirdly the capped nature of this arrangement which the government has never  moved an inch on means it can be overwhelmed based on arrivals last year in a fortnight. It is  a poorly constructed deal which the government hasn’t lifted a finger to change one letter of,  even after the Panel report suggested they should, they have not changed a letter. So the  government has sidelined that option by their own lack of action. So there is a new Minister  for Immigration, he enters the revolving door of Labor policy failure that immigration  ministers of Labor have been in now for years. The arrival of two more boats over the last  couple of days, 130 yesterday, 60 a few days ago I think just underscore the fact that they can 

 change ministers as often as they like but they can’t change how the people smugglers and  people offshore see their lack of resolve. That’s why the boats keep coming. The only thing  that will change that is a change of government. 

 QUESTION:  [Inaudible] 

 BISHOP:  Colin Barnett’s already made it clear that he doesn’t control the allocation of federal funding  from fundraising. The point he was making is that Western Australia wants a fair deal out of  the GST and we’ve agreed that there should be a fair deal but in relation to fundraising no  that’s a matter for the party administration not for the parliamentary team.  

 QUESTION:  So did he overstep his authority? 

 BISHOP:  I think when you have a look at the questions and answers he didn’t actually say that and he’s  just clarified it’s a matter for the party administration. Thank you. 

 - Ends - 

 

