---
title: "Four boats as Rudd's election fix continues to unravel"
date: "2013-07-23"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397498
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719287%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling FOUR BOATS AS RUDD’S ELECTION FIX  CONTINUES TO UNRAVEL July 23, 2013

 Four illegal boats have arrived, with a total of 299 people on board, since Kevin Rudd announced his PNG election fix  which continues to unravel, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for  Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “As always with Kevin Rudd once you get to the detail of his big announcements that’s when they all unravel,” Mr Morrison  said.

 “There remain huge questions about the cost, legal challenges, a right of veto for PNG on who goes there, the ability to  ramp up capacity in PNG, not to mention any detail on resettlement which has not even been agreed yet. Labor refuses to  acknowledge let alone answer these questions, preferring to bluff and bluster their way to the election. 

 “Labor claims that everyone who comes by boat will go to Papua New Guinea and all those who are found to be refugees  will be resettled there. Neither of these assertions is backed up in the text of the arrangement, which doesn’t even have  legal standing. 

 “Once again Kevin Rudd has been exposed as all talk, no delivery. He just can’t be believed when it comes to border  protection.

 “Labor just wants another election fix on boats, just like they had with their “East Timor solution” in 2010.

 Mr Keenan said: “Another four boats have been intercepted as the people smugglers start to test the Rudd Government’s  resolve when it comes to properly implementing border protection policies.

 “The reality is that every time the people smugglers have challenged the Labor Government’s resolve they have won.

 “When Labor introduced offshore processing, they did it half-heartedly because they do not believe in the policies that  they are implementing.

 “Labor will always choose the path of least resistance and if history is any indication then they will again cave to the  pressure placed on them by the people smugglers.

 “It will take a strong stable government to implement the proven policies of the Howard Government in order to shut down  the people smugglers business,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 FOUR BOATS AS RUDD’S ELECTION FIX CONTINUES TO UNRAVEL > Mich...

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

