---
title: "Abbott abandons stop the boat promise"
date: "2013-02-22"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391010
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2247885%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 22 February 2013   

 ABBOTT ABANDONS STOP THE BOAT PROMISE   

 Tony Abbott has been exposed by his Immigration Spokesperson on his claim he would stop the  boats “within a few months”.   

 The Opposition is now walking crablike away from a solemn Tony Abbott promise to “stop the  boats”, saying they won't be able to fix this problem as promised.   

 On Wednesday, Tony Abbott said in Melbourne:   

 “...within a few months the carbon tax will be gone, within a few months the mining tax will  be gone, the boats will be stopped...”   

 Just one day later, his Shadow Minister for Immigration is saying this issue would take “years to fix".   

 Mr Morrison has finally admitted what the Government has always known, that the Coalition has no  quick fix to stop asylum seekers traveling to Australia by boat.   

 The Shadow Minister also wouldn’t say whether he would quit if he hadn’t stopped the boats within  12 months, should he become Immigration Minister. This is because he knows that the Coalition’s  “stop the boats” slogan is not a policy, rather they are just empty words.   

 The Gillard Government knows that a three word slogan will not stop the global problem of people  using desperate measures to seek asylum.   

 We need a regional approach involving countries of origin, transit and destination under the  auspices of the Bali Process.   

 Mr Abbott has also been caught out doctoring parts of the transcript of his speech in which he said  he would stop the boats “within a few months”.    

 How are voters meant to believe anything Mr Abbott says?   

 The Gillard Government is determined to break the people smugglers’ business model and stop  them taking people’s life savings and all too often their lives.   

 We are committed to implementing all the recommendations of the Expert Panel into Asylum  Seekers.    

 It’s time the Opposition and the Greens Party listened to the experts and support the  recommendations in full.   

 Media Adviser: Maria Hawthorne 0407 015 986   

