---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Canberra: 07 May 2013: Greens overseas aid bill; mining tax; Family Tax Benefit A; public service; asylum seekers"
date: "2013-05-07"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
  - "Greens overseas aid bill"
  - "mining tax"
  - "Family Tax Benefit A"
  - "public service"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435787
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2427113%22
---

 1 

 

 

 

 

 Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader   

 And    

 Lee Rhiannon  Greens overseas aid spokesperson   

 

 Tuesday 7 May 2013   

 Press conference    

 Transcript   

 Subjects: Greens overseas aid bill, mining tax, Family Tax Benefit A, public service asylum seekers 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Thank you very much for coming along today. I’m very pleased that Senator  Rhiannon and I have been joined by a number of young people who do believe that there are people  in the world who are entitled to a fair go, and that is the recipients of Australia's overseas aid  programs. Australia is a rich country, we are very well off in the scheme of things and we can afford  to pay our way when it comes to overseas aid. There has been a disturbing trend in recent years for  the Government to start diverting money from what people would think of as reasonable overseas  aid programs to the defence programs or most recently to pay for the Government’s failed  detention centre and processing of asylum seekers. We have now had the OECD come out and say  that other countries deserve to have a fairly clear indication of where Australia's going to put its aid  and there is a  genuine concern that in this year's budget we will see the Government cut again into  the overseas aid program to pay for its failed detention policies.  

 So we’re here today to say that the Greens and the community are supportive of sticking with the  commitments we made - so 0.7 per cent of our gross national income by 2020 going to overseas aid  and the Millennium Development Goals and also to stick with the timetable we had before by  2015/16 to reach 0.5. To that end Senator Rhiannon has a bill that we intend to introduce to the  Parliament because looking at the likelihood, if the polls are right, of an Abbott government and the  erosion of overseas aid by this Government we need some certainty in place. 

 LEE RHIANNON: The Greens’ bill is what most Australians desire. It would set out the need for an  Australian Government to lock in an increase in our aid and also surety that that aid works for the  majority of people and the environment in low income countries. This bill is badly needed. As  Senator Milne has set out we have seen recently where the Australian Government has really 

 2 

 

 treated the aid budget as a ATM where they can dip into when they have a failed policy like the  detention centres or they need a bit of money for defence spending. And that’s just not right, it’s not  what Australian expect - when they hear the word aid, they believe that the right thing is being done  and this is what this bill would help to ensure. 

 Some of the key aspects of the bill is that it would require yearly reporting by the Foreign Affairs  Minister to Parliament. That report would need to set out what the aid budget, what the aid  program has achieved, if it hasn’t achieved its goals, why not and what the Government plans to do  about it. It also sets out a new office, a watchdog position, which would be the Office or a  Commissioner of Aid Effectiveness and this is badly needed, we need it independent of Government.  So all those aspects of the aid that now the OECD has also identified needs to be more frankly and  openly shared with low income countries, they need to be provided, and we need to have measures  about how that will be achieved. And then on top of that there is a key aspect of the funding that  Christine has set out. 

 So this is work that the Greens have been taking forward, we have discussed extensively with those  who work in this area as well as people from low income countries. And in many ways it mirrors  work that’s been done in Britain, because in many countries Britain would be an interesting example  because of their financial problems. They are locking in 0.7 per cent, you’re seeing conservative  governments take that step and it’s now time that Australia did the right thing and it’s certainly the  expectation of more Australians. This week, and many of those people are with us now, there are  8000 Australians surviving on less than two dollars a day for their food during this week. I’m one of  them and I’ve certainly join them because I understand how that really does help display the strong  commitment Australians have in this important area.  

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Thanks Lee. There are some other issues of the day I might just comment quickly  on first. Joe Hockey has come out and said that under an Abbott government there would be an end  to the era of entitlement, an end to the era of entitlement for everybody in the community except  the big miners it would seem, except those who are the recipients of fossil fuel subsidies in the  mining sector. So come on Mr Hockey and Prime Minister Gillard - if you are serious about equity in  this country, if you’re serious about equality of opportunity why is it that the big miners are to be  protected and yet people who are on Family Tax Benefit A are going to not get the money that was  promised to them because the mining tax has failed. Well the solution is not to say to those people  you are not entitled to that support anymore, the solution is to fix the mining tax. Everybody knows  what the flaws are, what we have shown from the PBO costings, we can raise more than $26 billion  by including gold in the mining tax and fixing the flaws, going to the 40 per cent rate by making sure  that we plug the gap in terms of the royalty payments, getting rid of the accelerated depreciation, all  those things can be done means we can go ahead with the programs that were rightly there to  support people who need it most. Instead of that single parents are missing out, we now have family  Tax Benefit A people who will be missing out, not to mention people Newstart and everybody agrees  those people are living below the poverty line. So this is not a fair country if we can’t get the money  from the people who can afford to pay and actually make it available to support the people who  need it most. So if you’re worried about entitlement let’s go straight to the people who do have a  sense of entitlement and that’s the big miners and those who are receiving those fossils of subsidies,  namely the big miners and let’s get the money back for the community. 

 3 

 

 On another matter with Mr Abbott he has said again that he intends to take people out of the public  service, reduce the public service by up to 20,000 people but he’s also going to take the public  service out of Canberra and distribute it around the country. Well it’s about time he told the people  of Canberra and the community how that would work in practical terms. The public service, how are  you going to send the CSIRO for example to Karratha or somewhere else - what exactly is he talking  about? This is one of those policies which he’s out and about talking in the regions about but he’s  not here with the public service in Canberra telling people what it actually means for the effective  operations of the public service into the future.  

 JOURNALIST: Can I also ask you Senator about the Government's decision to release families and  children into the community on bridging visas that deny asylum seekers work rights that will keep  them there for about five years. Do you have concerns that this will entrench disadvantage?  

 CHRISTINE MILNE: I’m devastated to hear that the Government’s cruel policy in relation to asylum  seekers just gets worse by the minute. As we are seeing the way people are desperate, they’re in the  community on bridging visas, they are not allowed to work, they are living in derelict circumstances  and now we’re having the Government say it’s quite okay to put families into those positions. It is  not okay, these are real people, these are mothers and fathers and children, and are you saying that  you can just shove out in the community, no ability to work, no support, is this what it means ‘no  advantage’? What it means is you’re putting vulnerable people into circumstances where families  won’t be able to feed their children. I don’t think that is the kind of Australia that most people think  we should be proud of. So I am really concerned about the Prime Minister making cruel decisions  and I would like to ask Mr Abbott whether he intends to continue with such a program such that we  see families so badly treated right under our noses and it is not going to be good enough in a  decade's time for people in this Parliament to be standing up making apologies and saying they  didn’t know that that is the circumstance that they were putting families in, well we do know and it  has been agreed to by a Labor Government and supported by the Coalition and it’s wrong 

 JOURNALIST: The Coalition proposed a work or the dole scheme for those on such visas - would that  change the situation at all? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: What needs to change is the way that we treat people seeking asylum. It is not  illegal to seek asylum and we need to be looking at the circumstances that they are leaving. Take Sri  Lanka for example, the Government and the Coalition are all too fast to support the Rajapaksa  regime, to pour money into the Rajapaksa navy, and how they deal with trying to stop asylum  seekers leaving Sri Lanka, but nobody wants to face up to the fact that Amnesty International, that  human rights groups are saying that torture is going on, that persecution is going on in Sri Lanka as  we stand here now, and that we should be abandoning CHOGM for a start because we ought not to  be legitimising that. So coming up with other programs that adversely impact people seeking asylum  is just continuing this cruelty. Let’s actually live up to our human rights obligations and support  people who are genuine refugees in order to enable them to live the lives they want to live and  make the contribution they want to make to our community. 

 JOURNALIST: Is this worse than temporary protection visas? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Look temporary protection visas are shocking and we’ve just had an expose on  the SIEV X for example where 353 people drowned and a large number of those were women and 

 4 

 

 children and they were on that boat because of the Howard Government’s temporary protection  visas not allowing people to get family reunion and therefore women and children thinking they had  no option but to get on boats. Now we’ve got a situation where families are being put out into the  community with no capacity to support themselves and essentially thrown onto the streets. I think  that is completely unacceptable and I’m not going to go into how cruel, how more cruel, what is  extreme cruelty, it is all wrong. This whole policy is reaching a point where we need to have a real  community revolt against the way both Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott are treating vulnerable people.  

 JOURNALIST: There have been a number of changes to Family Tax Benefit A for instance and a  number of other announced cuts over the last week or two - have you had any correspondence with  the Gillard Government in regards to this and have they spoken about any other possible cuts  they’re making ahead of the budget?  

 CHRISTINE MILNE: No, we’ve had nothing in writing from the Government or discussions with the  Government about what they propose in the budget. They have been doing what all governments  do and that is flying some flags it in the media to see how people think about things. Well clearly the  Greens have said we will not support cuts to universities, we are opposed to taking money out of  any part of the education system. We need to support people from early childhood right through to  university and we won’t support those cuts. As for the changes they’re proposing to the Family Tax  Benefit A, the first we heard of that is in the media today, and we’re joined ACOSS in saying we have  real concerns about the fact that these are really targeted payments and they are for the people  who are most in need. And so why is it that you would protect the mining bosses, the big miners of  Australia and not support the most vulnerable and needy in our community. And that is the question  which Prime Minister Gillard and Tony Abbott need to answer.  

 JOURNALIST: What makes you think there will be further cuts or reallocation to overseas aid next  week? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Well I’m very concerned that the Government moved last year to take so many  millions out of the aid budget and redirect it to their detention system effectively and I have no  evidence to support the fact that they are going to do it again in the budget in even greater  measure, but it is very clear they are looking for savings, their cruel detention system is costing more  than they anticipated and given that they were prepared to do it once you can anticipate they will  probably try to do it again with the support of the Coalition, but I don’t know Lee if you have  anything further to add? 

 LEE RHIANNON: Well there’s certainly an enormous concern within the sector that there could be  cuts and that’s why people have been working very hard and I certainly congratulate Oaktree and all  those people who have organised the event of Live Below the Line and the week prior to the Budget  is a reminder that we don’t need cuts, what we need is an increase in the aid budget. 

 JOURNALIST: Can I just ask whether you’re concerned about a further deferment of 0.5 per cent  target? 

 LEE RHIANNON: Well certainly that’s one of those things that’s been suggested that could happen.  At the moment we have not had anything confirmed but when you look at the track record of the  Government and of the Coalition on this issue, and it’s worth remembering in November 2011 they 

 5 

 

 actually voted with the Greens with a solid position of committing to 0.5 per cent by 2015 and since  then the Government has pushed it back, now the Coalition no longer is putting any timeline on that  at all so the rumours continue and it is a worry and it’s why we’re stepping up our voice and the  Greens have come forward with our bill. 

 JOURNALIST: There’s no chance that your bill could be successful though as the Government and  Opposition are not going to support it.  

 LEE RHIANNON: We recognise that at the moment but there is changing climate and again I reiterate  8000 people across Australia living below the poverty line, this is one of the most active online  campaigns in terms of Make Poverty History. We have a conservative government in Britain that has  taken a step 0.7 per cent and has made that commitment, so life is about change and this is an area  that needs to change.  

 CHRISTINE MILNE: And the Gillard Government is fully aware of the polls, they are fully aware that  an Abbott Government is on the path in Australia. If they had a real concern about locking in a  contribution to overseas aid according to the policy platforms of all parties then the Gillard  Government would work with the Greens to lock this into legislation before the election. 

 JOURNALIST:  Senator Milne just on a different subject, can I ask you what is your understanding of  Simon Sheikh’s length of his membership of the Labor party, what your understanding of that is? 

 CHRISTINE MILNE: Oh for goodness sake, Simon Sheikh is a terrific candidate for the Greens in the  ACT. I am hoping that Simon can dislodge the Liberal senate position in the ACT and bring the  dynamism and excitement that he has into the Senate. In terms of being a member of the Labor  party previously he’s made no secret of that and has said that he tried it, it changed his mind and I  welcome that and I’d welcome many other dynamic young Australians who may have joined the  Labor party once to now join the Greens. 

 

