---
title: "Tearing down world heritage will destroy jobs in Tasmania"
date: "2013-09-09"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211439964
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2715712%22
---

 Tearing down world heritage will destroy jobs in Tasmania   

 Australian Greens Leader Senator Christine Milne has written to the Prime Minister elect  Tony Abbott to urge him not to revoke any areas of Tasmania’s Wilderness World Heritage  Area.   

 “If Tony Abbott tears down world heritage he will be tearing down the brand that will  provide Tasmania with the jobs and economy of the future,” Senator Milne said.   

 “Tasmania celebrates world heritage. The state celebrated the decision to protect our high  conservation value forests when the World Heritage Committee listed them in June this  year.    

 “Both the timber industry and the conservation movement recognise that putting forests  into world heritage is the key to Tasmania’s clean green brand, boosting tourism industry  and creating thousands of new jobs for the state’s economy.   

 “Eric Abetz wants to take us back to the old economy of ‘dig it up, cut it down and ship it  away’ because he thinks that will comfort people in this period of high unemployment. But  it is a lie. There are no jobs in the old economy. There is no future in a failed business model.    

 “If Tony Abbott drags Tasmania back to his old comfort zone then he will be destroying the  brand that offers Tasmania a real hope for the future.   

 “There are no jobs in the old economy. Those jobs collapsed because world markets don’t  want native forest woodchips.”   

 NEW PM SHOULD HONOUR PONTVILLE PROMISE   

 Senator Milne has also called on Tony Abbott to honour the commitment of former  Immigration Minister Tony Bourke by releasing 200 children from the Pontville Detention  Centre.   

 “Before the election, Tony Burke gave hope to the children in Pontville by promising to  release them into the community and the new PM should honour that commitment,”  Senator Milne said.   

 “Tasmania has opened its heart to these young refugees and have called on the government  to release them immediately. It would be an act of severe cruelty to keep them locked up  after they promised that they would be released.”   

 Media contact: Peter Stahel 0437 587 562   

 

