---
title: "Celebrating refugee success through film"
date: "2013-02-21"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390933
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2245628%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  JULIE OWENS MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR PARRAMATTA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 20 February 2013   

 CELEBRATING REFUGEE SUCCESS THROUGH FILM   

 Five refugees from the Horn of Africa region star on the big screen in a documentary launched  by the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Brendan O’Connor.   

 Mr O’Connor and Federal MP for Parramatta Julie Owens attended the premiere screening of  New Land, New Life in Parramatta, in conjunction with the Horn of Africa Relief & Development  Agency (HARDA).   

 Mr O’Connor said the documentary showed an inspiring story of success and opportunity for the  refugee community in Australia.   

 “The film is a moving portrayal of the struggles and victories refugees face in establishing their  new life in Australia,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 “The overwhelming success of these refugees is a reminder of our world-class settlement policy  and services, allowing migrants to flourish and Australia to capitalise on the full benefits of  migration for our society.”   

 The three men and two women featured in the documentary include an Ethiopian who is now  one of Mitsubishi Holdings Australia’s top executives and a former child soldier from South  Sudan who arrived at age 18 speaking no English, but now works as a criminal lawyer.   

 Ms Owens said the documentary not only told of the refugees’ inspiring journeys, but their  hopes for the future in their adopted country.   

 “The documentary is not just about where these amazing individuals have come from but how  they want their journeys to continue, with a special brand of humour and emotion,” Ms Owens  said.   

 “New Land, New Life provides an opportunity for the wider community to understand first-hand  the contributions and achievements of these Australians, many of whom arrived as  humanitarian entrants having endured difficult circumstances overseas.   

 “The film will educate the broader community about the positive contribution that the African  community makes for all Australians.” 

 

 Commissioned by HARDA, the film’s production was funded by the Australian Government.   

 “The Gillard Government is committed to making sure people settling in Australia have the  support and help they need to fully participate in Australian community life,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 

 Media Contacts:  Minister O’Connor: Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604  Julie Owens MP: Office 02 9689 1455   

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

