---
title: "Record arrivals continue under distracted and divided Labor government"
date: "2013-03-19"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392194
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721551%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling RECORD ARRIVALS CONTINUE UNDER  DISTRACTED AND DIVIDED LABOR  GOVERNMENT March 19, 2013

 Two more illegal boat arrivals, with a total of almost 150 people on board, means 1,000 more people have arrived by boat so far this year than over the same period last year, as Labor sinks deeper into division and dysfunction, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Fresh  from  a  record  year  of  failure  on  our  borders  Labor’s  continued  refusal  to  restore  the  full  suite  of  proven  border protection measures and their continued distraction and dysfunction is taking their border protection chaos to a whole new level,” Mr Morrison said.

 “Meanwhile people smugglers continue to  get everything  they ever wanted from this government - record profits and a  guaranteed business model of permanent residency for their clients who they send on the perilous journey to Australia.

 “The  human  toll  of  Labor’s  border  failure  is  a  staggering  40,000  offshore  humanitarian  applicants  who  were  rejected Australian visas last year or 85% of everyone who applied. This is compared to just 9% of applicants who arrived by boat who missed out.

 “It  doesn’t  matter  how  many  times  Julia  Gillard  desperately  tries  to  distract  people,  the  boats  keep  turning  up  on  her watch. Kevin Rudd started them and Julia Gillard won’t stop them. Only a change of government will get our borders back under control,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “So  far  for  the  month  of  March  there  have  been  11  more  boats  carrying  more  than  seven  times  the amount of people that arrived in March last year.

 “The numbers don’t lie - Labor cannot hide from the stark reality that clearly indicates the extent to which they have failed to protect Australia’s borders.

 “This  Government  claims  to  be  tough  on  stopping  the  boats  but  all  their  actions,  from  preventing  the  reinstatement  of temporary protection visas to restoring full access to the courts for boat arrivals, proves otherwise.

 “With such a record of failure its remarkable that Labor refuses to change approach as they cling to failed policies despite all of the evidence that shows how damaging they have been for Australia,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 RECORD ARRIVALS CONTINUE UNDER DISTRACTED AND DIVIDED LABO...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

