---
title: "Abbott abandons his "stop the boats" promise"
date: "2013-04-11"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393205
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2365645%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Thursday, 11 April 2013    

 ABBOTT ABANDONS HIS “STOP THE BOATS” PROMISE 

 Tony Abbott is abandoning his promise to “stop the boats”, refusing to say if a Coalition  Government would be able to fulfil their commitment. 

 Mr Abbott has previously said he would stop the boats within months. Yesterday he ran away  from that commitment, saying he would only be able to “make a difference” in the first term,  should the Coalition be elected to Government. 

 He refused to say when, or if, he would stop the boats. 

 When asked by Howard Sattler on 6PR on Wednesday, Mr Abbott would not confirm the length  of time a Coalition Government would take to “stop the boats”. 

 

 SATTLER: Is it going to take three years to stop the boats? 

 ABBOTT: Well, we will have a term of parliament in which to make a very substantial  difference and then we will, as is right and proper in a democracy be judged on our  performance. 

 6PR, 10 APRIL 2013 

 

 We’ve always known the experts don’t believe the Opposition’s policy on asylum seekers will  work. 

 Now we know the Opposition doesn’t believe it will work either. 

 Of course, in March, we had the Opposition Immigration spokesperson admitting the “stop the  boats” promise was something the Opposition would only be “attempting” to do if they make it  to government - and he couldn’t say when.    

 To add insult to injury, when asked later in March, the Manager of Opposition Business said,  “there’s always a risk we might not be able to completely stop the boats…” 

 The Gillard Government knows that a three word slogan will not stop the global problem of  people using desperate measures to seek asylum, we need a regional approach involving  countries of origin, transit and destination as part of a regional framework. 

 Mr Abbott has nothing new. He says he will turn around the boats, which Indonesia has said it  won’t accept and which would endanger our Naval and Customs personnel. 

 Mr Abbott will need to work with our regional partners, should he become Prime Minister, but  he and his Ministers continue to ferociously trash the reputation of neighbours, damaging  Australia’s ongoing relationship with them. 

 We are committed to implementing all the recommendations of the Expert Panel into Asylum  Seekers. 

 It’s time the Opposition and the Greens Party listened to the experts and support the  recommendations in full. 

 Media Adviser: Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604 

 

 

