---
title: "Coalition to give Police the support necessary to manage Labor's border failure legacy"
date: "2013-09-01"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436684
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2701384%22
---

 

 

 

 Media Release    

 Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman 

 

 Sunday 1 September 2013    

 Coalition to give Police the support necessary to manage  Labor’s border failure legacy    

 A  Coalition  Government  would  give  Police  Forces  across  Australia  the  necessary  access,   authority  and  critical  information  they  need  to  help  deal  with  the  consequences  of  Labor's   border protection failure, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison  said today. 

 

 “State Police have been denied the clarity they need on their role in responding to incidents  relating to immigration detention centres as well as critical information they need to do their  job,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 “That is why, if elected, the Coalition will move immediately by demanding a status report  on  each  of  the  outstanding  Memorandums  of  Understanding  between  the  Department  of   Immigration  and  Citizenship  and  Police  Forces  across  the  country,  with  the  intention  to   finalise the agreements as soon as possible. 

 

 “These  agreements  have  been  outstanding  since  the  Christmas  Island  and  Villawood   detention centre riots of early 2011, where the NSW Police Force and Fire and Rescue were  delayed  for  nearly  two  and  a  half  hours  from  entering  the  facility  as  it  burned,  despite   providing warnings months earlier that such an event could occur.    

 “These  Memorandums  of Understanding will  allow Police Forces  nationwide to respond to   incidents in immigration detention centres from protests to alleged crimes, escapes and other  issues that may require a police response.    

 “Under Labor, Police and emergency services have been left with continuing uncertainty over  their powers to assist the Commonwealth to respond to serious incidents at detention centres,  such as happened during and in the wake of the Villawood riots. Our Police deserve to know  where  they stand  legally  when  the  Commonwealth  calls  on  them  to  deal  with  outbreaks  of   violence or fires at such centres.    

 “The Coalition will also agree to Police requests to provide address details of asylum seekers  that are released into the community on bridging visas and to consult with Police prior to any  release of illegal boat arrivals into their community.    

 “Labor has refused these Police requests point blank. This is information Police need  to do   their job both from a community policing perspective and for the protection of those in the  community on bridging visas who may be vulnerable.    

 “Decisions  on  moving  any  asylum  seeker  into  the  community  will  be  made  under  the   Coalition's new triaged assessment process with those less likely to receive a positive refugee  assessment being managed straight into detention as soon as possible.    

 “Labor  has  been  dumping  the  consequences  of  their  failed  border  protection  policies  onto   communities across Australia with no regard for the effects on Police Forces.    

 “The  Coalition  will  ensure  that  Police  across  Australia  are  given  the  support  they  need  to   deal, where necessary, with Labor's massive 30,000 illegal boat arrival legacy,” Mr Morrison  said.    

 NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell welcomed the commitment from the Federal Coalition.    

 “This  agreement  is  long  overdue  and  I’m  very  pleased  the  Federal  Coalition  has  agreed  to   make it a priority, should it be successful on Saturday,” Mr O'Farrell said.    

 “Labor  has  for  too  long  dragged  its  heels  on  implementing  the  necessary  arrangements  to   share this information - vital for the NSW Police Force and the NSW Department of Health  in particular.    

 “We have been calling on the Federal Government to deliver this agreement for a long time,  yet Labor was never interested and made no progress.    

 “This is yet another example of Labor’s border security failures.”    

 Media Contacts:        Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667 (Mr Morrison)                                      Cameron Hamilton 0409 227 048 (Premier O’Farrell) 

 

