---
title: "Biggest start of any month for illegal boat arrivals"
date: "2013-04-04"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392872
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721517%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling BIGGEST START OF ANY MONTH FOR  ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS April 04, 2013

 The arrival of two more illegal boats, with a total of over 100 people on board, has seen April record the biggest start of any  month  for  illegal  boats,  Shadow  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “With six boats and over 350 people illegally arriving in just the first three days of this month, Julia Gillard has achieved another shameful record of border failure with the biggest start to any month for illegal boats,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The records of failure on our borders keep tumbling under Julia Gillard who is using every last desperate trick in the book in an effort to distract Australians from the collapse of our borders on her watch.

 “Almost twice as many people have arrived on illegal boats in the  first three days of this month than  the less than  200 people who have been sent to Nauru and Manus Island this year under Labor’s Pacific Solution.

 “People smugglers are selling odds that less than one in twenty boats is likely to have their passengers end up on either Nauru or Manus Island, while the rest will join the thousands of others being released into the Australian community on welfare.

 “As a result boats are now arriving every few hours, adding to the 69 so far this year with a total of almost 4,300 people on board.

 “Labor  will  never  stop  the  boats.  They  have  neither  the  policies  nor  the  resolve  necessary  to  get  the  job  done,”  Mr  Morrison said.

 Mr  Keenan  said:  “In  the  first  3  days  of  this  month  there  have  already  been  six  boats,  carrying  over  350  passengers, intercepted on their way to Australia.

 “That’s an average of two asylum seeker boats arriving every day- an extraordinary rate of arrivals that is stretching the  resources of our Border Protection Command to breaking point.

 “The Government must use their upcoming Budget to restore some of the severe cuts they made to the Australia Customs and Border Protection Service, including the 750 staff they have cut since coming to office.

 “It is not good enough that Labor has on the one hand created a record breaking crisis at our borders and on the other hand has slashed funding and personnel from the very agencies tasked with cleaning up their mess,” Mr Keenan said. 

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 BIGGEST START OF ANY MONTH FOR ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS > Michae...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

