---
title: "Abbott's fear campaign on 'foreign criminals' a farce"
date: "2013-06-16"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395851
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2527557%22
---

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 16 June 2013   

 ABBOTT’S FEAR CAMPAIGN ON ‘FOREIGN CRIMINALS’ A FARCE   

 The Opposition’s fear campaign continues today with the announcement of a “foreign criminals”  policy.    

 Immigration and Citizenship Minister Brendan O’Connor said the power to cancel visas and remove  non-citizens who have committed serious crimes already exists.    

 “If Tony Abbott had done his homework, he would know this current financial year 97 people have  had their visas cancelled and removed, compared with only 55 people in the last year of the Howard  Government,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 “Despite the current life-time exclusion of criminals removed under s. 501 of the Migration Act, the  Opposition seem to be proposing to allow criminals to return to Australia.” 

 The Opposition’s plan is that convicted criminals “would not be allowed to return to Australia for 20  years”.  The law as it is currently states that a person whose visa is cancelled on the grounds of  either a substantial criminal record, past and present criminal conduct or past and present general  conduct is permanently excluded from Australia. 

 In further evidence of the half-baked nature of today’s announcement, and in shades of their  discredited “turn back the boats” proposal the Opposition can’t answer basic questions about how  or where refugees would be returned if their visas were cancelled. 

 

 THE BOLT REPORT 

 ANDREW BOLT: What - how would you then send them back? What if they - if they’re refugees,  we have accepted them as refugees, presumably because they’re in danger back in their homeland  - would you send them back into that danger? 

 

 GEORGE BRANDIS: Where - where it is feas - where it is possible to do so. Of course, it is not  always possible to return people to - to deport people to certain countries, because of the  domestic circumstances of those countries. 

 MEET THE PRESS 

 HUGH RIMINTON: What about the places that will take them back, but where they’re going back  into - where they’re going back into danger? That’s the - that’s against the law of refoulement. 

 

 JULIE BISHOP: We have to - Well, we’re not going to breach international laws. We’re not going to  breach international treaties. 

 

 HUGH RIMINTON: So where will you send them? 

 

 JULIE BISHOP: But we’re sending people back if we’re able to send them back. 

 

 Mr O’Connor said that additionally, international law stipulated refugees could not be   sent back to the place from which they have fled.   

 “The Australian Government takes very seriously its role in protection the Australian community   from unacceptable risk of harm from criminal or other serious conduct by non-citizens.  The rule of   law applies equally to everyone in the Australian community,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 “This policy is part of Tony Abbott’s cynical campaign to raise fear in the community.”    

 

 Media contact: Melissa Arch, 0439 438 126   

