---
title: "Retiring Liberal MP criticises Abbott's Asylum Policy"
date: "2013-06-17"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395881
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2529500%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 17 June, 2013   

 RETIRING LIBERAL MP CRITICISES ABBOTT’S ASYLUM POLICY 

 Retiring Liberal MP Judith Moylan has criticised Tony Abbott’s controversial asylum seeker turn back  policy following a scathing assessment from a former senior defence official earlier today. 

 After delivering her valedictory speech Ms Moylan used a Sky News interview to publicly denounce  Mr Abbott’s policy and express concerns for what would happen to the asylum seekers left at sea. 

 MS MOYLAN: I think if we want to build neighbourly relationships we have to use our best  diplomatic skills to deal with this and that means engaging with Indonesia, not trying to  solve our immediate domestic political problems by pushing people back over in the  international waters back to Indonesia.  

 The other thing is we don’t know what happens to those men, women and children on the  boats once those boats are pushed back in the water.  

 So if we’re going to cry about deaths at sea, people getting on boats, what are we thinking  about when we say well let’s push the boats back. Because once they’ve pushed them back  our patrol boats go back to Christmas Island and we don’t know what happens to those  people. Do they ever reach the mainland of Indonesia? 

 Former Defence Force chief Admiral Chris Barrie also rejected Tony Abbott’s plan to “turn back the  boats” and joined a chorus of experts warning that the dangerous policy would not work. 

 Speaking on ABC News Breakfast this morning, Admiral Barrie described carrying out Howard  Government directives to turn back boats as “filthy, dirty work”. 

 PRESENTER: So a policy like that puts the Navy under too much pressure? I remember you  saying those operations during the Howard Government, the Navy hated doing this? 

 ADMIRAL BARRIE: It’s filthy, dirty work for the Navy. Of course it’s traditional. Let’s go back  to 2001, the few boats we did manage to get back needed to be made seaworthy, needed to  be fitted out with appropriate lifesaving equipment - they didn’t arrive with that, these  boats were coming on one-way trips. 

 [...] 

 Engines had to be rebuilt because they were destroyed as soon as those boats sighted one  of our vessels… Sometimes the health of people on board wasn’t sufficient to enable a tow-back.  

 You put all that into the equation and ask yourself, what are asylum seeker boats going to do  - if this is the policy - when they sight one of our vessels on the high seas? 

 I think we’re going to see a lot more of sinking of the boats and other issues and I don’t think  that’s really fair on our people who have to go out and do this job. 

 Tony Abbott consistently says, “it has been done before, it can be done again”.  

 Admiral Barrie was the man that did it and he is sending a clear message that it is a bad idea which  will put Australia’s defence personnel at risk. 

 Tony Abbott needs to admit that there is no quick fix to the global problem of asylum seekers risking  their lives to travel to other countries by boat. 

 The Navy has said it is dangerous, Border Protection Command has told him it will put lives at risk,  and Indonesia has repeatedly said it’s not possible. 

 Instead of listening to the experts the Coalition says no to Malaysia, a country which says yes to  accepting arrivals - but they say yes to sending arrivals to Indonesia, a country which says no. 

 The Gillard Government is the only party determined to break the people smugglers’ business model  and stop them taking people’s life savings and all too often their lives. 

 Media Adviser: Glen Atwell on 0437 437 218 or glen.atwell@immi.gov.au 

 

 

