---
title: "Yet another boat arrival - Coalition calls for return to focus on regional deterrence for Bali process"
date: "2013-04-02"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392757
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2721521%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling YET ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVAL - COALITION  CALLS FOR RETURN TO FOCUS ON  REGIONAL DETERRENCE FOR BALI  PROCESS  April 02, 2013

 The arrival of another illegal boat, with 81 people on board, comes as the Coalition calls on Ministers O'Connor and Carr  to use this week's Bali Process meeting to abandon the Government's efforts to take the Bali Process off track and instead  refocus the forum on regional deterrence measures to stop illegal arrivals, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 "April has started as March ended with another day, another illegal boat arrival. These continued record boat arrivals show  why Labor should be this week refocusing the Bali Process single mindedly on deterrence, which is why it was established  more than ten years ago by the Coalition with Indonesia in the first place," Mr Morrison said.

 "In recent years Labor have taken the Bali Process off course, trying to turn it into a regional UNHCR, with policies  designed to accommodate asylum seekers rather than deter them coming into and transiting through the region. This has  not and will not stop the boats.

 "The Coalition will restore this focus on deterrence to our regional cooperation and pursue policies of deterrence at  source, transit and ultimately on our own border as a destination country.

 "For as long as Labor remains in office, the people smugglers will remain in business and Australians will be left with  ongoing cost, chaos and tragedy.

 “The Coalition believes in stopping the boats and will do it with our full suite of proven border protection measures  including refocusing the Bali Process on deterrence so we can prevent tragedies at sea, get our immigration budget under  control and restore confidence in our immigration program,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “The daily water taxi service for boat arrivals continues courtesy of the Gillard Government’s inability to  control our borders.

 “In the past week alone there have been 11 boats and over 800 people smuggled across Australia's borders. 

 “As a result of Labor’s inconsistent policies and harsh cuts to the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, the  boats continue to arrive at a rapid rate all while the people smugglers make millions of dollars in profit from their insidious  trade in human misery.

 “They have no credibility on border protection and they have shown this with every budget and staff cut that they do not  prioritise our frontline border protection agencies.

 “If elected the Coalition will take immediate action to protect our borders and restore the faith of the Australian people in  our immigration system,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 YET ANOTHER BOAT ARRIVAL - COALITION CALLS FOR RETURN TO FOC...

 12/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

