---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 13 November 2013: Australia's damaged relationship with Indonesia; the Coalition's secrecy on boats arrivals; temporary protection visas"
date: "2013-11-13"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Australia's damaged relationship with Indonesia"
  - "the Coalition's secrecy on boats arrivals"
  - "temporary protection visas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400635
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2840638%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  WEDNESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2013   

 Subjects: Australia’s damaged relationship with Indonesia, the Coalition’s  secrecy on boats arrivals, temporary protection visas.    

 RICHARD MARLES: Today we’ve seen right now in the House of Representatives  the handling by this Government of its border protection policy reach new levels of  chaos. Given the opportunity to explain the Abbott Government’s position in relation  to its border protection policy, Minister Scott Morrison has just voted to gag himself.    

 This is a Government which is characterised by a culture of secrecy.  The Coalition  promised in opposition it would provide the Australian people with transparent and  open government. Now we see that having won office, they are treating the  Government of Australia on a ‘needs to know’ basis. This was an opportunity for 

 Scott Morrison to explain the position of the Government in the House of  Representatives.  And so this morning we have seen the first failure by the Abbott  Government, the first failure by Scott Morrison, to use the Parliament in an  accountable way. That flies in the face of every commitment that the Coalition gave,  every commitment that Christopher Pyne as the Leader of the House has given,  about the way in which the House of Representatives will operate.   

 And so we now have the farcical situation where there is a state of confusion,  throughout this Government and in Australia, about the extent of negotiations  between the Government of Australia and the Government of Indonesia on a people  swap arrangement. We will not hear a word of this from the Government in the  Parliament of our country.    

 We have a situation where a boat has apparently arrived in Darwin on Monday night,  we have no explanation from the Government about who was on board, and what  are the fate of those people who we believe have been landed in Darwin.   

 This is a situation which must change. This morning was an opportunity for the  Government to do that, and we have seen them fail the first test.    

 JOURNALIST:  If negotiations are indeed on foot, is it not reasonable that the  Government conclude those negotiations with Indonesia, conclude those  arrangements and then announce its position.     

 

 MARLES: In circumstances where we are hearing reports from Indonesian officials  that approaches have been made from the Australian Government, now we’re  relying on the reports that we see from Indonesia but unfortunately that’s all we  have to rely upon, in circumstances such as that, it is of course imperative for this  government to explain what it is doing.      

 So long as there is a culture of secrecy about the way in which it goes on its  operations, so long as this government treats the Australian people on a ‘needs to  know’ basis there will be continuing questions about what this government is doing,  and there will be a continuing state of confusion about all manner of policy, and in  this instance about whether or not there are negotiations on foot for a people swap  arrangement with Indonesia. It is imperative that the Government clear this situation  up right now.    

 JOURNALIST:  Bill Shorten is about to meet with the Indonesian Vice President,  will he ask the Vice President there and then what this arrangement is that they’re  negotiating, and also, are you going to back the Greens’ motion to get rid of TPVs?    

 MARLES: Well firstly, Bill Shorten is going to be meeting with the Indonesian Vice  President. It’s a very important meeting as a representative of the Opposition with a  very senior figure in the Indonesian Government. It is not for the Opposition to be  managing the foreign relations of this country with Indonesia. What we need to be 

 seeing is either the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Prime Minister or the Minister for  Immigration - who would know who was responsible for this right now within the  Government - but one of them needs to make clear what the state of negotiations is  between Australia and Indonesia in relation to a potential people swap arrangement.  And we ought not to be relying on an Opposition asking questions of an Indonesian  Government representative, we ought to be relying upon our own Government to  provide the Australian people with information.          

 In relation to your second question about TPVs, that is a matter which we will take  under consideration. But Labor’s position in Government in relation to TPVs was well  known.    

 JOURNALIST: I just want to clarify, apparently a proposal was faxed through from  Australia to the Indonesian Government with some sort of proposal, just to clear 

 everything up, do you think that proposal should be released, or should the  Government just explain everything that was in that proposal?      

 MARLES: I think in the circumstances, where we have senior representatives of the  Indonesian Government providing us with this information, it is obviously imperative  for the Australian Government to come clean and explain what they are doing, and  explain to the Australian people what they are doing?   

 Now the Leader of the House said earlier this year that were the Coalition to be  elected to office, he would provide a facility within the House of Representatives for  Members to explain themselves in circumstances where they needed to do that. Well  you can’t think of a better circumstance than what we have seen over the last few  days, and what we tried to do this morning was provide Scott Morrison with that  opportunity. Given that opportunity, Scott Morrison voted this morning to gag  himself. That is the state of farce to which we have descended under the Abbott  Government.         

 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Marles, quite famously under the previous government, Chris  Bowen took a series of trips to Kuala Lumpur to negotiate the Malaysian people  swap. Was that wrong?          

 

 MARLES: Of course it’s not wrong, and we’re not saying there is anything wrong  with the Government of Australia entering into negotiations with our regional  partner, nor are we saying there is anything wrong in the circumstances to have  some of those negotiations conducted in quiet. But in circumstances where we see a  government which has built a culture of secrecy about the way it operates entirely,  in circumstances where we have seen a government which is treating the Australian  people on a ‘needs to know’ basis, and in circumstances where information about  these negotiations are coming to light in Australia from Indonesian officials, that is a  set of circumstances where the Australian Government now needs to explain itself.  This morning was the opportunity for them to do that, this is a test they have failed.                    

 

 JOURNALIST: The Greens’ disallowance motion could be voted on as early as  Thursday, when are you going to come to a position on this?    

 MARLES: We will come to a position in good time before any vote is taken, and we  will take our time to work out our position in relation to that motion. But as I said  earlier, Labor’s position in in relation to TPVs in Government was well known.          

 JOURNALIST: Can you elaborate on that for us, that position?     

 MARLES: Well Labor in Government never supported TPVs and there is much  material about why we don’t support TPVs. But we do in relation to the Greens’  disallowance motion is an issue which carries with it other factors, and we will 

 consider those issues and make our decision in relation to that in due course.             

 JOURNALIST: Just on TPVs, one of the complaints about Labor’s alternative to  TPVs was that it didn’t have work rights, at least with these you’ve got some kind of  work rights. Isn’t that a preferable alternative to the one the Gillard Government put  up?     

 

 MARLES: Well let’s be clear, TPVs are argued in the context of providing a  disincentive for people to come to Australia. Now what Labor did in office was put in  place an arrangement with Papua New Guinea, which is the single piece of public  policy which has actually changed the game, which has stemmed the flow of boats  from Indonesia to Christmas Island. That, more than anything else, more than any  of the bells and whistles that we have seen from the Abbott Government since it  came to power, is the arrangement with PNG which has changed the state of affairs.  It is what is providing a disincentive for people to take their lives into their own  hands, and to put themselves on boats from Indonesia to Christmas Island. If you  look at the stem in the flow of boats, it dates from the 19th of July, which was when  that was put in place. We took Australia off the table, and that is the main step that  needed to be taken, that was taken by Labor, taken by the then Rudd Government,  to provide the greatest disincentive for anyone to get -                    

 JOURNALIST: I think you’ve got your timeline wrong but I’m talking about the  visas that were introduced well before -      

 MARLES: I understand the question you’re asking, I understand the question you’re  asking. The point I’m making in relation to TPVs is that they are argued by the  Coalition principally in terms of providing a disincentive, and you can read the  policies that the Coalition took to the last election in relation to that. If you want to  talk about a disincentive for people to get on a boat, the single most important thing  that has been done, Labor’s alternative if you like, was the arrangement that was  entered in to between our Government then and the Government of Papua New  Guinea which took Australia off the table. Thank you.          

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524   

