---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Fairfield West: 1 October 2013: Australia-Indonesia bilateral relationship; turning back boats"
date: "2013-10-01"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "Office of BOWEN, CHRIS, MP"
subjects:
  - "Australia-Indonesia bilateral relationship"
  - "turning back boats"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211444931
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2757840%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 INTERIM LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON   

 

 TRANSCRIPT   

 DOORSTOP, FAIRFIELD WEST   

 TUESDAY, 1 OCTOBER 2013 

 

 

 SUBJECTS: Australia-Indonesia bilateral relationship, turning back boats.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming everybody.    

 Well last night in Jakarta, Prime Minister Abbott apologised for previous foreign  policy incidents between Australia and Indonesia, trouble is he’s created a major  incident himself in his first few weeks as Prime Minister.    

 The relationship with Indonesia is one of our most important bilateral relationships,  it needs to be treated with care and with deep respect, and this is the opposite of  the approach that the Australia Government has taken in its first few weeks. They  were warned previously that this would be the case; they were warned by us and by  Indonesia themselves, that this would be a major challenge for the Indonesian  bilateral relationship. And yet we see reports in The Australian today, that Mr Abbott  did not even raise the issue of turning back the boats with President Yudhoyono in  his meeting.    

 Now of course, Prime Minister Abbott has form here. He didn’t raise it when he met  with President Yudhoyono as Leader of the Opposition, but as the Prime Minister of  Australia representing the country, with a major threat to our bilateral relationship,  for the Prime Minister not to even raise this with President Yudhoyono is a major  failing on the Prime Minister’s behalf.    

 Now Tony Abbott yesterday said that he would respect Indonesia’s sovereignty. He  needs to be clear with the Australian people as to what that means. Given that  Indonesia has made it very clear that they regard turning back the boats, buying the  boats and paying bounties in Indonesia as a threat to their sovereignty: what does  the Prime Minister mean when he says he will respect Indonesia’s sovereignty?  

 Does it mean that the turn back the boats policy is being dropped? Does it mean  that the buy back the boats policy is being abolished? Does it mean that the  bounties policy is not proceeding?    

 The Prime Minister should be upfront and clear with the Australian people about this  and stop hiding from scrutiny. I note that the Prime Minister failed to hold a full  press before he left for Indonesia. He should certainly hold a full press conference  on his return from Indonesia to answer these questions. Perhaps Mr Morrison could  come out of hiding and answer some of these questions.    

 Also, I just want to say briefly yesterday our Shadow Minister for Immigration Tony  Burke pointed out that the advice to him was that on health grounds, when he was  Minister for Immigration, that turn around, turning around people off Christmas  Island to offshore processing within 48 hours would not be achievable. That matches  the advice that I received when I was Minister of Immigration and other Ministers  for Immigration have received.    

 Again, I call on the Minister for Immigration today to come out of hiding to release  any health advice he has, to release information as to how many people had been  taken offshore within 48 hours, what the position of the health advisory committee  for the Department of Immigration is, what research has been done as to the  impacts of this 48 hour turn around, how many people have been taken offshore  within 48 hours and how many have not. He made a big song and dance about this  last week, said that this was his big approach, and yet he’s failed to provide this  information.   

 Up until yesterday, all we’ve seen from the Minister for Immigration is the continued  implementation of the previous government’s policies in relation to Papua New  Guinea. He’s failed to turn around a boat yet, we understand given the paucity of  the information he has released and he has failed to indicate just how this 48 hour  turn around policy is being implemented.    

 Happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, the one thing that has been achieved by the new Prime  Minister is achieving the new bilateral forum between Australia and Indonesia,  something that Labor was unable to do. Should he be praised for this?    

 BOWEN: Oh look, any interaction with Indonesia is a positive one and we would  work on anything that further promotes engagement, but when you’ve had the  bilateral relationship so severely undermined by one policy and a poorly prepared  policy and a policy they were warned about - we warned that this would endanger  one of our most important bilateral relationships - and that has played out.    

 Now bilateral engagement and forum are all very good and we would welcome that  but when you’ve got the relationship so threatened, so challenged by this poor  foreign policy from the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister that is the bigger  issue.  

 

 JOURNALIST: Is this meeting a step forward in improving the relationship?    

 BOWEN: Every step forward, every increase in engagement is an improvement that  we would welcome.    

 JOURNALIST: On those three elements, turning back the boats, buying the boats  and paying informants bounties, should he drop any of those or all of that?    

 BOWEN: Well, he needs to explain what his approach is.    

 Now, buying back the boats is probably the most ridiculous piece of public policy  that has been invented in Australia in the last 20 years. Going into Indonesia with all  its islands, with all its fishing industry and saying we’ll buy boats is a ridiculous  policy, always was, always will be.  Indonesia’s made its views clear about that. So I  do believe that policy should be dropped.    

 Turning back the boats we’ve said is highly dangerous; will endanger the lives of  Australian defence personnel and the lives of the asylum seekers. For that reason  alone it is a highly problematic policy apart from the threat and challenge it provides  to the Australian bilateral relationship with Indonesia. We believe in offshore  processing and offshore resettlement, we will take people, we would and we did, we  would take people safely to countries, and countries that have agreed to take them,  like Papua New Guinea.    

 On the bounties, again Indonesia’s made its views very clear. You need to work with  the Indonesian authorities, you need to work cooperatively with them on law  enforcement in Indonesia, that’s what we did in office, that’s what the very  professional public servants have done and I’d expect that to continue.    

 JOURNALIST: On another topic, Mr Bowen, paid parental leave, the Coalitions’  policy, there’s clearly a difference of view in the Labor caucus, what will Labor do?  What is the Labor policy?    

 BOWEN: Well, let’s see some legislation from the new Government. We’ll look at  that, the Shadow Cabinet, consider it, and consider it carefully. The Leader would  obviously have a view to put to the Shadow Cabinet, I as Shadow Treasurer would  consider that and put a recommendation to the shadow Cabinet and that is a  process to be worked through.    

 We’ve seen the leadership process going on here, two candidates putting forward  their case for the Labor leadership; it’s a very, very good process working very well.  And their entitled to put their views through that process and then the Shadow  Cabinet will consider its position when we see some legislation, when the Prime  Minister gets around to recalling Parliament.    

 JOURNALIST: Speaking of leadership, did you watch Julia Gillard’s performance  last night?   

 

 BOWEN: No, I’ve seen some of the reporting of it but I didn’t watch it live.    

 JOURNALIST: She said that Kevin Rudd continually undermined the Party while she  was in power. Is that true?    

 BOWEN: Ah no, but I’m looking forward to the future, I’m not going to engage in  debates about history. Julia Gillard has a lot to be proud of as her time as Prime  Minister, clearly the caucus took a view earlier this year, that it was time for a fresh  approach that obviously provided some great difficulties for Julia as it always does in  those circumstances. She has a lot to be proud of. The Labor Party has a lot to be  proud of in both Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard.   

 JOURNALIST: So you would categorically deny that Rudd undermined...   

 BOWEN: Kevin Rudd behaved professionally and in the best interest of the Labor  Party in all times in my experience. He returned to the Prime Ministership at the  request of the Party because the Labor Party took the view that it was in the best  interest of the Party. Wasn’t necessarily in his own best interest; he could have  declined the offer to return to the Prime Ministership, but he didn’t because he felt it  was in the best interest of the Labor Party to be available and the Labor party owes  him a debt of gratitude. We also recognise and respect Julia Gillard’s service through  a very difficult a hung parliament and one which achieved a lot in her time as Prime  Minister.    

 JOURNALIST: What’s the mood in the Labor Party today following Ms Gillard’s  appearance?    

 BOWEN: Oh well, the mood in the Labor Party is one which is focused on the  leadership contest which is going on; two excellent candidates, Anthony Albanese  and Bill Shorten putting forward their case for Labor in the future.    

 JOURNALIST: What is your own opinion on paid parental leave? Should you  support it or not?    

 BOWEN: My own opinion on the paid parental leave scheme is that the  Government’s position is a very poor one. It is funded by a tax slug of Australia’s  self-funded retirees and part pensioners. In terms of our approach in the Parliament  it will be a matter for the Shadow Cabinet and the Caucus to consider.   

 JOURNALIST: So Scott Morrison is holding these weekly briefings. What do you  think about him regularly breaking it to go on the Ray Hadley show?     

 BOWEN: I think he should not only be breaking that to go on Ray Hadley, I think  he should be breaking it to go on other shows and to appear before press  conferences such as this. You know being the Minister for Immigration; it doesn’t  mean you can only front the media once a week. As a former Minister for  Immigration I think you would all agree that I was regularly making myself available 

 to answer tough questions on difficult issues as the Minister for Immigration should.  Tony Burke did the same, Brendan O’Connor did the same, and Chris Evans did the  same. We made ourselves available not when we felt like it, not when it was  politically expedient.    

 As the Minister for Immigration you do not, or certainly should not have the luxury  to decide when you will go in to front the Australian media once a week. You front  the Australian media to answer the questions, the answer the tough issues and to  explain yourself. This is much more about managing the media cycle than managing  our boarders.   

 I’ve got time for one or two more questions.   

 JOURNALIST: George Brandis- in regards to spending $13,000 over the last four  years on new books, this obviously comes after the wedding situation, what is your  take on this?   

 BOWEN: Well, I think what Mr Brandis is guilty of is gross hypocrisy in relation to  his travel claims and I think a clear breach in relation to the travel claims.    

 In relations to the communications allowance, it is something members will use as it  best benefits their ability to garner information. In my case I have only used it for  newspapers I haven’t used it for any books, each member should consider their own  approach, I think if there is to be a review of that, it should be done in accordance  with all the normal processes.    

 If Mr Brandis is confident that he has met all the guidelines, then my question would  be has he met the guidelines if he has then that is what is appropriate.   

 JOURNALIST: But isn’t $13,000 a bit excessive?   

 BOWEN: Well, again members of parliament are entitled to buy newspapers and  magazines, I didn’t actually realise you could use it for books until I read it in the  paper this morning.    

 It has not been my practise and wouldn’t be my practise going forward.    

 If Mr Brandis is acquitted all the responsibilities incumbent on him in terms of the  guidelines, then that would then satisfy me, If the guidelines were to be reviewed  this is something the Labor party would look at in good faith.   

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard said that her overthrow of Kevin Rudd was legitimate,  whereas his overthrown of her was not, what do you think about that?   

 BOWEN: I think I’ve answered that question and addressed that issue. The Labor  Party took a decision in June, which undoubted was a difficult one for Julia. We took  that decision with majority of the caucus, in the best interest of the Labor Party. I  understand she would have a different perspective, but that was the decision taken 

 by the majority of the Caucus, we are very much focused on the future and the  contest between two very excellent candidates for leader of the Labor Party.   

 JOURNALIST: Just one more question, Scott Morrison warned Lebanese people not  to use the Syrian conflict as an excuse to get in, because those Lebanese people  have Syrian passports. Did you find that when you where the Immigration Minister  that, that was a practise that happened then?   

 BOWEN: The Syrian conflict has worsened and deepened since my time. I think  that I would thankfully agree that nobody should come to Australia by boat; they  should apply through the normal channels. I increased when I was the Minister for  Immigration - the quota for people affected by the Syrian crisis - through our  offshore resettlement program.    

 I would hope the new government continues with that the new government  continues with that whether they are reducing the refugee intake and humanitarian  quota over all. I see reports this morning that some of those people were not  actually affected by the Syrian crisis, but whether claiming to be. I don’t know I’ve  seen what I’ve seen in the media.    

 The crisis is an ongoing one it’s a deeply distressing and disturbing one and will have  an impact on refugee flows all over the world.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you going to vote for Mr Albanese or Mr Shorten?   

 BOWEN: I have made my view very well known that as interim leader I will not be  endorsing either candidate. Actually I’d endorse both of them as excellent  candidates and the party will be well served regardless of who wins.    

 Thanks very much.   

 Ends   

