---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 13 November 2013: first Question Time; debt limit; MYEFO in the Jakarta Post; a price on carbon; Australia-Indonesian relations; asylum seeker arrangements"
date: "2013-11-13"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "first Question Time"
  - "debt limit"
  - "MYEFO in the Jakarta Post"
  - "a price on carbon"
  - "Australia-Indonesian relations"
  - "asylum seeker arrangements"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400638
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2840585%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  WEDNESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2013   

 SUBJECT: First Question Time, Debt limit, MYEFO in the Jakarta Post, a  price on carbon, Australia-Indonesian relations, asylum seeker  arrangements.    

 CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning everybody. Well this morning, Parliament back and  the first Question Time of the Abbott Government. Today, there is nowhere for the  Abbott Government to hide. Time for the Abbott Government to finally start  answering some serious questions. Tony Abbott has a choice today, he can actually  answer questions or he can treat the Parliament with the contempt that he’s been  treating the Australian people with since the election.    

 Question Time is an important part of Australian democracy and we’ll certainly be  expecting Tony Abbott to be answering questions today that he’s refused to answer  in recent weeks. Today, the Leader of the Australian Greens has announced that the  Greens will support Labor’s amendment in the Senate to limit the increase in the  debt cap to $400 billion. Obviously I welcome the Greens support for this Labor  move.    

 Joe Hockey now has a choice. He can have an increase in the debt cap today. He  says it’s urgent; he says we’ll go through the debt cap in December. The Labor Party  has been very responsible, very constructive and said we will increase the debt cap  but we will only increase it to $400 billion. If Mr Hockey wants to continue playing  politics with this, playing brinkmanship with this, he can reject the Senate, the views  of the Senate, which now clearly will be carried when the vote goes to the Senate  and he can insist on his half a trillion dollar debt cap. But he won’t get it. He won’t  get it. He can get an increase in the debt cap to $400 billion and he can have it  today. The choice is his.    

 I saw Mr Abbott, the Prime Minister, again today claiming on Channel 9, that when  in Opposition the Liberal Party did not oppose these increases in the debt cap. He’s  either deliberately or unintentionally misleading the Australian people. He is plain  wrong. The trouble for Mr Abbott is when you make these claims, there’s a little  thing called Hansard which records how people vote.    

 And in 2009 and 2012, Liberal Party members of the House of Representatives and  the Senate voted explicitly against moves to increase the debt cap. They didn’t put  up proposals or alternatives like the Labor party has constructively done, they voted  against it.    

 So how dare, how dare the Prime Minister claim to have voted for increases in the  debt cap when the Hansard clearly shows they voted against it. How dare Mr Hockey  lecture us about Tea Party politics when he, as Shadow Treasurer, authorised and  instructed his colleagues to vote against increases in the debt cap. We’re not going  to cop these lectures from Mr Hockey and Mr Abbott who went around the country  pre-election saying that they’d reduce the debt.   

 Not only that, not only he said they would reduce the debt, but said that Australia  was: not in crisis, not an important problem when it came to debt, but we had a  ‘budget emergency’, a budget emergency. And now in office, have taken steps which  have increased the budget deficit and have led them to increase the debt cap to half  a trillion dollars. And in a cynical move, attempt to blame the previous government  for their own decisions which have increased the deficit since the election. Again,  move evidence that this is not the Government that Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey  told the Australian people they would get before election day.   

 Happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you playing Russian Roulette with the economy on this?   

 BOWEN: No, we’ve been very constructive, very mature in our approach and  offered the Government an increase in the debt cap of $100 billion. Not a small  amount. Now Mr Hockey says we might need to come back and ask for more within  6 to 12 months. Is he saying really and seriously that Australia’s debt may go past  $400 billion in the next 6 months? Well if he is, release MYEFO, release his mini-budget, I mean maybe he’s already released it. I haven’t checked the Jakarta Post  this morning, that’s where we get our updates on Australian politics these days from  the Government. But he can release it soon, and then he can justify his increase in  the debt cap, which he’s seeking the approval of Parliament for. Laura.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, if this turns into a stand-off don’t we risk reaching the  debt cap by December of this year, is this a US-style fiscal cliff?   

 BOWEN: Well it’s a matter for Mr Hockey to accept the wish of the Parliament. The  wish of the Parliament as will be expressed, will be that we will approve an increase  in the debt cap to $400 billion. A $100 billion increase, a substantial one. Which  would be more than enough, even as I understand it, on Mr Hockey’s reckoning, to 

 get us through December and beyond. So, I don’t recall the Tea Party in the United  States saying “We’ll give you a $100 billion increase, or a very substantial increase  but you’ll need to justify more” which is the approach of the Opposition here. We’re  recognising the need for an increase in the debt cap. We’re recognising that very  openly and clearly, but Mr Hockey has not and cannot justify his political ploy of  increasing Australia’s debt limit to half a trillion dollars without releasing his mini-budget. Matt.   

 JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen, a big day for the Coalition in the repeal the carbon  price, what are your thoughts on that today?   

 BOWEN: Well, the Parliament as I understand it, will hear from Mr Abbott in his  moves to repeal the carbon tax, our position is very, very clear.  Our position is that  we all agree that the fixed carbon tax should be removed but the matter is what  comes next and we’ll be applying the normal parliamentary processes and scrutiny  to that. The Australian people who voted for the Labor party voted for a party which  believes in action on climate change and that is what we will deliver from  Opposition.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you ignoring the pleas from business though?   

 BOWEN: Well, our position was very clear before the election and our position is  very clear after the election, and they are the same position. When you vote for us  at the last election, you voted for a party which believed in a price on carbon. I said  I’d come back to you.   

 JOURNALIST: When push comes to shove, when the deadline comes for that debt  ceiling, will Labor stick by it…   

 BOWEN: Yes.   

 JOURNALIST: …without exception?   

 BOWEN: $400 billion is our position.   

 JOURNALIST: Not negotiable at all?   

 BOWEN: Well, if Mr Hockey wants to talk, he can seek to talk but our position is  very clear, $400 billion is justified, and that will be the position of the Senate, and  we will maintain that position. Let me be very, very clear, Mr Hockey has a choice,  he can have an increase in the debt cap to $400 billion, or he cannot. It is his choice  whether to accept the wishes of the Parliament. He arrogantly and nonchalantly  announced an increase in the debt cap to half a trillion dollars. Well I’ve got a news  flash Mr Hockey, increases in the debt cap are subject to Parliamentary approval.  Parliamentary approval he will not get.    

 JOURNALIST: So if money does run out on December 12th just to clarify, would  you be willing for Australia to go through something similar to what American went  through?   

 BOWEN: We’re approving an increase in the debt cap. We’re approving an increase  in the debt cap which is more than enough, more than enough to get us through  December.   

 JOURNALIST: With the new Senate enquiry, are you still negotiating with the  Greens, is that something that’s likely to…   

 BOWEN: I’d leave Mr Butler to comment on that in terms of detailed discussion.   

 JOURNALIST: At today’s first question time, what are you expecting from the  chamber?   

 BOWEN: Well, I’m expecting very good questions from the Labor Party which you’ll  see at 2 o’clock.   

 JOURNALIST: We’re now hearing contradiction come out of Indonesia over  whether or not there’s negotiations for a people swap, are Indonesian politicians  playing politics on this matter as well?   

 BOWEN: Well I think Indonesian politicians would be looking at the situation in  Australia with some puzzlement. You’ve got a Government refusing to be upfront  with the Australian people. You’ve got a Government refusing to engage with  Indonesia through the normal channels. You saw Scott Morrison wringing his hands  on radio the other day, saying Indonesian position had no rhyme or reason, which is  exactly the opposite of what this Government promised they’d do. They said they  would not engage in megaphone diplomacy, they told us “Look, just trust us, it’ll be  alright, we’ll have much better negotiations and relationships of Indonesia than the  Labor party” Well that’s worked out well hasn’t it?   

 JOURNALIST: Could Indonesia use this lack of information coming out of Australia  to their advantage then?   

 BOWEN: I don’t think it’s a matter of Indonesia’s advantage, I think the Indonesian  Government has always, in my experience, wanted to work constructively with  Australia. The Vice President of Indonesia is in Australia today, he’s very welcome.  He’s receiving a great honour, and I think that’s appropriate that we recognise the  work that Indonesia and Australia are willing to do together if the Australian  Government is willing to take the right approach.    

 JOURNALIST: If the people swap deal is indeed on the cards, would Labor support  it?   

 BOWEN: Well we’d need to look at any details, obviously we believe in better  regional cooperation, and we need to pointing out the hypocrisy of a Liberal Party 

 which excoriated regional arrangements which saw Australia taking refugees from  other countries including Malaysia. If they now want to go down that road, they  need to justify their change in position.    

 JOURNALIST: On the carbon tax, what would you say to the three big lobby  groups today that are lining up against the Opposition and are calling on you to  withdraw the carbon tax?   

 BOWEN: Well I’d say this, I’d say this: We don’t believe that it’s the right thing to  do, to walk away from a fixed carbon price and replace it with a piece of public  policy vandalism which is Direct Action. And we won’t vote for a piece of public  policy vandalism which is Direct Action, and if the Government cared about cost of  living as they say they do, and they say they care about peoples bills and about  people’s abilities to pay their bills, then why are they introducing another bill which  will abolishment of the School Kids Bonus? If they care about business, why are they  introducing another bill which will see taxes on small business go up, and the Labor  Party’s small business tax deductions reversed? I mean these guys can’t have it both  ways.    

 They are playing a very hypocritical game, saying they care about business, saying  they care about cost of living, at the same time as they are introducing bills before  the Parliament which will see money taken away from Australian families with  children at school, and which will see taxes on small business increase, increase.  And yet they claim to care about business and cost of living, and they dare to lecture  the Labor Party on it. I think we’re done. Thanks guys.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879   

