---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Brisbane: 19 July 2013: Kevin Rudd's border protection failures"
date: "2013-07-19"
creators:
  - "Abbott, Tony"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397339
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2609555%22
---

 1 

 

 JOH  

 

 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH   

 19 July 2013                  

 TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE HON. JULIE BISHOP MHR,  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION AND SHADOW MINISTER FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE,   AND MR. SCOTT MORRISON MHR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION 

 AND CITIZENSHIP  BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND    

 Subjects: Kevin Rudd’s border protection failures.    

 EO&E........................................................................................................................................... 

 

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Obviously Julie, Scott and myself have just become familiar with the announcement that Mr Rudd and  Prime Minister O’Neill have just made and I think it's appropriate that we give you our initial response.   

  I welcome it, but it won’t work under Mr Rudd. I do welcome the generous response of PNG to Australia's  difficulties here. I do welcome it, but it will never work with Mr Rudd in charge.    

 Let's face it, this is Labor 's fifth go at getting it right and while this certainly is a very promising  development in offshore processing, it is about processing boat people, it's not about stopping the boats and  that in the end is what we have to have. We have to have policies in Australia that ensure that the boats stop  coming.    

 So I do welcome it. I don't see it working under Mr Rudd and I think the question that the Australian people  have to ask is who do you trust on this subject? Who do you trust to stop the boats? Do you trust the political  party which started them up again? Do you trust the political party that closed down Manus Island or do you  trust the party that is the original and the best when it comes to actually stopping the boats?    

 I am now going to ask Julie to stay a few words and then Scott and then I'll take a couple of questions.    

 JULIE BISHOP:   

 Thanks, Tony. Tony and Scott and I will shortly be briefed by the Papua New Guinean Prime Minister Peter  O'Neill on the announcement and we welcome the fact that Prime Minister O'Neill and his government have  been prepared to work with Australia on this issue. Of course, the challenge will be to dismantle the people  smuggling trade and that's what a Coalition government will be determined to do.    

 2 

 

 I thank Prime Minister O'Neill for giving us the opportunity to meet with him this afternoon after his trip  down from Port Moresby today and we look forward to discussing this matter and other matters more  broadly with him.    

 This represents an enormous challenge for Papua New Guinea, an enormous challenge if that country is  required to resettle thousands, or tens of thousands of people and so we understand the challenge that it  presents to Papua New Guinea and we are delighted to have the opportunity to talk to Prime Minister  O'Neill about those issues shortly.    

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Scott?   

 SCOTT MORRISON:   

 Thanks. As Tony said, John Howard had a solution that worked and Kevin Rudd got rid of it. Labor have  now had five ideas and every single one of them so far they've failed to be able to implement. This proposal,  as Tony said while we welcome the very strong support of Papua New Guinea in addressing this issue with  Australia, it all hinges on one thing and that is Labor's ability to implement it, which we know every single  time they've tried here, they have failed and that is why Tony is right. You have to ask yourself the question,  who you trust to put in place policies they believe in.    

 The Coalition has always believed in these policies. The Government, the Labor Party have always opposed  these types of policies and that's why they've always failed, particularly more specifically in relation to the  detail of this initiative. This initiative depends upon the Government's ability to transfer every single person  that turns up now from the next boat, as Minister Burke said, to Papua New Guinea. There is currently not  the capacity for people to be transferred to Papua New Guinea in the numbers that we're seeing now, which  are arriving at around about 1,000 per week. That means they'll have to be accommodated here in Australia  until there is capacity which will be made available in Papua New Guinea.    

 Mr Knight who is a Member of Parliament for Manus Island has already said today this could take years to  put that sort of capacity in place on Manus Island. Issues regarding landowners and so-on are very  complicated in Papua New Guinea. So the ability for them to get the capacity in place here and for the  Australian Government to be able to implement this will ultimately decide how well this plan can be put in  place.    

 So what we have is thousands of people continuing to turn up every week. They sit here in Australian  detention centres as the lawyers circle and this becomes a potential lawyers’ picnic in terms of injunctions  and everything else that can happen. We’ve seen it all before and there are also very serious legal questions  in Papua New Guinea about the terms upon which someone comes into that country that still are yet to be  resolved. The amount of moving parts in this arrangement are significant and you’ve really got to ask  yourself whether this government - this Labor government under Kevin Rudd has the credentials and record  to be able to put this sort of arrangement in place.   

 The other final point I’d make is there is no cost in here. Those costs have not yet been revealed. How big  this cost is is open-ended and particularly with people resettled in Papua New Guinea. The Prime Minister  said that Australia will be paying resettlement costs. Well, for how long Prime Minister? Every day? Every  day of the rest of their lives? They’ll be paid welfare or whatever it is, is required up in Papua New Guinea?  These are the sorts of details the Prime Minister just glossed over today as he announced yet another idea  which this government has proved they cannot turn ideas into solutions.   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Thanks Scott. Well said. Ok, do we have any questions? 

 3 

 

 

 QUESTION:   

 If the Coalition wins the election, would you retain this deal?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well we are going to study all the detail and as Scott has just pointed out, the announcement from the Prime  Minister is very light on detail. So we are going to look at the detail. We welcome the readiness of the PNG  Government to assist Australia in this way. But we just don’t trust this Prime Minister and this government  to make it work because they haven’t been able to make anything else work when it comes to stopping the  boats and in the end that’s what it’s all about. It is about not just processing people who arrive by boat, but  actually stopping the boats and that’s what’s got to happen.   

 QUESTION:   

 How do you think the Papua New Guinean Prime Minister will respond when you essentially tell him that  the policy’s good but we’ve just got crazy guy in charge? Do you really think he’s going to respond well to  that?   

 TONY ABBOTT:   

 Well I am full of gratitude to the PNG Government for their willingness to assist and what I am looking for  from our Prime Minister is first of all some demonstration of the will that it takes, the determination that it  takes, to actually make a difference given that this is the person who created the problem in the first place.    

 The other thing that I think all Australians will be looking for right now is specific detail on how this is all  going to work. What’s going to happen to the people who arrive before processing centres can be  constructed in PNG? How long does the Government envisage that it will take to construct processing  centres in PNG? How much is it going to cost to construct these processing centres in PNG? How long will  the people who go to PNG effectively be pensioners on the Australian taxpayer? These are all very  important questions of detail and we know, because we’re familiar with the way Kevin Rudd works, that  he’s very good at making announcements but he’s hopeless at actually implementing a policy.   

 Let’s never forget that this is a government which is hopeless at doing things but great at announcing things.  They’re brilliant at low politics but they’re hopeless at actually governing and stopping the boats is a real  test of whether or not you can be an adult government and this is a test that the Labor Party has consistently  failed.   

 

 [ends]   

