---
title: "PM Abbott's gift will help hide human rights abuses"
date: "2013-11-17"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400755
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2848524%22
---

 PM Abbott’s gift will help hide human rights abuses  17 November 2013    

 Australian Greens Leader Christine Milne says the Prime Minister’s gift of two naval vessels and co-operation with the Sri Lankan authorities to help stop people fleeing the country is collaboration on  human rights abuses.   

 “The Prime Minister’s silence on human rights abuses in Sri Lanka was inexcusable complicity, but  this is nothing less than collaboration and it is abhorrent,” Senator Milne said.   

 “I am devastated and heartbroken at the thought of Australia assisting a disgraced government to  suppress and control its citizens.   

 “In order to sure up Tony Abbott’s cruel and hollow policy to stop the boats he is resorting to  collaboration with Sri Lanka and will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses. This has nothing to do  with fairness, justice or saving lives.   

 “I don’t think Australians who genuinely thought that stopping the boats was about saving lives will  feel comfortable knowing that ‘stop the boats’ now means preventing people from running away  from torture and condemning them to human rights abuses.   

 “Sri Lanka is not a transit country. People are escaping from torture and abuse.   

 “Any resources provided to Sri Lanka would be better spent in leading a genuine regional solution  that cares for refugees by bringing more of them to Australia and by pushing for global action to  investigate alleged war crimes.   

 “The Australian Greens congratulate David Cameron for doing what Australians expected their Prime  Minister to do, to stand up for people suffering from persecution and abuse.”   

 Media contact: Peter Stahel 0437 587 562   

