---
title: "Almost 2,700 illegal arrivals since PNG election 'fix'"
date: "2013-08-19"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399096
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2674225%22
---

 

 Media Release    

 Scott Morrison MP  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Coalition Campaign Spokesman 

 

 Michael Keenan MP 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection    

 Monday 19 August 2013 

 Almost 2,700 illegal arrivals since PNG election ‘fix’    

 The arrival of 209 more people on the latest illegal  boat is the largest boat since Labor  announced their PNG election ‘fix’, taking the total number of people to have arrived to  2,700 since the policy was announced, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,   Michael Keenan said today.     

 This  is  also  the  second  biggest  boat  to  arrive  since  Labor  abolished  John  Howard’s   proven border protection policies.      

 “Just like Kevin Rudd's election campaign, Kevin Rudd's PNG election ‘fix’ continues to  unravel  by  the  day.  This  follows  confirmation  from  PNG  Prime  Minister  Peter  O'Neill   and his Foreign Minister Rimbink Pato that PNG will not resettle all those sent there for  processing despite Kevin Rudd's big, bold claims,” Mr Morrison said.      

 “The boats keep arriving with over 1,000 people so far this month and arrivals on track to  reach the 3,000 Mr O'Neill has already indicated that PNG is prepared to accommodate  on Manus Island.     

 “The  one  way  to  end  the  last  six  years  of  cost,  chaos  and  tragedy  on  our  borders  is   through  the  election  of  a  Coalition  Government  which  will  implement  the  necessary   policies and resolve back to government to stop the boats.”     

 Mr Keenan said: “Over 200 people have arrived on one of the largest illegal boat arrivals  so far this year.      

 “This is yet another indication that the people smugglers are not taking this Government  seriously.     

 “Anything that Kevin Rudd or the Labor Party promise on stopping the boats is just more  talk from the same people responsible for reinvigorating the people smuggling trade.      

 “What  Australia  needs  is  a  robust  border  protection  system  that  only  a  Coalition   Government can deliver.”      

 Media contacts:         Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667 (Morrison)                                    Hannah Weir 0458 167 600 (Keenan) 

 

