---
title: "Further action to deny permanent visas to illegal arrivals"
date: "2013-12-20"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211402956
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2912542%22
---

 Immigration Minister Scott Morrison   20 December 2013  

 Further action to deny permanent visas to illegal arrivals 

 The government has taken further action to honour its promise to deny permanent  visas to those who have arrived in Australia illegally by boat, following the decision  by the Greens and Labor to disallow Temporary Protection Visas. 

 Following the Labor/Greens decision in the Senate to disallow temporary protection  visas on December 2, the government took immediate action to cap the number of  onshore protection visas, to ensure that we honoured our promise to the Australian  people and did not honour the promise of people smugglers by providing permanent  visas to those who came by boat. The legislative instrument to put the cap in place  under s85 of the Act, came into effect on December 4. 

 At the time of this announcement I noted the cap would impact on onshore  applicants who had lawfully entered Australia and made protection claims. I further  noted the government would be making announcements to address this issue. 

 On December 5 I authorised a further regulation change to restrict eligibility for a  subclass 866 protection visa to onshore applicants who had entered Australia  lawfully. Once this change had been made I intended to lift the cap. 

 On December 14 the new regulation came into effect and on December 19 I lifted  the cap.  

 The government has a clear and thumping mandate to restore temporary protection  visas that is being denied by Labor and the Greens, repeating their worst decision in  government that was followed by over 50 000 arrivals on over 800 boats and more  than 1100 deaths. 

 Labor and the Greens voted against what the Australian people voted for, and have  voted to honour the promise made by people smugglers to those they lured onto  boats that they would get permanent residency in Australia. 

 Denying permanent residency to those who have already come by boat is as  important as ensuring that those who now seek to come are denied settlement in  Australia by being sent to Nauru or Manus Island. The fact that Labor does not  understand this just highlights again why they can never be trusted to protect our  borders. Once again they have shown they are divided, double minded and always  deferring to the Greens.  

 There can be no amnesty on permanent visas for illegal boat arrivals and under this  government there will not be. 

 This government will not give an inch when it comes to protecting our borders and  will take every step necessary to ensure that people who have arrived illegally by  boat are not rewarded with permanent visas, despite the best efforts of Labor and  the Greens. 

 

