---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 9 July 2013: Labor's Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals; Coalition's policy to turn back boats where safe to do so"
date: "2013-07-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Labor's Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals"
  - "Coalition's policy to turn back boats where safe to do so"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396884
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2581095%22
---

 Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison  

 Transcript - Sydney Doorstop 

 Tuesday 9th July 2013 

 Subjects: Labor's Rudd-carpet for illegal boat arrivals, Coalition’s policy to turn back boats where 

 safe to do so 

 MORRISON: 

 Well almost 1,000 people have now arrived since Kevin Rudd was returned to the Prime Ministership at a 

 rate of more than 100 people a day, the same rate that was occurring under Julia Gillard. We see that with 

 this government nothing has changed. This government remains a policy free zone when it comes to 

 border protection.  Earlier today Minister Burke held a press conference in Canberra.  It was my 

 expectation and I expect the expectation of the media that Minister Burke may have actually announced a 

 policy in this area.  But no, it was just more talk.  That’s what we come to expect from this government.  

 Just more talk all the time when it comes to border protection.  No policies, just talk from Kevin Rudd and 

 Minister Burke.  There are a few initiatives that they have rumoured about but they are merely poor 

 imitations of Coalition policy and even their attempts to revive past failures such as the Malaysian people 

 swap remain grounded.  In particular, Minister Burke has openly admitted now that having 800 people as 

 part of the Malaysian people swap is completely insufficient.  It was always insufficient.  When it was 

 happening the first time it was announced in 2011, this arrangement was good for a dozen boats.  That’s 

 it.  It has always been an insufficient agreement and that has been one of the key reasons why the 

 Coalition has always considered this a dud deal.  But now the Minister says he’s going to revive it.  Well if 

 he’s going to revive it based on his own arithmetic it would require many thousands of people to be subject 

 to that arrangement and that’s clearly not something this government is in a position to say they can 

 implement because the Malaysian government barely agreed to 800 let alone 8,000.  Equally this is a 

 government that can’t be trusted to implement policies they don’t believe in.  It was Minister Burke who 

 called Nauru a white elephant.  Now this Minister can’t be trusted to implement policies like offshore 

 processing that he’s been an ardent opponent of for most of his political life in the Federal parliament and 

 you can’t trust Labor to do things on our borders that they simply don’t believe in.  What you can trust them 

 to do is to do the things they do believe in and it was Minister Burke when he was Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration together with the Leader of the Opposition Kevin Rudd at the time who advocated the abolition 

 of Nauru and the Pacific Solution and temporary protection visas.  They can be trusted to do that and that’s 

 what you can expect more of if they’re re-elected at the next election. 

 

 Also today we had from Tony Burke the very bizarre situation of claiming not only did John Howard not stop 

 the boats but now he’s claiming John Howard started them when he was in government.  I mean, we’ve 

 always known that Labor doesn’t believe that John Howard did stop the boats, they’ve never accepted that 

 and now this absurd proposition that John Howard actually started them in terms of any policy changes that 

 occurred before the change of government in 2007.  The contrast between John Howard and Kevin Rudd 

 could not be more stark and we actually saw it yesterday as we had seen on previous occasions.  John 

 Howard’s actions on the Tampa demonstrated his resolve, his clear resolve to take on the people 

 smugglers and ensure that they did not cross the line.  Our government now has been ferrying people 

 across that line every day since Kevin Rudd came to the Prime Ministership the first time around.  We saw 

 it with the treatment of the Maltese ship yesterday, we saw it with the Parsifal under Julia Gillard less than a 

 year ago.  This is a government that runs a water taxi service.  It’s not a government that engages in 

 policies and actions like John Howard did on the Tampa and that’s the real difference.  It really is a 

 difference of resolve and still to this day there is no acknowledgement by Minister Burke or Prime Minister 

 Rudd that it was their decisions in 2007-08 that started the boats.  It was their decision to abolish temporary 

 protection visas, their decision to abolish the Pacific solution, their decision to go back on their promise 

 before the 2007 election that they would turn boats back where it was safe to do so.  It was their decision 

 that put the sugar back on the table in 2007-08.  Regardless of what happened later when they say they 

 moved too slow, it’s what they did in the first instance that set all of this running.  

 Today we also learnt that Minister Burke was unable to give a commitment to stop the boats.  Labor 

 doesn’t want to stop the boats, they just want to talk about the boats from here to the election.  They want 

 to go to conferences and talk about the boats, they want to go to press conferences and talk about the 

 boats but what they don’t want to do is put in place policies that are proven to do just that and that is to stop 

 them, which is the expectation of the Australian people.  So if Kevin Rudd is re-elected at the next election, 

 what you can expect him to do in this area is just keep talking.  If Tony Abbott is elected at this election, 

 you can expect him to act from day one as he pointed out last night.  

 Now just also on a couple of other details it is very welcoming to receive the confirmation from none less 

 than people like Major-General retired Molan, from Vice Admiral Ritchie, from Brigadier Hogan once again 

 confirming the absolute viability and indeed the necessity to have within our arsenal of measures to stop 

 the boats the policy of turn backs where it is safe to do so.  This can be done, it has been done, it is being 

 done even in other countries as we speak including in Sri Lanka and the United States.  Our own navy 

 continues to conduct very serious interception operations in the Gulf of Aden as part of Operation Slipper.  

 These are things that can be done, it’s just that our government won’t have the resolve to get them done.  

 Finally, Minister Burke seems to be making an assumption when it comes to issues of search and rescue.  

 Minister Burke needs to explain why his government has not taken the steps that would see people who 

 are rescued at sea in the Indonesian search and rescue zone are not taken back to Indonesia.  This 

 government has allowed a very, very dangerous precedent to remain in place now for some time.  And that 

 is if you try and sink your boat, you will get to Australia.  Now that is something that should have been 

 raised constantly with the Indonesian government now over yeas and not just the last few months.  Yet we 

 still have this government taking the situation where every time they’re put in the situation of making a 

 decision, they bring people directly to Australia rather than going to the place which has the first 

 responsibility to provide a place of safety in their search and rescue zone, which is Indonesia.  

 At this election, this is the last chance to stop the boats.  At this election if Kevin Rudd is returned, the 

 people smugglers would have not just have won the battle they would have won the war.  So as it narrows 

 as it inevitably was going to, there is a very clear choice for the Australian people.  If you are sick and tired 

 of the chaos and the cost and tragedy we’ve seen on our borders as a result of this Labor government then 

 there is a clear choice for you.  If you choose the Abbott-led Coalition then we can stop this.  We will never 

 give up on this.  The Labor government have and I would encourage you not join them in giving up and 

 voting Labor.  

 QUESTION: 

 Is there any basis that you would accept re-negotiating the Malaysian swap deal?  

 MORRISON: 

 First of all, the government would actually have to be able to put something on the table which they clearly 

 cannot do.  I had these discussions with Minister Bowen and Minister Rudd when he was the Foreign 

 Minister.  The Malaysian government will not agree to anything more than 800.  The Malaysian government 

 will not agree to put legally binding protections on that arrangement.  And they can do that under their own 

 Migration Act or they can do it through other international conventions they may seek to sign.  Those are 

 just simply not things the Malaysian government are prepared to countenance and that is on the authority 

 of both Minister Bowen when he was the Immigration Minister and Foreign Minister Rudd, now Prime 

 Minister.  

 QUESTION: 

 Mr Burke says the Coalition should explain how it can oppose the Malaysian deal when it says you’re 

 happy to send people back to Indonesia which is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention.  What’s your 

 response?  

 MORRISON: 

 Well I’ll give you the same response I’ve given to that question on many occasions when Mr Bowen used to 

 put the same issue.  First of all, people have placed themselves in Indonesia.  That’s where they would be 

 going back to.  They have made a choice to put themselves in Indonesia.  Second of all, there is a very real 

 difference between Indonesia and Malaysia.  First of all Indonesia is a signatory to the Convention Against 

 Torture, Indonesia is a signatory to the Convention on civil and political rights, Indonesia is a signatory to 

 the Convention on the Rights of the Child when it comes to primary school education.  These are 

 conventions that Malaysia is not a signatory to so I think there is a very real world of difference between the 

 situation for people in Indonesia as opposed to Malaysia.  But the real issue when it comes to the 

 Malaysian people swap is the fact it just doesn’t work.  At 800 people it was always a dud and has since 

 then has just been an excuse used by the Gillard government to do nothing.  I note that it’s now been 

 effectively junked because there’s no way to take this forward currently with the benchmarks that the 

 Minister himself has put on it.  It is the government who has a problem with the Malaysian people swap 

 because they can’t get the Malaysians to agree to the arrangement as they’re now talking about it.  

 QUESTION: 

 Mr Burke says he’ll have information soon about the differences between the asylum seeker issue in the 

 region and the United States coastguard stopping boats coming from Cuba, do you think there are 

 differences?  

 MORRISON: 

 I’ll allow Minister Burke who I notice the government hasn’t even until now even considered the situation in 

 the United States.   I’ve been raising this issue for some time.  As I said, they have been involved in alien 

 maritime interdictions as they call them since the early 80s in a serious way with tens of thousands of 

 people who have been returned so this is a standing policy in the United States, it has been and remains to 

 this day.  In the financial year just completed, just over 1800 people were returned so this is a standing 

 policy of the United States.  It’s happening in Sri Lanka, I mean the Sri Lankans are intercepting and 

 returning on figures last year when I was there in February I was able to determine this, about one in three 

 vessels were being intercepted and returned to Sri Lanka so I think there are very clear examples of how 

 this is being done now and of course there are very clear examples of how it was done then.  Minister 

 Burke is saying these vessels will somehow just move around if they’re intercepted.  What he doesn’t seem 

 to understand is what Vice Admiral Ritchie was saying is that they returned to Indonesia under their own 

 steam and if it’s a search and rescue situation that Australian vessels are called upon to assist well why 

 does Minister Burke assume that people would be taken to Australia in those circumstances?  He has no 

 reason to assume that other than the position adopted by his own government which is just to roll over and 

 bring everybody to Australia.  That’s his policy; roll over and bring everybody to Australia.  

 QUESTION: 

 Would you have an official debate with Mr Burke?  

 MORRISON: 

 Well I actually had one, a debate with him yesterday afternoon on Adelaide radio so I’ve never been shy of 

 debating these issues, no one has ever accused me of that.  Minister Burke I see is still coming up to 

 speed in the portfolio, he doesn’t seem to be aware of many of the details of the area.  He’s just come into 

 the job and I think that’s one of the problems with this government.  We’ve had three Immigration Ministers 

 in the space of less than six months and now we have an Immigration Minister who’s described his own 

 Prime Minister as being chaotic, unable to make decisions.  I don’t think that’s a terribly big endorsement of 

 the working relationship between the two men.  Tony Abbott and I you wouldn’t find a cigarette paper’s 

 difference between the two of us.  

 QUESTION: 

 On this issue of stop the boats which you say Minister Burke won’t commit to but you say you will stop the 

 boats, can you explain to us what you mean by stop the boats?  

 MORRISON: 

 We will achieve the same ends that the Howard government was able to achieve and Vice Admiral Ritchie I 

 think put that fairly clearly the other day.  When he was asked why were you not conducting further 

 interceptions, he said because the boats stopped.  Because the boats stopped.  So through our intelligence 

 and various other methods of collecting information, we will know when the people smugglers’ model has 

 been broken.  We certainly knew it last time and we will know it again.  I think we’ve been very clear about 

 what we mean by that and the Australian people I think certainly understand what we mean by that.  Our 

 commitment is clear but the other difference with us and the government on this is we believe it can 

 happen.  We actually believe you can stop the boats. We know that because we’ve done it before, we know 

 that because we know we’ve got measures that can do it and we know we have the resolve to get it done.  

 Kevin Rudd doesn’t believe you can, he doesn’t believe John Howard achieved it, he doesn’t believe there 

 are ways you can achieve it now.  That’s why I say Kevin Rudd has given up and he’s trying to convince 

 the Australian population that it can’t be done, so don’t worry about the issue, it just can’t be done.  That’s 

 why I say to the Australian people don’t give up on it.  Don’t buy Kevin Rudd’s line that says this problem 

 can’t be fixed.  Because it can be and by supporting the Coalition we can achieve that together.  

 QUESTION: 

 How will we assess whether the Coalition government has stopped the boats?  Will we see zero boats for a 

 certain amount of time? 

 MORRISON: 

 The same way we did last time.  I mean, is anyone here disputing the fact that the boats stopped last time? 

 [pause - silence] No.  So we knew it happened last time and we’ll know it happened again in the future.  

 QUESTION: 

 What do you make of Minister Burke, I think he said there was no denying mistakes were made by Labor in 

 2009 by not acting quickly enough.  Is there another -  

 MORRISON: 

 No it doesn’t go far enough.  What Minister Burke doesn’t do is acknowledge what happened in 2007 and 

 2008.  They have collective amnesia about when Prime Minister Rudd rolled out the Rudd carpet to people 

 smugglers and put the sugar on the table.  I mean, I explained these things I think in very common terms.  

 Minister Burke seems to have problems with that. But this is a very clear way of explaining what 

 happened.  I don’t think Minister Burke or the Prime Minister want the Australian people to be reminded of 

 the fact, of what he did.  This mess started when Kevin Rudd abolished John Howard’s strong border 

 protection regime.  They knocked down every brick in the wall that John Howard put up in terms of border 

 protection and they refuse to take responsibility for it.   It wasn’t because they acted too slowly.  It’s 

 because they acted in the first place to abolish what was in place.  That’s why we’re in this mess and all 

 Kevin Rudd wants to do now is talk and talk and talk and talk and talk.  That’s what you get from Kevin 

 Rudd - just more talk.  What you’ll get from Tony Abbott and me is action from day one.  Thanks very 

 much.  

 Ends 

 

