---
title: "Coalition confusion during question time"
date: "2013-06-25"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396272
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2548217%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Tuesday, 25 June, 2013    

 COALITION CONFUSION DURING QUESTION TIME   

 The  Coalition  made  a  mockery  of  question  time  today  by  making  a  number  of fundamental  errors  that will only serve to encourage more people to undertake a dangerous boat journey to Australia.   

 Bonner MP Ross Vasta committed the biggest howler after taking a bum steer from the Member for  Cook and “reminding” Minister O’Connor the Government had removed families from Manus Island.   

 ROSS VASTA: I remind the Minister of the Government’s decision to remove families from the Manus  Island processing centre…  Question time - 25 June 2013   

 The Member for Bonner and the Leader of the Opposition shot a death stare toward the Member for  Cook when the Minister advised the House not only had that decision not been taken, but families  remain on Manus Island.   

 After question time, the Member for Cook tried to back-pedal - and missed a division in the House -  during a rambling press conference.   

 SCOTT  MORRISON:  There  was  no  suggestion  today  that  all  the  families  were  already  off  Manus   Island.  Doorstop - 25 June 2013   

 No amount of back-pedalling can cover up the Coalition’s lies on border protection. Mr Morrison has  a track  record of  saying and doing anything to  encourage  more  boats  to  undertake  the  dangerous  voyage to Australia.   

 In  April,  he  peddled  lies  about  the  Government  being  unable  to  transfer  people  to  regional   processing centres.   

 SCOTT MORRISON: When I was on Manus Island I was advised by the PNG Immigration service that  transfers  had  been  suspended.  That  advice  was  confirmed  to  me  by  the  Chief  Migration  Officer   through  my  office  this  week  when  the  Minister  himself  denied  the  fact  that  transfers  had  been   suspended. 

 Doorstop - 15 March 2013 

 

 Mr  Morrison’s  lies  have  been  exposed  by  the  fact  that  there  have  been  15 planeloads of  asylum   seekers to the Manus Island regional processing centre.   

 Whether  it’s  a  doorstop,  during  question  time,  or  ‘peddling’  error-riddled  media  releases,  Mr   Morrison just can’t get it right.   

 MEDIA CONTACT: Glen Atwell 0439 437 218 or glen.atwell@immi.gov.au 

