---
title: "Pyne walks away from stop the boats timeframe"
date: "2013-06-07"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395518
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2503825%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Friday, 7 June, 2013    

 PYNE WALKS AWAY FROM STOP THE BOATS TIMEFRAME 

 Confusion continues to reign over Coalition claims they will ‘stop the boats’ with Opposition  frontbenchers unable to agree a key policy deadline. 

 Manager of Opposition Business Christopher Pyne today said the Coalition could not provide a  date for when they would ‘stop the boats’, stating that such a position would be ‘asinine’. 

 This comes within 24 hours of Tony Abbott and immigration spokesperson Scott Morrison  declaring the Coalition would ‘stop the boats’ within a first term. 

 The latest split in the Coalition ranks reveals what the those familiar with the policy discussion  have always known, that Mr Abbott’s promise to ‘stop the boats’ is an empty slogan and not a  real policy that will make a difference. 

 A three word slogan will not stop the global problem of people using desperate measures to  seek asylum and it is dishonest for the Mr Abbott to continue trying to dupe the public. 

 The Coalition on stopping the boats: 

 Christopher Pyne has claimed that no deadline can be placed on when an Abbott government  would be able to ‘stop the boats’.    

 Pyne: Well, it’ll stop because the policies that we introduce will be ones that will actually  be meaningful and make a difference. But Marius, I can’t tell you that on 15 September  the boats will suddenly stop and the Australian public know that. And trying to play the  game of picking a date - the public would regard as asinine. 

 ABC, News Radio - 7 JUNE 2013 

 

 Just yesterday, Tony Abbott and immigration spokesperson Scott Morrison insisted they could  set a strict timeline.    

 Abbott: The short answer is yes. We will make a difference from day one.  Doorstop interview - 6 June 2013 

 

 Journalist: In the first term?   

 Morrison: Of course. 

 Sky - 6 June 2013 

 

 Two days earlier even Christopher Pyne himself was much more confident.    

 Pyne: There’ll be a sharp drop in boat arrivals - I have no doubt about that - once the  Senate passes our legislation to bring back temporary protection visas, to turn back the  boats where it’s safe to do so and to increase offshore processing.  ABC 891 - 5 June 2013 

 

 The Gillard Government is the only party looking to implement all the Expert Panel’s  recommendations to prevent dangerous journeys and reduce the number of boat arrivals. 

 The Opposition just make up policies recklessly without thought or care as to whether they will  work - even resorting to calling the Indonesian Ambassador a liar after the he made it crystal  clear that Indonesia would not accept their turnback policy. 

 Tony Abbot’s negativity is doing nothing to deter asylum seekers from risking their lives. 

 Media Adviser: Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604 

 

 

