---
title: "Statement on Scott Morrison and the Egyptian adult male"
date: "2013-06-03"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROB, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395283
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2496966%22
---

 

 

 STATEMENT 

 3 June 2013 

 STATEMENT ON SCOTT MORRISON AND THE EGYPTIAN ADULT MALE 

 This morning I received an email from the Opposition spokesman for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison, seeking a Joint Select Committee to be established based on his  concerns about an Egyptian adult male arriving at Christmas Island in or around May 2012,  and his concern that national security has been breached.   

 His Notice of Motion is attached. 

 In Question Time, Mr Morrison moved a suspension motion to try to bring on his motion on  this matter.  

 I voted against the motion as I have written back to Mr Morrison seeking further information  on a number of questions I have, and am awaiting his reply. See letter attached.  

 

 ENDS   

 



 1 

 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

 

 

 NOTICE OF MOTION 

   MR MORRISON  I move that:   

 (1) A Select Committee on the ‘National security issues relating to the processing and  detention of a convicted terrorist who arrived by boat in and around May 2012 and  other related matters involving the Government’s handling of national security issues  for irregular maritime arrivals”   

 

  Having regard to the following circumstances:   

  In or around May 2012, an Egyptian adult male accompanied by his family arrived  illegally by boat at Christmas Island claiming asylum. After initial processing the man  and family were transferred to the Inverbrackie Alternative Place of Detention—a  detention facility for low risk asylum seeker families in the Adelaide hills.  

 

  By end August 2012 it was established by ASIO that this man was convicted of  multiple terrorist offences—a member of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad which merged  with Al Qaeda in June 2001. He was the subject of an Interpol Red Notice.  

 

  The man and family remained in low security detention at Inverbrackie until April 2013  when they were transferred to higher security detention facilities at Villawood in  Sydney.  

 

  The Select Committee should:   

 (a) establish the facts surrounding the case in relation to:    

 (i) the full chronology of the events relating to the man and his family’s  arrival and detention in Australia and associated security and criminal  investigations;  

 

 (ii) how and when relevant agencies and Ministers became aware of the  man’s terrorist conviction and what action was taken in response to that  knowledge;    

 (iii) the adequacy of interagency co-operation, and in particular co-operation  between DIAC, ASIO and the AFP, in identifying, sharing information,  and taking steps to appropriately deal with the individual concerned;    

 (iv) why the individual was left so long at the Inverbrackie low security  facility before being transferred to Villawood;    

 2 

 (v) the current location and security arrangements for the man and family;    

 (vi) the current status of immigration processing of his asylum or any other  claim; and    

 (vii) action being taken in relation to his extradition to Egypt and the point of  responsibility for ongoing management of this national security case;    

 (b) review the facts and make an assessment of any failings in the Government’s  handling of this case and who will be responsible;    

 (c) identify and establish the facts relating to the Government’s handling of other  cases, involving national security issues including, but not restricted to:   

 (i) Sri Lankan national suspected of murder who was released into  the community  before being taken to Villawood detention centre;   

 (ii) a suspected Iranian drug smuggler who arrived via boat and is now in  a   mental health facility;   

 (iii)asylum seeker claims involving membership of the group the Liberation  Tigers of Tamil Eelam; and   

 (iv) any other asylum seeker claim that has received a negative ASIO security  assessment; and   

 (d) make recommendations to address issues identified in the review.    

 (2) The committee consist of 7 members, 3 members to be nominated by the Government  Whip or Whips, 3 members to be nominated by the Opposition Whip or Whips, and 1  non-aligned member. 

 

 (3) The committee may supplement its membership by up to four members, with a  maximum of two extra government and two extra opposition or non-aligned members.  Supplementary members shall have the same participatory rights as other members, but  may not vote. 

 

 (4) That every nomination of a member of the committee be notified in writing to the  Speaker of the House of Representatives.    

 (5) That the members of the committee hold office as a select committee until presentation  of the committee's report or the House of Representatives is dissolved or expires by  effluxion of time, whichever is the earlier. 

 

 (6) That the committee elect a government or a non-government member as chair at its first  meeting.    

 (7) That the committee elect a member as its deputy chair who shall act as chair of the  committee at any time when the chair is not present at a meeting of the committee, and 

 3 

 at any time when the chair and deputy chair are not present at a meeting of the  committee the members present shall elect another member to act as chair at that  meeting.    

 (8) That, in the event of an equally divided vote, the chair, or the deputy chair when acting  as chair, have a casting vote.   

 (9) That 3 members of the committee constitute a quorum of the committee provided that  in a deliberative meeting the quorum shall include 1 government member and 1 non-government member.  

 

 (10) That the committee have power to appoint sub-committees consisting of 3 or more of  its members and to refer to any sub-committee any matter which the committee is  empowered to examine.  

 

 (11) That the committee appoint the chair of each sub-committee who shall have a casting  vote only and at any time when the chair of a sub-committee is not present at a meeting  of the sub-committee the members of the sub-committee present shall elect another  member of that sub-committee to act as chair at that meeting.  

 

 (12) That 2 members of a sub-committee constitute the quorum of that sub-committee.   

 (13)  That members of the committee who are not members of a sub-committee may  participate in the proceedings of that sub-committee but shall not vote, move any  motion or be counted for the purpose of a quorum.  

 

 (14) That the committee or any sub-committee have power to call for witnesses to attend  and for documents to be produced.    

 (15) That the committee or any sub-committee may conduct proceedings at any place it sees  fit.  

 

 (16) That the committee or any sub-committee have power to adjourn from time to time and  to sit during any adjournment of the House of Representatives.   

 (17) That the committee may report from time to time but that it present its final report no  later than 30 June 2013.    

 (18) That the provisions of this resolution, so far as they are inconsistent with the standing  orders, have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the standing orders.   

 

 

 

 

 .................................................... (signed) .................................................... (signed) 

 

 Mover  Seconder 

