---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra : 27 February 2013: access to university; Chaney Report; Coalition platitudes; Prime Minister's visit to Western Sydney; asylum seekers"
date: "2013-02-27"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS, SCIENCE AND RESEARCH"
subjects:
  - "access to university"
  - "Chaney Report"
  - "Coalition platitudes"
  - "Prime Minister's visit to Western Sydney"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391199
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2260260%22
---

 

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS,   SCIENCE AND RESEARCH  MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS   

 *TRANSCRIPT*   

 DOORSTOP, CANBERRA   

 WEDNESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2013 

 

 SUBJECTS: Access to university, Chaney Report, Coalition platitudes, Prime  Minister’s visit to Western Sydney, asylum seekers.   

 CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming today everybody. This is an important opportunity to  lay out the stark contrast and the stark differences facing Australia’s universities later this  year. The Labor Government has a very strong and proud track-record of funding  universities, which has seen a massive increase in the number of young Australians and  older Australians having the opportunity to study at university.    

 As I said in my speech, universities are a transformative opportunity for Australia; for young  Australians to improve their lives and to have the opportunities that they deserve. It  shouldn’t matter where you live in Australia, it shouldn’t matter what your parent’s income  is, it shouldn’t matter whether you’re the first in your family to go to university like I happen  to be, or whether your family has a long track-record of going to university, you should have  that opportunity - and our reforms have made that a reality.    

 Tomorrow, Mr Abbott addresses this Conference. I hope that he gives more than platitudes,  more than slogans, but lays out his funding plans. I hope that he makes commitments not  to cut university funding. I hope that he makes a commitment not to abolish the demand-driven system. I hope that he makes a commitment to keep the university indexation model.  If he doesn’t do that, then Australia’s universities - from the Chancellors and Vice-Chancellors, to the professors, to the lecturers, the students, the families of students - are  entitled to assume that he will slash and burn university funding, just like the Howard  Government, of which he was a member, of which he is so proud, did in their term of office.    

 Happy to answer some questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, can you outline some of the key recommendations in the  international education report?    

 BOWEN: Yeah, thank you for asking. I’m today releasing the Chaney Report into  International Education. The report is a good one, it points to the fact that the sector has  been resilient in difficult circumstances. It makes the recommendation, for example, for a  ministerial steering committee to consist of me, other ministers, state ministers,  representatives of the sector; and makes recommendations in relation to regulation and  monitoring the performances of TEQSA, for example, in relation to a number of  circumstances in relation to international education.    

 I’m releasing the report today, at some point in the not-too-distant-future I’ll release also  the Government’s response.    

 JOURNALIST: The report is forecasting a 30 per cent rise in international student numbers  by 2020. You’ve already said you’ll give more details in the Government’s response you say,  but what sort of support is this sector going to need, given these numbers are expected to  rise so drastically?   

 BOWEN: Well our demand-driven system, of course, responds to any increases in numbers  in universities, and of course that is in relation to domestic students; and in relation to  international students they pay a substantial amount of money to study in Australia, which  then better funds universities. I think there’ll be a range of challenges which the ministerial  council will need to work on in relation to infrastructure and access to services, et cetera,  from an increase in international student numbers.    

 JOURNALIST: There’s 35 recommendations, I think, in the Chaney Review. Do you  anticipate that the Government will adopt most of those?   

 BOWEN: Yes -   

 JOURNALIST: - Are there some that you won’t?   

 BOWEN: Well look, of course there’s a process that the Government will go through, but it’s  a good report and I would anticipate us accepting most of the recommendations, Laura, yes.   

 JOURNALIST: Will Labor maintain the current indexation for universities funding if it wins  the election?    

 BOWEN: Our track-record is very clear: we introduced the indexation model, of course we  did. And of course, we’re very proud of it.    

 Sorry, I’m going over here -   

 JOURNALIST: - Is one of the recommendations something akin to Tourism Australia?   

 BOWEN: Look, the recommendations don’t really go to the creation of any new massive  bureaucracy, but it does go to better coordination and better collaboration across all levels  of government with the sector.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen, what is the intention with the Student Services and  Amenities Fee over the next period?   

 BOWEN: Well in relation to that, my predecessor announced a review which was chaired by  the Honourable Arch Bevis, and I’ll be awaiting that report.    

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned interconnected sector, and getting the department to advise  on different ways of bringing the sectors together. There’s mechanisms to do that at the  moment through the HEP, SAF, EIF and so-forth, but the Government is systematically  blocking attempts by vocational colleges to interconnect; so are you looking at replacing  those mechanisms and putting something -    

 BOWEN: I don’t accept the premise of your question, and as I’ve outlined in the speech  I’ve asked my department to prepare, in consultation with Universities Australia, a  principles-based guidelines for collaboration.    

 Collaboration between the two sectors is, of course, very welcome, but it has to be done in  the best interests of students in both sectors and not as a cost-cutting measure. I’ll look at  each proposal based on its merits, but that’s why I’ve asked the department to prepare  some principles-based measures so that there are clear criteria to be reached. I think that’s  in the best interests of the sector, so that they understand what the Government is seeking  to achieve, and they understand what boxes they need to tick in order to get proposals  approved.    

 JOURNALIST: Why is it that -    

 BOWEN: You had a go Laura, so we’ll go over here but then we’ll go to you next Laura.   

 JOURNALIST: Christopher Pyne said this morning his first priority as Education Minister  would be to improve education standards within universities, lecturer and teacher standards.  Do you think, is that a priority for you as well?   

 BOWEN: We’ll that’s another platitude from Mr Pyne. I’d like to see some meat around that  particular commitment. He’s given one speech on higher education in his entire time as  education spokesperson - he seems more focused on political muckraking most of the time,  so any substance from Mr Pyne is particularly welcome. Laura -   

 JOURNALIST: How bad is Labor in Western Sydney at the moment and do you think that  Prime Minister Gillard campaigning out there next week will make any difference at the next  election?   

 BOWEN: Well of course it’s important that all Prime Ministers get around the country. Prime  Minister Gillard has been a regular visitor to Western Sydney all through her time as Prime  Minister - that’s a good thing. We’re an important region. One of the nation’s biggest  economies is in Western Sydney - bigger than several states; one million people, more than  a million people live in Western Sydney.    

 So of course Western Sydney is very important to the Government’s agenda. I think that as  a Western Sydney MP and Cabinet Minister. Of course it’s important the Prime Minister  visits; she has done regularly. She’ll be visiting a little more intensively next week because  she wants to spend more time in Western Sydney over a period of time - that’s something  that I think we should be very much welcoming.    

 JOURNALIST: Will you campaign with her next weekend?   

 BOWEN: I’m sure I’ll be seeing the Prime Minister next week, yes.   

 JOURNALIST: But will you be out on the hustings with her?   

 BOWEN: Oh look, I’ll be doing a range of events, some of which the Prime Minister will be  at and some of which she won’t.   

 JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd is very popular with the Chinese community, particularly in  Western Sydney. Can you see those same sorts of scenes that we saw with Kevin Rudd a  few months ago?   

 BOWEN: Look, Kevin is very popular with the Chinese community. Many of us go to many  Chinese functions and the Prime Minister has always been very welcome and very popular at  Chinese functions as well. So I’m sure that you would see the Prime Minister welcome, very  welcome of course, at any function she attends.   

 JOURNALIST: What are the big issues in Western Sydney? What do you expect Julia  Gillard to be concentrating on? Is it education? Is it trying to win over people on the carbon  tax, or is it…?   

 BOWEN: I think the Prime Minister will be talking about the Government’s commitment to  Western Sydney, our achievements in Western Sydney; the University of Western Sydney  and the big expansion of places at universities like the University of Western Sydney that  provided a big increase in the opportunity of people from disadvantaged backgrounds to get  to university. The proud record which was started in her time as Minister for Education and  has been continued.    

 I think she’ll be talking about our steps to deal with cost of living pressures, education, the  Schoolkids Bonus, of the increase in the Child Care Rebate - all those issues, of course,  which are issues across Australia and issues in Western Sydney as well.   

 JOURNALIST: When will you introduce streamlined visa processing for…?   

 BOWEN: That’s very well advanced and we’ll be making further announcements with my  ministerial colleague, the Minister for Immigration Brendan O’Connor, in the very near  future.   

 JOURNALIST: Doug Cameron this morning said that TPVs and asylum seekers are not an  issue in Western Sydney. That’s your old portfolio and you are in that region. Do you think  that those issues are important to people in your electorate.   

 BOWEN: You’re right it is my old portfolio and of course Brendan O’Connor will provide  commentary going forward.    

 However, our policy commitment is clear: we are the only party committed to introducing  and implementing all the recommendations of the Houston Panel. That is what is necessary  to stop people risking their lives to get to Australia by boat. That is why we are doing it, and  that is why we will continue to do it. That’s why we will continue to point out that whilst  ever the Liberal Party and the Greens Party combine in the Senate to stop the Government  implementing its policies, we will continue to have the challenge of boat arrivals in Australia.   

 JOURNALIST: Combining your old and new responsibilities, I suppose, charges have been  laid on a Sri Lankan asylum seeker at Macquarie University. Are you confident that  universities - university campuses - are a safe place to house asylum seekers?   

 BOWEN: Australian law applies to everybody, including those who are being house in the  community as asylum seekers - and the law should be allowed to take its course. And that’s  a process that should be respected.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there are chance that the Prime Minister could do more harm than good  in Western Sydney this week given her personal unpopularity at the moment?   

 BOWEN: The Prime Minister is always welcome in Western Sydney - of course she is. And  it’s always important to see Prime Ministers out and about in the community.   

 Thank you very much guys, cheers.   

 ENDS   

