---
title: "New arrangement with Nauru Government"
date: "2013-08-03"
creators:
  - "Rudd, Kevin"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398144
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643063%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION   

 

 NEW ARRANGEMENT WITH NAURU GOVERNMENT   

 Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has today signed an Arrangement with the President of  the Republic of Nauru Baron Waqa regarding unauthorised maritime arrivals.   

 The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) agreed to by Australia and Nauru, is in  broadly similar terms to the arrangements with Papua New Guinea.    

 This MOU strengthens the regional approach taken by the Australian Government.    

 Under the Arrangement, it will now be possible for asylum seekers to not only be  processed in Nauru, if they are found to be in need of protection, they could also be  settled there.    

 In the first instance, the Government will focus on transferees in family groups and  unaccompanied minors for settlement.    

 Nauru is a nation with a small population. We would only expect modest numbers to  ever be involved in settlement and our expectation is that they would be family  groups and unaccompanied minors.   

 The significance of today's announcement is not the numbers that are involved, but  that we are adding an extra layer to a comprehensive regional approach and we  thank the Government of Nauru for that.   

 The Government of Nauru first raised with Australia the prospect of looking at  settlement arrangements in a meeting between Justice Minister David Adeang and  Immigration Minister Tony Burke in Canberra on July 9.    

 Since that time, the two governments have been working together in identifying  appropriate locations for family accommodation.   

 It is clear that the only way to deal with the challenge of people smuggling is through  a comprehensive regional approach.    

 A cornerstone of this regional approach is to ensure people smugglers do not have a  product to sell because people that come by boat without a visa will not be settled in  Australia.    

 The Government has always said that people smugglers would continue to test our  resolve.   

 Today’s announcement is a reminder of the full strength of the resolve of this  Government.  

 

 Australia is committed to Nauru’s future development. Over the last three years  under our Partnership for Development, Australia has invested $91.1 million in aid to  Nauru, to support better health, education, electricity and water for the people of  Nauru.     

 Australia expects to provide $29.9 million in aid to Nauru in 2013-14.   

 The recent riots involving a number of the single male transferees at Nauru on July  19 has led to a number of individuals being charged under the law of Nauru.   

 Australia respects the law of Nauru and respects that these individuals will have their  charges tested following due process in the courts of Nauru.    

 The incident has put particular pressure on the capacity of the prison in Nauru.    

 The Australian Government has agreed to assist the Government of Nauru in  expanding its prison capacity.   

 Today’s announcement will allow families and unaccompanied minors to settle and  reside in Nauru without gaining citizenship.   

 We have instructed Australian officials to work with officials from Nauru to streamline  visa arrangements.    

 

 BRISBANE  3 AUGUST 2013   

 PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744   

