---
title: "Launch of the Refugee Family Reunion Guide"
date: "2013-05-21"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211394366
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2467837%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

 THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP  Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General  Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Ageing   Federal Member for Blair 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 21 May, 2013 

 Launch of the Refugee Family Reunion Guide 

 

 Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General Shayne Neumann MP hosted the launch of the  Refugee Family Reunion Guide in Brisbane.    

 The Guide has been produced by the Refugee and Immigration Legal Service, which is  Queensland’s specialist provider of free legal advice to migrants and refugees.    

  “The Refugee and Immigration Legal Service provides valuable legal assistance services to  refugees, asylum seekers and disadvantaged migrants in the Queensland community,” Mr  Neumann said.    

 “The Refugee Family Reunion Guide contains practical information and advice which will assist  people through the family reunion process and help them to determine the best option for their  situation.     

 “The Guide will help to overcome potential barriers such as financial constraints or lack of  familiarity with the Australian legal system, and ensure that vulnerable and disadvantaged  members of the community can access free, easy-to-understand information about the law.     

 “The Australian Government is proud to support the Refugee and Immigration Legal Service’s  important work, including the update of the Refugee Family Reunion Guide, by way of financial  support provided through the Commonwealth Community Legal Services Program.”     

 The Guide is a comprehensive, easy-to-use resource to assist refugees as well as those acting on  their behalf in other support services and community legal centres across Australia.     

 The Refugee and Immigration Legal Service is a not-for-profit community legal centre  specialising in refugee and immigration law.  It provides free legal advice, assistance and 

 representation to disadvantaged migrants and refugees, as well as a range of community legal  education resources and programs.     

 More information about the Refugee and Immigration Legal Service can be found on their  website: http://www.rails.org.au/.     

 Media contact:  Madonna Oliver - 0477 757 791 

 

 

