---
title: "NZ asylum deal exhausted in just three days"
date: "2013-02-10"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390309
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2723292%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling NZ ASYLUM DEAL EXHAUSTED IN JUST  THREE DAYS February 10, 2013

 The illegal arrival of three boats in just three days carrying more than 190 people has already exhausted the arrangement with  the  New  Zealand  Government  to  take  150  refugees  who  have  arrived  in  Australia  by  boat,  Shadow  Minister  for Immigration  and  Citizenship,  Scott  Morrison  and  Shadow  Minister  for  Justice,  Customs  and  Border  Protection,  Michael Keenan said today.

 “The latest boat carrying 55 people is the 15th boat so far this year, with a total of 871 people having arrived so far. This is the fastest start to arrivals we have seen in any year, even under Labor,” Mr Morrison said.

 “The high rate of arrivals that continues under Labor's failed border policies and resolve only highlights just how much of a non-event yesterday's announcement by the Prime Minister in New Zealand was.

 “The agreement for New Zealand to take 150 boat arrivals has been overwhelmed in just three days. At the same time the PM  wilfully  missed  an  important  opportunity  to  join  with  New  Zealand  to  get  the  focus  of  regional  cooperation  back  on bolstering regional border security, which is why the Bali Process was established by the Coalition in the first place.

 “Julia  Gillard  is  always  looking  for  new  ways  to  accommodate  people  turning  up  on  boats,  rather  than  restoring  the policies that stopped them. 

 “On Monday the Coalition's Bill to restore temporary protection visas will be introduced into the parliament, providing the Government with the opportunity to admit they got it wrong and put back one of the key measures they abolished that set in the chaos, cost and tragedy that has been occurring on our borders ever since,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan  said: “The  latest illegal boat arrival places more  pressure on  the Australian Customs and  Border Protection Service at a time when the agency is facing huge pressure to regain control of Australia’s borders on the limited resources  provided by this Labor Government.

 “When  you  consistently  remove  funding  and  personnel  from  frontline  border  protection  agencies  then  you  leave  our borders vulnerable to penetration from criminal syndicates.

 “Labor cannot provide stability to Australia’s borders - they cannot even provide stability within their own Government.

 “The Coalition has a plan to stop the boats from coming - a plan that has already worked to stop them coming before and will work to stop them coming again,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 NZ ASYLUM DEAL EXHAUSTED IN JUST THREE DAYS > Michael Keenan MP

 13/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

