---
title: "Coalition's plan to increase offshore processing capacity at Nauru"
date: "2013-07-30"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397831
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2628317%22
---

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION  

 SCOTT MORRISON  

 Coalition's plan to increase offshore processing capacity at Nauru 

 Tuesday 30th July 2013 

 The Coalition will enter into a five year plan to permanently increase the capacity for  rigorous offshore processing at Nauru.    

 This is part of the Coalition’s ongoing commitment to stop the record illegal arrivals  to Australia by boat, which has now reached almost 50,000 people since Kevin Rudd  dismantled the Howard Government’s proven border protection policies in 2008.    

 If elected, the Coalition will begin with an immediate, short and medium term,  increase in accommodation facilities. The first step will quickly increase capacity at  Nauru by 2,000 places in tented accommodation.  More steps will follow.    

 The expanded capacity on Nauru is part of our long-standing commitment to genuine  offshore processing and will complement the expansion of processing capacity on  Manus Island to ensure we finally have genuine offshore processing.    

 The five year plan will also see the establishment of a major post-assessment  accommodation village that will be placed on new and existing leased sites.    

 I have also been able to confirm that there is capacity to further significantly increase  accommodation facilities at other identified locations, including the State House site.    

 Illegal arrivals will be provided assistance to pursue resettlement options in countries  other than Australia. 

 

 Together with the rebuild of the destroyed processing centre and the establishment  of the 600 person family centre, this will result in substantial assessment and post  assessment accommodation capacity on Nauru.    

 Increasing capacity will also require increasing our commitments on security, to  rebuild trust and confidence with the Nauruan people on these issues in the wake of  the recent riot.    

 Notwithstanding these events, Nauru remains strongly committed to the continuation  of offshore processing on Nauru.    

 The Coalition has always been committed to offshore processing and Nauru has  always been and remains our first option and will continue to be the mainstay of our  offshore processing arrangements, complemented by the capacity on Manus Island.    

 Unlike Labor, the Coalition remains committed to rigorous offshore processing as  part of our proven policies to stop the boats, which includes temporary protection  visas, a willingness to turn boats around where it is safe to do so and Operation  Sovereign Borders which will bring 15 different agencies together to work in concert  on border protection.    

 The Coalition’s five year plan for Nauru is in stark contrast to Labor’s five week plan  for illegal arrivals which is not about permanently stopping the boats, it’s about  seeing Labor through to the election. 

 

