---
title: "Families to be considered for bridging visas but 'no advantage' principle applies"
date: "2013-05-07"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435753
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2425065%22
---

 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 TUESDAY, 7 MAY 2013   

 Families to be considered for bridging visas but ‘no advantage’ principle applies   

 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Brendan O’Connor today said that bridging visas may  also apply to families who arrive by boat and seek asylum.   

 This approach is consistent with the Government’s commitment to the ‘no advantage’ principle,  Mr O’Connor said.   

 While some families may be released into the community on bridging visas, they will remain  subject to regional processing arrangements.   

 They will be not be processed any faster than had they waited in a refugee camp overseas.   

 “The alternative to putting asylum seekers in the community is to detain people   while their  claims for protection are assessed,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 “This is not only expensive, it takes a toll on people’s mental health and wellbeing.   

 “If they are found to be refugees, they will be granted a visa to remain in Australia.  If they are  not, they will be expected to depart Australia.   

 “People released into the community on bridging visas will receive adequate support, but it will  not be so generous that it encourages people to come to Australia by boat.”   

 Families on bridging visas will not have access to Centrelink support but may receive an  appropriate allowance.   

 The arrangements for undertaking health, security and identity checks will be conducted while  people are in immigration detention facilities.  These checks are mandatory for all people  arriving to Australia by boat and claiming asylum.     

 Where there are children in family groups, these detention centres and their services are  adapted for families and children.  The stay in a detention centre for families will be for the  shortest possible time and only while their mandatory check are undertaken. This will include  Christmas Island, Curtin and Wickham Point.   

 Detention facilities at Curtin will be reconfigured to house families short-term while mandatory  checks are conducted.   

 “We know that there are concerns in the community about people making their way to Australia  in people smuggling vessels, but the Labor Party is the only party truly working to prevent  dangerous journeys to Australia by boat,” Mr O’Connor said.   

 “Tony Abbott prefers to persist with his dangerous and unworkable policies because it is in his  short-term political interest for boats to keep arriving.   

 “Mr Abbott says he will turn back boats to Indonesia. Indonesia says it won’t accept the boats,  our navy says it’s dangerous - so who is Mr Abbott listening to?    

 “While the Opposition continues to cynically exploit community concern and fuel anxiety about  the security of our borders, the Government will continue to implement the recommendations  of the Expert Panel.”   

 Media enquiries:             Maria Hawthorne 0407 015 986  Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604   

