---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 7 January 2012: UN Security Council; Death of Liam Davies after drinking adulterated alcohol; AusAID."
date: "2013-01-07"
creators:
  - "Carr, Bob"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "UN Security Council"
  - "Death of Liam Davies after drinking adulterated alcohol"
  - "AusAID."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211387668
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2153535%22
---

 Minister for Foreign Affairs Senator Bob Carr  

 Press conference  Transcript, E&OE, proof only 

 7 January 2013 

 BOB CARR: Well, I wanted to talk about Australia's role in the Security Council, the fact that 

 we have been asked to take over from Germany in chairing the committees on sanctions 

 against the Taliban and against Iran and Al Qaeda. This is a serious diplomatic job and the  other members of the Security Council are happy to trust Australia with it.  

 It is fairly weighty. The chair of these committees was held by Germany. Germany ceased to 

 be - ended its two year non-permanent term and Australia is being trusted with these  responsibilities. It confirms that we are highly regarded by other members of the Security  Council and that includes the five permanent members of the Security Council. Australia is 

 taken seriously and taken seriously in terms of our counter-terrorism credentials. We see  that as significant.  

 We have one major priority at the UN right at this moment and that is to get an Arms Trade 

 Treaty. The Arms Trade Treaty applies to small arms and light weapons. They're estimated  to be responsible for 2000 deaths a day in the world. A Kalashnikov is the biggest example.  You see them in photographs of boy soldiers in West Africa or East Africa. The world is 

 awash with them.  

 We want to reduce their number, by holding countries that allow their export responsible for  how they get onto world markets. And an Arms Trade Treaty would do that. We want to get 

 all the nations of the world signed up to it - all 193 nations signed up to it. If we fail to do that  we'll be looking at what we can do that's second best. So, that's a big subject on our agenda 

 at the present time.  

 I also wanted to say something about a tragedy and that is the death of 19 year old Liam  Davies after drinking adulterated alcohol while holidaying on Lombok. There had been  reports of other cases, less serious but still requiring hospitalisation in Indonesia. The issue 

 is adulteration of drinks and we are going to make representation to the Indonesian  authorities about whether more careful policing and better regulation - especially of the  lower end of the market - might be a useful thing to do.  

 We're thinking of popular tourist areas like Bali and Lombok to ensure that appropriate safety 

 standards are maintained in the preparation and the mixing of these drinks. We can't enforce  Australian alcohol standards overseas. But we can make representations to see that young 

 travellers are better protected from this danger, while at the same time making warnings to  young Australians that you've got to be on your guard against material being added to the 

 drinks you order at a bar. Now, we've made that warning before.  

 So, we'll find ways of working with our good friends - the Indonesians - to reduce the risk of  adulterated drinks.  

 I might pause there and invite your questions on these and other matters.  

 QUESTION: Would you - the AMA has come out today and said that they'd like a name and 

 shame list. Would you go as far to say that about these places on places like Bali and 

 Lombok that are [indistinct] serving these very highly contaminated drinks? Would you go as  so far to say that there should be a DFAT warning against these [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: I think consumers are entitled to know the reputation of the place that they're 

 spending their money in. Just how you would take responsibility for getting that to visitors I'm  not sure. But if the AMA or others were to nominate a site then I'm sure that would come to  the attention of a lot of Australian travellers.  

 QUESTION: But would you consider DFAT warnings [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: I don't think DFAT can end up being a consumer protection agency in 

 Indonesia. I don't think we can accept that responsibility for ourselves. I think we've got to 

 make serious representations to our Indonesian friends about more effective regulation.  

 QUESTION: [Inaudible question]. 

 BOB CARR: I've asked our Consul-General in Denpasar to see if he could get started on 

 this as soon as possible.  

 QUESTION: Have the Indonesian authorities responded to [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: I don't know. I don't know.  

 QUESTION: Senator Carr, just on our role monitoring or [indistinct] the sanction. Will this 

 [indistinct] any additional staffing or cost to [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: Yes it will. The whole job of working on the Security Council will do that and 

 that's why I've welcomed an increase in the allocation to DFAT to enable us to do these and  other things.  

 QUESTION: But specifically this particular task chairing this particular committee. Will that 

 involve [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: I'd need to talk to the Ambassador to establish that but certainly our role on the 

 Security Council overall requires additional staff in New York.  

 QUESTION: And would you anticipate or expect that the drawdown in Afghanistan might 

 have some [indistinct] on the work of this committee? Could it be, for instance, that a  resurgent Taliban is more active or oppressive in attempting [indistinct]? Is that a possibility? 

 BOB CARR: I don't think so. I think that would be too speculative. I think we need to see 

 more of the regional and ethnic balance that emerges in Afghanistan as the transition is  given effect.  

 QUESTION: How far do you think the international community is prepared to go or could be 

 prepared to go to facilitate this exit from Afghanistan in terms of bringing the Taliban to the  table? 

 BOB CARR: Well, it's all on the public record. I've got nothing new to say about that. That's 

 all there in the position of the US Government and the Australian Government.  

 QUESTION: Staying in that neighbourhood, Bashar al-Assad gave a speech recently, I'd like 

 to get your reaction to that in general terms but also specifically we are seeing reports or 

 [indistinct] - reports, I suppose, that more Australians are travelling to Syria to fight for the  opposition. Are you concerned about that [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: Yeah. Well, it is against the law and we underline that at every opportunity. It's 

 against the law as an Australian to go in to a foreign place and to do battle there. And  certainly if that comes to the attention of the Australian Federal Police or our security 

 agencies, that would be acted on.  

 I just make the point that the Assad speech gave no impetus to the movement towards a  cease-fire or to a negotiated peaceful transition within Syria. They're the tests. We need a 

 cease-fire so that the killing ends and we need the Geneva transition plan to be  implemented.  

 But there's no encouragement in his words that he's prepared to take the first step that will 

 enable that to happen, namely him resigning and removing himself from government.  Because none of the participants in this bloody murderous civil war are prepared to engage  in a dialogue while he remains president.  

 QUESTION: Two questions, Senator Carr. Firstly, our new responsibilities monitoring the 

 sanctions will obviously [indistinct] Australia is placed in the Middle East. How will this affect 

 - will it affect and how will it affect our relationship with Israel? 

 BOB CARR: No. It means we're in charge of advising on sanctions that are already in place 

 as a result of international law - that is decisions of the Security Council. So, there's 

 sanctions in place. The decision to apply them and what they contain is there as a result of  Security Council resolutions. Our job is to see that they're being appropriately enforced.  

 QUESTION: And just on another matter, the visit of the Grand Mufti of Australia to Gaza just 

 after Christmas. Has there been since then any suggestions that any Australian law might  have been breached? 

 BOB CARR: No, I haven't seen such suggestions. We as a government don't have dealings 

 with Hamas and we urge Hamas to begin recognising the reality of Israel and the need to  have a settlement in the Middle East based on recognition of Israel, security for Israel, and a  Palestinian state. That is the language we want to hear emerging from Gaza.  

 That is the Australian position so the visit by the Mufti has nothing to do with the Australian  Government but we would urge him, we would urge his interlocutors in Gaza, to start talking  the language of two-state solution and of Arab recognition of Israel and commitment to the 

 security of Israel that will enable the creation of the Palestinian state via the component parts  of the peace in the Middle East that we all want.  

 QUESTION: A few weeks back you mentioned that there would be funding changes to aid 

 organisations overseas. [Indistinct] didn't, sort of, notify any of those organisations to the  public about which ones wouldn't get their funding delayed. Have those organisations, say  like UNICEF, have they been notified that they're going to be getting their funding delayed? 

 BOB CARR: I'll talk to AusAID about the implementation of our package but I'm pretty 

 confident that we can find the money for asylum seekers, which is a legitimate use of  Australian aid money.  

 Every country in the world allocates money from its aid budget to look after refugees or 

 claimant refugees on its own soil and at the same time meet some of the commitments  we've made in countries that need Australian support to alleviate poverty.  

 QUESTION: And also, you also brought in a - what was called a transparency charter when 

 it came to Australian aid to basically let the public know that they're - where their money was  - their taxpayer money was going overseas. Do you think the fact that you haven't named 

 those organisations that are going to have their funding delayed offends that charter? 

 BOB CARR: No, it doesn't.  

 QUESTION: [Inaudible question]. 

 BOB CARR: Yeah. We need extra people on our staff to do the work associated with being 

 on the Security Council and we're giving implementation to that. We're allocating extra staff 

 to New York.  

 QUESTION: Can you guarantee though that Australia is [indistinct]…? 

 BOB CARR: Oh, absolutely. We're a responsible and active member of the United Nations. 

 We've been prominent in discussion of the anti-terrorism agenda. This is not a new area for  Australia. We give effect to these sanctions, in some cases we've been ahead of the UN  position.  

 Our experience in Afghanistan equips us with a familiarity of the Taliban and its personnel  and its agenda so I think we're well placed to play this role. But the standout fact is that other  members of the Security Council, including the five permanent members, thought that 

 Australia was big enough and good enough to take on a job that had previously been done  by Germany.  

 QUESTION: Also I just want to go back to the funding delays. Is there going to be a time 

 where you will speak to them - the public and say what organisations will be getting their  funding [indistinct]? 

 BOB CARR: Sure, yes. There's publicly available information and when the decisions are 

 made they'll be given effect to. But in the meantime, Australia is in about the middle range  when it comes to what percentage of the aid budget goes to looking after refugees or  claimant refugees on the soil of the country. We're in about the middle range, we're not the 

 one that spends the highest percentage and we're not the lowest.  

 Sweden takes $397 million out of its aid budget to look after refugees who are in Sweden;  Norway - $335 million; the US - $895 million. This is a legitimate use of aid money. You 

 spend money on looking after refugees or claimant refugees who happen to be on Australian 

 soil, it has the same effect as looking after them if they're in a camp in Jordan or Turkey.  

 QUESTION: But you're not just spending it on refugees - that money - you're actually 

 spending it on asylum seekers as well. So, all this money is also being [indistinct]… 

 BOB CARR: I said refugees or claimant refugees.  

 Terrific, thank you.  

 

