---
title: "Three boats in 24 hours as Labor wars with itself, not people smugglers"
date: "2013-03-20"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392254
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2314283%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Three boats in 24 hours as Labor wars with itself, not people smugglers 

 Wednesday 20th March 2013 

 Three illegal boats in 24 hours with a total of almost 200 people on board, including one boat 

 believed to have come from Sri Lanka, shows that a government that is at war with itself cannot fight 

 people smugglers, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow 

 Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “This is a government that is at war with itself rather than being at war with the people smugglers, a 

 government that is focused on protecting itself rather than protecting our borders,” Mr Morrison 

 said.  

 

 “This is a government in a panic room making panicked decisions on a daily basis.  That is no way to 

 run the country and no way to protect our borders. Every single new illegal boat arrival just 

 highlights this fact time and again.  

 

 “The government tries distraction after distraction but that doesn’t stop the boats coming.  Illegal 

 boats and new records for border failure continue to arrive on a daily basis.  

 

 “The latest vessel, which was intercepted in the vicinity of Cocos (Keeling) Island, is likely to have 

 arrived from Sri Lanka and would be the first vessel to have come from that country since 21 

 December last year.  

 

 “This further underscores the need for a consistent and universal policy in relation to Sri Lankan boat 

 arrivals, which is what the Coalition has consistently advocated, including in discussions with the Sri 

 Lankan Government when the Coalition visited the country earlier this year.   

 

 “When Bob Carr visited Sri Lanka he left them with nothing, he gave them nothing and he did 

 nothing.  The Coalition in government would be putting measures in place in Sri Lanka to ensure that 

 vessels did not leave their waters, let alone enter ours,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “The huge influx of boat arrivals continues with 9 boats carrying almost 600 people  having been intercepted in the last week alone.      

 “Border Protection Command continues to struggle with this unprecedented rate of boat arrivals on  the limited resources and staff that Labor have allocated them.       

 “Since coming to office Labor has cut 750 jobs from the Australian Customs and Border Protection  Service - significantly reducing its ability to protect our borders.       

 “With all the time, energy and money they have to allocate to intercepting boat arrivals it is no  wonder that our borders are being left susceptible to penetration by criminal gangs and illegal  fishers,” Mr Keenan said.   

