---
title: "Greens platform relaunch"
date: "2013-07-14"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397095
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2593139%22
---

 

 

 - MEDIA RELEASE -  SENATOR THE HON. ERIC ABETZ  Leader of the Opposition in the Senate   Shadow Minister for Employment & Workplace Relations  

 Liberal Senator for Tasmania  14th July 2013    

 Greens platform relaunch   

 Senate Opposition Leader, Eric Abetz, says the Greens’ platform being re-released  today has no credibility because it doesn’t count the full cost of the Greens’ policies  and because it cloaks the Party’s more extreme policies in generalities.    

 When releasing the Greens’ “updated policy platform” only six months ago, Acting  Leader Adam Bandt said:   

 "The Greens also accept that voters are also entitled to ask of us the same questions  they ask of the other major parties, such as how much our initiatives will cost and  where the money will come from."   

 But you can be sure today’s document will not tell us the multi-billion dollar costs of  the Greens’ ‘open door’ policy on asylum seekers or their demands to extend the  Carbon Tax, to cite just two of their economically irresponsible proposals.   

 Nor will it tell us the cost of Greens’ policies like freezing funding for private schools,  abolishing the private health insurance rebate and raising general income tax which  are airbrushed under cover of general ‘principles’ and ‘aims’.   

 Today Greens leader Christine Milne is simply repackaging her Party’s platform, with  some Parliamentary Budget Office costings of key Greens’ taxes and some specific,  redistributive policies which will form the basis of the Party's election campaign  according to media reports today.   

 “It will not be comprehensive.  It will not be sincere.   It will only have the appearance  of respectability.  As a result it will not be credible.”   

 Senator Abetz said that, under the Labor-Green Alliance, the public had come to see  that the Greens were not a group of benign environmentalists, but a hard left party  intent on Marxist social engineering, promoting Leftist ideological positions, with  adverse consequences for jobs and society.   

 “The public has seen the result of the Greens' Carbon Tax policy which has cost jobs  and driven up electricity prices.”   

 “The public has also seen the disastrous results the Greens 'open door' attitude to  border protection, which has seen Australia lose control of our borders to people  smugglers.”   

 "The attempt by the Greens to hide their policies in general ‘principles’ and ‘aims’,  tempered by a few costed tax and spending measures is deceptive and will fail,"  Senator Abetz said.   

 “While Christine Milne is positioning the Greens as - of all things - middle-of-the-road, the radical left-wing in her Party, like her candidate in Grayndler, Hall  Greenland, talk up the need for death duties and the Boycotts Divestment Sanctions  campaign against Israel.”   

 "The Greens need to actually repudiate their extremist policies before people will  believe they've changed.   Simply airbrushing them from the Greens’ policy platform  will not wash," Senator Abetz said.    

 Media enquiries: David Allender (03) 6224 3707, 0457 590 881  www.abetz.com.au 

 

