---
title: "Liberal-National Party all at sea on UN Refugee Convention"
date: "2013-06-19"
creators:
  - "Oakeshott, Rob"
source: "Office of OAKESHOTT, ROB, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395975
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2531670%22
---

 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 19 June 2013 

 LIBERAL-NATIONAL PARTY ALL AT SEA ON UN REFUGEE CONVENTION 

 INDEPENDENT Lyne MP Rob Oakeshott says he is “thoroughly disgusted” that the Liberal-National Party is today back-peddling on the United Nations Refugee Convention, despite  using this convention 12 months ago to defeat his Bali Bill in the Senate. 

 A year ago, the Liberal-National Party joined with the Greens in the Senate to kill a Private  Member’s Bill on asylum seeker arrivals because one possible off-shore assessment option,  Malaysia, was not a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention. 

 Mr Oakeshott, who introduced the Bali Process Bill, said the Liberal-National Party’s  hypocrisy today on the convention was evidence of politics being played on ‘boat people’. 

  “In light of comments from Scott Morrison and Michael Keenan today, that it might not  adhere to the UN Refugee Convention, I re-circulate letters sent to MP colleagues in 2012  when the Bali Process Bill was put to the House of Representatives and the Senate,” he said. 

 “The LNP voted against the private member’s bill because of its stated conviction to the UN  Refugee Convention. Some LNP MPs, including Mr Keenan, shed tears at the time because  their belief in this position was so strong. 

 “Now, that argument seems to have no policy merit at all. What about the tears? 

 “The LNP position on the UN Refugee Convention exposes the shameless politics of the past  three years of ‘boat people’. 

 “If Mr Morrison and Mr Keenan are today expressing doubts about the UN Refugee  Convention, why did they use it, and vote with the Greens Party, to block a Bill that  supported existing foreign policy - a bilateral agreement between the 50 countries, including  Malaysia and Australia, that are signatories to the bipartisan Bali Process. 

 “This agreement reflects the region’s efforts to slow the movement of people throughout the  Asia-Pacific region. 

 “The politics is clear, the policy is not.  And the politics is very ugly,” Mr Oakeshott said.   

 “The charge today is that Mr Morrison, Mr Keenan and Mr Abbott never believed in the  holiness of the UN Refugee Convention, yet they used it just 12 months ago to defeat a Bill  that would have helped address asylum seeker arrivals. 

 “It is a disgraceful exposure of crass politics.” 

 ENDS       Media contact: Sharon Fuller - 0429 787320 

