---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Sydney: 25 October 2013: Operation Sovereign Borders update"
date: "2013-10-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
  - "Campbell, Angus"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400050
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3098999%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 

 Operation Sovereign Borders update  Friday, 25 October 2013 

 Press Conference, Sydney 

 Joint Press Conference with Scott Morrison - Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection, Lieutenant-General Angus Campbell - Department of  Defence and Assistant Commissioner Steve Lancaster - Australian Federal  Police. 

 Scott Morrison: Welcome to this week's briefing on Operation Sovereign Borders. 

 As usual, I'm joined today by the JATF Commander, Lieutenant-General Campbell,  also joining us today is Assistant Commissioner Lancaster who leads the Operation  Sovereign Borders Disruption and Deterrence Task Group. 

 This morning I've returned from Malaysia where yesterday I met with Dr Zahid, the  Malaysian Minister for Home Affairs, to discuss a range of issues principally on our  cooperation on people smuggling matters. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders is about applying maximum pressure all the way along  the chain, from destination to source, to end criminal people smuggling, and as a  result, stop the boats to Australia. 

 Malaysia is a critical geographic link in the people smugglers' chain to Australia.  Previous estimates suggest that as much as 60 per cent of the traffic to Australia by  boat passes through Malaysia and that entry to Malaysia is either by air, by land  across the Thai-Malay border, or by sea, whether to Langkawi or other islands. 

 While there have been some ventures directly from Malaysia to Australia by sea, the  predominant activity through Malaysia is transit activity to Indonesia, through the  Malacca Strait. 

 For Australia to have strong borders, our region must have strong borders, and that  is where we are investing our effort. 

 Stopping the boats is not just about offshore processing or even our maritime  operations. No one measure, no one initiative, solves this problem. Consistent  application across all measures all the way up the chain is what is required to  achieve the success. 

 Disrupting arrivals at Kuala Lumpur International Airport, or across the Thai-Malay  border, or preventing the passage to Sumatra across the Malacca Strait is as critical 

 and I would suggest, even more critical, than anything we do once that boat leaves  Indonesia. 

 The Coalition has always understood this. That is why I was pleased to reboot our  cooperation with Malaysia where I found nothing other than enthusiastic support  from Minister Zahid to work with Australia and in particular with the new Abbott  Government. 

 The meeting with Dr Zahid, who is a highly influential figure within the Malaysia  Government and was recently re-elected to the position of Vice President to the  ruling party with the highest number of votes, has enabled some key outcomes. 

 Firstly, as the first Cabinet Minister in the new Abbott Government to visit Malaysia, I  was able to reinforce strong messages of friendship, cooperation, and support  conveyed by our Prime Minister during his recent bilateral meeting with Prime  Minister Najib at APEC. 

 We were also able to restart and upgrade two important initiatives that have laid  dormant for the past 12 months. The first was Australia's undertaking to respond to  Malaysia's proposal for a MOU on transnational crime, which I will now take forward  and progress with my colleagues, in particularly the Attorney-General and secondly  to upgrade the joint working group on people smuggling between Australia and  Malaysia that last met in Malaysia in December of 2012 to become a joint working  group on transnational crime to provide a vehicle for the actions, the joint operations,  the capability development and information sharing that addresses not only people  smuggling, which is an early priority both of action under the MOU and the joint  working group, but also on issues of drugs, guns, people trafficking and other cross  border related issues where our border enforcement authorities have a critical role to  play. 

 At the meeting I invited Dr Zahid to Sydney for our next meeting with the intention  that the first meeting of the joint working group would be early next year at the latest. 

 However, actual joint operational activity between Australia and Malaysia on  preventing and disrupting people smuggling will not have to wait until then, that will  commence immediately. 

 There was a strong commitment to move on a series of joint operations agreed  yesterday involving Immigration, Customs and Border Protection and supported by  Australia on air, land and sea borders in the months ahead. 

 Included in this was Dr Zahid's welcome offer for Australian Immigration officials to  work directly with the Ministry of Home Affairs to assist, plan, and prepare these  operations. Now, this is a practical demonstration that real cooperation has already  gone beyond discussion to actual operations. 

 In addition, Dr Zahid undertook to take up our request to extend the constrained visa  arrangements now in place for Iranians coming into Malaysia to Iraqis and Syrians  and we will continue our dialogue on further reforms and exclusion to visa on other  arrival arrangements. 

 There was also strong support to take the biometric data exchange pilot, which is in  an infant stage, to a whole new level, and we look forward to working through that  process in the months ahead leading up to the first meeting of the joint working  group. 

 At the meeting we also had a very positive discussion on Australia's support for the  work of the UNHCR in Malaysia and our commitment to provide ongoing support to  both resettlement of genuine cases out of Malaysia - from existing caseloads I stress  - that would not include secondary movers through the region and to support for the  various humanitarian projects where we are already working with the UNHCR. 

 These outcomes work together to prevent transit through Malaysia. These efforts are  about stopping people getting to Indonesia and hence stopping them getting to  Australia. They are about delivering on our commitment to promote and action  regional deterrents which makes our region's borders stronger which makes  Australia's borders stronger. 

 Next week I will be pleased to report outcomes of these discussions at my meeting  with the Indonesian Coordinating Minister Air Marshal Suyanto in Jakarta next  Wednesday. This meeting will build on the initial Leaders meeting between our  Prime Minister and President Yudhoyono, and the strong work of officials and the  Prime Minister's special envoy General Molan in recent weeks. 

 This meeting is all about establishing and progressing operational understanding that  are needed to support our cooperation, not only at sea but within Indonesia and on  Indonesia's borders as well. This is about creating operational understandings within  a framework of strategic trust. 

 Commander Campbell will brief you on the regular matters that are the subject of  these briefings and we will then have some questions on matters relating to  Operation Sovereign Borders. 

 Before doing that I note that progress is being made on the expansion of our  processing and accommodation capacity on Manus Island as well as on Nauru.  Contrary to some media reports this week, Manus Island is not at capacity, and an  additional more than 400 places will also be available by the end of next week and  there is further expansion happening at the Manus Island processing centre beyond  that expansion that I've just mentioned. 

 Also, the development of the post processing accommodation at East Lorengau is  also under way, contrary to those reports, with site clearing and access roads the  early priority as you can see from the work already under way and those photos  were taken very, very recently. 

 I will now ask Commander Campbell to provide his regular report and introduce  Assistant Commissioner Lancaster on the matters he'll report to you today. 

 Angus Campbell: Thank you Minister. 

 Welcome to the Operation Sovereign Borders weekly briefing for the period 9 o'clock  Friday 18 October until 9 o'clock this morning. For those who have not previously  attended, I will just note that my comments will be confined to activities during the  week, ending 9 o'clock this morning relating to the off-water reception and  processing of illegal maritime arrivals under the control of the Department of  Immigration and Border Protection. I will not discuss current or potential future on-water operations. 

 During the reporting period, people from two suspected illegal entry vessels had  arrived into immigration processing. 

 On Sunday 20 October, 126 people were transferred to Immigration authorities at  Christmas Island. 

 On Monday 21 October, a further 40 people were transferred to Immigration  authorities from a second vessel. In addition, during the reporting period four crew  members were transferred to the control of Immigration authorities. 

 For the reporting period a total of 118 people were transferred to offshore processing  centres, 74 people to Manus, and 44 to Nauru. 

 Since the commencement of Operation Sovereign Borders on 18 September, until 9  o'clock this morning, a total of 573 people have been transferred to offshore  processing centres. That is 386 to Manus and 187 to Nauru. 

 Also, as at 9 o'clock this morning, there were a total of 1101 persons in Manus and  682 in Nauru, with 2272 people in the Christmas Island facilities. I would note, as the  Minister commented, we continue to have sufficient offshore processing capacity to  meet current and anticipated future requirements. 

 On 23 October, the Australian Government returned 28 illegal maritime arrival  detainees to Vietnam on a flight into Ho Chi Minh City. Ten of the detainees decided  not to pursue any claims and chose a voluntary return. The remaining 18 detainees  were found not to be owed protection and were also returned. Their removal from  Australia is consistent with Australia's obligations. 

 Since last week's briefing, Indonesian authorities led by the Indonesian National  Police and working with our Disruption and Deterrence Task Group, have arrested  two crew, two facilitators and one organiser during two disruption operations for  which we are greatly appreciative. Their efforts and those that continue across  source and transit countries are greatly helping to stop the movement or disrupt  illegal maritime arrivals. 

 I've invited, from the Australian Federal Police, Assistant Commissioner Steve  Lancaster, head of the Disruption and Deterrence Task Group, to speak on some  current other operational activities today. 

 Before he speaks, as I would note, as this photograph of a past venture reminds, the  risks of travelling by boat to Australia are very real. As I said last week, people  smugglers do not care about the safety of those people whose money they take. The 

 journey is not worth the risk. No one who arrives by boat without a visa will come to  Australia. 

 Welcome, Steve. 

 Steve Lancaster: Thank you, Commander. Thank you, Minister. 

 I'd like to report on several key outcomes over the last seven days that relate to  Operation Sovereign Borders Disruption and Deterrence Task Group on top of the  data and statistics that were provided by the Commander in relation to our  international operations. Australia-based investigation has realised the resolution of  two investigations that relate to people smuggling with domestic and international  links, Operations Ambassis and Kamala. Those operations resulted in a summons  being served on a 34-year-old female and a 34-year-old male for offences relating to  people smuggling. 

 With respect to Operation Ambassis, on Wednesday the AFP served a summons on  a 34-year-old female former Iranian national who is now currently an Australian  citizen, to face Sydney Court on 26 November 2013 relating to proceeds of crime. 

 The single charge relates to $40 000 seized during a police search warrant on a  residence linked to a convicted people smuggler named Ali Khorram Heydarkhani  who was identified by the Commander last week in last week's briefing as a  significant people smuggling organiser, now serving a lengthy period of time in jail for  people smuggling offences. 

 The woman has been charged with dealing in proceeds of crime contrary to Section  400 of the Commonwealth Criminal Code. The maximum penalty for this charge is  10 years imprisonment and or a $102 000 fine. 

 With respect to the other operation, Operation Kamala, yesterday the AFP arrested a  34-year-old Iranian national from the Villawood Detention Centre who it is alleged  worked as a people smuggler organiser whilst in Indonesia. 

 It will be alleged the man was involved in the planning and facilitation of the  unauthorised arrival of asylum seekers on a single vessel that arrived in Australia in  August 2012. The man himself arrived as an illegal maritime arrival shortly after in  September 2012. The man is due to appear in Central Local Court today charged  with the offence of one count of people smuggling contrary to section 233(A) of the  Migration Act. The maximum penalty for this charge is 10 years imprisonment and/or  $170 000 fine. 

 The arrest brings the total number of alleged people smuggling organisers in  Australia since 1 January this year to six, with 16 matters currently before the court.  These charges are further evidence of the Operation Sovereign Borders commitment  to disrupt and detect those who seek to organise and facilitate ventures in Australia  and offshore. 

 Those people involved or who were involved in people smuggling criminal activity  outside or inside Australia can expect to be investigated and prosecuted. You can 

 also expect a knock on the door by police, as experienced by two people this week.  We urge any members of the community who may have information about people  smuggling syndicates operating in Australia to report this to Crime Stoppers on 1800  333 000 or online on Crimestoppers.com.au. 

 The AFP has over 25 people smuggling investigations of Australian-based targets  that we are aggressively pursuing and I will guarantee you there will again be more  police action to come. Thank you. 

 Scott Morrison: Thank you Steve. 

 Journalist: What assurances have you got from Malaysia that they are going to be  able to stop or increase the rate of people transiting through their country and are we  going to provide more resources from Australia, AFP or Immigration officials to  Malaysia? 

 Scott Morrison: One of the very helpful things that Malaysia do in this area is they  are quite well resourced currently in terms of the assets. I visited the Maritime  Enforcement Agency the day before last and inspected some of their vessels that  are used to patrol the Malacca Strait as well as I had the opportunity to view one of  their operations rooms where their radar surveillance information is coming in and is  being reviewed on a constant basis. These assets and this equipment puts them in a  place where they can move on things. 

 Where we're able to help is with further intelligence to support their operations,  further assistance with planning and deployment and, whether it's our Customs and  Border Protection officers that are there and to the extent that that needs to be  bolstered, then that will be done. 

 But at this phase we're in the planning stages of these operations we're seeking to  do in the weeks and months ahead. Also what we're talking about are operations at  Kuala Lumpur International Airport as well and that involves stronger screening of  those who are coming in from various aircraft and things of that nature. 

 The Malaysian Government has a very strong track record and a strong workforce  that operates in these areas, so our support here is more of the planning and  resource nature, as it's required. The Malaysians lead these initiatives and their  officers conduct these arrangements. Where support is in the planning and  resourcing. 

 Journalist: Is Malaysia going to take any asylum seekers themselves? 

 Scott Morrison: Malaysia has around 110 000 people registered as refugees within  Malaysia and we had some very constructive discussions with UNHCR over the last  48 hours. I visited one of the mobile processing registration centres that the  Australian Government is supporting. This is in the process of simply being able to  register and give better identification for refugees living in Malaysia or asylum  seekers living in Malaysia. I found Dr Zahid's interest in our work there to be very  encouraging and I think there is a good opportunity to further improve the  circumstances for people who find themselves, particularly those coming from 

 Myanmar because there is quite a large resident population in Kuala Lumpur in  particular but in Malaysia more broadly that has come from Myanmar and they've  been there for many, many years. 

 And so whether it's the work the UNHCR does with schools or clinics, or things of  that nature, there's opportunities to further support that work but our commitment to  continue to take people out of Malaysia, as I stress not secondary movers coming  from the Middle East, those who have come to Malaysia as their first country of  asylum, which is largely what you're talking about with people from Myanmar, that is  where we're primarily drawing our intake into our programme. 

 Journalist: The Guardian Australia reported today that there have been dozens of  allegations of sexual assaults involving staff, detainees and children in detention  centres over the past three years. The previous Minister commissioned an  independent review of specific claims relating to Manus Island. Will you commission  similar reviews relating to the allegations on mainland facilities? 

 Scott Morrison: If people have evidence or allegations, then they should bring them  forward and they'll be referred to the police as appropriate. A few weeks ago, I sat  down with the Police Commissioners from all states and territories, and what we  discussed there was giving police full access to be able to investigate crimes. If there  are allegations of crimes, whether it's in detention centres or in the community, it is  the job to have police go and investigate those crimes. If people are going to make  allegations, they can do that. They should do that through the appropriate authorities  and if they're presenting those allegations to any agencies under my authority then I  would expect those to be appropriately referred to the police. 

 Journalist: Minister, does the department provide its incident logs directly to the  relevant police authorities? 

 Scott Morrison: Any of my agencies would cooperate with any police inquiry. 

 Journalist: Minister, is the enhanced screening process now [inaudible] for all  asylum seekers, regardless of nationality and mode of arrival? 

 Scott Morrison: It principally applies to those where we have arrangements where  people can be involuntarily returned if that's what is required. Voluntary returns are at  a different stage of the process but the practice has predominantly applied to those  where there is the opportunity for people to voluntarily return. 

 Journalist: Compared to arrivals under Labor, it does appear as though the boats  are slowing. Is that a result of the Coalition's [inaudible]? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, as I said last week and the Prime Minister has affirmed in the  past week, yes there has been a reduction and in particular over the first month we  saw a reduction of 70 per cent in arrivals but the government is making no claim  about that. It's for others to make commentary on those matters. What we're  resolved to do is to continue to deploy the full suite of measures that we have  available to us from destination to source to end criminal people smuggling to  Australia. Now, each week we will come and tell you how many people arrived and 

 you can draw your own conclusions from that. We aren't drawing any conclusions  from that, we're just getting on with the job. 

 Journalist: Minister, in relation to the Manus Island sexual assault claims, the  Cornall Report is supposed to be completed at the end of September. Have you  received or reviewed that report? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, any report or advice I may or may not have received is  something I would report on at an appropriate time but as I said, any of the matters  that require criminal investigation, we would never hesitate to refer those matters to  police because they're the appropriate agency to deal with criminal matters and we  take a very strong view about crimes being potentially committed in detention  centres. And people who are found to commit crimes in detention centres, if  convicted, face having their visas or their applications for visas denied. 

 Journalist: Will you release the Cornall review publicly? 

 Scott Morrison: I said I would make a decision on any report I may or may not  receive or any advice at the time. 

 Journalist: Do you fear there will be riots on Christmas Island after it was revealed  that Immigration officials are telling asylum seekers on there that they have the  choice to either go home or face indefinite detention? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, the choice they have is to go home or await their transfer to  Nauru and Manus Island where, under the Nauru and the Papua New Guinean  Government, their claims would be assessed in accordance with offshore  processing. The policy is anyone who turned up after 19 July, they don't come to  Australia. There's where they go and we are addressing the transfers for arrivals that  have occurred particularly since Operation Sovereign Borders began with our 48  hour transfer process. We want to know particularly those who may be thinking  about getting on a boat at the moment that they shouldn't expect to get to Australia  because they won't. They'll be on Nauru and Manus Island in very short order. Now,  Labor left behind quite a backlog of people that it didn't transfer to Nauru and Manus  Island. We aren't going to make that mistake in terms of those who now seek to turn  up in Australia, but that requires that those who turned up before the election in  particular that they'll remain on Christmas Island until we're able to transfer. That's  the policy. 

 Journalist: We've seen riots on Christmas Island over less harsh messages. Are  you doing any contingency planning or beefing up AFP presence? 

 Scott Morrison: Your own paper has reported on some of that activity and the  precautions that have been necessarily taken. And I should stress in the years  ahead the detention network where detainees are held isn't the environment that  previously presented under the previous government. Ultimately, people who will be  in our onshore detention network will be people who would receive negatives. 

 Journalist: The ABC has spoken to asylum seekers in Darwin who are facing the  prospect of returning home or staying in detention indefinitely. They've told the ABC  they'd much rather stay in detention indefinitely. What do you think? 

 Scott Morrison: That's their choice but they won't be settled in Australia. They won't  be coming to Australia, their next stop is Nauru and Manus Island. 

 Journalist: So how long will you keep them there? 

 Scott Morrison: Until they're transferred. We've been very clear about that. 

 Journalist: How many people have you brought from Nauru to the mainland in the  last couple of weeks? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, before I ask Commander Campbell to give you the specifics,  as I said, the policy for offshore processing at Nauru and Manus is for people who  arrived after 19 July. That's who will be there. Anyone who arrived before that time is  subject to the legacy arrangements, the 32 000 legacy arrangements that I've  referred to which is a separate action and process that the government is pursuing. 

 Angus Campbell: 120. 

 Journalist: How many pregnant women are in onshore and offshore facilities? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I don't go into those sorts of details at these briefings. All I say  is that there are no exceptions. There are no exceptions. If people are onshore, then  it is always been the practice, and was the practice under the Howard Government,  that people who were vulnerable are held in community detention rather than held  detention. And that policy is continued by this government. And in terms of offshore  processing, there are no exceptions. The most dangerous place for a pregnant  woman to put herself is on a boat coming to Australia. That is a very dangerous  place for a pregnant woman to be and that's why we want to stop pregnant women  getting on boats. 

 Journalist: Are any of the pregnant women separated from their families? 

 Scott Morrison: On occasions where women may have to have particular treatment  at particular places, then that can occur. But what is done is what's in the best  interests of the person's medical treatment. That's the prevailing requirement and the  family would be brought back together as soon as possible. 

 Journalist: What's the status of any babies born in detention? 

 Scott Morrison: Well what do you mean? 

 Journalist: Is there any chance that they'd be given Australian citizenship or they're  stateless? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, as I said, people are being transferred to Nauru and Manus  Island and for those who are already in Australia; there'll be various legal issues  around that. But the situation of any parents will be crystal clear. 

 Journalist: Could you tell me if there's been any loss of life incidents since the boat  went down off West Java last month? 

 Scott Morrison: You could reasonably assume that if there were we would have  reported them as we have previously. 

 Journalist: So you're saying no? 

 Scott Morrison: We don't comment on on-water operations as you know. But, it is  the government's practice when there are serious incidents that we would have  conducted such a briefing. 

 Journalist: So, the answer is that is no? No loss of life since then? 

 Scott Morrison: Well you've got my answer. It's fairly self-evident. 

 Journalist: A question for Commissioner Lancaster, you say you have encouraged  people to come forward with information about people smugglers, what was done  with the information that was given to the AFP Community Liaison Officers about the  Lebanese venture? 

 Steve Lancaster: We don't provide a running commentary on the information  received from sources or informants. 

 Journalist: Are you investigating? [Indistinct]? 

 Steve Lancaster: We don't confirm or deny any operations that we're conducting at  the moment. And in relation to the questions answered last week with respect to did  we have knowledge of that particular venture, the answer is no. 

 Journalist: I have subsequent information, and I gave that to the AFP, about the  meeting when, where and the names of the AFP community liaison officers. Are you  denying that meeting took place? 

 Steve Lancaster: No, but I won't disclose who it is we do or do not speak to. 

 Journalist: Do you have contact with the PNG Government since the military and  police incident there, and have you asked for any investigation? 

 Scott Morrison: My agencies have been there since that incident, the Secretary of  my Department was there earlier this week. 

 Journalist: When you met with Dr Zahid, was there an expression from him that the  relationship with Australia was severely damaged by Labor's management of the  asylum seeker issue? 

 Scott Morrison: That Labor's relationship? 

 Journalist: That Australia's relationship with Malaysia was damaged as a result of  Labor's handling of the asylum seeker issue. 

 Scott Morrison: Our relationship with Malaysia is in tip top shape. It's in tip top  shape. And the agreements and understandings that were built with Dr Zahid  yesterday, I think, take us to a new level of cooperation. 

 But that cooperation is focused very much on operations. It's about doing things. It's  about disrupting. It's about disrupting the transiting of people through Malaysia. And  that is incredibly important, because if you can stop the person getting into Malaysia  and prevent them from getting across the Malacca Straits to Sumatra and then to  Indonesia, then the further you deal with this issue up the chain, the less you have to  rely on the more difficult and frankly more costly measures and more risky measures  that occur closer to our own shores. 

 Journalist: The Vietnamese nationals that were sent back, did they go through an  enhanced screening process and will you be looking at broadening that process? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I've already answered that question in terms of the screening  processes. They were found not to be owed obligations, protection obligations by  Australia. 

 Journalist: So will you broadening that program then? 

 Scott Morrison: It stands as an operational procedure where it can be applied and  where actions can be taken after the procedure is applied. 

 Journalist: Minister, will the government be providing new funding for antenatal,  pre-natal care in Nauru? 

 Scott Morrison: We will be ensuring that the care that needs to be provided for  people on Nauru is in place. Now, last week, I think it was, might've been the week  before, I reported when I visited the hospital in Nauru during my recent visit there. 

 Now, the maternal unit within that hospital was unaffected by the fire. Unaffected. So  the pre-existing arrangements that are there are maintained and as I said at that  briefing, around 360 babies are born in Nauru every year. 

 Journalist: Can you tell us what the capacity is for Nauru, Manus and Christmas  Island? 

 Scott Morrison: We don't report on what the capacity is at both of those places, only  to say that there is sufficient capacity and we're expanding that capacity. By the end  of next week we should have, in addition to what we currently have on Manus Island,  an additional 400 places, and we are rapidly expanding capacity on Nauru. So, as  the Commander said, we have sufficient capacity to deal with the anticipated and  actual arrivals. 

 Journalist: Must be getting pretty full if you're bringing people from Nauru to the  mainland? 

 Scott Morrison: That's simply a matter of enforcing the policy of pre and post July  19 arrivals. 

 Journalist: What are they being told, the people that are being brought from Nauru? 

 Scott Morrison: They will be subject to the RSD processes that exist for the legacy  caseload. They are part of the legacy caseload which I remind you is of 32 000  people that were substantively unprocessed by the previous government. 

 A massive backlog left to the new government to deal with. We have a significant  challenge on our borders, but parallel to Operation Sovereign Borders we have a  significant challenge in working through the backlog of 32 000 people which were  part of the 50 000 people who illegally entered Australia under the previous  government and cost taxpayers blowouts of more than $11 billion. And of course we  know about the tragedies at sea. 

 Journalist: Minister, with that incident on Manus between the military and police,  have you identified any failure on the part of G4S? 

 Scott Morrison: Look, I wouldn't be going into any of those sorts of specifics.  Equally some months ago there was a very significant incident at Nauru as well,  where property was burnt to the ground that taxpayers had put in place. 

 All of these matters have been reviewed. That other incident was only a week ago.  I'm not going to go into this briefing, or in others, on matters - that information hasn't  been fully relayed to me as yet, then I'm not going to get in the habit of speculating or  anything there. 

 I mentioned on a previous occasion that the Commander had put in place a force  protection review on both Manus and Nauru and that process is working through. So,  we will be taking every step we think is necessary to ensure the security of those  facilities and they're ongoing operations. 

 Journalist: Was it true that the detainees were left without anybody to protect them? 

 Scott Morrison: That is not my report, no. 

 Journalist: That was the report, that they were left behind. 

 Scott Morrison: No-one was left behind. 

 Journalist: The detainees said that they were locked in the compound and  everybody else left. Is that true, or not true? 

 Scott Morrison: That is not my report. That has also been clarified in the statement  that I issued after last Friday's press conference. When I received further information  that was included in my statement on the Sunday. When I received that- 

 Journalist: G4S didn't leave? 

 Scott Morrison: G4S did not leave and G4S have similarly made that statement. So  again, all sorts of wild claims are made. But they are rarely substantiated, and if  substantiated, we will address them very seriously. 

 Journalist: You're saying you don't know? 

 Scott Morrison: No, I'm not saying that at all, that's what you're saying. 

 Journalist: You're saying you're waiting for your brief, and you're not being told  everything from the incidents… 

 Scott Morrison: I'm not saying that Natalie. What I'm saying is, that is not our report.  So that claim is without substantiation. 

 Journalist: The ABC has been reporting about overcrowding on Christmas Island.  It's got to the point that there are two toilets for every 500 people, and people  queuing hours for meals? 

 Scott Morrison: Again, I have seen those reports. And, again, they're not  substantiated. 

 Journalist: On the G4S, under that contract you've got a joint Australian and PNG  government management committee. 

 Scott Morrison: Correct. 

 Journalist: When did they last meet, can you tell me? 

 Scott Morrison: I'd have to come back to you on that. 

 Journalist: They've never met, have they? 

 Scott Morrison: I just said I'd come back to you on it. So, when I come back to you  on it then you will have your answer. 

 Journalist: I'm just drawing from documents that the Department supplied to me  under freedom of information laws, where they've come back and said that the joint  committee to oversee- 

 Scott Morrison: -I raised the issue of the joint management committee at my recent  meeting with the Attorney-General Kua and the composition of that group and the  management of the centre I think is progressing well. 

 Journalist: So if you've discussed them, have they met? Or when will they first  meet? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I said to you that I will come back to you on that when I'm in a  position to do so, and that's what I'll do. 

 Journalist: When you were in Malaysia, did you discuss other things like the  detention of Nick Xenophon last year? 

 Scott Morrison: No. 

 Journalist: Is there a reason for that? 

 Scott Morrison: Didn't come up. 

 Journalist: You didn't bring it up? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I was there to discuss people smuggling issues and  transnational crime. I'm not aware Senator Xenophon was accused of either of those  things. 

 Journalist: He was accused of something, obviously. 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I'll leave that to Senator Xenophon and I'll leave that to the  Foreign Minister and others. They're matters probably addressed in that domain. 

 I should stress though that I found the organisational arrangements and the  professionalism of our High Commission in Malaysia to be absolutely outstanding.  And the management of that relationship, particularly under High Commissioner  Miles Kupa, has been just extraordinary and he's done a great job. 

 Journalist: Some asylum seekers have been to the Department asking for the  opportunity to elaborate on answers they've given in the enhanced screening  process. How is the Department dealing with those requests? 

 Scott Morrison: All of those matters were addressed in the process at the time.  Australia is able to determine fairly quickly whether there is a genuine protection  obligation that might be present. And the matter is finalised and the action is taken  and then people were removed as appropriate and that's how it works. 

 People should understand if you come to Australia on a boat, particularly if you come  from someplace like Sri Lanka, then you will face that. And as you know, 79 out of 79  were found not to be owed protection obligations by this government when they last  tried. 

 So my suggestion is they shouldn't try and neither should anyone else try to get to  Australia by boat because you will not get what you paid for. It just won't happen. 

 Thank you. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm209107.htm   Last update: Monday, 28 October 2013 at 09:26 AEST 

