---
title: "Gillard should take Obama's advice on illegal arrivals as another boat arrives"
date: "2013-02-14"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390586
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2231028%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Gillard should take Obama's advice on illegal arrivals as another boat  arrives 

 Thursday 14th February 2013 

 The latest illegal boat arrival, with 37 people on board, came at the same time Barack Obama highlighted 

 reforms needed to deal with illegal arrivals, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott 

 Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Micahel Keenan said today.  

 

 “In his State Of The Union address this week Barack Obama said: 'real [immigration] reform means strong 

 border security' and 'people going to the back of the line behind the folks trying to come here legally'.  

 

 “Julia Gillard is always keen to quote Barack Obama when it suits her but on this occasion she should be 

 taking his advice.  

 

 “Julia Gillard's refusal to restore temporary protection visas and continue to hand out permanent visas to 

 illegal boat arrivals shows her continued defiance to putting in place the policies needed for real border 

 security.  

 

 “Only this week the government confirmed more people arrived by boat in the first half of this financial year 

 than they budgeted to turn up over the full 12 month period.  

 

 “This latest boat will therefore go straight to the bottom line, imposing additional cost on the Australian 

 taxpayer in a year where the bill already exceeds $2.2 billion.  

 

 "Under Labor the average number of people turning up illegally every month has gone from two to more 

 than 2,000,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “This latest boat arrives amid a week of Labor’s smoke and mirrors tricks to detract from 

 the litany of failures unveiled in Senate Estimates.  

 

 “This latest vessel was intercepted on Tuesday night yet the Government has waited until Parliament has 

 risen to release the details so as to once again try and avoid scrutiny of its border protection failures.  

 

 “Earlier this week it was also revealed that for the first time in over a decade the Southern Ocean has been 

 left unpatrolled for 12 months as all Customs patrol vessels have been sent to deal with Labor’s border 

 protection failure.  

 

 “Customs does not have the resources or the personnel to cope with the unprecedented rate of boat 

 arrivals let alone protect Australia’s interest in the Southern Ocean, because of the huge cuts that Labor 

 have made to Customs budget.  

 

 “This Government refuses to take responsibility for the chaos they have created at our borders but come 

 September 14th the Australian people will be able to hold this Government accountable,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

