---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Jakarta, Indonesia: 20 August 2013: special conference on the irregular movement of people in Jakarta; asylum seeker vessel rescue"
date: "2013-08-20"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "special conference on the irregular movement of people in Jakarta"
  - "asylum seeker vessel rescue"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399204
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2676172%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER TONY BURKE   PRESS CONFERENCE   AFTER THE SPECIAL CONFERENCE   ON THE IRREGULAR MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE 

  JAKARTA, INDONESIA   20 AUGUST 2013 

 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Special conference on the irregular movement of people in Jakarta;  asylum seeker vessel rescue.  _____________________________________________________________  

 

 TONY BURKE: I want to, on behalf of Australia, thank President Yudhoyono for the  initiative today and the chairing by Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa was expert  and brought together some outcomes that build momentum in a way that the Bali  Process to date had not yet been able to build.   

 There are three particular areas of momentum that have been built out of today that  are important and worthy of note.  The first is the reference to laws being changed in  individual. Now you already have a down-payment on that here in Indonesia with the  decision on visa on arrival with respect to people who are coming from Iran.    

 The second issue is with respect to returns.  Often the language at international  meetings has referred purely to voluntary returns.  What we have in the language  today is a preference obviously for voluntary returns but with an acknowledgement  that there are occasions where people simply have to be returned to their country of  origin where they do not have a valid claim.  That being in the language of the  declaration today I believe is significant.    

 The third thing which is significant which was drawn out in the discussions around  the table particularly from the representative of Sri Lanka, is the need for whatever  the policies are of the different countries for them to be communicated.  It is not  enough for each country to simply in their own nation be communicating their  policies.  It is also important that up and down the pipeline of people smuggling  operations for the policies of different nations to be communicated and be  communicated loudly.   

 The Foreign Minister Pato from PNG took the opportunity today to re-affirm very  strongly the position of PNG with respect to the regional resettlement arrangement 

 that they have with Australia which is that people who are transferred from Australia  to PNG will not be returned to Australia, they will either be resettled in PNG, returned  to their own country if they don’t have a valid claim, or, settled in another  participating nation.  These three issues - the communication, the fact of the need to  change laws when they are being abused and, the point with respect to the capacity  to make returns, actually give us the structure of a framework that is required to deal  with what is a regional problem.    

 The language on the first page, the covering note of the declaration you will see  reference to it being very much a shared problem - a shared challenge, and it is  shared throughout our region.  If anybody wanted to doubt that people smuggling  was a regional problem - they could not doubt it any longer once they heard the  voices around that table today.    

 We have challenges of criminal networks throughout our region looking to flout the  immigration laws of country after country.  It is a bad outcome for the individuals  concerned if they have a convention claim and they are not able to have it heard.  It  is equally a bad outcome for the individuals concerned if they end up being exploited  by people smugglers.    

 We have in the Indian Ocean as I speak, and it was referred to in a question earlier,  a significant number of people on a vessel which has capsized.  This story is sadly  not an unusual one.  The information that I have, and this information does change  because it talks about reports on the high seas - the information that I have received  was that more than one hundred people were on board, not many more than a  hundred but more than a hundred, and the latest I had heard was that some ninety  had been rescued so far.  What that means in term of loss of life at sea, we will wait  for more reports to come in.   

 I think the great horror of what we have all seen in the distance between the shores  of Indonesia and the shores of Australia is people are sometimes asked the question  how many people have drowned? The truth is; nobody knows the answer to that  question. Nobody knows exactly how many people have lost their life at sea.  It was important that around the table today that you had the International  Organisation for Migration - you had the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees represented. While the nations around the table need to be firm in their  resolve in implementing their polices, nobody should doubt the compassion of these  policies.  We are making sure the criminal networks cannot self-select who will be  eligible or not eligible for humanitarian programs and we are making sure there are  pipelines so when people do have a settlement option they arrive there safely.   

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) doesn’t that indicate that the PNG solution and deal  which has been communicated to many of the communities is not working? And also  one of the things that came out of the declaration was increasing legal modes of  resettlement or travel, Australia takes just 600 a year out of the 10,695 asylum  seekers here - many of them say, please speed up the process for the proper  channel.  What is Australia doing about giving people more legal options and safe  options?   

 TONY BURKE: Ok I will take the issues in reverse if I may. In terms of our offshore  humanitarian program, we have taken our humanitarian from 13,750 places to  20,000 places - now a number of those places are being taken up by an onshore  component at the moment. We stand ready to consider a proposal that would take  us all the way to 27,000 places if the policies we have in front of us now have the  impact that we hope.  

 

 The issue in terms of making sure people go through the correct processes it would  be wrong to presume that as a result of that the one correct place to go to was the  UNHCR offices in Indonesia. Because effectively then you would have Indonesia  operating as a magnet for people around the world and you would solve a problem in  Australia and potentially create a different one in Indonesia.  So it is important that  when we are working through our humanitarian program and working out how many  places should come from different countries that we do it in a consultative ways with  the transit countries where the UNHCR offices are.  But there is a similar problem for  example in the camps based on the Thai/Myanmar border there is a similar problem  faced in many UNHCR camps throughout Africa a similar problem working with  some of the challengers in Malaysia so we need to do it constructively with each  country but it needs to be done in the exact frame where you put the question which  is it needs to be framed in a way that it is about people can go through a safe,  appropriate means rather than a smuggler without actually creating a perverse new  problem.   

 JOURNALIST: Maybe Indonesia wants to increase the intake for the year, and my  point was the drivers for boats is that the process could take 17 years, so what is  Australia considering increasing to?   

 TONY BURKE: In terms of the premise of the question, can I just say that we have  an entirely cooperative way of dealing with the number of people who would come  from Indonesia - entirely cooperative with the Indonesian Government. Now I don’t  want to ignore the first part of your question because it is important and the first part  of your question dealt with what impact is this having? I made clear when I stood  beside Prime Minister Rudd and Prime Minister O’Neil that the people smugglers  would test our resolve on the regional resettlement arrangement.   

 We always knew they would test our resolve, and the fact that they are still able to  find some boats and fill them with significant numbers of people does not change the  fact that there have been reports I have received in terms of the information you get  from Government and that many of you have publicised as well of large numbers of  people either deciding to go home or register with the UNHCR because they have  realised that people smugglers no longer have a product to sell.   

 There will be some people who say “well I am going to give it a go”, there will be  some people who get on board a vessel and take the risk and there will be some  people who drown in doing so. But for everybody who makes it across to Australia  they will find out that we were exactly serious about the implementation of our  policy.  People will get their settlement claim heard. They will get, if they have a valid  refugee claim, a durable outcome.  That outcome though won’t be in Australia. It will  at the moment be in either PNG or in Nauru.  What we are taking from people  smugglers is the concept that they can determine what the country of settlement will 

 be.  That is the product they sell.  That’s what’s causing people to take risks on the  high seas.  Yes, people will test our resolve, and every person will find that they are  deported.   

 JOURNALIST: In regards to Muslim Rohingyas, I was told by someone high in the  UNHCR that Muslim Rohingyas who apply for legal application for asylum to  Australia have a very small chance in having their claims approved and this is also  what is happening in all 21 resettlement countries. Is that statement correct and why  is it so? This person told me it is because of their lack of education.   

 TONY BURKE: Certainly I have heard some similar concerns from the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to what you just articulated.  Can I assure  you from Australia’s perspective that the tests that we use are that of the Convention  and only the Convention.  People who are poor are certainly not at a disadvantage, if  they were we would not take very significant numbers from camps within Africa that  we take.    

 I was in my own electorate in Sydney and I was with a number of Muslim Rohingyas  and an Eid function on Sunday night in a suburb called Lakemba that suburb next  door to where I live but there are different challenges in different parts of the world  but the specific issues I would really have to refer them back to the UNHCR the test  that we apply we apply strictly according to law and strictly according to the  convention. We do choose our Humanitarian Program in consultation with the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and at different points in time they will  prioritise different caseloads.  Certainly the rationale you offered on it being about  education or poverty - absolutely not, I can refute that part of it.   

 JOURNALIST: Was there any discussion of the Tony Abbott ‘Turn back the boats to  Indonesia Policy’? And if so, what tenor did it take?   

 TONY BURKE: It is an easy answer - no. There was none. I have spoken about  Tony Abbot’s policy about as much as Tony Abbott has spoken to the Indonesian  Government about them when he’s been here.   

 JOURNALIST: On Tony Abbott, he has complained that perhaps you shouldn’t be  signing up to an agreement, I know it’s not an agreement, but what is your response  to that? And why wasn’t the opposition invited considering we are about to face an  election?   

 TONY BURKE: I have been to a number of international conferences, sometimes  you get a letter from the opposition for an international meeting saying they wanted  to come along - I didn’t get one on this occasion - I don’t know if Bob got one?   

 BOB CARR: No.   

 TONY BURKE: So, normally if you want as a member of the Opposition to come  along to a meeting - you ask.   

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)   

 TONY BURKE: Oh I leave it to them if they want to ask - I am not desperately  running around saying “please please will you hang out with me”? So, but, all the  caretaker conventions have been completely observed. The opposition were fully  briefed on this, you look at the wording on the declaration, they will be a stretch to 

 find any opposition to what is contained in the meeting today, but all of the caretaker  conventions have been observed.   

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)   

 TONY BURKE: Oh I expect the Opposition will find a way to oppose.  That’s been  the pattern thus far.  Their argument on this one will have to be pretty creative but I  wouldn’t put it past them.   

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) and also, do you have any idea on why Iran wasn’t here?  Does it have anything to do with them - they being the introduction for the non-visas  on arrival in Indonesia?   

 TONY BURKE: I can’t add anything further to what Minister Natalegawa said earlier.  As the organiser of it, Indonesia put out the invitation and I really can’t add anything  to what the Minister put earlier.   

 JOURNALIST: So the absence of a big source country like Iran (inaudible)   

 TONY BURKE: I just said I can’t really add anything to what he said, I am agreeing  with what Minister Natelagawa said. I am not sure how I can add to my answer when  I said I am not adding to his. 

 

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned involuntarily versus voluntary returns, is it the case  that Iran does not take involuntary returns, and is that something that needs to be  addressed?   

 TONY BURKE: Yes that’s right, and I don’t think anyone could pretend if they were  here today that they would have done an automatic about-face from what has been a  long standing policy of theirs. That has been a long standing policy and involuntary  returns are a difficult issue for many countries but if you are going to have a situation  where the convention actually works then you need a situation if someone has a  claim that is not valid that they can be returned and that is why I thought it was very  significant that we had that in the declaration today.   

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) How many people were actually on board the vessel this  morning, and how many have been removed as of now - and can you tell us more  about the search and rescue operation?   

 TONY BURKE: The latest information that I have is that just over 100 people were  on board and some 90 people had been rescued - on exact numbers, that was a  little while ago, hopefully more have been rescued now, but when operations happen  on the high seas, the first cut of information can frequently change.    

 ENDS   

