---
title: "Address to CEDA - State of the Nation conference, Canberra"
date: "2013-06-24"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Liberal Nationals Coalition policy"
  - "Economic management (Party policies)"
  - "Election, Federal, 2013"
  - "Economic conditions"
  - "Government performance"
  - "Conferences"
  - "Committee for the Economic Development of Australia"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396211
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2546057%22
---

 

 

 1 

 

 

 HON JOE HOCKEY MP 

 SHADOW TREASURER 

 

 ADDRESS TO CEDA - STATE OF THE NATION CONFERENCE 

 GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE 

 MONDAY, 24 JUNE 2013 

 

 **CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY** 

 In the lead up to the election we have had significant and important debates about Australia’s  fiscal position and what the Coalition will do about it. 

 There can be no doubt in anyone’s mind that the Budget is in a mess. 

 After promising surpluses the Government is now promising deficits.  

 The difficulty is that we don’t know the real state of affairs and probably won’t until after the  election. 

 In  my  recent speech  to  the  National  Press  Club  I  identified  three  headline  areas  where  the   Budget numbers are quite unbelievable and since then, I have been proven correct. 

 Firstly the carbon tax revenue assumptions continue to look ridiculously optimistic. 

 Similarly the mining tax revenue also looks ridiculously high. 

 Finally the expenditure associated with illegal boat arrivals looks ridiculously low given that  the boats are arriving at double the rate forecast in the Budget. 

 Repairing  the  Budget will be  a  prolonged  process because unlike  previous  repair  jobs, this  time we don’t have the luxury of a long list of valuable assets to sell.   

 The NBN is no Telstra and it has no real commercial value. And, self-evidently, Medibank  Private is, in scale, no Commonwealth Bank. 

 So there is no easy path to convert assets into cash to pay down debt. 

 The only way we can sustainably undertake fiscal repair is to deliver consistent surpluses. 

 The Coalition is well practised in cleaning up Labor’s mess. And we are ready to  do it again  by putting the Budget back on a sustainable footing through cutting waste and unnecessary  programs and reducing the size of government. 

 

 

 

 

 

 2 

 

 The Legacy 

 Without  in  any  way  diminishing  our  commitment  to  that task  I  do  want  to  broaden  the   national discussion to address some of the economic challenges that lie ahead. 

 Our economy  is  now entering  a  significant transition  period much  quicker  than  many   expected.   

 The  mining  investment  boom  is peaking  and  the  stimulus  from  high  commodity  prices  is   waning. 

 We need the non-mining sectors to grow more quickly than anticipated and take up the slack. 

 The challenge now is that, under this Government, the great structural reforms put in place by  successive Governments of both political colours over the last thirty years have stalled and in  some cases been wound back.    

 Since 1983 there had been a continuous and often bipartisan approach to the deregulation of  the Australian economy. It’s one of the key factors which has contributed to the resilience of  the Australian economy and underpinned our ability to respond to adverse external shocks  

 But that’s changed in the last five years. 

 Under the  Rudd/Gillard  Government the  economy  has  gone  backwards  in  key  areas,  with   more taxes, a much heavier regulatory burden on business, less flexible labour markets and  less competition in key sectors such as banking. 

 My fear now is that under Labor the non-mining sectors of the economy have become more  brittle and inflexible. The noise from dramatic growth in the mining boom muted out the cries  from the rest of the economy for continuing positive reform. 

 For  example,  it’s  relatively  painless  to  re-regulate  the  labour  market  when  massive  wage   growth occurs in mining and mining services despite it just being 2% of direct employment.  

 But  as  the  sound  and  fury  of  a  boom  calms  down  the  structural  costs  of  poor  regulation   become apparent. 

 So these structural errors must be fixed.  Whilst my top priority is fixing the Budget we will  need to kick start growth and jobs by removing the shackles around the non-mining economy. 

 

 An Economy in Transition 

 The  mining  industry  has  been  undergoing  the  biggest  boom  in  Australia’s  history.    Investment in mining now comprises around 60% of all business investment in Australia, up  from just 15% ten years ago.1 

 But having risen to the highest level on record, business investment as measured by the ABS  capital expenditure figures peaked in the September quarter last year and has fallen in the two  quarters since.   

 Within this, mining investment looks to have topped out in the last quarter or two. (Although  there is some debate about whether there may be a little more upside in the near term.)   

 

 1  ABS catalogue No 5625.0 

 

 

 3 

 

 What  is  troubling  is  investment  in  non-mining  businesses  has  been  sliding  for  the  last   eighteen months and in the March quarter this year was 17% below its September 2011 peak.  

 The latest national accounts confirm this story of variable economic activity. 

 The increase in overall GDP of 0.6% in the March quarter and 2.5% over the year shows that  the economy is still growing but at a below trend pace. 

 Digging beneath the numbers shows that all of the March quarter growth was due to the trade  sector, with net exports contributing a full 1% to growth in the quarter. 

 Other measures such as domestic demand or gross national expenditure actually declined in  the quarter.  That is, domestically focussed economic activity shrank. 

 And look at the States. There has been six  quarters of consecutive contraction in state final   demand  in  Tasmania,  three  quarters  of  contraction  in  South  Australia,  and  two  quarters  of   contraction in Western Australia. 

 This slowing in growth is seen most clearly in a softening labour market. 

 The national unemployment rate currently stands at 5.5%, significantly higher than the low of  4% in February 2008. 

 More concerning is the  high  level  of  youth  unemployment,  with  fully  one  quarter  of   Australians between the ages of 15 to 19 years being unemployed.   

 That is 123,000 young Australians actively looking for work who cannot find a job.   

 And  the  underemployment  rate  is  now  7.4%,  much  higher  than  the  5.9%  achieved  in   February 2008. 

 We can do better. 

 I want to remind you of the economic fundamentals that a new Government will inherit. 

 

 1. New Regulation 

 Firstly,  this Government has  compounded  the  difficulty  of  doing  business with a  massive   program of reregulation. 

 Since the 2007 election, Labor Governments  have  imposed  an  additional  39  new  and   increased taxes along with an additional 21,000 new regulations on Australian businesses and  community. So much for its promise of one in, one out. It has repealed just 1,000 regulations. 

 This  is  a Government that  wants to  be big. Only yesterday the  Treasurer  was  boasting that  this Parliament has been “the most successful ever” having passed an amazing 582 pieces of  legislation. 

 Now, over the next four days the Government together with the Greens are going to guillotine  55 important bills through the Senate. That is nearly twice the number in one sitting week as  the entire number of guillotines used by the Coalition in three years. 

 All  this comes  at  a  cost  with  poorly  thought  through  legislation  that  is  often  unclear  and   sometimes contradictory. 

 Poor process means poor outcomes. 

 

 

 4 

 

 It is therefore no surprise that the entire debate on the Gonski education package is reduced to  a debate of two hours and 45 minutes in the Senate this week. 

 Moreover  under  this  Government we  have  seen  a reregulation  of  the  workplace,  additional   regulations  on  behaviour  from  broadcasting  to  alcohol  consumption,  new  regulations  on   financial services, increased environmental requirements, and the list goes on. 

 Sometimes individual industries are hit multiple times. For example there are separate pieces  of legislation  before  the Parliament to  require  foreign  workers  on  offshore  oil  and  gas   projects to hold visas, to reduce access to 457 visas for temporary workers, and to apply new  environmental  regulations to coal  seam  gas  and  coal  projects  that  will  essentially duplicate   state assessments. 

 These incredibly onerous regulatory requirements impose structural rigidity on our economy. 

 They  apply  across  all  industries  and  will  make  the  transition  towards  non-mining  activity   much harder than expected. 

 

 2. Financial Services 

 Secondly, we need a competitive financial services sector to ensure credit is readily available  and affordable. 

 At  a  retail  level  the market  share  of  bank  housing  loans  outstanding  to  the  big  four has  significantly increased from 75% in December 2006 to its current level of around 85%.  

 At  a  wholesale  level  the  GFC  has  had  some  impact  with  a  number  of  major  international   banks reducing their presence in Australia. 

 And  although  some  others  like  Chinese  and  Japanese  banks  have  become  more  active  here   there is a widely held view that there is simply not enough competition in funding. 

 In October 2010, to a few howls of outrage, I proposed a nine point plan to lift competition in  financial services. 

 If  we  win  Government there  will  be  a  “son  of  Wallis”  root  and  branch  inquiry into  the   financial  system.  Amongst  many  things  we  will  ensure that the  interests  of  depositors,   borrowers and shareholders are met by a competitive financial services industry. 

 

 3. Tax Volatility 

 Thirdly, this Government has introduced a series of capricious and unpredictable tax grabs as  a result of its fiscal incompetence, which have come with a very heavy cost to business and  consumers. 

 No  country  ever  taxed  its  way  to  prosperity yet the May Budget  added  a further  nine   increases. 60% of the announced policy saves over the forward estimates are in fact new or  increased taxes. 

 Increasing  the  number  and  complexity of  taxes  on  businesses  will  not  encourage increased  investment. Tax complexity will not boost economic activity and will not create job security. 

 The paradox is that this Government claims it is a low taxing Government. 

 

 

 5 

 

 But  in  quoting  its  low  tax  to  GDP  ratios  it  conveniently  forgets  that  the  huge  shortfall   between tax and spending is made up with non-tax revenue and borrowings.   

 Those borrowings are tomorrow’s taxes. 

 When we add up the Government’s total call on resources relative to the economy we find it  will be higher in 2014 than at any time under the Howard/Costello Government.   

 And  the  ratio  during  Labor’s  term  in  office  has  been more  than  two  full  percentage  points  higher than under the Coalition. 

 That is the clearest evidence there is that this is a big taxing and big spending Government. 

 

 4. Industrial Relations 

 Industrial relations has gone backwards under this Government 

 The facts speak for themselves. 

 The number of industrial disputes commenced over the year to March quarter 2013 was 212.   The number of working days lost over that year was 289,500.   

 Compare that with the record of the Coalition. 

 In the last year of the Howard Government the number of industrial disputes was almost half,  with 134 disputes, and 49,700 working days lost - less than one fifth the current rate. 

 What we are seeing now is the tip of the iceberg. 

 Massive new regulation burdens through Fair Work Australia and the abolition of the ABCC  have left employers and unions with a bitter confrontational infrastructure. 

 A  system  that  allows  increased  levels of  industrial  disputation  and  a greater number  of   productive days lost is not good for workers, it is not good for business, and it is certainly not  good for the country. 

 Whilst  the  Coalition  will  not  bring  back  Workchoices  our  announced  policy rebalances  the   debate.  

 

 5. Low Confidence 

 One  of  the  factors  inhibiting  the  re-booting  of  the  non-mining  sectors  is  low  business  and   consumer confidence. 

 Maintaining confidence is crucial to underpinning economic growth. It’s a game changer 

 Confident  businesses  will  keep  investing,  growing  their  businesses,  improving  productivity   and creating wealth and jobs. 

 Confident households will keep spending, buying houses, travelling and so on. 

 Confidence can help an economy cope with adverse shocks. 

 But  equally,  a  fall  in  confidence  can  precipitate  lower  business  investment  and  greater   caution by households. 

 

 

 6 

 

 And right now neither businesses nor households have any levels of high confidence. 

 Business confidence2 slipped back in April and remained there in May to be well below the  series long-run average level. 

 Mining confidence is now close to its weakest level in four years, reflecting concerns over the  outlook for commodities demand.   

 But confidence in the non-mining sector is also at below-average levels.   

 The  May  report  noted  the  weakness  in  the  domestic  economy  appears  to  have  offset  the   benefits of the lower dollar and the RBA’s decision to cut the cash rate last month.  

 On the consumer side, confidence slumped following the Budget, and even in June remained  8% lower than its peak early in the year. 

 It is often difficult to identify the factors which drive consumer confidence but in the case of  the recent fall, the dominant concern was the economy and how this may affect job security.3 

 So  we  can  understand  that  the  Budget’s  forecasts  for  even  slower  growth  and  higher   unemployment would not be providing much comfort. 

 Weak consumer confidence is reflected in the continued high household savings rate, which  in the March quarter crept back up to 10.6%, and remains not far off quarter century highs. 

 It should be no surprise that worried households don’t spend. 

 

 6. Trade 

 This Government’s  wilful  disregard  for  Australia’s  interests  is  demonstrated  clearly  in  the   area of trade. 

 Australia is a medium sized relatively open economy with a significant trade sector. 

 We benefit hugely from open access to world markets and for a long time we have been an  active participant in negotiating more freedom in global trade arrangements. 

 With  global  trade  negotiations  stalled,  progress  has  continued  under  bilateral  and  regional  free trade agreements. 

 Or at least it had. 

 This Government seems  almost  uninterested  in  making  further  progress  on  removing   impediments to trade. 

 Bilateral FTA negotiations are underway with China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia and India but  they have not made much progress. 

 We are being outdone on this by our neighbour across the Tasman. 

 The Howard Government commenced negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement with China in  2005. So did New Zealand. New Zealand concluded its Free Trade Agreement with China in  2008. Our negotiations have stalled. 

 

 2  NAB Monthly Business Survey, April and May 2013  3  Westpac Melbourne Institute Index of Consumer Sentiment, 12 June 2013 

 

 

 7 

 

 Trade Minister Emerson has described a Free Trade Agreement between Australia and China  as  ‘overrated’.  This  is  an odd statement given that  at  the time we started talking in 2005 it   was predicted it could be worth an increase to our GDP of about $25 billion by 2015.  

 New Zealand’s Free Trade Agreement with China has trebled the trade relationship between  the two countries.  More  than 90 per cent  of New Zealand’s  products  are going into China   duty free. 

 Australia is now at a competitive disadvantage to New Zealand.  That fact alone makes New  Zealand a more attractive place to invest in export industries as an alternative to Australia.  

 The Government's failure to conclude a free trade agreement with South Korea has likewise  resulted in the loss of real export income.  The United States is now capturing a large part of  the beef market into South Korea, at the expense of Australian beef producers. 

 

 The Coalition Plan 

 There is a pressing need to reboot the dynamism of the non-mining sector. 

 The Coalition will bring a different mindset to these challenges. 

 The current Labor Government believes in big government which needs to be at the centre of  everything and must be part of the solution. 

 We don’t.    

 We think Labor’s approach has been part of the problem.   

 The solution is not more government, it is less. 

 We  need  to  reduce  the  burden  of  government on  business  so  that  business  can  get  on  with   doing what it does best. 

 Our  solutions  are  driven  by  our  fundamental  belief  that  prosperity  does  not  come  from   government, it comes from business. 

 It  comes  from  business  investing  for  the  future,  driving  productivity  gains,  creating  wealth   and jobs. 

 And the contribution from government to this process is to get out of the way, get out of the  capital  markets,  minimise  the  tax  burden,  lighten  the  regulatory  load,  foster  a  competitive   market place and provide a stable and predictable environment. 

 We have to remove the regulatory shackles and reduce the taxes so that businesses can focus  on what they do best. 

 We have to restore economic growth to its potential as quickly as possible. 

 The centrepiece of our economic agenda is to facilitate the creation of one million new jobs  within five years and two million jobs within ten years. 

 Our Plan has  already  been  carefully  laid  out  by  Tony  Abbott  and  the  economics  team   including myself, Andrew Robb and Mathias Cormann. 

 We will lighten the tax load.  We will abolish the carbon and mining taxes as a first order of  business.  And we will deliver personal income tax cuts without the carbon tax. 

 

 

 8 

 

 We will also explore reforms to the operation of the tax office to ensure taxpayers get a fair  go while still paying their appropriate share of tax.  We want the operations of the Tax Office  to be transparent and predictable. 

 We will lay the groundwork for higher productivity.   

 We will lift workforce participation through our Paid Parental Leave scheme and measures to  improve outcomes for mature and young workers. 

 We  will reduce  regulation,  including  putting  in  place  a  one  stop  shop  for  environmental   approvals.   

 We  will  commission  inquiries  by  the  Productivity  Commission  into  business  competition,   and industrial relations to ensure market places are efficient and fair. 

 As  I  have  noted  we  will  have  an  inquiry  into  the  financial  system  to  ensure  the  system   continues to competitively serve the interests of depositors, borrowers and shareholders while  remaining safe and stable. 

 We will ensure infrastructure spending delivers value for money. 

 We will make incremental improvements to labour market regulation within the boundaries  of  the  Fair  Work  system.   Our  policy  seeks  to  improve  the  current  Fair  Work  laws  by   providing  common  sense  solutions  to  practical  problems  such  as  ensuring  right  of  entry   provisions  are  sensible  and  not  abused,  and providing  practical  help  to  small  businesses   within the Office of the Fair Work Ombudsman.  

 We  will  ensure  that  access  to  individual  flexibility  arrangements  cannot  be  restricted  in   enterprise  agreements  which  will  ensure  that  all  workers  can  ask  for  fair  and  protected   working arrangements if they want, subject to the worker being better off overall.  

 And  we  will  also  tackle lawlessness  on  building  sites  and  construction  projects  by  re-establishing the Australian Building and Construction Commission.  

 We  will  foster  closer  relations  with  Asia,  broadening  the  economic  relationship  to  include   services  such  as  education  and  health and  other  non-mining  industries. This  will  include   moving  to  conclude  free  trade  agreements  with  China,  South  Korea  and  Japan,  consistent   with Australia’s interests. We will also be focussing on Free Trade Agreements  with India,  Indonesia, the European Union, and the Gulf countries. 

 But perhaps even more important than these individual steps, we will foster a cooperative and  predictable environment.   

 We want to re-establish trust in government.   

 Business  must  know  that  the  rules  of  the  game  won’t  be  changed  while  the  game  is  being   played.   

 Households want to know that government will keep its word, and will do what it says. 

 This  new  compact  between  the  people  and  the  government should  help  boost  confidence   about Australia’s future prospects.   

 Consumers will spend when they are not constantly worried about keeping their job.  

 Businesses will invest for the future when they are confident the government is committed to  economic growth and will lay down clear and stable ground rules. 

 

 

 9 

 

 What We Will Do to Avoid a Possible Downturn 

 Finally, in  response  to  recent  commentary,  I  want  to  say  that  that  whilst  economists  must   always  contemplate  the  possibility of economic downturns, it  is the responsibility of policy  makers to reduce that risk. 

 It  is  the height  of hubris  to dismiss  out of hand dire warnings  of a possible downturn from  respected observers. It is wise to listen and prepare.   

 The Australian economy has proved resilient over more than two decades against very severe  global  shocks.  I believe  the  ingenuity and  innovative  spirit  of  Australians  will  continue  to  overcome adversity in the years ahead. 

 We are a great country with a great people - all we need for continued prosperity is a great  government. 

 Nevertheless, I would not be doing my job if I had not already given some thought as to how  economic  activity  could  be  safeguarded  should  the  downturn  in the private  sector  become   more protracted.  

 Australia  has  not  experienced  a  significant  downturn in over 20 years  and I am  determined   that it will not occur on my watch if we are elected on September 14. 

 Protracted downturns in economic activity are very damaging in terms of lost output and lost  jobs and it can take a very long time for the damage to be made good. 

 This  could  only  occur  if the  normal  cyclical fail  safes  of  lower  interest  rates,  a  lower   Australian  dollar,  and  the  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  were  unable  to  provide  a  complete   countercyclical boost. 

 In that case additional well considered government action could be appropriate. 

 But  I  can  make  this  promise.  You  won’t  see  the  Coalition sending  $900  cheques  to  dead   people.  We  will  not  be  spending  billions  of  dollars installing  pink  batts  and  then  millions  more removing them. And we will not be spending billions of taxpayer dollars on overpriced  school halls that schools don’t want and which do nothing to raise the standard of education. 

 

 Conclusion 

 It will be my number one imperative to safeguard the economy against a significant downturn  and to turbo charge economic growth and jobs. 

 The  resources  boom  has  made  a  wonderful  contribution  to  Australia’s  prosperity  and  the   mining industry will continue to be an important industry sector but we must prepare for the  day when the boom times are gone. 

 We must Budget for reality rather than hope.  

 We must plan our economy based on reality rather than exception. 

 The 90% of the Australian economy that is not involved in the mining and resources sector  will now need to shoulder more of the burden of growth. 

 This next election will be the most important in a generation. 

 It will also be the clearest choice in a generation. 

 

 

 10 

 

 If  we  are  given  the  privilege of  victory, an  incoming  Coalition  Government will  do   everything it can to overcome the economic and fiscal wind-back of six years of a bad Labor  Government. 

 The task is great but we are most definitely ready for the challenge. 

 [ENDS] 

 

