---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Fairfield, NSW: 25 September 2013: Coalition broken promise on demand driven funding to universities; asylum seekers; Indonesia; Labor leadership; MYEFO."
date: "2013-09-25"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Coalition broken promise on demand driven funding to universities"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Indonesia"
  - "Labor leadership"
  - "MYEFO."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211443220
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2746304%22
---

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 INTERIM LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON    

 TRANSCRIPT    

 

 DOORSTOP, FAIRFIELD    

 WEDNESDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2013   

 

 SUBJECTS: Coalition broken promise on demand driven funding to  universities, asylum seekers, Indonesia, Labor leadership, MYEFO.    

 CHRIS BOWEN: Well thanks everybody. Well today we’ve seen the Minister for  Education, Minister Pyne, reveal in the media Coalition plans to cut funding to  universities to improve access to people from across Australia to Australia’s  universities.     

 Also, he’s flagged the abolition of the student service fee, which provides services to  university students right across the country. And perhaps most concerning of all,  flagging now, for the first time that the new government intends to instigate a  review, with a view to abolishing the demand driven system of university funding.    

 Now let’s be very clear, the demand driven system of university funding is what has  driven a massive expansion of Australia’s universities over the last three or four  years.     

 We’re very proud of the fact that under the Labor government, 200,000 extra  university places were created. This has given people, from right across Australia,  from here in Western Sydney, from Australia’s rural areas, from Australia’s regions  the opportunity to go to university.    

 To abolish the demand driven system would be a blow to Australian regional  universities, to Australian Catholic University, to universities right across the country  that have been important in driving this massive expansion in university allocations.    

 Now this is a clear breach of commitment from the Liberal Party.    

 Christopher Pyne issued this press release [holds up press release], which was very  clear “Coalition will not cap places or raise HECS” the opposition said. In July, just  this July just gone, on the 7.30 Report, Mr Pyne said the Coalition had no plans to  abolish the demand driven system. The only difference between now and July is that 

 now they’re in office. They’ve been in office a week and we see them walking away  from core commitments; we see them walking away from their promises.     

 The other thing I want to cover today is it appears another boat arrived and was  taken into Darwin Harbour last night. A boat that Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison  don’t want us to know about.    

 Now if a boat was taken into Darwin Harbour when the Liberal Party was in  Opposition, Mr Morrison would have held a full court press conference to say the  Government needs to explain what’s going on. You couldn’t turn your television on  before the election without running the severe danger of seeing Mr Morrison talking  about boat arrivals.    

 Now that he’s actually the Minister responsible for actually doing something about it,  he’s gone into hiding. He’s in the witness protection program refusing to talk about  the number of boats arriving in Australia, refusing to be upfront with the Australian  people about what’s happening. Refusing to reveal whether a turn-back has  occurred or not, whether it was successful or not. This is simply unacceptable, a  simply unacceptable way of avoiding scrutiny. It shows that this new government is  more interested in managing the media cycle than managing our borders.     

 In addition, we’ve seen Foreign Minister Natalegawa make it clear that he is not  happy with the new government’s policies. At the same time, Minister Bishop refuses  to reveal what was said in the meeting between her and him, simply to say that it  was positive and cordial, which is not the view that Minister Natalegawa has given to  the Indonesian media. Very different reports from the Indonesian Foreign Minister to  the Indonesian media than we’re seeing from the Australian Foreign Minister to the  Australian media.     

 So clearly something is going on here, I suspect Minister Natalegawa has made it  very clear, as he did before the election as we warned, that Indonesia would not  cooperate with a turn-back policy, and I suspect that’s why we’ve not yet seen a  turn-back under this government, and the government refusing to talk about  whether they will turn back boats or not, and refusing to even to announce basic  things such as boat arrivals.    

 Happy to take some questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen seeing that the former Labor Minister, Kim Carr,  previously identified problems with the quality of some university graduates, isn’t is  reasonable for the new Government to act?     

 BOWEN: No it’s not. It’s not reasonable when they promised they wouldn’t. They  promised not to touch the demand driven system. Now Minister Carr correctly said  that we need to make sure that while expanding the availability of university access  that we assure that the quality remains high. But I completely reject the notion that  some in the Opposition, that some in the new Government have put, that somehow  this is an attack on quality. Just because you come from a school in Western Sydney 

 or in regional Australia doesn’t mean you can’t make a fine university student. As the  University of Western Sydney itself has shown through the very good results that  they have delivered, as regional universities across the country have shown through  the results they have delivered. If Christopher Pyne thought this before the election  he should have said so, saying so now after the election, very conveniently.      

 JOURNALIST: Do you accept the removal of a cap on places has lowered university  standards?    

 BOWEN: No, I think that Australian universities are world class, they produce very  good results and the quality is very good. I don’t accept that there is a choice  between access for people right across Australian universities and quality.    

 JOURNALIST: Would Labor block any Coalition moves in Parliament to reintroduce  the cap?   

 BOWEN: Labor will obviously look at all its options but our commitment to  university funding is very clear. Now what the Government is trying to do here is set  up an excuse to cut university funding. If you abolish the demand driven system you  are cutting university funding. That clearly wasn’t in their savings pre-election and in  fact we were told time and time again that education wouldn’t be cut. Well guess  what? Universities are education. And abolishing the demand driven system is a  massive cut to university funding and Mr Pyne today is trying to set up an alibi for  cutting university funding.    

 JOURNALIST: What about the student services fee? Will they be blocking any  attempt to get rid of that?    

 BOWEN: Well again, we’ll wait and see the Government’s proposals but we  introduce this fee to ensure that university students could have access to basic  services this is not about student unionism, it’s about basic services being provided  in universities whether it be child care, whether it be text books being provided on a  subsidised basis, whether it be catering, whether it be some basic sporting facilities.  And this is an important part of university. And there’s no good reason for what I  can see for this to be announced after the election. We’ll have a look at all of their  proposals and of course there will be a shadow Cabinet and Caucus process to run  through all of those issues.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think there’s a problem with GPS schools in Sydney for  putting talented athletes in [inaudible]?   

 BOWEN: Oh look, I’ve only seen those media reports, I don’t profess to be aware of  the full detail of the greater public school sporting system. I’ll leave that for others to  comment on.     

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, did you watch the leaders’ debate?    

 BOWEN: I did.  

 

 JOURNALIST: What did you make of it?    

 BOWEN: I thought both Anthony Albanese and Bill Shorten presented their case  very well. But this is exactly what we were talking about when we introduced this  system. Having the people who want to be Labor’s leader; Australia’s alternative  Prime Minister laying out their case to Labor Party rank and file members,  reinvigorating the Party. This happened in Britain following their defeat in 2010 as  we flagged. We wanted it to happen in Australia as well. To have that case put very  clearly. I think it’s a very good thing for democracy, a very good thing for the Labor  Party and a good thing for Australia, we’ve seen more debates between Anthony and  Bill, I think they both performed admirably last night and the Labor Party has a  choice between two very good candidates.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that the taxi driver who drove Bill Shorten to the  debate last night said that Mr Shorten was planting questions?    

 BOWEN: Ah look, I’ve only seen those media reports. I know that Bill behaves  professionally at all times and I’m sure that that was the case last night as well.    

 JOURNALIST: And do you think Clive Palmer has overstepped the mark with his  latest comments about the Electoral Commission?   

 BOWEN: Yes, yes I do. I think that the Australian Electoral Commission are a body  made up of fine and honest individuals and I think Mr Palmer’s continued attack on  the AEC is highly inappropriate. You don’t always like election results; we just had  one where we would have like to have gone better. But you don’t blame the referee;  you don’t blame the Australian Electoral Commission. To make the allegations Mr  Palmer has made against the AEC I think is inappropriate when you look at the fine  and honest individuals who run the AEC whether they are local returning officers or  senior officials. Now we can always have a discussion about electoral reform,  improving our voting systems. I’m always up for that and there are reforms that we  should be looking at including in the Senate voting system but to blame the AEC  when you don’t like the result is pretty poor form.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of the Senate result and what it looks like  considering the Palmer United Party has that big swing to it?    

 BOWEN: Well obviously, the Senate in Australian history throws up results which  mean - often we don’t have a clear majority in the Senate. Now I think there’s a  legitimate discussion to be had about the Senate voting system about some of the  suggestions that have been made about thresholds etc. There’s a standard process  for the joint standing committee on electoral matters to review every election. I’m  sure that will occur this time, will be a god opportunity for members of the house  and the senate to hear all of those issues.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, what do you think about Joe Hockey’s idea of sending an  itemised tax receipt to tax payers?  

 

 BOWEN: Well I don’t have a particular problem with it, but if we’re talking about  improving transparency and accountability sending out some sort of receipt on tax is  not necessarily the best way to do it. I wouldn't oppose it. What would be better is a  little transparency and a little accountability from the Government. We could see  boat arrivals announced for example, or we could see the Mid-Year Economic  Forecast brought down when it’s meant to be in November or December not in  January when everyone is on holidays; when you'll probably be on holidays, when  the press gallery will be on holidays. An outrageous attempt to avoid scrutiny by  putting off the Mid-Year Economic Forecast.    

 So I don’t have a problem with Mr Hockey’s proposal of a tax receipt but I would like  to see a bit more accountability and transparency across the board.    

 Thanks guys. Good on you.    

 Ends   

