---
title: "Better schools plan, asylum seekers, Australian Labor Party"
date: "2013-07-19"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397348
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2601812%22
---

 Minister for Education 

 Bill Shorten 

 Better Schools Plan, Asylum Seekers, Australian Labor Party 

 Thursday 18 July 2013  

 BILL SHORTEN: Good morning everyone.  It's lovely to be here at Sam's Market in  St Albans in my electorate at Maribyrnong.  It's important that members of  Parliament get out and talk to the voters about the issues that are affecting them.   But one of the biggest issues affecting voters is making sure that their children get  the best education possible in life.    

 So I'm pleased that the Federal Labor Government continues to negotiate  constructively with the Victorian Government about the Better Schools package,  which will see greater individual resources provided to every student in Victoria.   I'm pleased that we're still negotiating very constructively with the Queensland  Government.  In addition, there are very good talks, exceedingly good talks, under  way with the National Catholic Education Commission.    

 The Better Schools program; it’s really important that we grasp the opportunity of  Federal Labor's commitment to better funding in schools.  We want to make sure that  the state governments don't miss the opportunity to get valuable extra resources to  ensure that school children in Victoria and Queensland get the best start in life and  get that individual support which they need.    

 If you're a student who's falling behind, that extra support in skills and literacy.  If  you're a really bright student who really needs to be pushed and have their borders  and their imagination expanded, individual resources for those children too. So  there's a lot that's good that's in our Better Schools program and this government  remains committed to making sure that every child in Australia gets the education  that they deserve to put them, when they reach adult life, in the best start for life.   Happy to take questions.    

 QUESTION: How close are you to getting the Catholic schools to sign up? 

 BILL SHORTEN: The National Catholic Education Commission has to seek  instructions from all their state commissions.  But I have a great deal of confidence  that in coming days the Federal Government will receive the ongoing support of the  National Catholic Education Commission.  We've got some final details to work out.   My interest, and the interests of the Federal Labor Government, are that seven-hundred thousand children whose parents choose to send them to Catholic schools  throughout Australia get the best start in life.  I'm confident that we should be able to  close a deal with the National Catholic Education Commission in the next few days,  but there is some still ‘T’s to be crossed and ‘I’s to be dotted. 

 QUESTION: What about Victoria and Queensland?  How close are they? 

 BILL SHORTEN: Well, I've had something like seven or eight direct meetings with  representatives of the Victorian Government and representatives of the Queensland  Government.  They're in slightly different positions.  I have no doubt that Premier  Napthine is interested in the extra resources which the Commonwealth Labor  Government is offering every school child in government schools in Victoria.  

 But we need to make sure that the Commonwealth taxpayer dollars, which are  focused on making sure that children get educational resources regardless of their  postcode, that the principle is maintained of providing extra support for schools.   We've still got more detail to go in Victoria but I've got no doubt of the interest of  Premier Napthine in securing a great deal for every school child in Victoria, which is  good news for the parents of Victorian school children.    

 With regard to the Queensland Government, there seems to be some scratchiness in  negotiations.  Let me use this opportunity to reinforce to the Queensland  Government what the Prime Minister and I said to Premier Newman and their  Education Minister last week.  We respect that Canberra doesn’t run schools, that  the national Commonwealth doesn't run schools.  We respect the right of be it the  Catholic education system, or the Victorian education system or the Queensland  education system, who manage the schools, to run the schools.    

 The Commonwealth does not want to take over school education in Australia.   Rather, we want to make sure that school children in Australia don't just have a  Queensland class education, they have a world class education.  All I'm interested in  doing is making sure that the parents of every child in Queensland, get the same  extra resources that are on offer in other parts of Australia.  We want to make sure  that Queensland schools, which are good schools, are world class schools.    

 We want to make sure that every child who goes to a government school in  Queensland gets the extra help in practical terms.  The homework coaches, the  extra resources in schools, to help every individual child do well.  We want to see  school communities empowered.  We regard our proposition on Better Schools to  help individual children be the best they can be as a partnership between the  Commonwealth and state government.  And the beneficiaries should be the children  and parents of children going to these schools in Queensland and Victoria. 

 QUESTION: Do you have any further meetings scheduled with Queensland? 

 BILL SHORTEN: I've extended the invitation to the Queensland Government that I  would happily get on a plane and fly up and see them.  I respect that the Queensland  Government has got to balance its budget.  I respect that they've got financial  challenges.  What I would also just - in the politest and gentlest possible way - is  say to them, when you've got another level of government offering to provide two  extra dollars for every extra dollar that you invest in children's education in  Queensland, this is a good deal.   When you've got a Federal Government saying to Queenslanders, we respect your  education system.  We don't wish to run your schools, but we certainly would like to  be partners in making sure that Queensland school children get the best start in life  that we can possibly give them.  It doesn't matter if you're parents or politicians, we  should be united at every level of government and in our community to make sure 

 that school children get the best start in life and that's why we want to have better  school. 

 QUESTION: Are you going to have to extend the deadline again? 

 BILL SHORTEN: Well, let's hope that - the money offers are pretty clear.  What  we've got to do is iron out the objections that perhaps particular jurisdictions have.  I  and the Prime Minister are very positive and pragmatic people.  We don't wish to  take over Queensland schools.  We wish to partner with the Queensland  Government to give Queensland school children the best start in life.  

 It doesn't matter if you're at Indooroopilly Primary School or a primary school in  Mount Isa.  It doesn't matter, frankly, what your postcode is.  We want to make sure  that you and your teachers at those schools get the best resources to allow  individual children to fulfil their potential.    

 What the parents of school children in Queensland and Victoria want, what they want  from the state government and indeed Commonwealth Labor, is they want the same  forensic passion to make sure that kids leave school resilient and well-educated.   The world is a tough place.  The best gift we can give our children is to make sure  that when they leave school they've got the educational resources to do as well as  they can in life.    

 Not all parents want their children to be astronauts or Olympic athletes.  But every  parent wants to make sure their child is healthy, is happy, is resilient where they  can't be happy, and make sure that they've got the ability to take advantage of the  changing economy and do well in life. That is why it is important that the Queensland  Government and the Victorian Government don't miss the opportunity to put  resources into schools and Commonwealth resources so the Queensland education  system can be as good as I know it can be.  And we back up our hardworking  teachers in the Victorian and Queensland education systems.    

 QUESTION: The Queensland Education Minister made some fairly strong comments  this morning.  Is that a sign to you that they're going to dig their heels in on this?   And do you know what prompted those comments? 

 BILL SHORTEN: Well, I was a little confused about the level of adversarial nature of  some of the Queensland Government's comments.  What I would say to the  Queensland Government is, it is difficult running a government.  I get that you've got  debt issues to work through.  But, please, do not be confused by the fact that we are  from the Labor side and they are from the Conservative side.  There should be no  politics in school education.  The Commonwealth Government has a very good offer  to provide additional resources.    

 We're dealing with the concerns the Queensland Government has about will the  Commonwealth try and run schools.  That's not our job.  That's not our obligation.   That's the role of the Queensland Government.  But what we also know is that just  leaving schools the way they are, denying Queensland school children additional  resources, the homework clubs, the maths and science tutors, the extra options in  terms of the creative arts, we should be working hard to give our children the 

 broadest possible education with the most creativity and imagination.    

 So what I say to the Queensland Government is, there may be scar tissue about  previous negotiations.  Let's move forward to working together.  For me, the issue is  not Campbell Newman, or indeed the Federal Labor Government.  For me, the issue  is can we do better for our school children in Queensland?  Can we do better for our  school children nationally?  Yes, we can and we should do it together.  Thanks. 

 QUESTION: Just to close on another public matter. 

 BILL SHORTEN: One more, yes. 

 QUESTION: I’ve got two.  One on refugees. 

 BILL SHORTEN: Two.  Sure, no worries. 

 QUESTION: Is Kevin Rudd going to walk away from Australia's obligations to  refugees? 

 BILL SHORTEN: No. Let's talk straight about what's happening.  We are seeing a  change in the composition of people who are coming to Australia's borders via  people smugglers.  There certainly appears to be a greater proportion of people who  are plainly economic refugees.  We take in hundreds of thousands, tens of  thousands, of immigrants every year in Australia.  We are a generous nation when it  comes to immigration.  But what I also know is that we've got to stamp out people  smuggling.  It is an incredibly dangerous way to come to Australia.    

 What motivates Prime Minister Rudd is maintaining the integrity of our immigration  system, is making sure that people do not put to sea in unsafe boats, cruelly and  dangerously exploited by people smugglers.  And we know that the composition of  people coming to Australia is changing from just straight political refugees to people  coming for a much wider range of reasons.  We need to make sure that we have a  system which is based on regional cooperation, engaging with our neighbours, to  make sure we've got a lasting solution to these changed circumstances. 

 QUESTION: Minister, could I just ask… 

 BILL SHORTEN: Sorry, you were just going to ask me another question. 

 QUESTION: I just have one more on bullying.  I understand you're speaking at the  conference tomorrow. The ACTU and the National Centre Against Bullying want  national laws.  Are you going to introduce them? 

 BILL SHORTEN: We will have national laws in terms of bullying.  Bullying is a  scourge in our community.  I know some people are saying the bullying problem is  exaggerated in Australia's workplaces.  If you think that, then you're not familiar with  the individual experiences of literally thousands of people which get reported to us  through our parliamentary hearings.  Also bullying is estimated to cost Australian  business well north of $6 billion per annum.  These are big issues and it is not  enough for governments to put them in the too-hard basket. 

 

 The ACTU's submission is one of many, many submissions.  We will do everything  that we always do, with the maximum of consultation and respect for all points of  view.  But one thing's for sure, if you are a workplace bully, the Federal Labor  Government is no friend of yours. 

 QUESTION: Minister, could I just ask you, there's a third place left on the Victorian  Senate ticket.  Do you think that should go to a woman and, if so, who would you  recommend? 

 BILL SHORTEN: I'm not going to get actively involved in day to day pre-selection  matters of the Labor Party. We'll sort these matters out. We always do.    

 QUESTION: Do you think it will go to a woman? 

 BILL SHORTEN: I'm totally sure that we will have a candidate in the third place in  the Senate in the not too distant future.  I certainly think that there's an argument to  put more women into Parliament.  But I really don't want to get more involved about  the day to day matters of the Labor Party when I've got the important work of making  sure that we can get the best possible schools for Australian school children. Thanks  very much, everyone. Please shop at St Albans. 

 

