---
title: "Rudd adopts Rinehart and Abbott plan for Northern Australia"
date: "2013-08-16"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398949
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2666184%22
---

 Greens Leader Senator Christine Milne   

 Friday, 16 August 2013   

 Rudd adopts Rinehart and Abbott plan for Northern Australia    

 Kevin Rudd’s northern Australia plan is another example of Labor embracing Tony Abbott’s  destructive policies.     

 “Kevin Rudd is desperate and clutching at straws by adopting Gina Reinhart's and Tony Abbott’s ill-considered northern Australia plan,” Greens Leader Senator Christine Milne said.     

 “There is no doubt the big miners would love an economic zone where they paid less tax, had lower  environmental standards and could provide poorer workplace conditions.    

 “But it will do nothing for Australia's future as it is completely economically and socially  unsustainable.    

 “A CSIRO report in 2010 which showed that large scale agriculture is not sustainable in far northern  Australia because there is not enough water.    

 “He is prepared to ignore the science and ignore the environment in a desperate attempt to win  votes in Queensland. But it won't work.    

 “This is akin to "turning the rivers inland" and is another rear vision policy from both Tony Abbott  and Kevin Rudd.    

 “Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott have a 'mine’s vision' of digging up and selling northern Australia.  While the Greens have a 'mind’s vision' of an innovative diverse education and services future with  investment in universities, TAFEs and research.    

 “Kevin Rudd's idea of lowering the barriers to foreign ownership for northern Australia undermines  our sovereignty and risks sustainability.    

 “The Greens do not support selling agricultural land and water to the wholly owned subsidiary of  foreign governments of any persuasion.    

 “We want stronger national interest considerations and higher thresholds for foreign investment.    

 “Flashing red lights should be seen all around Kevin Rudd's promise to streamline environmental  regulation and assessment.     

 “This simply means lower standards, shonky processes and handing back powers to the states.    

 “The only guarantee out of this nonsense will be environmental destruction and the public purse  raided for subsidies.    

 “This tit for tat race to the bottom on everything from cruelty to refugees to environmental  destruction must stop.     

 “Australia deserves better. It’s clear to everyone the Greens are the opposition in Australia. The  others more closely resemble Tweedle Dee and Tweedle Dumb.”    

 MEDIA CONTACT:    

 Georgie Klug - 0438 376 082    

 

