---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 10 April 2013: asylum seekers"
date: "2013-04-11"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393178
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2363388%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  WEDNESDAY, 10 APRIL 2013 

 SUBJECT: ASYLUM SEEKERS 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I’m here, of course, to talk about the arrival yesterday of a vessel with  66 people on board at Geraldton in Western Australia. This is of course a very exceptional case, this  is only the second arrival in five years of a vessel arriving on the mainland. And of course we want to  ensure it's an exceptional case. 

 Our Customs and Naval personnel do a remarkable job, and they've been doing that for some time  now, going to the aid of people that are in need, intercepting vessels to ensure that our borders are  secure. 

 But of course, as I say, this is one exceptional case, and compared with the record of the Howard  Government, there is clear evidence of a much improved approach by our agencies. Under the  Howard years 19 vessels arrived on the mainland undetected, 11 arrived in Western Australia alone.  Nearly one in ten vessels - that is one in every ten vessels arrived on the mainland under the  previous Government. 

 But our naval and customs personnel, as I say, do remarkably well. They do brave work, they do fine  work, and they should not be attacked unfairly by the opposition. 

 Now, I've made very clear that it is the Government's intention to ensure that those people on that  vessel, when practicable, will be sent to Christmas Island for processing. And if the international  obligations pursuant to the Refugee Convention are not exercised, then they will be going directly to  Sri Lanka. 

 In the past few months we've had almost 1,000 Sri Lankans returned to Sri Lanka. That sends the  most powerful message of all, that if you are not exercising our obligations under the convention, if  you are not here to be afforded protection, you will be going directly home. 

 That approach has meant that we have had only three vessels since the 24th of December arrive  from Sri Lanka, and we will continue that approach wherever possible. 

 Now in relation to the comments by the Opposition, they are bordering on hysteria. The breathless  comments by the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister are quite absurd, particularly  when you look at the record of the Howard Government in the amount of vessels arriving on the  mainland undetected. My view on that is that this is Tony Abbott hoping to distract people from the  pathetic broadband policy he announced yesterday. I mean this is a joke of a policy from a man who  is not fit to be Prime Minister. And the sort of comments he has made last week, when comparing  our economy to Cyprus, and of course today suggesting that we're surrendering our borders, is  typical of a person who uses hysteria and fear to cause anxiety within the community. 

 Now I'm happy to take questions. 

 QUESTION: Were you surprised that they ended up in Gerladton and the way it happened  yesterday? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's always a surprise when it's an exception, it wouldn't have been a surprise  when it was happening more often a decade ago. As I say 11 vessels under the previous  administration. But it was exceptional, and it is a very unusual route, I have to say it's a very long  journey, they're very lucky that they did not perish at sea, and of course for that I'm certainly happy  that that has happened. But it is exceptional, and as I've made very clear we will be having - we will  send them to Christmas Island for processing. 

 QUESTION: But you want to send them to Christmas Island, why charter a plane at tax payer's  expense. Why not process them at Geraldton? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Because - well for a variety of reasons. Firstly, the majority of processing  occurs on the island, including the sort of services provided, such as translators and others who do  this job very well, expeditiously. 

 Secondly; the facilities, both the alternative accommodation and the detention centre are purpose  built for accommodating both families and single adult males. 

 And thirdly, and I agree with the department on this, this sends a very strong message to people  smugglers that if they seek to tell people that if you get to the mainland you'll be processed on the  mainland, well that is just simply untrue. 

 So it's important, both in terms of sending that message to people smugglers and also deterring  people, most importantly deterring people getting on these unseaworthy vessels, endangering their  life. We've seen too many maritime fatalities, we do not want to see any more, and that's why it's  absolutely critical that the Opposition support the recommendations of the expert panel to  implement all of the border protection policies that the government want to introduce, including the  Malaysian arrangement, so that we do see fewer vessels coming in this manner, and we do see  fewer people endangering their lives getting on these vessels. 

 QUESTION: These people must be really hoodwinked by the people smugglers because they  reported they were on their way to New Zealand. I mean how can that happen? I mean surely they  wouldn't be able to make it? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well there's been - it's not the first time there's been attempts to go to New  Zealand and I imagine it won't be the last. But they - look, the processing will I think - we'll find out  what the true intention was there. 

 Yes, we know that was what they suggested yesterday, but I will wait for the advice from the  department after the processing occurs and, as I say, it's not the first - it wouldn't have been the first  time that there has been a vessel seeking to go to New Zealand. 

 QUESTION: Colin Barnett said yesterday that this arrival raises concerns about crime gangs and drug  syndicates entering Australia, are those valid concerns? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look we've obviously detained these people, as always we detain people for  identity security and health purposes, and we've got professional people undertaking the  examination of these 66 detainees. 

 I do think it's bordering on hysteria to start suggesting that there is such a concern. I think that we  need to do the right thing here; they've been apprehended, they've been detained, they'll be  examined. They'll be detained until we are convinced that there are no security issues, and as I said  most importantly, where there is no - where they have no entitlement to the protection pursuant to  the Refugee Convention they'll be sent home. 

 Now in the last few months there's been almost 1,000 sent back to Sri Lanka, and we will be looking  of course to do that provided that our obligations are not exercised as a result of the processing that  will occur. 

 QUESTION: You’ve obviously been briefed by authorities, what was the reason it go so close? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: As I say this is a very unusual and dangerous and very long path to take. So  that's the first thing. We will, and the minister for home affairs has made very clear, that we'll review  the posturing of our vessels and speak with customs and border protection. We have an excellent  customs and naval agency that do remarkable work, brave work, and are very capable. The fact that  there's been only two vessels arrive on the mainland in five years is a testament to the  professionalism and dedication of our customs and naval personnel. 

 QUESTION: On the hunger strike, it seems that ambulance (inaudible) what’ you information on  what’s going on (inaudible). 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I'm advised that the person was dehydrated, and for that reason there's  been medical attention provided to that person. We always will dedicate a duty of care to people in  our custody, and no different for the person today or for any other person in our detention network.  We have fine medical staff that treat people, but my advice is on that matter, that there was an  issue of dehydration. 

 QUESTION: What are you instructions to staff at this time, during this situation, what do they do  intervene in this hunger strike… 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well look, the people who undertake the care of detainees are professionals,  they receive advice, it will be based on the facts as they find them, the circumstances in which  they're in. And I think we'll take a very sensible approach. 

 You have to remember this so called hunger strike started yesterday, and we take it seriously, and  we'll attend to their health needs, but the Government will never make any policy changes based  around any particular withdrawal of eating or other forms of conduct. 

 We will not change our position because of the conduct of people in detention. We will attend to  their needs, but people have to understand the Government will not make policy changes in such a  manner. 

 QUESTION: You say it started yesterday, I was under the impression it started Monday, by saying it  started yesterday are you suggesting (inaudible) 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, I'm just saying that with anything such as this the issue becomes more  fraught the longer it goes. I'm advised it was early in the morning of yesterday, but my point is we  are attending to their care. There has been an issue of someone being dehydrated, we've attended  to the care of that person, but this Government will not make any policy changes because people  are conducting themselves in any particular manner to try and influence Government decision  making. 

 Our Government decisions will be based on what is in the interest of this country. We will fulfil our  obligations under the convention, but we will not be influenced by conduct in this way. 

 QUESTION: Being Tamils do you think they are a danger to the community? Because they want to be  released, they want to get out of there. So do you think... 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it's not for me to think whether one person or other is a security issue.  We rely upon, quite rightly, ASIO to determine the clearance, the security clearance or otherwise, of  a person in detention. Overwhelmingly ASIO determines that there are not security issues with  respect to detainees, but they have identified a number. And we take their advice very seriously. 

 We will always ensure that national security is front and centre when we make decisions in relation  to border protection, and if ASIO has not provided a clearance to a particular person, then we take  that seriously and act on that advice. 

 QUESTION: What's your message now to the asylum seekers? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Which ones in particular I'm sorry? 

 QUESTION: Well the ones at Broadmeadows. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well look what I've made clear - my predecessor and the former Attorney-General actually implemented a review by a Justice Stone to look at the way in which this is handled.  She is progressing that review, and she will refer any recommendations she may have to the Director  of ASIO, which I think is appropriate. 

 This is of course a very vexed issue. You have people who might be afforded protection as a refugee,  but they have not had a security clearance. But the Government will always put national security  first. 

 But, given the difficulty of this area, we've sought a review from Justice Stone and as I say that  review is underway. 

 QUESTION: Given the opposition wants you to change the migration laws in terms of excising the  Australian mainland from the migration zone. And you want the Malaysia solution, is there any... 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No we want both, and in fact it's our legislation that's in the Senate and that  will be passed. And I didn't mean to interrupt you. 

 But we've got - there's a whole bunch of things that we want done. We want all of the 22  recommendations that Angus Houston, the former Chief of the Australian Defence Force put to the  Government, and we want the Opposition to stop putting their base political interests ahead of the  national interest. Support the Malaysian arrangement, not just support the legislation that's in the 

 Senate that will excise the mainland, that's our legislation. Support that, yes, make sure that's done  when we next sit, but also support the Malaysian arrangement because that, along with other  reforms within the 22 recommendations will reduce the likelihood that people will get on these  vessels and endanger their lives, and of course also support the 20,000 places under the  humanitarian program which means people will realise they can take the regular path and seek  asylum in that manner and reduce the deaths at sea. 

 But what we've had to date is Tony Abbott putting his personal political interests ahead of the  national interest, and in doing so he's endangering lives. Not only of those on vessels, but also our  naval and customs personnel who are asked to deal with this issue operationally each and every day. 

 It's irresponsible, it's against the national interest, and I ask again the Opposition to change its  position and for once listen to the experts and implement the policies they've recommended to  Government. 

 QUESTION: Minister O’Connor, just on your point about these people being sent to Christmas Island  because there’s the staff there, there’s the facilities there, are you telling us there isn’t the capacity  onshore… 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No I didn't say that, and I said actually there was a third reason, and if you'd  actually been listening... The third reason was that we want to send a very strong message that just  because you reach the mainland, you're not going to be processed on the mainland. That's an  important message to people smugglers who are seeking to sell the message that if you seek to take  the most dangerous route, and not just go to Christmas Island, but go as far as the mainland, which,  by the way is far more dangerous because it's a far longer journey, then people think that they'll be  processed here. 

 They will not be processed on the mainland per se just because they've arrived on the mainland.  That is our position, and that is as important as the other reasons I've also outlined including the  purpose built facilities and of course the resources. 

 Most of the processing does occur on Christmas Island, and as I say if they're not afforded, if they're  not to be afforded the protection because they don't fit within the entitlements pursuant to the  Refugee Convention they will be sent back to Sri Lanka, as has almost 1,000 Sri Lankans in the last  few months. 

 QUESTION: Minister O’Connor I was listening, but if you’re saying that there is the capacity on shore  then isn’t it disingenuous to use that as one of your three reasons at least? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I put all three together. I have not said one in isolation, I'm giving you... 

 QUESTION: But that one specifically, if you’re saying that there is capacity onshore, to use that as an  excuse, isn’t that disingenuous? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR:I'm not giving you as an excuse, I'm giving you the reasons why the  department... 

 QUESTION: Whatever language you want to use. 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well if you want to let me answer the question. I'm giving you the - there's  more than one reason, they're the three reasons. And I'm giving you all reason, and I've never  isolated one reason from the other, I put all three together. 

 QUESTION: Just on the detention centre hunger strike, refugee advocates say there was  five people  that fainted there, is that correct? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look I haven't received a briefing other than one person had dehydration,  and we've actually attended to their medical needs. 

 I mean look, this country deals with people very, very well. I'm sort of surprised when we get  attacked. We have the highest humanitarian program per capita in the world. We have the second  highest places - the highest per capita and the second highest in the world in putting people into -  settling people in Australia because they're fleeing persecution. 

 We are a fair and decent country, and I do not accept the contention by some that we treat people  unfairly. We put in place policies to prevent people endangering their own life. Let me tell you,  whatever difficulties people might have on occasion in the detention network, it's not the same as  three-year-old children dying at sea. It's not the same of babies and mothers dying at sea. That's  happened, it happened in 2001, it's happened more recently, it should stop. And that's why the  Opposition should, along with the Greens, who are also abrogating the responsibility, should attend  to this, listen to the experts and agree with the Government to implement the 22 recommendations  as outlined by three eminent Australians who've got 75 years of experience on these matters. 

 QUESTION: Just on New Zealand, there was a group of Chinese asylum seekers who landed in Darwin  either last year or the year before and who were allowed to go to New Zealand directly, what’s the  difference in this case? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look I'm not sure of the example to which you refer. 

 QUESTION: There was a group of around 20 or so that arrived in Darwin that wanted to go to New  Zealand, they were sent there, why not this group? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well as I say, they'll be processed, they've arrived on our shores, they've  arrived in our territory. They'll be processed properly in accordance with the law, with our  international obligations, and they'll be sent back to Sri Lanka if they're not exercising that  obligation. 

 I'm not aware of what New Zealand's position is. I'm not aware if that's actually in fact accurate,  whatever the assertions are. That's something that should be undertaken operationally by dedicated  and professional staff of the department and other agencies. 

 QUESTION: Have you spoken to your New Zealand colleagues in the Immigration Department or  Ministry over there? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well look, one thing I applaud New Zealand for is being part of the  settlement, and they've already agreed of course to have 150 places put aside for settlement, I think  that's a good thing. We need all countries of origin, transit and destination working together. This is  the regional challenge, that's why we met in Bali last week - 37 countries meeting to deal with this 

 challenge. This is a global problem, this is not a problem that Australia deals with alone. Every first  world country deals with this challenge, so does all of those countries of transit and countries of  origin, and that's why we need a regional solution. And to that extent of course New Zealand have  said that it would settle 150. I have not spoken to my New Zealand counterpart. 

 Thank you very much. 

 

