---
title: "PEFO 2013: Three revelations, three confirmations and proof Labor can't get its numbers right"
date: "2013-08-14"
creators:
  - "Hockey, Joe"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398765
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2662175%22
---

 

 

 Media Release    

 The Hon Joe Hockey MP  Shadow Treasurer  Coalition Campaign Spokesman    

 The Hon Andrew Robb AO MP  Shadow Minister for Finance, Deregulation and Debt Reduction  Chairman of the Coalition Policy Development Committee    

 

 Tuesday 13 August 2013    

 PEFO 2013: Three revelations, three confirmations and   proof Labor can’t get its numbers right    

 On a day where National Australia Bank announced business conditions remain at a four year  low and confidence has continued to fall, Treasury and Finance confirmed Labor’s Budget  emergency.     

 Revelation 1: An extra quarter of a billion dollars of Carbon Tax in just 11 days    

 Kevin Rudd deliberately misled the Australian people when he claimed, less than a month  ago, that the Carbon Tax was “terminated”.     

 Under Labor, the Carbon Tax is alive and well.     

 Treasury and Finance state that Kevin Rudd’s Carbon Tax is due to raise an extra quarter of a  billion dollars over the next four years - and that’s compared to the numbers Labor released  just 11 days ago in their   Economic Statement.     

 Treasury also affirms that the Carbon Tax will rise to $38 a tonne by 2019-2020, meaning all  Australian families will continue to suffer the growing impact of the Carbon Tax on their  electricity bills under Labor.     

 The revenue changes - due to a higher European carbon price and movements in the  exchange rate - confirm that linkage to the European carbon market shackles part of our  Budget and Australian families’ cost of living to the decisions of European bureaucrats in  Brussels.     

 Revelation 2: Cost of Labor’s border protection crisis could blow out to $15 billion    

 The document also shows that the cost of Labor’s Border Protection crisis now risks blowing  out to over $15 billion with the documents confirming the real risk of a further $3.5 billion  blowout over the forward estimates.     

 Treasury analysis shows that if recent illegal boat arrival rates are maintained even just  through 2013-14, before dropping back sharply (as the Government assumes), the associated  costs could blow out by a further $3.5 billion, bringing the total cost blowout to over  $15 billion.    

 Revelation 3: Downside risks and the structural Budget position    

 Treasury confirmed there is more volatility ahead for the Budget. Treasury stated that the  risks for the Budget are largely on the downside, noting that:    

 “The crisis in the euro area remains unresolved, and markets are anxious about how  the eventual unwinding of US monetary policy will play out. There is also lingering  uncertainty about the sustainability of Japan’s recovery, while markets remain  concerned about financial developments in China.” (Source: 2013 PEFO, p2)     

 Updated Treasury forecasts of the structural Budget balance show the Budget remaining in  structural deficit even beyond the forward estimates. Clearly Labor has no strategy to restore  the Budget’s structural integrity.     

 Confirmation 1: Growth will be slower and unemployment will continue to rise    

 Treasury confirms that the number of unemployed - already over 700,000, the highest level  in more than 14 years - will continue to rise, approaching 800,000 by June next year.    

 Growth will be slower for the current financial year at 2.5 per cent - all while Labor has no  strategy for economic growth.     

 Confirmation 2: The nation’s credit card will be maxed out (again) by Christmas    

 The document confirms that the nation’s current debt limit of $300 billion will be maxed out  by Christmas.     

 Labor has already been forced to increase the debt limit from $75 billion, to $200 billion, to  $250 billion, and to $300 billion just last year (2013 PEFO, p16 second last paragraph).     

 Debt will further rise to $370 billion within three years.      

 Just to service Australia’s debt will cost $10 billion in wasted interest payments every year -  and that is before a dollar of debt is even repaid.  

 

 Confirmation 3: The deterioration of the Budget has been confirmed    

 Treasury confirms that Labor’s Budget bottom line has deteriorated by $33 billion since the  May Budget - or around $3 billion a week.  The Budget deficit for this year will be $30  billion - more than $10 billion worse than last Financial Year and a deterioration of $12  billion in less than three months.     

 The PEFO refers specifically to $1.2 billion in schools payments for Western Australia,  Queensland and the Northern Territory. Press reports indicate that these are funds which will  not be paid.     

 The Government must immediately clarify whether it is ripping $1.2 billion away from these  three jurisdictions.     

 Conclusion    

 This document confirms Labor’s Budget mess. Labor has no economic plan - no plan for  jobs and no plan for growth.     

 The Coalition will carefully consider the revelations and confirmations contained in the  document.     

 Media Contacts:        Tony Ritchie 0407 002 704 (Hockey)                                      Cameron Hill 0408 239 521 (Robb) 

 

 

 Members of the media wishing to subscribe or unsubscribe to Coalition Campaign Media announcements please email  CoalitionMedia@chq.liberal.org.au     

 Authorised and printed by Brian Loughnane, Cnr Blackall and Macquarie Sts BARTON ACT 2600 

 

 

 

 The information contained in this e-mail, and any attachments to it, is intended for the use of the addressee  and is confidential. If you are not the intended recipient you must not use, disclose, read, forward, copy or  retain any of the information. If you have received this e-mail in error, please delete it and notify the sender by  return e-mail. 

 

