---
title: "Brand Labor continues its toxic slide"
date: "2013-03-12"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391792
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2292535%22
---

 10 March 2013      

 Brand Labor continues its toxic slide   

 FEDERAL leader of The Nationals Warren Truss has congratulated Colin Barnett and Brendon Grylls  on their landslide return to government in Western Australia.   

 “Even in opposition WA Labor managed to go backwards,” Mr Truss observed. “With everyone  praising the campaign WA Labor leader Mark McGowan ran, the West’s empathic rejection of Labor  undoubtedly has federal overtones.   

 “That takes nothing away from the government Colin Barnet leads and the resounding success of the  WA Nationals, who have won back seats.   

 “The West Australian result continues the strong gains made by The Nationals in state and federal  elections over the past three years.   

 “Indeed, Brendon Grylls’ courageous preparedness to leave his seat in the state’s south to wrest a  seat back from Labor in the Pilbara has been handsomely rewarded, requiring a 7% swing he won a  swing of almost 20%.   

 “The WA Nationals’ iconic Royalties for Regions program, which pumps $1 billion into regional WA,  was on everyone’s lips while I was campaigning with candidates just over a week ago. It makes good  on The Nationals pledge that a fair share of the wealth regional areas generate must be re-invested  in the regions.   

 “But there is no escaping that Julia Gillard wasn’t welcome out west and for good reason. Her carbon  tax is a dead weight on families, businesses and the economy, her mining tax is a drag on investment  and job creation, and her asylum seeker surrender has seen the human trafficking business go  gangbusters and be rewarded with community releases.   

 “Despite the fact that the Prime Minister didn’t dare put in an appearance throughout the WA  campaign, that didn’t stop West Australians continuing the resounding rejection of Labor that swept  NSW, Queensland, the NT and now WA in the wake of the government she leads.   

 “Federal Labor can’t hide from voters forever.   

 “Their carefully stage-managed jaunt through western Sydney last week only highlighted the extent  to which Labor’s heartland has been neglected, while exposing Labor’s contempt for regional areas  with the Prime Minister having never spent a week in the bush.   

 “As successive state elections have shown, the voters will not be denied and federal Labor’s day of  reckoning is coming.”   

 [ENDS]   

 Media Contact: Brett Heffernan on (02) 6277 4482 or 0467 650 020 or brett.heffernan@aph.gov.au   

