---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 6 December 2013: asylum seekers on Christmas Island"
date: "2013-12-06"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211401553
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2888224%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  FRIDAY, 6 DECEMBER 2013   

 SUBJECT/S: Asylum seekers on Christmas Island    

 RICHARD MARLES: What we’ve seen in the last 24 hours is a truly extraordinary  incident. Before the election the Coalition promised the Australian people that when  it came to border protection they would bring to bear the focus and the discipline of  a targeted military operation.      

 The question that now needs to be answered is how, with this focus and this  discipline, we see a boat arrive on Christmas Island without it even being detected?  How with this focus and this discipline is it possible for asylum seekers to spend  three days in Australia without ever being noticed? On this occasion Minister  Morrison was not hiding anything from the Australian people when the boat arrived  on Monday, because he himself did not even know.     

 What is absolutely clear is that we have a Government here which is not in control.  We’ve heard that four boats have arrived in the last week. Now in the last two  weeks before the federal election, when the PNG arrangement had had a couple of  months to take effect, we were down to an average of two boats arriving per week.  That shows that the PNG arrangement was working then and it is working now. The  flow of boats is substantially less than what it has been. But it’s not because of  Operation Sovereign Borders, it’s not because of the way Minister Morrison is  handling this portfolio, it is because of the PNG arrangement which Labor put in  place.     

 What we’ve seen from day one is that the Abbott Government has been inept in its  diplomacy with Indonesia around asylum seekers, they’ve done this in a schoolyard  manner, they have failed to show any resolve, and what we know now as a result of 

 the last week is that they are doing this without any competence at all. This is a  government which is no longer in control.    

 Any questions?    

 JOURNALIST: What do you think needs to be done?    

 MARLES: Well, what we need to hear from Minister Morrison is an explanation. An  explanation about how it is possible that people could have arrived in this  circumstance without being detected, we need an explanation as to how it’s possible  that asylum seekers can be in this country for three days without ever being noticed.     

 We actually need to see Minister Morrison get rid of all the bells and whistles of  Operation Sovereign Borders and focus on the main game here, and that is  prosecuting the PNG arrangement. And despite what he says, he clearly believes in  the PNG arrangement. Minister Morrison went to Papua New Guinea, has not  changed a single clause of the arrangement that Labor put in place. That’s what’s  making the difference, that’s what this government needs to commit to.  ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524   

