---
title: "Record arrivals continue under distracted and divided Labor Government"
date: "2013-03-19"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392181
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2311959%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Record arrivals continue under distracted and divided Labor Government 

 Tuesday 19th March 2013 

 Two more illegal boat arrivals, with a total of almost 150 people on board, means 1,000 more people 

 have arrived by boat so far this year than over the same period last year, as Labor sinks deeper into 

 division and dysfunction, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and 

 Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “Fresh from a record year of failure on our borders Labor’s continued refusal to restore the full suite 

 of proven border protection measures and their continued distraction and dysfunction is taking their 

 border protection chaos to a whole new level,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Meanwhile people smugglers continue to get everything they ever wanted from this government - 

 record profits and a guaranteed business model of permanent residency for their clients who they 

 send on the perilous journey to Australia.  

 

 “The human toll of Labor’s border failure is a staggering 40,000 offshore humanitarian applicants  who were rejected Australian visas last year or 85% of everyone who applied. This is compared to  just 9% of applicants who arrived by boat who missed out.     

 “It doesn’t matter how many times Julia Gillard desperately tries to distract people, the boats keep  turning up on her watch. Kevin Rudd started them and Julia Gillard won’t stop them. Only a change  of government will get our borders back under control,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

 Mr Keenan said: “So far for the month of March there have been 11 more boats carrying more than  seven times the amount of people that arrived in March last year.     

 “The numbers don’t lie - Labor cannot hide from the stark reality that clearly indicates the extent to  which they have failed to protect Australia’s borders.     

 “This Government claims to be tough on stopping the boats but all their actions, from preventing the  reinstatement of temporary protection visas to restoring full access to the courts for boat arrivals,  proves otherwise.      

 “With such a record of failure its remarkable that Labor refuses to change approach as they cling to  failed policies despite all of the evidence that shows how damaging they have been for Australia,”  Mr Keenan said.    

