---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 12 November 2013: Government secrecy over boat policy; Prime Minister being loose with the truth on the debt cap"
date: "2013-11-12"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Government secrecy over boat policy"
  - "Prime Minister being loose with the truth on the debt cap"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211400583
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2842488%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  TUESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2013  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA   

 Subjects: Government secrecy over boat policy; Prime Minister being  loose with the truth on the debt cap   

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION, BILL SHORTEN: Today we see an  extraordinary situation, the Abbott Government’s boats policy is in complete  disarray. We’ve got a senior advisor to the Indonesian Government, today,  contradicting Immigration Minister Scott Morrison’s version of events. What on  earth is going on with the boats policy? How is it that we’ve managed to get our  nearest largest neighbour so offside that they're commenting, directly  contradicting our own Government's policies. It's time that the Government  owned up to what's really going on. Their boat policy is in tatters and it makes  me wonder, what else is the Government hiding that we have to rely on  Indonesia to find out what's going on with Australian Government policy?  

 The other thing today which is quite extraordinary is that we've seen the  Coalition Government assert now in retrospect, through the rear vision mirror of  history, that somehow they supported Labor's propositions to increase the debt  cap by $50 billion when we were in Government and the Coalition was in  Opposition. 

 The Hansard record clearly reflects that when the now Government had the  opportunity to support Labor to reasonably increase the national debt cap, they  attacked increasing the debt cap and they resisted it with every inch of their  being.  

 Mr Abbott by his own admission is loose with the truth.  

 The fact that Hansard, the official record of the Parliament of Australia, shows  that when Mr Abbott was in Opposition they resisted increasing the debt cap at  all, shows that they are desperate to run up the Australian credit card and  increase it by nearly double and this is not on. Labor being constructive has said  we will support an increase to $400 billion. We're not going to give people loose  with the truth unfettered access to the national credit card.  

 Happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you support a people swap deal [inaudible] with  Indonesia?  

 SHORTEN: First of all, let's find out what the Government's doing on  immigration. They promised they would be able to stop the boats. Now they're  hiding the boats, now their hiding behind the military. First things first, let's just 

 see what really is going on with this boats policy that the Coalition promised and  clearly isn't delivering.  

 REPORTER: In principle though, given that Labor supported a people swap deal  with Malaysia, would you be ideologically supportive of sending asylum seekers  back to Indonesia that are picked up within a search and rescue area in  exchange for genuine refugees?  

 SHORTEN: This isn't a matter of ideology, first of all it’s a matter of the  Government telling the truth to the Australian people. I can't believe the  disrespect they’ve shown to Australia's media when they refuse to talk about  what's happening, when we have to buy a copy of the 'Jakarta Post' to find out  what Scott Morrison is doing. That's not a way to run the nation. Before we get  to new Government ideas, I think it's about time they explained how their  existing ideas are working or not working.  

 REPORTER: We know talks are going on with Indonesia, so do you support  those talks?  

 SHORTEN: I support working with Indonesia, not telling them what to do. This  patronising, paternalistic manner of the Government where they just think they  are right and they’ll just stamp their foot regardless of anyone and anything else 

 to me is breathtaking. What are the Government hiding? We all know that their  policy's in tatters. They clearly don't want to tell us what's going on. I think what  they're discovering is you can say one thing in Opposition, but if you do another  thing in Government the Australian people will say hang on a second, we voted 

 for you, but we want to make sure that what we bought at the election is what  we are getting after the election.  

 REPORTER: On the debt ceiling, is $400 billion non-negotiatable for you?  

 SHORTEN: We’ve made it clear, that we do support a legitimate increase in the  debt cap. Let's face it, every Australian knows, Joe Hockey said that increasing  the debt ceiling is not the way to solve a debt problem. Now he says it is. We all  know that if you just want to double the credit card limit on the national credit  card, they want to do it once so they don't have to come back to Parliament and  explain their economic policies. They won the election, that's fair. What they  didn't win in the election is the right to run up debt like a drunken sailor and to  simply say trust us and we'll be back later to tell you what's going on. 

 We've offered a sensible compromise. I’m a middle of the road guy. Labor wants  to be constructive. Why don't they release their Mid-Year Economic Fiscal  Outlook? Why don't they tell us the real picture? This is a Government who  wants to say trust us now and we'll tell you the detail later. That's not the way  Australia works. We want to see the detail and know what we're buying.  

 Thanks very much everyone, I’ve got to go to Parliament.  

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION’S MEDIA UNIT 02 6277  4053 

 

