---
title: "10,000: not in my name, not with my vote"
date: "2013-09-05"
creators:
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211437004
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2707308%22
---

 10,000: NOT IN MY NAME, NOT WITH MY VOTE   

 Over 10,000 Australians have signed a public pledge not to vote for either Kevin Rudd or  Tony Abbott’s because of their cruel approach to refugees, following a national  campaign by the Australian Greens.   

 Newspaper advertisements publishing the names of thousands of people who have  pledged: Not In My Name, Not With My Vote have been published in the Age and  Sydney Morning Herald papers today.    

 “The cruel approach by both the Labor and Liberal parties will see thousands of voters  turn away from the old parties this election,” Australian Greens Leader Senator Christine  Milne said.    

 The Greens launched the website www.notwithmyvote.com.au at the beginning of the  election campaign to urge Australians to stand up against Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott  and their cruel and dangerous asylum seeker policies.    

 “Australians are sick and tired of Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott and their race to the  bottom on refugees,” Senator Milne said.   

 “Their cruel policies of sending anyone who comes by boat to dangerous offshore  detention camps in Papua New Guinea and Nauru does not fit with our hopes for a  decent and caring Australia.   

 “That’s why so many Australians have joined the Greens’ campaign not in my name, not  with my vote to say ‘enough is enough’ - no more cruelty and punishment.   

 “They will not be voting for Kevin Rudd or Tony Abbott at this election because they are  disgusted by their approach of slamming the door on refugees and dumping them out of  sight and out of mind in PNG and Nauru.    

 “There are a number of people who have signed up to our campaign who have never  voted for the Greens before. In fact, some of them are terminating their party  memberships with the ALP and the Coalition because they are fed up and disappointed  with the old parties treating refugees so badly.    

 “Voters will be sending a clear message to Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott on Saturday  that the only way forward is to support the Greens’ by caring for refugees.”   

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said that a recent Newspoll showed that the majority of  Australians don’t want women and children to be sent to Australia’s island prisons on  Nauru and in PNG.   

 “The Greens are the only party offering an alternative to the harsh approach of the old  parties. We are giving people a choice to say that this cruelty isn’t being carried out in  their name,” Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “Once parliament resumes I will introduce a bill into the Senate that will amend the  Migration Act so that children and families cannot be sent offshore.   

 “Australians are generous and the majority of people don’t want to see vulnerable  children sent to the horrible conditions on Nauru or forced to live in the Malaria ridden  camps of Manus Island.   

 “The Greens are standing up for refugee children and the Australians who understand  that there is a better way.”   

 Media contacts:   Senator Milne - Peter Stahel 0437 587 562  Senator Hanson-Young - Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

