---
title: "Transcript of interview: Darwin Doorstop: 4 July 2013: Election date, pink batts policy, Queensland Coroner’s report, policy for Northern Australia, live cattle exports, border protection policy, Egypt leadership crisis"
date: "2013-06-04"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "Election date"
  - "pink batts policy"
  - "Queensland Coroner’s report"
  - "policy for Northern Australia"
  - "live cattle exports"
  - "border protection policy"
  - "Egypt leadership crisis"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395358
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2772498%22
---

 

  Julie Bishop MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 

 

 Darwin Doorstop 

 4 July 2013 

 Subjects: Election date, pink batts policy, Queensland Coroner’s report, policy for Northern  Australia, live cattle exports, border protection policy, Egypt leadership crisis   

 E&OE…   

 JULIE BISHOP Well I’m delighted to be here in Darwin, in the Territory, campaigning with  my friend and colleague Natasha Griggs, the Member for Solomon.    

 Kevin Rudd is not honouring the 14th of September as an election date but we must assume  there will be an election held at some stage and we do want him to nominate an election date  so that there can be some certainty around this campaign.    

 The people that I’ve been speaking to in the Territory and in Darwin today and the people  I’ve been speaking to around the country are looking for certainty and stability, competence  and experience in government. That’s what a Coalition Government will provide.    

 We’re talking to the people in the Territory about the Coalition’s vision - 2030 Vision for  Developing Northern Australia - and we’re getting some feedback on the economic  opportunities for Territorians.   Adam Giles the Chief Minister says that the Territory is 'open for business' and the Coalition  wants to support Territorians in realising their potential. 

 Today we have learned that the chaos within the Rudd Government continues from where it  left off three years ago. The Queensland Coroner’s report is a scathing, damning indictment  of the former Rudd Government. It seems that there were warnings about the risks of rolling 

 out this pink batts scheme so quickly. There were warnings of the risk to human life. There  were warnings about the dangers of electrocution and these warnings were ignored by the  Rudd Government.    

 Kevin Rudd must explain how it is that these warnings - which led in four instances to a loss  of life - how it is that they were ignored. How is it that the risks were not taken into account  in this scandalous scheme of rolling out pink batts in homes across Australia?   

 Kevin Rudd must release the letters containing warnings that were sent to his government  because so far no one in the former Rudd Government has taken any responsibility for this  scandal. Kevin Rudd is known for his erratic and chaotic manner. This is the time for Kevin  Rudd to show that he can be trusted with a program, can be trusted with government. He  should release all of the letters that were sent to his government warning of these risks and  then explain why it was they were ignored.    

 Any questions?   

 JOURNALIST To what extent is Kevin Rudd responsible for pink batts [inaudible]?   

 JULIE BISHOP This was Kevin Rudd’s scheme. He came up with a number of stimulus  programs in response to the Global Financial Crisis. We now know that these schemes were  rushed out quickly.   We now know from the Queensland Coroner that the pink batts scheme in particular didn’t  pay attention to the risks of danger to human life. That is the responsibility of government.  Kevin Rudd was the head of the government at the time. He’s now back as the head of the  government. He must take ultimate responsibility.   

 JOURNALIST What is your reaction to the findings?   

 JULIE BISHOP It’s scandalous. I cannot think of a worse example of a Federal Government  rolling out a service delivery program than one where people actually lost their lives. There  was damage to property. There was loss of life. It has been an utter waste of money, billions  of dollars of taxpayers money has been wasted.    

 The Queensland Coroner's report demands an explanation from the government and I call on  Kevin Rudd to release the letters that contained warnings about the risks that this program  posed to human life and damage to property and give a full explanation as to why these  warnings were ignored.    

 JOURNALIST Your 2030 Vision for Northern Australia has been criticised as a ‘policy to  one day have a policy’. What concrete things are in place for the people of Northern  Australia?   

 JULIE BISHOP We put in place a proper process. We don’t tell Territorians, or Western  Australians, or Queenslanders what to do. We want their input and their feedback. Our Vision  2030 Developing Northern Australia project seeks feedback, seeks input from people in the  Territory. We’re asking for submissions.    

 We’re going to set up a strategic partnership with the Prime Minister, the Premiers of  Queensland and New South Wales and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory so that 

 we can develop specific plans.    

 But one thing we can do now is address the problems caused by the Gillard Government’s  ban on live cattle exports to Indonesia. We will be supporting trade opportunities from the  Territory but we need to ensure that Australia’s reputation as a trusted and reliable supplier  can be restored. That is what Kevin Rudd should be doing in Indonesia. He should be  reassuring President Yudhoyono that Australia can once more be regarded as a trusted and  reliable supplier of goods because that ban by the Labor Government on live cattle exports  has not only damaged our standing in Indonesia, it affected food security in Indonesia and has  caused widespread damage in the cattle industry in Australia, particularly here in the  Northern Territory.   

 JOURNALIST What would the Coalition do, Ms Bishop, if it took power to reverse some of  the impacts of that live cattle export ban?   

 JULIE BISHOP Tony Abbott and I have been to Indonesia. We have met with the relevant  Ministers, the feedlot operators, the abattoir owners. We have discussed ways to restore our  standing. We have promised a ‘no surprises’ policy with Indonesia. That is, we will consult  with Indonesia on matters that affect their national interest and we will not impose bans such  as the Labor Government did which have such a devastating impact, not only on the industry  in Australia and in the Northern Territory, but also in Indonesia.    

 We are working with the industry to find ways to reassure Indonesians that we can be trusted  if they increase their quota of beef and we hope through closer economic relationships we’ll  be able to restore that.    

 We do propose to make as a first order priority Free Trade Agreements with a number of  countries in our region so we can increase a number of opportunities through new markets  and enhancing old markets in China, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and India, amongst other  countries. So there are a number of policies that we already have in place that we hope will  boost Australia’s economy as well as restoring relations with countries in the region.    

 JOURNALIST You don’t think the Coalition’s policy of turning back boats to Indonesia will  do even further damage to our relationship with Indonesia?    

 JULIE BISHOP Not at all. Indonesia is well aware of our policy. It’s a return to the Howard  Government policies that worked. Kevin Rudd unpicked policies that worked and restarted  the people smuggling trade. We need to change the laws in Australia to stop that trade.    

 John Howard introduced laws that stopped the people smuggling trade. Kevin Rudd  introduced laws that restarted that people smuggling trade. We will change the laws of  Australia back to the policies that worked, that stopped the boats. It’s an inescapable fact that  the change of laws under the Howard Government stopped the flow of boats through the  people smuggling trade.    

 JOURNALIST Kevin Rudd has conceded that he made some mistakes in rolling back those  policies brought in by the Howard Government. On the eve of going to Indonesia to meet  with President Yudhoyono surely that shows that there’s going to be some fruitful debate?   

 JULIE BISHOP Too little, too late. Kevin Rudd rolled these laws back in 2008 and since then 

 over 45,000 people have risked their lives coming to Australia by boat. Hundreds and  hundreds of people have died at sea as a result of the changing of the policies by Kevin  Rudd’s Government that got worse under Julia Gillard’s Government.    

 It’s all very well for Kevin Rudd to now concede years too late, hundreds of deaths later, that  he got it wrong. What we need Kevin Rudd to do is to put back in place the policies that  worked. Accept that the Coalition had it right and that he is responsible for unpicking the  policies that have caused so much chaos in our border protection system.    

 JOURNALIST The government has today confirmed that they’ve removed the final children  from Manus Island. What do you make of that? Do you support that move?   

 JULIE BISHOP Once more, this is the Government blundering along with its erratic policy  decisions. We didn’t ever support that move. The Government is now admitting that they got  it wrong.    

 The Government should listen to the Coalition because we have been warning them that the  unpicking of our policies would lead to this eruption in the people smuggling trade through  boat arrivals, the chaos in our detention centres, the loss of life at sea and we urged Kevin  Rudd to acknowledge that the Coalition had it right and put back in place the policies that  work. It shouldn’t be about Mr Rudd’s ego. It should be about the national interest.    

 JOURNALIST Do you worry that this debate is dehumanising people who are legitimately  trying to seek asylum and making Australia the laughing stock of the world?   

 JULIE BISHOP There is nothing humanitarian about encouraging people smugglers to sell a  business model that sees people get on boats and take a dangerous sea journey to Australia.  Hundreds and hundreds of people have died at sea under this Government’s watch. There is  nothing humanitarian about that. We need to stop the boats and dismantle the people  smuggling trade and put back in place integrity in our refugee system, in our immigration  system.   

 JOURNALIST Would you say that you’re confident the Country Liberal Party can steal the  seat of Lingiari off Labor?   

 JULIE BISHOP We know this is going to be a tough election. The Labor Party has got up to  its old trick of dumping an unpopular leader on the eve of an election hoping that it can trick  the Australian people into thinking that everything has changed, that the Labor Party has  changed, Kevin Rudd has changed. Well the trouble with Labor is it never changes.    

 We know that we have to earn the trust and respect of the Australian people. That’s why I’m  here with Natasha Griggs campaigning in the seat of Solomon. We’ll be campaigning in the  seat of Lingiari. We have the people and the policies that we believe will win the confidence  of the Australian people.    

 The Australian people can have confidence that we will live within our means, that we’ll stop  the waste, that we will stop the increased taxes, and that we’ll start to pay off Labor’s debt.  People can be confident that we’ll regain control of our borders, that we’ll return sensible and  stable and competent government to Canberra and they can trust us because we’ve done it  before.  

 

 JOURNALIST What’s your reaction to the dramatic events in Egypt overnight?   

 JULIE BISHOP We are watching this very closely. It’s obviously a very volatile situation in  Egypt. I think the way forward for Egypt is to return to a democracy as soon as possible. To  hold elections that are free and fair and that give voice to the people of Egypt. 

 It is a worrying time. I know that countries in the region in fact the globe is watching very  closely but we urge a return to democracy and the rule of law and participation by everyone  in the Egyptian elections that we hope can be held as soon as possible. 

 - Ends - 

 

