---
title: "Over 34,000 reasons people smugglers thriving under Labor"
date: "2013-03-19"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392187
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2311960%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Over 34,000 reasons people smugglers thriving under Labor 

 19/03/13 

 The arrival of the latest illegal boat, with almost 100 people on board, has seen Labor record another  milestone of failure on our borders with more than 34,000 people having arrived on illegal boats on  their watch, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister  for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today. 

 “While Australians can never count on anything from Julia Gillard except more failure, people  smugglers can always rely on her to guarantee their business model,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “Labor’s refusal to implement temporary protection visas and their endless levels of appeal for boat  arrivals mean people smugglers are able to sell their product of permanent residency, telling their  clients that even if they get a no on their asylum claim it will more often than not always end in a yes  and a permanent visa. 

 “Labor’s decision to open access for boat arrivals to the Refugee Review Tribunal means a 75 per  cent chance that any 'no' decision on their asylum claim is overturned. 

 “Afghans who arrive in Australia by illegal boat are over 13 times more likely to get a visa than  Afghans who apply offshore. 

 “Labor’s decision to restore full access to the courts for boat arrivals adds another avenue for them  to endlessly appeal and provides a better chance for them to stay in Australia, even if they have no  legitimate refugee claim. 

 “Every last brick in the wall that John Howard built up, Labor have knocked down. Bungled attempts  to try to rebuild what they destroyed, having been dragged kicking and screaming, have shown  neither conviction nor the competence needed. 

 “The Australian people will have the chance at this year’s election to see our borders fixed by voting  for a change of government,” Mr Morrison said. 

 Mr Keenan said: “There have now been more illegal boats arrive this financial year than in the entire  Howard Government term - 239 boats carrying more than 14,000 people and we still have another  three months left of this financial year. 

 “In the last week alone there have been 8 boats intercepted carrying a total of 564 people - that’s  more people arriving in one week than Labor’s entire monthly budget for arrivals. 

 “Labor cannot hide from these telling figures.  They very clearly highlight the extent to which this  Government has failed to protect Australia’s borders. 

 “It will take the tough policies of the Coalition to take back the control of our immigration system  from the people smugglers,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

