---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 12 December 2013: NBN Strategic Review; asylum seekers"
date: "2013-12-12"
creators:
  - "Clare, Jason"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS"
subjects:
  - "NBN Strategic Review"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211401915
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2895176%22
---

 

 JASON CLARE MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  THURSDAY, 12 DECEMBER 2013  CANBERRA   

 SUBJECT/S: NBN Strategic Review; Asylum seekers   

 JASON CLARE: Today is full of bad news. Let me concentrate on one of them.  Today the Government is going to release their plan to build a dodgy second  class National Broadband Network. The Minister is going to release a report  written by his mates. Written by a man who he owns a yacht with.    

 At 10 o’clock you’re all going to get locked up. At 10 o’clock the Minister is going  to hold a lock up and he is going to put the journalists here in Canberra in a  sleeper hold for two hours and try to convince you that his dodgy second class  NBN is what Australia needs.   

 Well I’ll say this. Journalists aren’t stupid. Australians aren’t stupid. They know  that Australians want and need better than a dodgy second class National  Broadband Network.   

 Now let me make a few predictions. First, expect that Malcolm Turnbull is going  to say that the cost of the NBN is now more. Now if he does that, be suspicious.  For the last three or four years every organisation has said the cost of the NBN is  the same. Whether it’s Treasury, or Finance or the Australian National Audit  Office, the Company, the Board, KPMG, Ernst and Young have all said the same  thing - that the cost of the NBN is the same. So if the Minister comes out today  and says, after he’s put his mates in to write the report, that the price is different  be very suspicious.   

 The second thing is, look out for the broken promise. Before the election Tony  Abbott said that everyone in Australia would get access to 25 megabits per  second by 2016. Now today when the Minister stands up look for words like ‘aim’,  look for words like ‘goal’, look for the steps that the Government takes to back  track on this commitment because a secret report from NBN was leaked to the  Sydney Morning Herald a few weeks ago said that it’s unlikely that the  government can implement this commitment. So look for the weasel words as the  Government tries to backtrack from this commitment.   

 Finally, look for how much it’s going to cost to build the second rate dodgy NBN.  Look for how much it is going to cost, not just to roll out the fibre but to fix and  maintain the old copper network. If the Minister doesn’t provide the real costs for  fixing and maintain that copper network than this report will have failed and it  won’t be worth the paper that it’s written on.    

 Happy to take your questions.   

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]   

 CLARE:  It’s very significant. I think it won’t be lost on anybody that today the  greatest Treasurer that Australia has ever had is here in Parliament at the same  time when you’ve got the worst Treasurer that Australia has got now running the  country, responsible for bad decision after bad decision. Whether it’s promising  to cut debt and then more than doubling it, or whether it’s making bad decisions  like Grain Corp, or the decision that he made a couple of days ago to stand in the  Parliament and effectively dare Holden to leave the country. Effectively tell  Holden to rack off and that’s what they’ve done as a result. So it won’t be lost on  anybody that the man responsible for building our modern economy that has  enjoyed twenty years of uninterrupted economic growth is here in the same  building as the man who is helping to cripple the Australian economy with bad  decision after bad decision.       

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of Billy Morrow being appointed as head of  NBN Co?   

 CLARE: Well I welcome that. I think it’s important that a decision is made as  quickly as possible to appoint a new CEO. We’ve had a part-time Chief Executive  now for the last couple of months, effectively working 3 days a week and as a  result we’ve seen the construction of the NBN slow since the election. That’s not  a good thing.   

 We’ve seen people taken off the NBN rollout map. Half a million homes and  businesses that were promised they would get Labor’s NBN, fibre-to-the-premises, have been taken off the rollout map. A breach of a promise I’ve got to  say.   

 A broken promise because Malcolm Turnbull said he would honour his promise  to deliver on existing contracts and he’s not doing that. Not only that. He also  promised that businesses that were working on the NBN would be able to  continue to employ their workers and they wouldn’t be laid off.   

 We are not just seeing people being laid off at Holden. We are seeing people  being laid off that are building the NBN. So anything to get somebody in the  NBN, to get the construction going again, rolling out is a good thing.   

 JOURNALIST: On asylum seekers there has been another damming report on  Manus Island, this time from Amnesty. The Greens say that the conditions are  deliberately bad because they are trying to force people to go back to where they  came from or push them to breaking point, is that a fair assessment.   

 CLARE: I wouldn’t accept that. It is important that the government does all of the  necessary things to make sure that people are treated fairly and I expect them to  do that.    

 JOURNALIST: Is it fair to have limited access to water, no access to soap, no  shoes and not being able to leave the compound without shoes? Are they fair  conditions?   

 CLARE: I don’t think so. Next question? Ok. Merry Christmas everybody.  Thanks.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: RYAN HAMILTON 0414 599 468   

