---
title: "Greens will move for independent review of search and rescue operations"
date: "2013-09-29"
creators:
  - "Australian Greens"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211444177
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2757774%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Sunday, 29 September 2013   

 Greens will move for independent review of search  and rescue operations   

 The Greens have renewed their push for an independent review of the search and rescue  protocols in the wake of the latest refugee boat tragedy.    

 "The Government's cruel and dangerous policy is putting more refugees’ lives at risk and  hiding from the media isn't helping save any lives," Greens immigration spokesperson  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said today.   

 "There must be a full inquiry into this weekend’s tragic loss of life at sea and a full review  into the protocols followed when a refugee boat calls for help or is in distress.   

 "This is the second time this month that distress calls from a refugee boat are reported to  have been dismissed and the rescuers failed to reach the strikes boat in time to avoid  tragedy.    

 "The Greens will move for an inquiry into the protocols once parliament resumes as we  promised during the election.    

 "It simply not acceptable to wave away concerning reports of confusion and delay in  response to distress calls and Mr Abbott must release the details of what happened in this  case and what his government knew of the boat.    

 "These are lives people, human beings including children, who have already suffered so  much in fleeing war and brutality.  They deserve the respect of a proper inquiry into what  happened.     

 “There needs to be a rigorous and independent review of AMSA’s search and rescue  protocols and how this is now operating under Mr Abbott's turn-back policy.    

 "Insulting Indonesia, banning family reunion and cutting the humanitarian intake is forcing  more refugees particularly children to come by boat. It is a dangerous and backwards  policy.”   

