---
title: "Manus reports show camps should be closed, not expanded"
date: "2013-07-24"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211397528
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2613940%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 24 July 2013   

 Manus reports show camps should be  closed, not expanded   

 The Australian Greens have expressed serious concerns about the reports of rape and  torture in the Australian Government’s prison camp on Manus Island.   

 “There is a humanitarian catastrophe unfolding under this government’s watch,” the  Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “The reports of abuse on Manus Island and the government’s feeble, inadequate  response have exposed the fact that there is no accountability and no oversight of the  prison there.   

 “The government has failed in its obligation to protect people who are fleeing war and  persecution and their response is to send more people to damaging island detention.   

 “Further reports of a malaria outbreak within the Manus Island detention camp show just  how problematic an unfeasible it is to keep people safe and healthy there.”   

 The Greens have also expressed their concern for everyone affected by the latest  tragedy in which a boat has sunk trying to reach Christmas Island from Indonesia.   

 “It is tragic that people feel a dangerous boat journey from Indonesia to Australia is their  only hope when fleeing in terror,” Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 “The Houston Panel recommended Australia take 3,800 refugees out of Indonesia,  giving them a safer pathway to protection. Unfortunately that recommendation has been  completely ignored.   

 “The Prime Minister’s call for a talkback radio debate on refugees is a crass display of  his eagerness to engage in the race to the bottom as he races to the polls.   

 “While Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott fight over who is the cruellest, the Greens continue  to be a voice for decency.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

