---
title: "Fiona Scott caught out - again"
date: "2013-09-04"
creators:
  - "ALP"
source: "AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436924
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2709231%22
---

 

 Campaign Media Release    

 FIONA SCOTT CAUGHT OUT - AGAIN    

 Fiona Scott’s attempt to blame a television program for misrepresenting her  comments on asylum seekers has been exposed as false.     

 The unedited transcript of Ms Scott’s discussion with Four Corners on asylum  seekers reveals that she was not taken out of context at all.     

 Ms Scott simply repeats - over and over again - her ridiculous claims.    

 This latest attempt to cover up her appalling gaffe comes on the back of Ms  Scott’s dodgy claims that she worked for the United Nations, which she was  forced to admit were actually false.     

 Ms Scott is an embarrassment to the community that she wants to represent.  

 REPORTER: Now you say refugees. That's a pretty hot topic, isn't it, asylum  seekers? 

 SCOTT: Well yeah, it is a hot topic, but it's a hot topic here because our traffic is  overcrowded. I mean you guys have been here a few days now, and I mean h-how  much fun is the M4 in peak hour? It's not fun at all. And you know, you imagine a  mum, you know, it's a classic example, ah trying to be back for a six o'clock pick-up from daycare, and every minute you're late you're getting charged. Now you  multiply that by a couple of kids, it means that when you think of overcrowding it  becomes an issue for people, it really does. So I think often you need to look at the  driving factors of what people are saying and them saying, yeah, our  infrastructure isn't coping with what we've got.  

 REPORTER: You say overcrowding and asylum seekers in the same breath. 

 SCOTT: Yeah. 

 REPORTER: What do you mean by that? 

 SCOTT: Well, ah overcrowding as in our M4 isn't coping. The ah the trains are  really, really full and- 

 REPORTER: But can you blame asylum seekers for overcrowding? 

 SCOTT: It's not that I'm blaming anyone for anything! It's the perspective in- 

 (talk/directions) 

 REPORTER: So you mention asylum seekers and overcrowding. I don't quite get  the connection. 

 SCOTT: Well, my recommendation is go and sit in the Emergency De-Department of Nepean Hospital or go and sit on the M4 and um people see  50,000 people come in by boat; that's more than twice the population of  Glenmore Park where we just were. So ah- 

 REPORTER: So do you think they're the people on the M4 blocking th-the  traffic? 

 SCOTT: I'm not saying what I'm thinking, I'm telling you the opinions of people  that I talk to and their feelings about it, and you asked about ah what what people  say and I'm just saying this is the sentiment that is out there in the community.  

 

 4 SEPTEMBER 2013  

 

 

 Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au     

 

 Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600    

 

