---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 18 October 2013: NSW fires; Operation Sovereign Borders briefing"
date: "2013-10-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "NSW fires"
  - "Operation Sovereign Borders briefing"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399869
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3099116%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 

 NSW Fires, Operation Sovereign Borders briefing  Friday, 18 October 2013 

 Press Conference, Sydney 

 Scott Morrison: Can I extend my sympathies to the family of the man who passed  away at Lake Munmorah. These are very difficult times for our state, as a New South  Welshman, and for the whole country, and I'm sure that Australians across the  country have in their thoughts and prayers the people and families who are affected  by those bushfires that are ravaging our state. 

 Can I also say to all of those who are out there fighting those fires on the front lines,  and also to those in our community who are supporting those affected by those fires,  once again we have seen the great spirit of Australians offering their own homes,  we've seen those putting out the hand of support to help those in need in these  situations, and I think it is always a great testament to the character of Australians. 

 Can I also thank all those in the broadcast media who have been keeping people  well informed of these issues, whether it's on radio, or television, or the various other  news services. These services I think also demonstrate the media at its best as well,  providing a very valuable service to those affected in these times. 

 Now, in accordance with our usual practice, I will ask the Commander to provide our  regular update, but before doing so I would like to make some introductory  statements. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders has now been operating for a month. Now, while there  has been a significant decline in the number of illegal arrivals by boat to Australia  during this period, I want to stress that the government is drawing no conclusions  whatsoever about those results, and we are inferring or making no presumption  about what that trend might be going forward. We are very conscious of the serious  challenges that lay ahead, and we are getting on dealing with and addressing those  serious challenges going forward. 

 Now, during this time, we have been doing things very differently as a government  across all of our operations to implement and operationalise the full arsenal of  measures through our JATF and its constituent agencies. As a government we are  not dealing in half measures on our borders, nor have we been dragged kicking and  screaming to implement these measures. Our focus has been also on salvaging the  operations for the claimed arrangements, announced by the previous government,  that have been left to the Coalition to implement. 

 The worth of those measures is established not in their announcement, but in their  implementation, and their being part of a broader policy framework. The boats are  not stopped by one-off, one-out initiatives, it requires the full suite of measures,  backed up by the strong and unified resolve of a government that is prepared to  make the calls and do what it takes to get the result. 

 In particular, there has been a significant effort to ensure offshore processing is  operating consistently with the Coalition's design and purpose for offshore  processing. The previous government introduced offshore processing under protest  in August 2012, and there was a lot less to show for more than 12 months of  operations than you would expect when Operation Sovereign Borders commenced, if  the previous government had been committed to this policy. 

 Under Operation Sovereign Borders, we have implemented a no-exceptions  approach, increased capacity, rapid transfer of arrivals, and putting in place post-assessment accommodation to deal with both negative and positive cases in  partnership with the Nauruan and PNG Governments. Now, without these  arrangements, the threat that no one would come to Australia was hollow. 

 After years of pressure, I note that the previous government had relented to  introduce send backs to Sri Lanka when the situation of Sri Lankan illegal arrivals by  boat had become so absurd, a boat full of pirates was making its way to Australia.  Now, under sustained pressure, the government introduced a screen out policy for  Sri Lankan arrivals at that time, that policy was strongly supported by the Coalition, it  has had good success, but it was policy from the previous government under protest. 

 In 2013, prior to the election, only one in five Sri Lankans were screened out and  returned by the previous government. The rest remain part of that 32 000 legacy  case load which is now being addressed by the government, who had arrived prior to  19 July, which is the subject of other operations. The single largest screen out for  any boat from Sri Lanka in 2013, prior to the election, was 58 per cent of those on  board. In addition, previously those who had arrived from Sri Lanka, and had come  via a third country, were not subjected to that screen out policy. Under Operation  Sovereign Borders we are taking a much stronger position on these issues, we are  not dealing in half measures under protest. 

 Commander Campbell will brief you shortly on the outcome of one of our latest  arrivals that will provide an early point of comparison. In addition I have instructed  the department to enforce the screen out procedure policy on all Sri Lankan arrivals  regardless of their pathway to Australia. 

 On another aspect of the operation, we continue to engage closely with our regional  partners, in particular Indonesia to work collaboratively wherever possible, and  collegially, and have again had some good success during the past week on  disruption operations which Commander Campbell will outline. 

 Last Friday I also met with Indonesia's Minister Syamsuddin to discuss matters  related to his immigration portfolio responsibilities. This exchange identified a  number of areas where operational support and cooperation could be further  enhanced to strengthen the cooperation between our countries, to strengthen the 

 region's borders, and to ensure that Australia was sharing the burden with Indonesia  on assisting them deal with the transit population resident in Indonesia. 

 Officials will be holding further dialogue in Jakarta over the next week to progress  these and other issues further in advance of my meeting with coordinating Minister  Suyanto. 

 I conclude by stressing, as I started, that the Abbott Government is not engaging in  half measures on our borders, whether it is offshore processing, our maritime  operations, or what we are doing in our region and right through to source. This is an  across the board effort that will be sustained relentlessly until the objective is  achieved. And I stress again that neither the Commander nor I, together with the  government more broadly, are making any assumptions, or drawing any conclusions  about the very positive trends that we are currently seeing. 

 Thank you, Commander. 

 Angus Campbell: Thank you Minister. Welcome to the Operation Sovereign  Borders weekly briefing for the period nine o'clock Friday 11 October until nine  o'clock this morning, 18 October. 

 Firstly, I'd like to take this opportunity to thank the Vice-Chief of the Defence Force,  Air Marshal Mark Binskin, for his instrumental work as acting commander of the joint  agency taskforce in my absence. His support to Operation Sovereign Borders is very  much appreciated, and has assured the joint agency headquarters has been stood  up in an effective and timely fashion. 

 The Chief of the Defence Force has completed the tasks set by the government to  establish the joint agency taskforce, which is now functioning as a discrete entity,  directing and coordinating efforts across government to achieve the objectives of  Operation Sovereign Borders. 

 I would also like to remind you that my comments will be confined to activities during  the week ending 9 am this morning, relating to the off-water reception and  processing of illegal maritime arrivals under the control of the Department of  Immigration and Border Protection. I will not discuss current or potential future on-water operations. 

 During the reporting period, people from three suspected illegal entry vessels have  arrived into immigration processing. On Saturday 12 October, 79 people were  transferred to immigration authorities on Christmas Island. These people are from  the Cocos Keeling Islands arrival that was mentioned at last Friday's briefing, but  was not counted during the previous reporting period. 

 The Department of Immigration and Border Protection considered each of those  individuals, and found that none of these people presented reasons for coming to  Australia that warranted further consideration, and that their removal would be  consistent with Australia's protection obligations. Seventy-three of these people have  been returned to Sri Lanka, the remainder are currently being assessed as to their  fitness to fly, with a view to returning them to Sri Lanka as soon as possible. 

 Also on Saturday 12 October, a further 53 people were processed by immigration  authorities at Christmas Island from a second venture. And on Thursday 17 October,  a further 41 people from a third vessel were transferred to Australian immigration  authorities at Christmas Island. In addition, during the reporting period, a total of  three crew members were also transferred into the custody of the immigration  officials. 

 For the reporting period, a total of 53 people have been transferred to offshore  processing centres, 25 people to Manus, and 28 to Nauru. Since the commencement  of Operation Sovereign Borders on 18 September 2013, until nine o'clock this  morning, a total of 455 people have been transferred to offshore processing centres,  143 were transferred to Nauru in this period, and 312 to Manus. 

 As of nine o'clock this morning, there were a total of 1061 people at Manus and 827  at Nauru, and an additional 2211 people in Christmas Island facilities. We continue  to have sufficient offshore processing capacity to meet current and potential future  requirements. I will now provide an update on other operational activities that have  occurred during the reporting period. 

 With regard to disruptions, I would like to express my sincere appreciation in regard  for Indonesian authorities, in particular, the Indonesian National Police, working with  members of our Disruption and Deterrence Task Group. This cooperation has seen  the arrest of one organising in relation to multiple ventures bound for Australia in the  last week. 

 Also since last week's briefing, the Indonesian National Police have affected two  successful disruptions of people smuggling ventures. The Disruption and Deterrence  Task Group has also assisted Sri Lankan Authorities with the recent surrender of a  significant people smuggler and three associates on Wednesday who are, together,  allegedly responsible for at least eight ventures, and have been questioned by Sri  Lankan authorities. 

 Additionally, a smuggler suspected of organising a venture in September 2012 was  arrested by Sri Lankan authorities on 14 October. And finally, I'd like to acknowledge  the work of those authorities in recent weeks in disrupting three additional people  smuggling ventures that might otherwise have moved towards Australia. 

 With regard to people smuggling and those who undertake that crime, I'd like to  make a few remarks. People smugglers prey upon the vulnerable and manipulate  them by peddling lies for profit. As long as these lies continue to circulate, I fear  vulnerable people will still get on boats and risk their lives and those of their family  and the very real possibility of drowning at sea. 

 We know from interviewing arrivals at Christmas Island and from rumours in source  countries, that people smugglers are circulating various lies to promote their  business. People smugglers claim families will receive preferential treatment and  only criminals and drug addicts will be sent to Papua New Guinea and Nauru. This is  a lie. Anyone who arrives by boat is subject to transfer offshore. 

 People smugglers claim the Australian Government will give substantial amounts of  money, up to $15 000 in some of the stories, for illegal immigrants to be returned  home so they will not face a financial loss. Again, this is a lie. They will lose their  money to people smugglers. 

 People smugglers claim those who have graduated from high school or university  will not be sent offshore because Australia welcomes people with skills and  education. Again, this is a deceptive lie. Anyone who arrives by boat is subject to  transfer offshore. 

 People smugglers tell prospective travellers not to listen to policy changes in  Australia, that only people who misbehave in Australian detention are sent to Papua  New Guinea and Nauru - another lie. Again, anyone who arrives by boat is subject  to transfer offshore. 

 People smugglers tell people that Papua New Guinea and Nauru are camps in  Australia, not countries. This is clearly a lie, told by people smugglers who will say  anything to get money from prospective travellers to put them on boats. 

 The message to people considering getting on a boat is clear; do not trust a people  smuggler. No one entering Australia by boat without a visa is given preferential  treatment. They will be sent to Papua New Guinea or Nauru for processing and will  not come to Australia. No one should underestimate Australian resolve in this regard. 

 In the past month, people arriving in Australian territory by boat without a visa have  either been sent home, in the case of Sri Lankans, or to another country - Papua  New Guinea or Nauru. This makes the dangerous journey to Australia a no-win  situation. To prospective travellers I say, do not trust a people smuggler. Do register  your circumstances with UNHCR and IOM. 

 There are formal channels through which people [indistinct] persecution can apply  for a place in Australia's humanitarian program. Indeed just two weeks ago, the  Minister referred to a group of 500 people fleeing the violence in Syria who have  been offered places to permanently resettle in Australia. These people will be settled  through an appropriate channel. They did not get on a boat. 

 I note, taking place right now are a range of active investigations into current people  smuggling activities of which I am limited in what I can say or discuss. I've spoken  about the lies people smugglers are using now to convince people to get on boats.  But let's not forget about the old lies like promises of luxury vessels and individual  cabins, which have had tragic consequences. 

 So I'd like to remind you of a couple of examples of the kind of criminal individuals  people smugglers are. First, this is one of the faces of the lies peddled to people  thinking about getting on a boat. His name is Ali Khorram Heydarkhani. He was  suspected of being involved with or linked to more than [indistinct] involving the  transit of more than 1000 passengers over the 12 months prior to his arrest. 

 On 7 August 2012, Heydarkhani pleaded guilty to and was convicted of four charges  of aggravated people smuggling, including danger of death or serious harm. On 22 

 October 2012, Heydarkhani was sentenced to 14 years with a non-parole period of  nine years and six months, commencing from 24 January 2011. 

 Investigations by the Australian Federal Police into an international people  smuggling syndicate resulted in the identification of Abu Quassey and Kali Shaneef  Diu(indistinct) as significant people smugglers suspected of organising many  ventures. 

 In 2003, Quassey was convicted in Egypt of causing death through negligence,  manslaughter and migration offences and was sentenced to seven years in prison.  On 17 July 2005, [indistinct] was convicted and sentenced to nine years  imprisonment. 

 But these people were located and held to account is a very positive step, but cold  comfort to those who put their trust in the hands of these criminals and pay with their  lives. Let me be blunt, people smugglers are calculating and heartless criminals.  They do not care about the welfare of those they take money from, their personal  situation, their safety or their future. Once they have taken the money and  overloaded unseaworthy boats with vulnerable people, these people are forgotten.  Thank you. 

 Morrison: Questions. 

 Question: Minister, there were reports today about medical staff on Manus Island  working for the IHMS have been evacuated. Can you give us any more detail on  that? 

 Scott Morrison: There was an incident earlier today on Manus Island and  appropriate steps were taken to ensure all staff were placed into safety and that was  a matter involving agencies of the Papua New Guinean Government, and that is a  matter for the Papua New Guinean Government to address in terms of the incident. 

 But to the extent that Australians and the centres were affected, all necessary  appropriate steps were taken to ensure that all staff were placed in safety and  [indistinct]. 

 Question: Can you give us any more details on what the incident is? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, that's a matter for the Papua New Guinean Government  because it involves issues relating to the activities of their own agencies. 

 Question: There were also reports today circulating that you plan to transfer seven  more pregnant women to Nauru. Can you comment on that and confirm that that  transfer is going to happen, given that we know there are already two pregnant  women on Nauru. 

 Scott Morrison: Well, what you claim to know, I think, is a matter of conjecture.  What I can tell you is that everyone is subject to the transfer to Nauru or Papua New  Guinea. That is the government's policy. 

 Question: So we know, because the [indistinct] told us that there is - well there are  two pregnant women housed on RPC3 in Nauru. You made a visit there last week  and there are again reports coming out that there's no access to running water inside  these marquees and that's [indistinct] house outside. Do you think the facilities inside  RPC3 where pregnant women are being held are adequate? 

 Scott Morrison: Again, you make a whole range of assumptions which I'm not about  to confirm one way or the other, but people who are taken to Nauru are put in  appropriate care and under appropriate monitoring by professional medical staff to a  standard of care that I am absolutely satisfied with. 

 Question: So what I'm asking actually is - obviously you made a visit last week -  and I would like to know because you were at Regional Processing Centre 3. Could  you tell us about the facilities that were on offer there, in terms of - in particular,  toilets and access to running water? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, why don't I take you through the sort of medical services that  are available at the centres? I actually [indistinct] that there was onsite emergency,  primary and mental health care for transferees. These services are provided by  IHMS general practitioners, nurses, paramedics, psychologists, counsellors and  visiting psychiatrists. IHMS staffing levels are adjusted to be appropriate to the  number of transferees. IHMS is required to deliver health care to transferees that is  the best available in the circumstances and broadly comparable with health services  available within the Australian community. 

 The onsite Health [indistinct] operates seven days of the week and 12 hours per day.  After hours emergency coverage is provided for 12 hours per day. IHMS also  organise the provision of specialists, auxiliary and acute care for transferees. Some  of these services are available at the [indistinct] Public Nauru Hospital and there are  IHMS supplements available... 

 Question: ...I'm asking you specifically about access. 

 Scott Morrison: You've asked the question, and I'll answer it. And if required, by  organising visiting practitioners. 

 The department, also, in the processing facilities has appropriate time and care for  pregnant women if available, and is available on Nauru, as required. And ongoing  assessment of women who may be in that situation is always present under the duty  of care and the services of the IHMS staff that are there. So I am very satisfied with  the level of care that is being provided on Nauru for people who may find themselves  in that situation. And I stress again, the most dangerous place for a pregnant woman  to be is on a boat coming to Australia. And I strongly suggest that they shouldn't do  that. 

 Question: So specifically, on access to running water, you're not going to comment  on that? 

 Scott Morrison: I've outlined the services that are available there is ample water  provision. I've seen the tanks. I've seen the services and that's part of the services  that are provided at those centres. 

 Question: [Inaudible question] 

 Scott Morrison: Again, this suggestion that there's a pregnant woman with twins on  Nauru is simply not true. 

 Question: They're not there? 

 Scott Morrison: It's actually not true. 

 Question: So there's no... 

 Scott Morrison: ...There is not a pregnant woman with twins on Nauru. 

 Question: We were told this by... 

 Scott Morrison: ...Well, they are wrong. 

 Question: [Indistinct] visited last week. 

 Scott Morrison: And this is why I'm stressing to you, I strongly suggest that the  media should more thoroughly interrogate the sorts of claims that are being  represented to you. That is a classic example. This suggestion that there has been a  pregnant woman with twins on Nauru is simply not true. Now, that said, everyone is  subject to the policy of the government that they will be transferred to Nauru. And we  ensure that there is appropriate medical care for not just those conditions, but a wide  range of conditions. And people are under close monitoring, particularly to [indistinct]  in that condition and we ensure that these services are in place. 

 Question: So the people who worked at the [indistinct] UNHCR who went to visit  Nauru next week... 

 Scott Morrison: Well, take that up with him. 

 They're not telling the truth? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, you'll have to take that up with them. 

 Question: Can I ask you about the boat that sank off West Java last month. A lot of  Lebanese [indistinct]. 

 Can you tell me when the government was first made aware that a people smuggling  operation was targeting people in Lebanon and with the view of bringing them to  Australia [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: I'll ask the Commander. 

 Angus Campbell: I can tell you - I don't have it with me right now, the [indistinct]  group, but I can get that for you. But it was about two hours before we were able to  get sufficient information to initiate surveillance response. 

 Question: Sorry I think we're talking about two different things. You might be talking  about when the boat took off from Indonesia. I'm actually talking about when the  government, any person in the government or a government agency - all the  government agencies I've spoken to this week haven't returned my calls. 

 They're all gagged, and they all said come here. So was any person in the  government was made aware of a people smuggling operation targeting people in  [indistinct] to Australia. 

 So we're talking about the wave of [indistinct]. 

 Scott Morrison: The government was not aware until a call arrived. Now I'll have to  check the detail into which agency in which states [indistinct] 

 Question: I'm talking about the several agencies who .. 

 Scott Morrison: You'll be familiar with the briefing because you were here for it. 

 Question: Last week, yeah. 

 Scott Morrison: Vice Chief Binskin actually took you through the West Java incident  and referred to the phone call that had come through a source in Melbourne. And  that was - and the timeline of that was outlined in quite precise detail by the Acting  Commander Binskin at that time, and that's the [indistinct] 

 Question: That was a matter... 

 Scott Morrison: That's the reference that the Commander - no, but that's when we  became [indistinct] 

 Question: So I've been told that at least two agencies were told about the people  smuggling [indistinct] and I'll put those questions to the agencies so you should  already know about [indistinct]. 

 Scott Morrison: Sure, and I... 

 Question: So you're saying that that's not true? 

 Scott Morrison: And I have spoken with representatives [indistinct] from at least one  of those agencies and that is not correct. And I would ask you, as the Minister has  raised on another issue, to please interrogate your sources. 

 Question: The difficulty, of course, when you're trying to interrogate your sources is  that we, as journalists, are trying to contact you to get your comment on these  matters. 

 Scott Morrison: But we're not making the claims. Others are putting those claims to  you and I suggest that you ask them to substantiate those claims. 

 The government is not going to be in the habit of responding to every fanciful notion  which is put forward. If people are going to make claims and they wish to  substantiate them to you or to the government, then an appropriate prompt response  can be provided. But we're not in the habit of responding to rumour. 

 Question: So how do we substantiate them when they've told us, who, when, where  [indistinct] 

 Scott Morrison: Well, you've raised that question and we've addressed it. 

 Question: Can you give us a bit more detail on the expansion of the enhanced  screening process that you've discussed? Obviously there are a number of human  rights groups that have some concerns that the process itself doesn't allow for due  process. You know, it's a fast-tracked process, a number of people - well, the  majority of people aren't allowed access to legal representation. 

 Can you explain exactly how it's going to work and whether you understand the  concerns that human rights groups have? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I can understand the process that we conduct which is a  screen out, screening process to see why people have said they have come to  Australia and then our officials can make an assessment about whether there is  something to pursue further. 

 And what happened in this case, in this case, is 100 per cent of those who are on  that last vessel that turned up a week ago, 73 have already gone home and were  transferred earlier in the week, and a couple of others that are subject to fitness to fly  issues and we're resolving those. 

 So, again, I'm completely comfortable about the process that has been used. And  the message is very clear. If you're coming here to try something on to get access to  Australia from Sri Lanka, you'll go straight back. 

 And under this government, you cannot expect that that policy is going to be  introduced and implemented in half measures. It will be introduced in full measures. 

 Question: So it's quite a fast turnover time. Can you talk me through it? [Indistinct] Is  it something that happens as soon as you get off the boat? I mean, how quickly are  these people interviewed? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, I'm not going to go into commentary that can deal with current  and future operations and prejudice those, and I've said that before in these  briefings. But the process has been done consistent with how it's been practiced in  the past. And the government is very adamant that those who don't have any form of  claim go back, and that's what we're doing. 

 Question: Can you tell me how many boats have issued distress calls or had to  receive help since the [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, again, that goes to issues that may deal with current or future  on water operations. 

 Question: [Indistinct] distress in the past months, it's a past operation. It can't  [indistinct] .. 

 Scott Morrison: [Indistinct] Well, I'm sorry, I disagree. 

 Question: Maybe you'd like to help by telling us how many boats might have been in  trouble last month [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, if a vessel had been in distress, for arguments' sake, and that  distress had resulted in serious incident, as we had with West Java in the West Java  incident, then you could have been expecting us to be providing that sort of response  and explanation as we did here a few weeks ago. 

 Now, we have no cause to provide any such explanation because no such incidents  had occurred since the West Java incident. 

 Question: You're saying nine incidents have occurred? 

 Scott Morrison: What I'm saying is that no incidents that have involved the sort of  situation that we saw with West Java where basically people - where the vessel  upturned and people died tragically. I mean, we have had no such incidents since  then. 

 I hope we don't have any in the future and I hope people don't put themselves at risk  of such incidents. 

 Question: What about people being rescued? It doesn't have to be everybody  [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: Again, we don't comment on water operations unless there's a  serious incident which would obviously require, appropriately, an explanation of what  has occurred, particularly where people have lost their lives. 

 Question: Is that what a serious incident is? Someone has to die? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, that is - I would call that a very serious incident, yes. 

 Question: Yes, alright, but is that your - you won't tell us about it unless someone  died? 

 Scott Morrison: I think we've been pretty up front about this. Where it is appropriate  to provide a comment on a serious incident, and that's assessed on a case by case  basis. 

 The previous government actually did the same thing when it came to very serious  incidents where briefings were provided like this, and we haven't changed that policy.  And that's why we issued the statement on the Saturday evening of that event when  issues were being raised and why we gave a very full and frank account on the  following Monday in quite precise detail. 

 So where there are circumstances or events that warrant that type of response, then  obviously it'll be provided, but it'll be done at the appropriate time where the facts are  properly assembled and we can give the sort of detailed account that we did on that  occasion. 

 We're not going to provide a running commentary I think carelessly on these types of  serious incidents. We will be very calm and measured and we'll get the facts right,  and then we'll brief on it. 

 Question: Minister, during the - well, before the election you committed to scrapping  the Stone review of ASIO [indistinct]. Can you just give us an update on how that's  going, whether you [indistinct] ..? 

 Scott Morrison: [Indistinct] I said. What I said is we'd basically see how it was  operating in practice, and that's what we're doing. 

 Question: So it hasn't been scrapped then? 

 Scott Morrison: No. 

 Question: Can you tell me the nationality of the people that arrived yesterday to  Christmas Island? 

 Scott Morrison: As you know, we don't go into nationalities of those who arrive. 

 Question: Can you tell us how many people were in that boat? 

 Scott Morrison: The commander [indistinct]. 

 Question: Yesterday? 

 Scott Morrison: That was [indistinct]. Forty one people arrived yesterday. There  were some suggestions there were 60 [indistinct] this morning. 

 Question: Yeah, no. 

 Scott Morrison: Forty one. That's why we wait, to get it right. 

 Question: Minister, a couple of weeks ago you issued a press release saying the  number of alleged offences committed by asylum seekers in the community is rising,  and we know that you've withdrawn 10 bridging visas since coming to office. Can  you give us the specific dates upon which these alleged offences are supposed to  have occurred, so we can actually put the - try and understand the case for how  they're rising? It was a slightly sort of confusing press release where they were. 

 Scott Morrison: I can't assist you with you comprehension of my releases. I think  they are fairly clear, and the statements that I've made - now I should stress that isn't  an Operation Sovereign Borders matter, that is a matter that relates to the  administration of my broader portfolio responsibilities, and there was a press release  that went into each offence, and the number of those offences. 

 Now, you will be aware, if you've been part of this debate prior to the election, that  the previous government have only made reference, I think, to two incidents prior to  the last election. 

 Question: But the Question... 

 Scott Morrison: So, in that statement I listed quite a large number of incidents that  have taken place post the election, and that we dealt with those. I also said in that  statement that in no way would I suggest that this group was in any way a greater or  lesser offender than any other group in the community. But that's not the point -  that's not the point I was seeking to make. 

 Question: No, but the point, I suppose, is that to make a claim that these - the  number of offences are rising, and then not to give to date when these alleged  offences occur. 

 Scott Morrison: Well I said they've occurred since the election, and prior to the  election the government had only referred from memory to only two such offences. 

 And I'd be happy to - we can follow that up for you and get you the number that have  been disclosed by the government prior to the election, and then - but those offences  continue, I should stress. I have cancelled further bridging visas since I issued that  statement. 

 Question: How many have you cancelled? 

 Scott Morrison: Well I'll come back to you, and I'll take that under [indistinct]. They  happen fairly regularly. 

 Question: Can I just ask a couple of questions about Manus. Can you tell us where  the staff [indistinct] have been taken, and if so [indistinct] taken off the island? 

 Scott Morrison: Choules. 

 Question: Pardon? 

 Scott Morrison: To the Choules, which is the naval vessel that is there currently  providing accommodation and that is due to hand over at the end of this week, from  memory, with the Bibby Progress which will be taking up that lost. So that's fairly  close to the centre, and there's maritime access obviously from the site to get people  to that vessel fairly quickly. 

 Question: And how many people are we talking about [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: I'll have to take that under advisement. 

 Question: Any of the Australians [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: Not to my knowledge. 

 Question: Is it a violent incident? 

 Scott Morrison: Well it's only just occurred earlier today, and I have not had a full  briefing on it. So, I don't really - I'm not in a position - precise details, other than to  say that there was an incident, it involved PNG agencies, and not Australian  agencies, and that Australian staff were placed in appropriate protection and taken to  safety. 

 Question: Is it just IHMS [indistinct] staff that have been evacuated, or are there  other agencies that have? 

 Scott Morrison: Any staff that were affected or compromised were taken to safety. 

 Question: Were any of the asylum seekers taken? 

 Scott Morrison: I don't have any information on that. I'm not aware of any asylum  seekers, or transferees - that's they're interned in the centre - were affected. But  again, I haven't had a full briefing on it, so I'm not in a position to give you the full  details on that. 

 Question: Do you know basically what happened? Somebody threatened  somebody, or somebody did something? 

 Scott Morrison: I don't have those details at the moment. All I can tell you, it was a  matter between PNG authority agencies. It wasn't a matter involving Australian  agencies. So that is a matter for the PNG Government. 

 Question: And do you know if it happened within the area where the transferees  [indistinct]? 

 Scott Morrison: I don't have those details in front of me. It's a fairly recently. 

 Question: When will you know about that? 

 Scott Morrison: Well, when we have information on it, we'll review that information  and we'll make it available as appropriate. 

 But I wouldn't want to escalate the event beyond what we know about it at this stage,  and when we have a better briefing on the event, as it only occurred fairly recently,  then we will have a better understanding of what was involved, and any necessary  steps that need to be taken, obviously [indistinct]. 

 I mentioned a couple of weeks ago that one of the things we've done on Operation  Sovereign Borders is we've tasked a - correct me commander if I get the term wrong, 

 [indistinct] sort of force protection review, in terms of the centres both at Nauru and  Manus, it was something that I had identified with General Molan after my recent visit  to Manus. And that is actually underway over the course of the next week. 

 So, that will have - a very early opportunity, I imagine, to take [indistinct] what may  have occurred with this [indistinct] incident, and I'm sure that's built into our plan. 

 Thank you. 

 

 See: Index of Speeches  

 URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm208911.htm   Last update: Saturday, 19 October 2013 at 18:15 AEST 

 

