---
title: "Theatre production to tackle violence against women"
date: "2013-02-25"
creators:
  - "Owens, Julie"
source: "Office of OWENS, JULIE, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391129
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2258054%22
---

 

 

 JULIE COLLINS MP  Minister for Community Services  Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development  Minister for the Status of Women 

 

 SIMON CREAN MP  Minister for the Arts   

 JULIE OWENS MP  Member for Parramatta   

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 Theatre production to tackle violence against women   

 The Minister for the Status of Women, Julie Collins, and Member for Parramatta,  Julie Owens, today met with the African-Australian performers who are bringing their  experiences of overcoming violence in their lives to the stage with the help of around  $140,000 from the Australian Government.   

 Ms Collins said the production, Baulkham Hills African Ladies Troupe, is a unique  way of raising community awareness of the impacts of violence against women.   

 “This show is one way we can support change in community attitudes about gender  equality and violence against women,” Ms Collins said   

 “It supports our aims under the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women  and their Children 2010-2022, which is underpinned by the belief that involving all  governments and the wider community is necessary to reduce violence.    

 “The production will feature the personal stories of four African women—a young  poet and rapper, an ambassador for the UN Refugee Agency, a former child soldier  who is now a mother of four, and a community leader who works for the police force.   

 “The women will perform the stories of their lives—how they drew on their resilience  to overcome the violence in their lives to study, raise families, build careers and give  back to their communities. 

 

 “Their stories are truly inspiring, but what is even more inspiring is that these women  want to contribute to their communities by raising awareness of this serious issue.   

 “Theatre has the extraordinary power to convey important messages in an  accessible way, and this theatre production will engage with the African and broader  community to raise awareness that violence against women is never acceptable.”   

 The Minister for Arts, Simon Crean, said $100,000 of the Australian Government  funding for this production was provided through the Australia Council’s Community  Partnerships grant program.    

 “Community engagement with arts and culture is vital, and these grants provide  funding for community projects that engage a broad range of participants in their  activities,” Mr Crean said.    

 Ms Owens said a series of post-show forums will be held in collaboration with African  Women Australia to discuss the issues raised in the show.   

 “A digital resource pack will also be produced, including a documentary about the  experience of the women involved in the production, the filmed show, and resources  on how to seek help and assistance,” Ms Owens said.   

 “The pack is intended for use by front line workers in the health, justice, community  and education sectors, including aid workers in developing countries.   

 “One in four Australian women is born overseas and we are working hard to ensure  the voices of women from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds are  heard.”   

 

 SYDNEY 

 25 February 2013 

 Media Contact: Joe Scavo 0409 679 924 (Ms Collins)                             Paul Murphy (02) 9689 1455 (Ms Owens) 

 

