---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 23 August 2013: opposition asylum seeker policy; coal seam gas; opinion polls"
date: "2013-08-23"
creators:
  - "Burke, Tony"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "opposition asylum seeker policy"
  - "coal seam gas"
  - "opinion polls"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211399389
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2686720%22
---

 

 

 Campaign Transcript    

 TRANSCRIPT OF MINISTER TONY BURKE  PRESS CONFERENCE  MELBOURNE   23 AUGUST 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 Subjects: Opposition asylum seeker policy; Coal seam gas; Opinion polls  _____________________________________________________________ 

 

 TONY BURKE:  Before I deal with the issues that have been raised by the  Opposition today, can I provide some information on some other issues where  there's been a number of enquiries and some media reports already. 

 First of all, I've noticed on social media actually there's been some reports of a 75-year-old dementia patient who reportedly is currently in a situation where she might  find herself being, or the person might find themselves being deported back to South  Africa. I've asked for a brief on that to be brought to me by the beginning of next  week with an indication to the department that I intend to view this case with  sympathetic consideration, so I'll look at that at the beginning of next week.  But for  the first reports I've seen of  that, it certainly doesn't match up with how you'd want  Australia's immigration system to be dealing with a dementia patient.      

 On the next issue there's been a number of letters which go back and forth between  departments all the time, between Papua New Guinea and Australia.    

 Ordinarily they are letters that remain within government, but one of them from about  a week ago has made its way into the media and has resulted in some speculation  that Australia would not have access to the East Lorengau site on Manus Island.    

 I want to be able to inform you that we received yesterday in writing from the Papua  New Guinea Government, from the Chief Migration Officer, that the issues relating to  the East Lorengau site have now been settled, and that site is now available for us to  begin work on. So the speculation that's been occurring was with respect to an old  letter now that that's been clarified I believe that that detail at least is important to  bring down on the public record in this way.    

 The Opposition today have claimed, and they've claimed that they've been working  on this announcement for four years, it takes a very special skill to work on  something for four years and then still deliver it like you're on the run. But that is  unfortunately what the Opposition have done. If you look at both the papers this 

 morning as to how they’ve dropped the announcement out there and the media  conference they've just completed, if I could just point out a few concerns.    

 In the first instance, in the drop that was given to today's papers, they started to  detail how they would conduct covert operations in other countries. I don't think it  takes a lot of consideration before we get to principle number one of covert  operations, which is you don't drop them to the media. The whole nature of a covert   operation is that you, it would be dealt with in a covert fashion, and the immaturity of  the Opposition in thinking it was a clever media line to start talking about covert  operations as sort of a match up to the kindergarten child who runs around saying  hey I've got a secret , do you want to know what it is? The entire power and nature of  covert operations is that you don't telegraph them through the media, and the  decision of the Opposition to do so, I just find odd.    

 The second part of their policy today has Tony Abbott effectively doing the exact  opposite of everything he said almost exactly three years ago, the quotes are all out  there to find, where he objected to the East Timor announcement at the time, from  the former Prime Minister. Go back over Tony Abbott's words then about the need to  receive consent from a country before you make an announcement, and mind you,  on his comments about the need to receive consent from a country before you make  an announcement, that was right.    

 The sad thing is today he's done the exact opposite. They've in some way informed  embassies of an announcement, sought no consent whatsoever and then rushed out  to the media. Now let's remember, what we're talking about here and the nature of  the announcement that they're saying what they'll do in other countries, they're  talking about deploying Australian Federal Police. Now just think from the  perspective as an Australian, if another country unilaterally announced they were  sending their policy force to our country to conduct their own operations, you can  imagine how that would be received within Australian. And the clumsy nature of  simply letting embassies know at the last minute that this was about to come, without  seeking consent, without seeking cooperation, without seeking any direct  engagement of that fashion with the other countries, is a recipe almost guaranteed to  fail, and certainly puts Australia at a disadvantage from the moment of  announcement because they are more concerned with the media strategy than they  are with the policy strategy.    

 The final part, and I think the most bizarre part of what they've announced today, is  the boat buyback scheme.    

 They've talked about going through villages and buying back fishing vessels that  might be used for people smuggling. Indonesia is an archipelago, Indonesia has one  of the largest fishing fleets in the world. In 2004, the Food and Agricultural  Organisation did its estimate of how many fishing vessels there were in Indonesia.  The figure they came up with, and they said at that point, this is 2004, the figure was  continuing to grow, 1998 had been the last time they'd done figures, so from 98 to 04  it was continuing to grow: 726,000 fishing vessels in Indonesia. If you presume that  that has increased at all, we are talking about a buyback scheme in a market of three  quarters of a million boats.    

 Of all the mad ideas I've heard in immigration, I think boat buyback wins. The whole  concept that you can deal with three quarters of a million boats, most of which are  being used for poor villages to make a livelihood, and Australian officials are going to  wander in and buy boats from them, and whatever pace we were to buy them, it  wouldn't match the pace at which new boats were then be manufactured to replace  them.    

 It is simply crazy policy - no other way of describing this, no other way at all. Three  quarters of a million boats, and they'll know which ones are going to be used for  people smuggling, and they'll have a boat buyback scheme. We have a situation  where, if you were to do it, I have no doubt at all it would be great for the shipbuilding  industry of Indonesia, and they would be lending a hand to the shipbuilding industry  of Indonesia in a way in which they're not willing to lend a hand to the car building  industry of Australia.    

 But if you look at it purely from an immigration perspective, the scale of what you're  dealing with just leaves it as doomed to fail. And I look at today's announcement  from the Opposition and I see one thing, and one thing only: they know that the way  to be able to deal with this is through the Papua New Guinea arrangement, they  know that the key to be able to do something about people smuggling is to take  away the product that is being sold, and they know in particular from the video  footage that was released yesterday of asylum seekers speaking in their own words  about how what they paid for was no longer available. They know that the regional  resettlement arrangements are what will break the back of people smuggling  operations. Now we said at the time when we announced it, they will test our resolve  for a period of time and they will keep doing it. But make no mistake on the ground  now, people are moving away, people are registering with the UNHCR, more people  are going home and every time another plane lands in Manus Island just like another  plane load landed there this morning, just like family groups landed in Nauru the  other day, people are realising the Government is serious on this policy and  increasingly people will be finding their way back home.    

 JOURNALIST:  Going back to your own policy, you budgeted for 3000 places on  Manus Island in your economic statement, but you say there is a capacity for  10,000? 

 BURKE:  There is a capacity well beyond that.    

 JOURNALIST:  Where is the money coming from (inaudible)?    

 BURKE:  If I can take you through the figures because I saw it was reported in that  fashion in the Australian today and maybe I didn’t provide clarity on the numbers  sufficiently yesterday but if I can go through it again. From the Lombrum and east  Lorengau sites combined that’s where you get your 3000. There is another site, not  favoured by the PNG Government at this stage which has also been raised at the old  airport site where you would be able to get in the order of about 4000 people. But  there is a site at the western end of Manus Island where if we went there and that  has been identified by the PNG Government and the Governor of Manus Island as a  potential site. That site on its own would take 10,000. Now at the moment, I don’t  expect that we are going to need those sites. If we need them and if we need to build 

 then we will make those positions. But there is a mistake being made by some  people who are looking at the numbers and I’m not saying that the paper made this  mistake, the previous media conference did and that is believing that the number of  people who arrive by boat must match the maximum capacity of whatever the  processing centre is.    

 Unlike the old situation where people would remain in a regional processing almost  forever unless they ended up coming back to Australia. Under the regional  resettlement arrangements people get processed and then they get settled. That’s  what happens. As people are settled, they leave the centre and they move into the  community and what matters is you have the processing happening that you have  people start to move through the system. You have a steady pace of people arriving  and a steady pace of people leaving. And some people will leave voluntarily in  advance of a settlement determination. Because they know that if they actually  wanted to get to Australia the moment they are settled in Papua New Guinea, they  no longer have a refugee claim so if they wanted any chance of being settled in  Australia, they have to actually go home or go to another country and register with  the UN to come through the offshore program. Settlement in Papua New Guinea  doesn’t provide a pathway to get closer to Australia. In terms of a refugee  determination it actually prevents you from getting further because it’s the end of  your refugee claim. So the capacity that is required at Manus is to be able to deal  with the processing as it goes through.  If we had a much bigger surge than what we  have had so far, we would have to make decisions about increasing the capacity on  Manus.    

 JOURNALIST:   You would therefore have to increase funding?    

 BURKE:    If you increase capacity, you would have to increase funding, I’m not  expecting that we would have to but if you were to make that decision it would cost  more money. There have been reports in the Papua New Guinea press about a  number of other provinces, not on Manus Island, but elsewhere within Papua New  Guinea where different governors they believe would have come forward offering  sites. But at this stage we are only looking at Manus and the sites that we’ve got and  the rate of capacity increase. When you take account of the numbers who are  making inquiries about leaving and the numbers who will find themselves being  settled in coming months means that I see no evidence that we have a capacity  problem.    

 JOURNALIST: The Opposition is saying that they are going to give more money to  help Indonesians with their own search and rescue operations, will you match that?    

 BURKE:  We already have extensive work through AusAID in different ways with  helping the Indonesian Government with capacity. But I think it’s important that whey  you make announcements about capacity building in other countries that you  actually involve them in the conversation. It makes a difference to cooperation, it also  makes a different to having policy that has common sense. I think you can absolutely  guarantee that the opposition never tested the boat buy back policy with the  Indonesians, I think you can pretty much guarantee that because the Indonesians  know how big the fishing fleet is for their country. I used to be fisheries minister, I  used to deal with Indonesia on it. Straight away when I heard this, I thought you 

 couldn’t know anything about Indonesia and be promoting a policy of that nature. So  on anything about capacity building, we continue to work with other countries in the  region but that is not something I would unilaterally announce, I don’t think it is  proper to do so. I think it’s pretty patronising to our neighbours to think that a team of  people who believe that they want to be in government in a couple of weeks’ time  are willing to just unilaterally make announcements about what they will do in other  people’s nations without the concurrence of the other nation.    

 JOURNALIST:  Are you concerned by the latest polls that shows that Labor Party is  really flagging in key seats?    

 BURKE:  Can I tell you I’m probably in an unusual situation on this. In terms of  media interest, in the work that I am doing, there is probably no campaign where I  have been more relevant. But it’s also the case, there has been no campaign where I  have been involved in less campaigning. And the work that I have been doing has  been very much logistical implementation of a policy and then making sure that I’m  taking the opportunity to keep you up to date on it. From what I have seen and I’m  probably more removed from this than almost anyone else on the front bench. But  from what I have seen, we have a situation where we have been the underdogs on  this the whole way through and we have some ground to make up. If the opposition  keep making announcements like they have made today, then we should be able to  make up that ground pretty comfortably. What they have announced today is  ludicrous.    

 JOURNALIST:   The UN Committee on Human Rights handed down a report  yesterday on the detention of 46 refugees saying they should be released,  compensated and given counselling. What is your advice to that?                  

 BURKE: The people who they are referring to, are people who as I understand it  have had a negative security determination. We take the advice of security agencies  very seriously. I haven’t gone through the report in detail, but if the implication of the  report as I understand from the notes that I have seen on it. If the implication of that  report is that we should ignore security clearances and put people into the  community when we have been advised when it’s not safe to put them into the  community, it is not something that I would do, not something that I would do.    

 JOURNALIST:   Are you worried about long term harm to the refugees?    

 BURKE:  These are incredibly difficult situations and I don't deny how difficult this  one is in the sense that you have somebody who has been found to be a refugee, so  therefore it is reasonable that they can't go home. But at the same time, you have a  security determination that they shouldn't be released into the community. Now that  does create a diabolical situation, but when making responsible decisions as an  Australian Government Minister with the implications that happen for the Australian  community, I continue to back the advice of the security agencies.    

 JOURNALIST:   I'm asking you this because you were recently Environment  Minister, but there was an online survey released today, 400,000 Australians  showing that they're very nervous about coal seam gas. Do you think there should  be more federal oversight? 

 

 BURKE:  There was a need for more federal oversight, and we changed the law to  make sure that that happened, that's what the water trigger is. And the principal  issue with coal seam gas, they'll be a whole lot of different issues, fracking and  principles like that, but the core of the environmental issue has always been the  impact on water, whether it be underground water or surface water. And those  changes to the law were made by the Parliament earlier, anything on further  responses to that you'd really have to go to Mark Butler.    

 JOURNALIST:  If people are saying that this is something they're really worried  about, what would you say to them?    

 BURKE:  And we changed the law to make sure that those issues get taken into  account, and we provided very significant funding to make sure that instead of the  companies paying for their own research and just presenting that, that there was an  Independent Expert Scientific Committee that would conduct independent research  and have that applied.    

 If you have a science based processed,  you generally have a safe process, and  unlike our political opponents, we've respected the science regardless of the issue.    

 JOURNALIST:  Can I just clarify on Jean Goldblatt, so it's looking extremely likely  that she will get residency, that's the woman in Western Australia, sorry.    

 BURKE:  I'll wait for the file to come to me, I've seen the reports about it, and the  reports to me have caused me to in my instructions to the department to say that I  want a brief, I want it soon and I want them to understand that I intend to give very  sympathetic consideration to this particular case. Now I'll wait for the brief to actually  come to me, but there's a formal process where the Minister can either let these  things go through to the keeper or you say I want to call this one in, I've decided to  call it in.    

 JOURNALIST:  How quickly will you, sorry, how quickly are you moving people to  Manus? You keep saying that there's capacity there but isn't there a bottleneck in  Australia at the moment and isn't that putting a temporary strain on the Australian  detention network?    

 BURKE:   No, no, I don't accept that. We've got fewer people on Christmas island  now than when I first became Minister. Obviously  you want  your detention network  numbers to be as low as they can be, that gives you an ease of management, it's a  more effective outcome for the Australian people in terms of tax dollars as well, but  the numbers on Christmas Island now are lower than they have been previously.  That doesn't mean that they're not higher than I'd like them to be, they are, but the  way, and we found this with Sri Lanka. It wasn't the first plane load of people who  were sent back to Sri Lanka, that that meant suddenly the boats stopped coming  directly from Sri Lanka. But it was the constant path of people would come, people  would be screened out, people would be put on a plane and they would be sent  back, and it would happen time and again when people weren't activating our  protection obligations, and the pathway of those boats directly from Sri Lanka to  Australia stopped. 

 

 Now with this, I don't believe that the correct answer and you know, Tony Abbott  keeps daring me and Scott Morrison keeps daring me to you know do the frenzy of  let's get lots of planes over and do it in a chaotic, immediate way. We don't need to  do that. Everybody who arrives will end up leaving Australia, everybody, and they  know that, and they don't like it, but they know it will happened. And we're making  sure in an orderly way that the planes will keep going across. And for a while they  thought no family groups have gone across, they thought maybe family groups would  be ok. Well family groups are now going directly to Nauru and there will be family  accommodation worked through on Manus Island, but it is not at the standards that I  want yet. But it will all happen, but it will happen in an orderly way. And if I’m being  dared into an alternative frenzy and I’m saying no I’m going to do it in an orderly way  then I’m pretty relaxed about my role in that debate. 

 

 ENDS    

 

