---
title: "Labor's record summer of boats continue"
date: "2013-02-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390722
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2241116%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Labor's record summer of boats continues 

 Monday 18th February 2013 

 The arrival of two more illegal boats, with a total of 77 people on board, takes to more than 

 1,000 the number of people who have arrived by boat this year, continuing the record 

 summer of illegal boats under Labor’s border failure, Shadow Minister for Immigration and 

 Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border 

 Protection, Michael Keenan said today.  

 

 “The arrival of two more boats not only continues Labor’s record summer of boats for illegal 

 boat arrivals, it has now taken to over 1,000 people the number to have arrived illegally this 

 year, and over 33,000 arrivals in total since Labor abolished the Howard Government’s 

 strong border protection policies in 2008,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 “Labor has no response but excuses, like their Malaysia people swap debacle. The Senator 

 Xenophon incident is a reminder that the Government’s claims they could have delivered 

 practical protections for people sent to Malaysia is absurd. If the Australian Government 

 cannot ensure protections in Malaysia for our own Senators then what hope they can 

 provide them for people with no legally binding protections sent there under their failed 

 people swap?  

 

 “Labor know they cannot secure the protections the Houston panel demanded in their report 

 last year and have binned the policy as a result. It serves now only as an excuse for their 

 inaction.  

 

 “Only the election of a Coalition government will see the policies and resolve necessary to 

 stop the boats reinstated on our borders,” Mr Morrison said.  

 

 Mr Keenan said: “Two more illegal boats arrived on Saturday, however the Minister for 

 Home Affairs decided to wait until Monday to inform the public of their two latest failures 

 which has pushed the number of arrivals under their watch to over 33,000.  

 

 “These two latest boats carrying 60 people and 17 people add to the weekend total of 112 

 people arriving on three separate boats, ensuring the hard working men and women of 

 Customs Border Protection Command had no respite over the weekend.  

 

 “No matter how many times the Prime Minister reshuffles her front bench, no matter how 

 many ridiculous policies they pull out of a hat, the people smugglers know that this Labor 

 Government is a soft touch so they will continue to peddle their insidious trade by selling a 

 product that is enticing under this Government.  

 

 “2013 has now witnessed 1,086 people arriving on 21 boats - it has become abundantly 

 clear that until there is a change of Government the people smugglers will continue to hold 

 the monopoly on Australia’s border protection system,” Mr Keenan said. 

 

