---
title: "Refugee families have to be able to work, support themselves and contribute"
date: "2013-05-07"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211435777
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2425079%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Tuesday, 7 May 2013   

 Refugee families have to be able to work,  support themselves and contribute   

 The government’s plan to dump refugee families into the community without work rights or  appropriate support will force thousands of children to live rough, putting their welfare at risk,  the Australian Greens have said.   

 “This is just more cruelty from the Labor government, inflicted on refugees and their children  who have already suffered so much in fleeing war and torture,” the Greens’ immigration  spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said today.   

 “The so called ‘No Advantage’ test is an absolute joke, with four times as many people arriving  since it was introduced. It is not stopping the boats and only inflicting pain.   

 “Refugees need to have the right to work while they live in the community and have their claims  for protection assessed as quickly as possible.   

 “Make no mistake, this is the Labor Party’s own version of the Howard government’s Temporary  Protection Visas.   

 “Australians aren’t going to put up with the empty ‘deterrence’ line much longer and the  government simply has to admit that its cruel tactics aren’t working.   

 “Not happy with forcing families to live in poverty, the government is also going to send children  to the infamous Curtin Detention Centre.   

 “I fear for the children who are headed to Curtin and I fear for the families who this government  has now condemned to destitute poverty.”   

 The Greens will be moving a motion in the Senate on the 14th of May, calling for refugees and  asylum seekers who are released into the community to be given the right to work and support  themselves.   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

