---
title: "Working to live, not to work"
date: "2013-08-31"
creators:
  - "Bandt, Adam"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436636
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2701263%22
---

 Media Release   

 31 August 2013   

 Working to Live, Not to Work  Bandt release Greens workplace relations policy   

 Greens Deputy Leader and Federal Member for Melbourne Adam Bandt MP has released the Greens  workplace relations policy for the election.   

 Focused on tackling job insecurity and improving work / life balance the policy also outlines a plan to  improve the participation of disadvantaged groups in the Australian Public Service.   

 The Greens would also establish $120 million fund to support universities to shift staff from casual to  permanent positions and reducing job insecurity in the higher education system.   

 "Rising job insecurity and the battle to balance work and home life are putting people under  incredible pressure and Parliament needs to act. The Greens will put people at the centre of the  country’s workplace laws," Mr Bandt said.   

 "This pressure is affecting people’s wellbeing and their ability to plan their personal and family lives.  I met a woman employed in the same area of one university for 10 years, but she never had a day of  paid sick leave and had put off starting a family because her job wasn’t secure."   

 "The public sector and those heavily reliant on public funding, like universities, should lead the way  and give people greater job security. Recognising the particularly acute problem in the funds-starved  higher education sector, the Greens will provide universities with financial incentives to improve the  job security of their staff."   

 "Over two-thirds of women working full-time regularly feel time pressured. Parliament needs to  make it easier for people to balance work and life responsibilities, especially for carers."   

 "If we’re serious about supporting women returning to the workforce, we need better work/life  balance laws."   

 "Australians from refugee and migrant backgrounds are much more likely to be un- or under-employed than the rest of the population. We not only have taxi drivers with overseas-earned  Masters degrees, but we now have their locally educated children often unable to get job interviews.  I have met local graduates who have sent of dozens of job applications without response, yet when  they change the name on their CV from ‘Mohammed’ to ‘David’ the phone starts ringing."   

 "The Australian Public Service must lead the way and start employing more people from non-English  speaking backgrounds and people with disabilities. Over time, the composition of the APS should  grow to reflect the make-up of the Australian public."   

 Contact: Damien Lawson 0487 900 005 

 Link to Full policy - http://www.adambandt.com/workplacerights   

