---
title: "National broadband boost for Loddon Campaspe Community Legal Centre"
date: "2013-06-13"
creators:
  - "Dreyfus, Mark"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211395716
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2517713%22
---

 THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity 

 THE HON SENATOR STEPHEN CONROY  Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy  Leader of Government in the Senate  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Digital Productivity 

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE   

 13 June 2013 

 

 

 NATIONAL BROADBAND BOOST FOR LODDON CAMPASPE COMMUNITY  LEGAL CENTRE    

 Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus QC today announced the Loddon Campaspe Community Legal  Centre will receive $205,000 to provide legal assistance services and professional training to  regional Victoria through the National Broadband Network (NBN). 

 

 The project is in partnership with the Refugee and Immigration Legal Centre and the Federation  of Community Legal Centres Victoria and is funded through the National Broadband Network  Regional Legal Assistance Program.     

 “Increasing the availability of legal assistance services to residents of regional and remote areas  is critical to providing access to justice for all Australians,” Mr Dreyfus said.    

 “Through this program, providers can develop innovative ways of using the NBN to enable  residents of regional and remote areas to access legal assistance.”    

 “The NBN is a game changer and will open up new possibilities in providing better legal services.  We are connecting all Australians to the NBN, with no connection cost, because we believe  everyone deserves access to fast, reliable, affordable broadband,” Mr Conroy said.      

 “While our NBN investment in the legal assistance sector is clear, the Coalition has not  committed a single dollar to this important improvement to Australia’s justice system.    

 “Under the Coalition policy, people will have to pay up to $5,000 to connect or be left  disconnected from Labor’s fibre NBN. Millions of families who can’t afford up to $5,000 to  connect would be cut off from the full benefits of the NBN.     

 “The Coalition will create a digital divide in every suburb and town across Australia, denying  access to online services for millions people, including low-paid and disadvantaged Australians,”  Mr Conroy said.     

 The Government is committed to improving access to justice, with a total national contribution  to legal assistance services of $1.413 billion over the four years from 2013-14. This includes an  additional $10.3 million over four years for community legal centres.    

 More information about the National Broadband Network Regional Legal Assistance Program  can be found at http://www.ag.gov.au/nbnlegalassistance      

 Media contact: Annie Williams 0428 040 522; Gia Metherell 0477 366 575    

