---
title: "The ACT celebrates Harmony Day 2013"
date: "2013-03-20"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392279
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2802591%22
---

 

 

 The ACT celebrates Harmony Day 2013  Wednesday, 20 March 2013 

 Joint media release with Brendan O'Connor MP - Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship and Senator the Hon Kate Lundy - Minister for Sport, Minister for  Multicultural Affairs and Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. 

 ACT residents will join together to celebrate Australia's multicultural spirit tomorrow  as Harmony Day celebrations kick off across the country. 

 Over 50 events will be staged around the territory, including the illumination of  several iconic buildings in orange, the official colour of Harmony Day. 

 Black Mountain Tower, Old Parliament House, the National Museum of Australia, the  National Library of Australia and Questacon will all light up after dusk on March 20  and 21, acting as shining reminders of the strength of Australia's diversity and  multiculturalism. 

 Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Brendan O'Connor and Minister for  Multicultural Affairs, Senator Kate Lundy, said the annual celebration was a chance  for all Australians to embrace the many things that make our country unique. 

 'The values of inclusiveness, respect and belonging are fundamental to the  development of Australia's successful multicultural framework,' Mr O'Connor said. 

 'These values are at the core of what Harmony Day is about. 

 'This is a fantastic time to reflect on and celebrate the rich patchwork of cultures  which make Australia such a fantastic place to live.' 

 Community groups, schools and businesses are again getting involved, with events  ranging from a craft workshop at the Canberra Institute of Technology's Adult  Migrant English Program, to an event with refugee guest speakers organised by the  St John the Apostle Parish in Kippax, as well as numerous morning teas and other  celebrations around the territory. 

 Senator Lundy said the theme underpinning this year's celebration is Many Stories -  One Australia, emphasising that each of Australia's 22 million citizens has a unique  story to tell. 

 The stories which make up the broader Australian narrative are varied and unique,  and this year's theme aims to bring to light the amazing diversity amongst Australia's  citizens,' Senator Lundy said. 

 'Australians have been encouraged to reflect on their journey and share it with others  - in workplaces, on social network sites, at schools or within their communities.' 

 Since Harmony Day began in 1999, almost 50 000 events have been staged across  Australia as community groups, schools, churches, local governments and the  business community celebrate the cultures that make Australia a great place to live. 

 'Harmony Day is a fantastic opportunity to reflect on the unique sense of belonging  which has grown from Australia's multicultural foundation,' Mr O'Connor said. 

 'Together we can showcase the spirit of the cultural diversity which has made  Australia what it is today.' 

 For more information on Harmony Day and the events being staged in your state or  territory visit the website.  See: Harmony Day   

 See: Index of Media Releases 

 URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/bo/2013/bo194363.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 20 March 2013 at 12:45 AEST 

 

