---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Queenstown: 8 February 2013: Australia-New Zealand annual leaders' summit; Minerals Resource Rent Tax; Government assistance for New Zealand citizens; Australian Crime Commission; Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority; asylum seekers; Tarkine heritage listing; Australia-New Zealand relationship"
date: "2013-02-08"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Australia-New Zealand annual leaders' summit"
  - "Minerals Resource Rent Tax"
  - "Government assistance for New Zealand citizens"
  - "Australian Crime Commission"
  - "Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Tarkine heritage listing"
  - "Australia-New Zealand relationship"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390263
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2221980%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE  QUEENSTOWN  8 FEBRUARY 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:      Australia-New Zealand annual leaders’ summit; Minerals  Resource Rent Tax; Government assistance for New Zealand citizens;  Australian Crime Commission; Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority;  Asylum seekers; Tarkine heritage listing; Australia-New Zealand relationship   

 PM: I’m delighted to be here in Queenstown in New Zealand.    

 When I spoke to the New Zealand Parliament in 2011, I made the point that whilst  Australia has many friends in the world, the relationship between Australia and New  Zealand is one of family.    

 So it’s good to be here, as part of the annual leaders’ exchange in that very close  relationship.    

 I  also  made  the  point  when  I  spoke  to  the  New  Zealand  parliament  in  2011  that  I   didn’t  want  familiarity  to  slide  into  forgetfulness.  This  is  still  a  relationship  that   requires focus and work, even though it is such a close family bond.    

 As Prime Minister, I have instituted annual leaders’ dialogues between Australia and  New Zealand, and  tomorrow will  participate in  the  third  such  dialogue  between  me  and Prime Minister Key.    

 This  exchange  comes  at  a  time  when  we  are  celebrating  and  marking  the   anniversary of our Closer Economic Relationship.    

 It  is  a  relationship  over  three  decades  that  has  brought  two  liberalising  economies   closer together.    

 It’s an economic relationship that means that there is free movement of people and  ideas.    

 There’s trade, there is exchange between our two countries that enhances jobs and  growth for both of our nations.    

 Whilst the mechanics of the Comprehensive Economic Relationship between our two  countries may not be transparent to the people of Australia and New Zealand day to  day, the benefits are present with us each and every day.    

 As  part  of  this  special  anniversary,  Prime  Minister  Key  and  I  authorised  our   Productivity Commissions to work together and to provide a report on how to even 

 deepen  our  Comprehensive  Economic  Relationship  - the  close  economic   relationship between the two of us.    

 We  will  be  considering  the  work  of  that  joint  Productivity  Commissions  approach   tomorrow. It’s the first time it’s been done: getting our Productivity Commissions to  work together.    

 Whilst  I  don’t  think  we  will  be  able  to  respond  at  depth  and  in  detail  to  all  of  the   recommendations  of  that  report,  I’m  looking  forward  to  discussing  that  report  with   Prime Minister Key and what work we can do based on it.    

 In  addition,  I’m  looking  forward  to  talking  to  Prime  Minister  Key  about  a  set  of   challenges  and  issues that  Australia  and  New Zealand  face  in  our  world,  including  the challenge of people-smuggling in our region, the future outlook for Fiji, the work  that  we  are  doing  in  Afghanistan,  the  challenges  and  opportunities  we  face  in  this   Asian  Century  and  also  the  work  that  lies  beyond  the  RAMSI  drawdown  in  the   Solomon Islands.    

 So there is a lot to be working through and talking about.    

 Tomorrow  too,  I  will  have  an  opportunity  to  pay  my  respects  at  the  Queenstown   Memorial Gate.    

 The  centenary  of  Gallipoli  is  fast  approaching,  and  this  is  a  centenary  that  we  will   share together - the Anzac spirit being celebrated and marked in both of our nations.    

 I will be  able  to  announce  who  has the  winning design  for the  Australian  memorial  that will be constructed in Wellington as part of the way in which we mark 2015.    

 I  think  we  will  also  be  able  to  spend  just  a  little  bit  of  time  talking  about  the   opportunities  from  the  Cricket  World  Cup  in  2015.  So  there’s  a  lot  to  do,  and  I’m   looking forward to it.    

 JOURNALIST:  Will  you  be  telling  John  Key or  alleviating  any concerns  about  New  Zealand citizens treated as second-class in Australia when it comes to social welfare  benefits and the like?   

 PM:  Well,  because  of  our  special  relationship  we have  arrangements  for  New   Zealanders  that  have  a  generosity  associated  with  them,  that  is  not  given  to  any   other nationals from any other country when they come to Australia.    

 First  and  foremost,  New  Zealanders  can  come  to  Australia  and  access  our  labour  market without restrictions; we don’t confer that benefit on any other nation.   

 New Zealanders who live in Australia are also entitled to a range of benefits: things  like  the  Family  Tax  Benefit,  Baby  Bonus,  access  to  Medicare,  the  pharmaceutical   benefits scheme-   

 JOURNALIST: So the status quo will remain though?   

 PM: Well, I’m just going through in relation to the terminology of your question.    

 I think it is important to understand that New Zealanders in Australia do get access to  these benefits: Medicare, PBS, Family Tax Benefit, Baby Bonus, to name just a few.    

 So it is a relationship we don’t accord to any other nationals from any other part of  the world.    

 JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible)  pay  for  its  promises,  when  the  receipts  from  mining  tax   are  so  low  compared  to  the  estimates?  And  why  weren’t  these  figures  released   yesterday?   

 PM: Well, I think the Treasurer’s dealt with all of this in Australia.    

 As you know, we were in receipt of some advice about taxpayer confidentiality, and  the Treasurer has taken appropriate advice about whether or not these figures could  be released.    

 The MRRT  is a profits-based tax, and we saw a big reduction in commodity prices  last year. In some sectors, commodity prices are now starting to track back up, but  there was a big hit to commodity prices last year.    

 As a profits-based tax, you’d expect that to show in the figures.   

 JOURNALIST:  What’s  your  response,  Prime  Minister,  to  the  sports  scandal  that’s   erupted  back  home,  and  also  what  will  you  be  telling  John  Key  about  the   involvement, if any, of New Zealand teams and players.    

 PM: I don’t have any message for Prime Minister Key.    

 JOURNALIST: He has asked for a briefing, has he not?   

 PM:  Prime  Minister  Key  of  course  can  have  a  briefing,  but  I  personally  don’t  have   any message for Prime Minister Key on this matter.    

 On the question of the things that were revealed, I think all sports fans, including me,  find this pretty sickening.    

 We  are  people  who  go  and  sit  at  grounds  or  watch  sport  on  TV  and  marvel  at   amazing sporting prowess.    

 We cheer on the deeds, and the sense that anything we’ve seen has actually been  fuelled  by banned  substances I think would  be  pretty sickening for sports fans. It’s  pretty sickening for me.    

 JOURNALIST:  Do  you  think  (inaudible)  the  details  should  be released  though?   Because at the moment, there are concerns on both sides of politics that all sports in  Australia are being tarred with the same brush at the moment.  

 

 PM:  Well  this  is  for  the  expert  agency  involved  to  deal  with  and  work  through.  Of   course I understand people want more information.    

 We’ve  had  the  Crime  Commission  working  with  our  Anti-Doping  Agency,  and  they   will  need  then  to  take  the  next  steps  to  get  all  (inaudible)  people  the  rest  of  the   information.   

 JOURNALIST: Would you like to see it released though?   

 PM: I don’t think it is for me - when we were talking about agencies, like the Crime  Commission and an anti-doping agency - to be issuing instructions.    

 I think they need to get the work done the best way they can with all of the expertise  that they bring to bear.    

 JOURNALIST:  If  Prime  Minister  Key  needs  or  asks  for  assistance  from  the   Australians in terms of identifying New Zealanders or New Zealand sports teams that  have been affected by the doping scandal, will that be made available to him?   

 PM:  Prime  Minister  Key  can  certainly  get  all  of  the  information  he  wants,  and  if   there’s any assistance Australia can provide, of course we would provide it.    

 JOURNALIST:  Prime  Minister,  the  Government  has  talked  a  lot  about  sharing  the   benefits of the boom. Isn’t the reality now that you’ve spent money that you simply  don’t have?   

 PM: Let’s just be very factual here about what is happening in our economy. I spoke  extensively about these matters at the National Press Club last week.    

 We came out of the global financial crisis strong. We all pulled together to get that  done - that’s a good thing.    

 We’re in a phase of economic change now where the high Aussie dollar is bearing  down on a number of industries and affecting corporate profitability and we need to  keep working to make sure we’ve got jobs and growth and a diversified economy for  the future.    

 What  we’ve  seen  in  the  resources  sector,  we  are  moving  towards  the  peak  of  the   investment boom, and then beyond that we will move to the peak of the production  boom.    

 Profitability  is  at  its  highest  when  people  are  in  peak  production.  Profitability  is   obviously impacted by volatility in commodity prices.    

 What we said to the nation with the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is that we wanted to  tax profits in our minerals sector in the most efficient way, that is, to take tax when  they are at their most profitable.    

 There was always going to be volatility in the MRRT as a result, but I still think it’s  absolutely fair that at the  peak of  the  profit cycle, Australians see tax from  mineral  wealth that is dug out of the grounds we all own and the grounds we all share.    

 JOURNALIST:  So  if  you  factor  in  the  royalty rebates  and  the  cost  of  administering   the tax, then could it come back down to zero in terms of revenue?   

 PM: Well the figures have been released today, and the architecture of the tax is as  I’ve described it.    

 JOURNALIST: But do you  now concede  that you’ll need almost a  miracle  to  reach  that $2 billion predicted profit that the mining tax was going to get in the first year?   

 PM: Well, the figures have been released today.   

 JOURNALIST: It’s a long way from $2 billion though.    

 PM: The tax works as a profits-based tax - that’s the appropriate design.    

 We’ve  always said  we  wanted  an  efficiently based tax, and  that is a  tax that takes  when mining is at its most profitable.    

 Now I’d remind people - if we just want to go through this debate. When this debate  first started, what we were told in the national discourse - and let’s remind ourselves  of it - we were told by the other side of politics that the existence of a profits-based  tax  in  mining  would  destroy  the  mining  industry  and  everybody  would  be   unemployed.    

 That was what we were told. It’s an irresponsible scare campaign which once again  has been proven to be an irresponsible scare campaign.    

 We deliberately designed a profits-based tax.    

 Last year we saw some volatility in the global economy; we saw some concerns at  that point about the economy of China; it had an impact on commodities prices.    

 Now as we move into this year, I think all of the doomsayers about China have been  proved  wrong,  and  we  are  seeing  good  economic  conditions  and  growth  in  China   and we’re continuing to see good demand for our resources exports, and we’ve seen  some recovery in commodities prices.    

 A profits-based tax is purpose-designed so that when you get these cycles, including  very quick-changing cycles like the one we’ve seen over the last six to nine months,  it can respond.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we’re told that asylum seekers will be on the agenda  when  you  talk  with  Prime  Minister  Key  tomorrow.  Will  Australia  be  asking  New   Zealand  to  take  the  asylum  seekers  out  of  Nauru  as  happened  under  the  Howard   Government?   

 PM:  Look,  we’ll  have  something  to  say  when  we’ve  actually  had  the  leaders’   discussion, but certainly people-smuggling is on the agenda for the discussion.    

 JOURNALIST: Just back to the issue of New Zealanders' entitlements when they’re  living  in  Australia.  Will  you  entertain  the  idea  during  the  bilateral  meetings  of  any   changes at all to those entitlements?   

 PM: I anticipate Prime Minister Key will want to raise this matter with me, so we will  have a discussion in the room.    

 But  I  would  remind  that  close  relationship  with  New  Zealand  and  that  close   relationship  is  reflected  in  current  arrangements  for  special  category  visa  holders   from  New Zealand in Australia.    

 No  other  nation  on  earth  has  its  citizens  come  to  Australia  and  enjoy  those   entitlements or benefits.    

 JOURNALIST:  Could  I  just  take  you  back to  the  sports  and  drugs  scandal  at  the   moment.  Would  you  agree  with  some  of  the  commentary  made  today  that  the   release of a report which did not have a lot of detail in it has cast a cloud over the  entire sporting fraternity in Australia, and do we need to get a quick resolution to it?    

 So people who have done nothing wrong can be assured that they’re not going to be  caught up in the muck of it all?   

 PM: I think it’s important that the Crime Commission and the Anti-Doping Agency go  about the work and public release of the work in the way that they think is best.    

 I can understand people involved in sporting codes who are now anxious to see the  next bit - I can well and truly understand that. But I think we’ve got to let the experts  get on with the job.    

 As  an  individual  I’d  have  to  say  I’ve  been  pretty  shocked  by  this  material.  If  you’d   asked  me  to  make  a  guess  about  doping  in  Australian  sport,  I  wouldn’t  have   intuitively  come  out  with  the  work  that  the  Crime  Commission  and  the  Anti-Doping  Agency have.    

 So we’ve already benefited from their hard work, their expertise, and they’ll bring that  to bear for the next bit.    

 JOURNALIST:  Prime  Minister,  can  we  have  a  couple  of  words  on  the  relationship   with New Zealand, just to describe your relationship with New Zealand?   

 PM: The best description, I think, of the relationship with New Zealand is the one I  used when I had the very distinct honour of addressing the New Zealand Parliament  in 2011.    

 It is a relationship of family. There is a bond between Australia and New Zealand that  is different to any bond that we share in any other part of the world.    

 The very fact that it’s fundamental to our soul and how we perceive ourselves; the  legend of Anzac is part of us and it’s part of New Zealand.    

 That is, I think, showing us the depth of the bond that we feel together. So, forged in  history, here in contemporary times, and always here for the future.    

 JOURNALIST:  Prime  Minister,  was  your  Government’s  decision  about  the  Tarkine   just about winning votes, or what do  you  say to  the  Greens and  other groups who   are outraged by what’s happened today?   

 PM:  Well,  first  and  foremost,  these  decisions  are  taken  by  Minister  Burke  as  the   appropriate decision-maker under legislation, which is very specifically done.    

 There are legal obligations here that Minister Burke has to acquit, and he exercises  his judgement against those legal obligations.    

 JOURNALIST: Does it help you though to win (inaudible) support in Tasmania?   

 PM:  I’d  remind  you:  this  is  legal  obligations;  an  appropriate  decision-maker  having   exercised that decision-making power.    

 So  it’s  a  decision  of  Minister  Burke  under  a  piece  of  federal  legislation  properly   informed by the best of research.    

 Thanks very much.    

 [ENDS]   

