---
title: "Address to the National Press Club, Canberra"
date: "2013-09-04"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211436904
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2709233%22
---

 4th September 2013   

 NATIONAL PRESS CLUB ADDRESS  SENATOR CHRISTINE MILNE  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN GREENS   

 *CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*   

 Welcome once again to the National Press Club for today's National Australia Bank address. The 15th and  penultimate event in our pre-election series and the third of hour leaders' addresses. Tomorrow we will host the  Prime Minister, of course,, but today it's Australian Greens leader Christine Milne who joins us. A former school  teacher and environmental activist, Senator Milne assumed the leadership of the Greens last year just prior to the  retirement of Bob Brown from Parliament, having in her earlier political career served as leader of the Greens in  the Tasmanian Parliament. With the carbon tax reemerging as a critical issue as the election campaign enters its  final days, the Greens are again set to play a key role if as expected the coalition is elected on Saturday. While  Tony Abbott has pledged to scrap the carbon tax, any move to repeal the legislation can be blocked obviously by  the Labor and the Greens in the Senate, at least until June next year, when 36 of the 40 Senate positions which  are up for election will actually expire. Those four of course are the Territory positions which don't have mixed  terms but are linked to the House of Representatives. Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome Senator Christine  Milne.(Applause)   

 Thank you very much indeed. I'm delighted to be here. It's great to be within a few days of polling day after having  had such a great campaign around the country with the Greens. I want to start by acknowledging the Ngunnawal  people the traditional owners of the land and pay my respects to their elders past and present. In that context, I  want to say how pleased I am that as a result of the agreement that we signed with former Prime Minister Gillard,  that we have advanced the cause of Indigenous recognition in our constitution. The Greens will work in this period  of government to make sure we achieve Aboriginal recognition in the constitution and to get rid of racial  discrimination from that document once and forever. I want to ...(Applause)   

 One of the well roughly experiences of the election campaign so far was heading up to Darwin to spend time with  our Senate candidate up there Warren H Williams. I heard from Warren the work he was doing in Aboriginal  communities particularly on health issues, but also trying to secure education in language. And that is so important  if you're going to maintain culture. But in the course of that, I got talking to Warren and to our House of Reps  candidate up there, Todd Williams, both musicians. They'd both been out to the detention centre in Darwin and  they had started a jam session for the benefit of the asylum seekers in the detention centre. They were so moved  by the experience and the gaugement that had happened, Warren has now written a song about that. That will  eventually be released. What it does say to us is when Warren came back he said to me how ashamed he was as  an Aboriginal person that this cruelty was taking place on Aboriginal land. Aboriginal people certainly have a great  deal to teach us all. In terms of what Warren has said, it's pretty much the same. Everywhere I've been around the  country in this election campaign, people have come up to me and said they really reject the cruelty, the race to  the bottom in the treatment of people seeking asylum in our country and so many people, more than 10,000, have  signed on with the Greens to the web site and the advertisement that says not in my name, not with my vote. And  I'm really proud of the fact that so many Australians have stood up with the Greens to say we won't tolerate that  kind of cruelty. Now, one of those is a wonderful old lady called Beryl. I want to wish Beryl a happy birthday today.  She's 80 today and I'd like you to read the letter that - I'd like to read the letter that she has written and letterboxed  herself in the seat of Melbourne. This is pretty extraordinary. This weekly turn 80. I have lived in the electorate of  Melbourne for nearly 30 years. Like many of my friends, I'm disturbed by the direction of politics with a level of  meanness from both the Liberal an Labor Parties on the treatment of the most vulnerable. This includes appalling  refugee policies. Cuts to overseas aid to fund offshore detention and the unfair level of Centrelink payments to  unemployed and single parents raising teenagers. This pandering to an uncaring element around Australia is  surely out of step with the values we hold in the electorate of Melbourne. The election of Adam Bandt at the last  election proved so important in preventing an Abbott government achieving expanded Medicare cover for dental  care, a price on carbon and support for renewable energy. His work has given me up. It goes on from that. But that  just shows you what the feeling is out there in the electorate. Because I can tell you that many people are feeling  exactly the same way as Beryl. They're feeling really disappointed, because they wanted this election to be a  contest of ideas about the future of this country. A contest of ideas about what it might look like in 10, 20 or 50  years' time. A contest of ideas about what heights this nation might scale as we move into the Asian Century and  as we deal with the challenges of living in a more globalised, more connected and a hotter and wetter world. At  another level, people have been really disappointed because they are feeling under pressure in their day-to-day  lives. They're feeling less satisfied with their lives and they feel like the daily grind is just wearing them down and  they want ed a national conversation during this election campaign about quality of life in our society. Is there a  way to guarantee a good and secure life for their children and their children's children and at the same time how  can you pay the bills, how can you put food on the table, how can you secure affordable housing, how can you 

 have time to visit your friends and your aged relatives and participate in the community? That's the kind of  conversation people were hoping to have, but instead of that, this federal election has been dominated by the  small, mean, narrow, tedious and entirely predictable race to the bottom from the old parties. It's actually  deteriorated into American-style politics which I don't think Australians like very much. Where it has become the  politics of celebrity, of political theatre, of distraction. And people are fed up with it and they just want it to be over. I  got thinking to myself, well, why has that actually happened in Australia? And it's pretty clear, this election has  basically been confined to one world view and it is a world view that is shared by both the Lib rammed and Labor  Parties and they only differ to a degree, they don't differ in terms of having a different perspective in how the world  should be. So just let me give you an example. They agree on refugee policy, trying to outdo each history in  cruelty. They are both prepared to condemn single parents to poverty. In order to bring the budget into surplus  earlier. They are prepared to let the big miners off the hook because they're both terrified of the advertising  campaign and the political power of the big miners. They basically look at women in our community and they say,  OK, 80% of single parents are women, but too bad, we are going to protect the vested interests instead. They are  jeopardising the future with their preparedness to cut university funding. And how can you think that that is a good  thing to do if you have a view about the future which says we have to move from a dig it up, cut it down, ship it  away type economy to one that is based on innovation and a future which requires such a strong education base.  They're also refusing to raise revenue from those who can afford to pay, whether it's the banks or the miners, or  getting rid of fossil fuel subsidies and the fact of the matter is if you want a debate, you have to have both sides of  the argument. And we haven't had both sides of the argument in any of the leaders' debates or any of the portfolio  debates because they're fundamentallily agreed. A survey done in 2005 said that Australians were basically asked  to choose between two positive scenario ares to the future and which one they expected to happen and which one  they preferred to help. Now the first one was focus on individual wealth, economic growth and efficiency and  enjoying the good life for those who could get it. The other one was based on community, family, equality, and  environmental sustainability. And people came back and 73% said they expected the former to be future scenario,  but actually, 93% said they preferred the latter. An that's what's been wrong with this election campaign. The Rudd  and Abbott debate, their party machines, most of the media have confined the debate at the election to that one  scenario of individual wealth, economic growth and efficiency and enjoying the good life for a few and they have  left aside a whole world that is different and that's where the Greens have come in. So actually what's interesting  about this election is not what has been debated, it is what has actually been left out of the debates. That's what  people wanted to talk about but it hasn't been there except for the Greens. We have been standing up for what  matters, we've been saying what does matter is caring for people and caring for the environment. And that should  be at the heart of government. And it's not that there isn't strong leadership in this country for that scenario. Yes,  there is, and it's with the Greens. It's not that there isn't a different world view. It's not that there isn't certainty about  that kind of vision. It's that it simply has to be found with the Greens. You won't get it from the old parties. Now  when you're talking about building a more caring society, when you're talking about lifting people out of poverty,  you have to start with Newstart and Youth Allowance and support for single parents and the Greens have. And  we've said right through this election and well before it, we need to lift people out of poverty, we need to increase  those by $50 a week with an extra supplement for single parents. We've also said we have to reduce the pressure  on people's daily lives that is invest in public transport, for example. That's a critical way of improving the amenity  of cities and take pressure off people and I know my colleague out Adam Bandt has been working very hard on  Doncaster Rail in Melbourne as one of those projects that would do that. But another issue in this world view the  Greens are talking about which people raise with me all the time is housing affordability. Homelessness. How can  students afford somewhere to live? What about women who've ended up without superannuation and in middle  age forced into homelessness and shelters? These are real issues people want to talk about and they haven't  been there in the election campaign, but the Greens have put them on the agenda and we've said we want to build  200,000 new homes in the next decade to look at that issue of homelessness and affordability. We've talked about  access to fresh food, local, seasonal, looking at also out-of-pocket expenses for health care and dental care.  We've wanted to put $660 million into Medicare and also $4.9 billion into Denticare because this is actually about  significant social change. We've also gone for the universities and the TAFEs and said we want $5 billion to go into  those. We want to reverse the cuts and we want to increase funding. Because if you're serious about education, it  has to be from early childhood right through school, into university and TAFE and lifelong learning. That is what is  required for this century and anyone who doesn't understand that isn't actually taking on the future in a realistic  way. But we've also said you need access to child care and aged care and that's why we've said we wanted to put  an extra $2 billion into child care, because it's not just access it's actually having the facilities in the area that you  live with the capacity to look after children from babies through to the older demographic. You also have ending  discrimination. This is where the Greens stand alone again. We're the only party that has stood up and said we  don't support discrimination of any kind in Australia and we want it removed hand that is why for marriage equality,  every Green MP every time will vote for equality and ending dis face. And we will end discrimination, whether it  comes to employment practices, whether it comes to access to aged care facilities. This is about a discrimination  issue. And trying to turn it into a conscience issue suggests that people would regard women's rights, for example,  as a conscience issue. Well, I don't think so. I don't think that that is an appropriate way to view this and that's why  the Greens are on the record in this way. We're also talking about addressing job security. Making sure that people  in the work force are able to consider work/life balance as they go through their working years an looking after our  agricultural land and water so that we can grow food into the future in this country and finally of course, issues like  being connected, supporting the NBN and the Greens have been out there since Day 1, supporting that. So we  actually see all of those things in the context of a big picture in a world that is transforming. Woe shouldn't be 

 looking through the rear vision ministry. We are seeing this as facing up to global warming, facing up to increased  population pressures, facing up to habitat loss, facing up to the real challenges of the century, whereas Tony  Abbott is looking backwards. It's a back-to-the future strategy. Whereas the Greens are offering honest, straight,  strong leadership, saying these are the challenges and we've got to face them, he is offering weak and backward-looking leadership by saying that business as usual will do and it won't. This is where you get serious about  redesigning our cities, for example. What we have to do is take advantage of the changes and get ahead of the  curve. And so in cities, be looking at public transport. You'd be looking at much more energy efficient buildings.  You'd be looking at cycle ways. You'd be looking at zero waste strategies, container deposit legislation. Powering  our whole community with 100% renewable energy and that really gets the whole community thinking about how  they cannot only participate in that, but how buildings in cities can become power stations amongst   

 power stations amongst themselves. We have to look after our precious places in the context of the pressure  they're going to be under from global warming, from habitat destruction, from population increases, how do we look  after them and sustain them in the longer term. Now, all that is at risk. If the polls are right, and Tony Abbott is  elected as Prime Minister, if he gets absolute control of both Houses of Parliament, that vision for the future, that  whole world view will be sidelined completely. That's why we need Adam Bandt returned in the House of Reps and  we need a strong Senate. With the Greens returned to the balance of power in the Senate to stop the excess of an  Abbott government. A vote for the Greens in the Senate is a vote to stand up on things that matter, things like  global warming and carbon pricing. I've been an environmentalist all my life. And I can tell you the things that I  have secured with others, with communities over time, the coral reefs of New Caledonia, several National Parks,  threatened species, they're all at risk because of global warming. Now so far in this critical decade of addressing  climate change with the IPCC report to be due in a few weeks' time we know the world is on track for 4 to 5  degrees of global warming. That's why we've got the Renewable Energy Agency, the Clean Energy Finance  Corporation forks get behind the rollout of renewables at scale in a time frame that gives us a chance. It's why we  also secured the biodiversity fund and the clean technology fund, because it's not just about renewable energy and  reducing emissions from energy, it's about storing carbon in the land cape and keeping that carbon in the  landscape and maintaining biodiversity but it's also stopping expanded coal and fossil fuels. We're the only party  honest enough to stand up and say if you're serious about addressing global warming then that that coal and that  gas has to stay in the ground. We have the courage to stand up and say that. Whereas what you've got from the  old parties is saying they're prepared to open up the galley and Bowen Basins. They're prepared to build new cold  ports up and down the Great Barrier Reef. We're prepared to put World Heritage in danger before the Great Barrier  Reef and threaten the 63,000 jobs in tourism that are on the reef. Tony Abbott has come out and said that he will  pull the forests that we've just had listed as World Heritage. Tasmania's magnificent old-growth forests at last,  great carbon stores, great banks of biodiversity in those forest, he will pull them out of World Heritage and that will  be another Australian World Heritage site listed as World Heritage in danger. Let me go for a moment to  extinctions. We have the government this week refusing to fund the save the Tasmanian devil Coalition and Labor  have said they will mine the Tarkine in spite of fact that the Australian heritage commission has shade that it  should be protected. In Victoria the led beaters' possum is faced with extinction all around the Australia th.d is the  face of the environment. Now, Tony Abbott has shown his true colours on climate change. Whereas the Greens  have come out at this election and said increase our level of ambition. Let's increase the renewable energy target  to 90% by 2030. Let's put more money into the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, not less. Let's make it 30 billion  over 10 years. Let's get into this. Let's actually improve the grid, connect the renewables, get new renewable  energy zones that would see Port Augusta, for example, be able to move to solar thermal, to see Western  Australia be able to host solar thermal. That is the kind of vision people want to see. But Tony Abbott has said, no,  after having cast a pall of uncertainty over the whole country in terms of energy investment in recent years, he's  basically stopped the rollout of investment in solar and wind for the last 12 months because people don't know  what the energy policy is going to be. He's now abandoned any pretence of of action. He's gone back to saying if  thank if his money doesn't cover a 5% reduction in emissions he doesn't care, that's all he's spending, it doesn't  matter to him. Once a sceptic, always a sceptic. He said he thought climate change was crap and that is exactly  his position right now hand he doesn't care. I cannot believe that he stands up with his daughters on a stage and  he doesn't care about global warming because that means he doesn't care about what happens to them in 2050.  That is the reality. People have to start thinking about what it is they need to do for their own children. He will also  be a global embarrassment at the G20 and in the global climate talks because 2015 is the year we're trying to  negotiate a global treaty on climate change and he is the one who will be walking away from that and Australia will  be looking ridiculous in global terms and he will have pulled down, if he gets absolute power, the whole framework  that the international energy said was dem plate legislation for developed countries. We should be really proud that  we have led the way during this last period of shared power in Australia, we led the way on climate policy. It should  be an embarrassment if that is at risk. He thinks now he can stop the Clean Energy Finance Corporation an he  can't. I'm today releasing advice from the clerk of the Senate that conclusively demonstrates that an Abbott  government cannot stop the Clean Energy Finance Corporation from undertaking its legislative obligations to fund  clean energy projects around the country without Parliament amendingth legislation. That's because when we  designed the legislation we made sure we had in it the money that needs to flow. Mr Abbott and Mr Robb are  arrogantly assuming they can usurp the role of the Parliament and direct the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to  halt its legislative function and they simply can't do it. Only the Parliament can repeal the carbon price and only the  Parliament can stop the rollout of renewable energy through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and that's why  you need a strong Green voice in the Senate. Adam Bandt in the reps and a Green in the Senate to stand up 

 against the excesses of an Abbott government and on the 7th of September, Abbott-proof the Senate. Now,  beyond that, there are a number of things that Tony Abbott can't do if the Greens are in balance of power in the  Senate. I shall run through a few quickly. He can't get rid of the instant asset write-off for small business, for  example,. He can't get rid of the social safety net that he wants to take the measly $4 a week from l some of our  poorest people. He can't do that if the Greens are there to prevent him from doing so. He can't stop refugees being  stripped of their legal rights, if the Greens are in the Senate. To prevent him from doing so. He can't abolish the  low income superannuation tax rebate if we are there. Equally if we are there, he can't devolve the decision-making powers on the environment to the States. That is critical to protect our National Parks, to protect our  wonderful wild areas and finally, if the Greens are there in balance of power in the Senate, he can't repeat  WorkChoices or the resurrection of the Australian Building and Construction Commission. So that it would treat  workers in such an appalling way. There are a number of things we could work with a coalition government to do.  One is on paid parental leave. We believe it is a workplace entitlement. That's why we say that Tony Abbott's plan  is way too excessive. We would rein it in to be fairer. We've also recognised, they have said at various times that  they have strong family values, so you would think they would want to ban junk food advertising during prime-time  hours. Bicheno bsh has said she'd like to see semiautomatic handguns banned. That's great so do the Greens.  We'd work with them on that to make our community safer. They also said they want to put dental into Medicare.  The Greens have driven that so we'd be prepared to work with them to drive it even harder of the they've also said  they would have a more stringent test on the national interest when it comes to the Foreign Investment Review  Board and the foreign ownership of agricultural land and water. The Greens take a stronger position than the  coalition does. However, we would work with them to strengthen what is there already. With only a few days to go  in this election, the Greens are here to inject hope into the Australian community, because I foe people are really  worried about an Abbott government. They are even more worried at the prospect of an unfetterred power  arrangement for Tony Abbott if he had effective control of both houtss. That's why the Greens are fielding a  fantastic team of outstanding candidates around the country and really, we do have a wonderful membership and  great candidates and they are battling with conservative forces everywhere they're standing. So Adam Stone in  Queensland, for example, is battling it out with the Katter party for that last Senate seat. Cate Faehrmann in New  South Wales is battling it out with the shooters and with Pauline Hanson and we all know what happened in New  South Wales when the shooters got in, they sold off the electricity system in exchange for shooting in National  Parks. That's the kind of thing that would be on the agenda unless we get Cate in from New South Wales. Here in  the ACT, Simon Sheik, this is a good opportunity for an upset for the Greens here and to actually be able to send a  strong signal that cutting 12 to 20,000 public service jobs is wrong way, go back. The Greens believe that public  servants do real work and do real jobs even though they don't wear fluoresce sent vests and hard hats. They  work.(Applause)   

 In South Australia, Sarah Hanson-Young is battling is out with the Conservatives, Conservative side of politics and  in Western Australia, it's exactly the same for Scott Ludlam . Peter Wish-Wilson and Janet Rice in Victoria and  Tasmania are battling it out with Family First so we have got a struggle on our hands and the Australian community  can choose either a united strong team of Greens with a world view which talks about care for the environment,  care for people, which wants to put community, family, equality, environmental sustainability back into the heart of  government, or they will see an Abbott government potentially with effective power in both Houses unfetterred off  the leash able to do as he likes. In Melbourne, Adam Bandt, what an outstanding candidate he is and what a good  vibe that is going on in Melbourne. I'm confident he will be returned because the Greens' voice needs to be heard  in the House of Representatives as well. We not only have a great team of candidates, we have fantastic policies. I  have to tell you I am really proud of the suite of policies we're taking to this election. They are comprehensive.  They're internally consistent. They're fully costed. Unlike any other party we're consistent. We're staying if you  want to deal with global warming you can't go opening up new coalmines. You have to be skiff at any time if you're  serious about policy and principle. If you want to get people out of poverty you can't bloke single parents getting  greater support or putting more into Newsort - Newstart. This year we've got 140 endorsements from our policies  from major groups from around the country. Don't fake my word for it. Please go to our web site to  Greens.org.au/endorsements and you will see some of them. But they come from people like Dr Russell Roberts,  chair of the national alliance for rural and regional mental health. He has said of our policy, it's one of the most  sensible pieces of policy work I have seen from a political party on rural mental health in the last 25 years. I want to  thank Penny Wright who's sitting here who worked so hard on that particular policy position. We've got also got  from the Australian food sovereignty alliance, only the Greens have developed sort of policy approach which is  needed to face the challenges we face in coming years an decades. The insurance companies have supported our  commitment for increased expenditure on pre-disaster resilience, to 350 million a year, saying this is an ambitious  program but one that we believe is critical to this nation's future safety and prosperity. Even the AMA, Dr Steve  Hambleton, has come out and said and congratulated the Greens on health policy saying that our policy to restore  Medicare benefit, and return more than 600 million is Medicare fund something great. They're just some of the  examples of people who have endorsed us. Equally all our policies are costed. We've put them through and we are  putting them through as the election rolls out to the Parliamentary Budget Office and we are complying with the  charter of budget honesty, which Tony Abbott is not. What an irony that he is the one who says they are  responsible economic managers and yet they are going to this election with a junk policy on a global warming with  direct action, for example, but not one policy have they put into the Parliamentary Budget Office. The Labor Party  have put in 61 policies to Treasury. We've put in 74 to the Parliamentary Budget Office. And the coalition has put in  zero. Zero economic responsibility in this. So finally, I just want to say we have run a great campaign around the 

 country. And I want toe thank all of you and people around the country who have stood up with the Greens through  this election campaign and in anticipation, all the people who are going to work with us on the booths and I know  that there are going to be many out there this weekend. We are the strong alternative voice in Australian politics.  We're the people who can be trusted to stand up for what matters, to care for people and care for the environment.  So on September 7, vote 1 the Greens. Thank you.(Applause)   

 Time now for questions from our media members. I think there's a reasonable number of Greens supporters in the  room. (Laughter) We have a large number of questions to get through. I would pay peel to our media members to  try to restrict themselves to a single question and keep the questions reasonably short. The first one today from  Laura Tingle.You've talked in your speech about the Tweedledum Tweedledee nature of the two major political  parties today. And you've said that people are looking for the kind of vision that the Greens are offering. But the  reality is the polls are showing that the swing is on towards Tony Abbott, who is against a lot of the things you  stand for. And that there's been a big surge in votes for other parties like the Katter party, the Palmer party and  also for the microparties. My question would be: to what extent are the Greens Kuala Lumpur paubl for this trend  and secondly, what is your take on the rise of the microparties and what they mean for the rise of the Senate post  2014? I think the rise of the microparties and the increase in the number of don't know just confirms what I said in  my speech, that people aren't satisfied with the nature of the debate that's been on this election. They're sick of  them. They want to get rid of it but they haven't actually explored what the alternatives are. As to culpability of the  Greens of not getting the vision out there, we have tried to get the vision out there, but this is where I agree with  Kevin Rudd in terms of the Murdoch press there has been a campaign being run from Day 1 which supports the  world view that I talked about, that is about individual wealth, competition, trash the environment, get what you  want and don't worry about the rest thats a been out there. Social media is a bit different, though. When you go on-line you find there is quite a community conversation about a different perspective. I'm hoping this weekend that  people will look beyond the old parties and vote for the Greens. In terms of the Senate, there is a real risk that  Tony Abbott could get effective control of the Senate with a fairly ragtag group of extreme right minor parties. That  would be a real issue for Australia, because the tendency and experience in the last with these extreme minor  partys is that they will do a deal on a particular policy of self-interest for them in order to sell out the rest and that is  a big issue, and the shooters is the case in point, but there have been others and that's a clear case where I would  urge people to look at the policy platforms before they cast a vote, to make sure they understand exactly what it is  those parties are standing for.   

 Haven't the parties who've demonised carbon pricing pushed to the background for political gain the more vital  messages about why Australia needs to prepare against predicted catastrophic climate impacts? You covered in  your speech that Tony Abbott will limit the coalition's direct action policy commitment to 3.2 billion, even if that  amount doesn't result in meeting their emissions reduction target for 2020. Under direct action, storing car mon in  soils was originally meant to account for 60% of emissions reduction. The science says it's not going to happen.  Now the coalition has no proven alternative methods to fill that 60% void before they even get to 100. Like-minded  scientists I talk to who agree with CSIRO's theoretical that tree planting might be a possible alternative also say the  cost and impacts of agricultural production alone would make it practically impossible.Can you get to the question,  please? Here's the question. Do you believe that climate change is getting worse faster than we thought? And is  the coalition's direct action policy going to go anywhere near making a dent in it, both in terms of Australia's  domestic economic survival needs and our international moral obligation?IPCC report is due in about three weeks.  I'm expecting it to say there is an even higher level of confidence that global warm something being driven by  human behaviour. I'm expecting it to say that we need to act faster and that of course will feed into the global  negotiations and that's why I say that Tony Abbott is totally irresponsible when it comes to addressing global  warming. Everybody knows that direct action is a joke. There was never going to be any possibility that 60% of a  target could be achieved with soil carbon. Increasing soil carbon is a good thing to do but it will never achieve the  kinds of changes and level that is being suggested by the coalition. If you're serious about protecting carbon in  terms of forest, you are much better off protecting our old-growth forests and restoring degraded native vegetation  and doing that fast and immediately. That is what you would do if you were going to do that. But the other thing is  the Greens have said very strongly we don't support loss of agricultural land and water to coal and coal seam gas.  Why would you start and expand fossil fuel industries at the end of the fossil fuel age? This will be the century of  food security. Around the world people are going to struggle to be able to feed themselves and that's why other  countries are now buying up agricultural land and water. That's why the Greens are saying we should not be  selling any land and water to wholly owned subsidiaries of foreign governments. It's a bad idea. And we need to  actually start looking after our land here and producing as much food as as we can. There is not a single  economist, not a single scientist, any peer reviewed main that will say that direct action will do anything. It is a joke,  it is a lie, in fact and that's why I've just said that Tony Abbott is a rear-vision thinker and it is lazy, it is weak, and  it's dishonest. And what I think will happen, far from this talk about double dissolutions, what I think will happen, is  that the business community is going to come out very fast after the election if there's an Abbott government to  say, hang on, we can't go down this track, reveal before you repeal. And I think when he's asked to reveal exactly  what these policies are, it's all - the wheels are going to fall off actually. I know that there are many conservative  who is desperately want the Greens there in balance of power because they know how stupid this policy is sand  they're relying on the Greens to stop the carbon price being repealed just as Nick Minchin came out and was  confident that there would be amendments to paid parental leave in the Senate. Ie, the Greens will be there to fix  um the mess that Tony Abbott is making.(Laughter) (Applause) 

 

 In terms of the potential of the agenda of the Abbott government, where do you think the Greens might be closer to  compromise with the Abbott agenda than Labor would be.One of the ones I just cited for you was looking at  agricultural land and water, the Foreign Investment Review Board responsibilities, the threshold at which they  might examine any proposals to buy, so that whole frame, you would think, if you heard from the Newcastles, that  they were actually interested in fair trade, but let's see. We're prepared to negotiate to get fair trade as opposed to  free trade, but let's see what Andrew Robb and some of the others in the coalition think about that. Issues as I  mentioned, paid parental leave, the banning of handguns is another example, there will be areas, because our job  has always been to improve legislation. That's where we come from, if it is an improvement on where it was and  gets us on the path to something better then it's worth us working on it and getting that outcome hand that's what  we've always done and it's what we'll continue to do. You just mentioned the phrase reveal before you rel peel.  Just wanting to flesh that out a bit. What sort of things will the Greens be demanding of hypothetical Abbott  government in regards to the carbon tax repeal legislation snim e thinking about things like will you be seeking cost  benefit analysis of it, or a Productivity Commission inquiry, some other form of Senate inquiry, will you be seeking  legal advice, because it's potentially subject to challenge in the High Court. What sorts of practical things will you  be doing to flesh that out that legislation?None of the above when it comes to the clean energy package. It is there,  as long as the Greens are in balance of power, it will not be repealed. Because as I said the International Energy  Agency has described it as template legislation and it is, I'm really proud of it. I am appalled that Kevin Rudd has  raided the biodiversity fund. That was a very bad move. I can tell new rural and regional Australia when I talk to  communities out there, they're really pleased that the Greens got that money to help them engage in stewardship  of the land and they resent the fact that that's been taken away. Others are really resentful of the fact that Kevin  Rudd has abandoned the clean technology fund as well because that was enabling things like Norco that dairy  cooperative in New South Wales to get new refrigeration equipment, Fonterra in Australia got new more efficient  vats right. Around the country it's had fantastic outcomes and we're not going to see any of that go. The Clean  Energy Finance Corporation has already funded the Moree solar farm, the mrk Arthur wind farm. We won't be  watching any of that go cowso 'cause it's all good. Where I meant reveal before you repeal is that before he got  any, any ability to even talk about putting up something alternative he needs to have it modelled. Where is the  modelling for direct action? Where is the upgrading of direct action? It is a complete mystery to anyone and Greg  Hunt changes the parameters around it all the time. Will there be pen fees? Now it's moved to just an energy  intensity scheme, not absolute emissions. I cannot imagine the embarrassment for Australia if we go off to the  global carbon negotiations, the climate negotiations on the global treaty and try to suggest that it would be a  reasonable burden share in the global effort to reduce emissions for Australia to reduce our emissions by less than  5%. We would be laughed out of the room and that is exactly what I expect to happen and our Champions  Leagues here from the pacific would be thinking this is outrageous. The small island States, the poorer countries  around the world would be just saying Australia, you are a disgrace, on top of the cruelty to refugees which is  already undermining our reputation in terms of human rights and the Refugee Convention of the it's up to Tony  Abbott to put some detail but he's not going to do it, just as he isn't with his costings. He has not costed anything  and doesn't intend to. What sort of arrogance is that? I'd ask you about I guess regrets that you might have. Do  you think that the Greens did the right thing with the coalition to block an ETS heats? Now you're facing the  prospect of a Conservative government which has vowed to wipe out a carbon price altogether, wouldn't it have  been better to have a fully fledged price on carbon locked in years ago? I0 we've got a fully fledged price on  carbon locked in right now. This question arises because Kevin Rudd has chosen to think the whole country went  to sleep in the years when he he wasn't Prime Minister. Let me inform him it didn't. The country moved on,  actually. We delivered a carbon price and what's more we delivered an emissions trading scheme with a fixed  price for the first three years and Kevin Rudd also seems to have forgotten that his CPRS had a fixed price for one  year as well. If he doesn't like carbon taxes then he shouldn't have had his own fixed price for 12 months. This is  just political opportunism going on here. If we had had the CPRS in place now, the carbon price would be less than  $1. Less than $1. There would be no mechanism for increasing the target. We would be stuck with a completely  ineffectual scheme. What we have now is an 8% reduction in emissions an transformation going on around the  country. I couldn't be happier with the decision that we made to say we want effective action on climate, not what  was being put up then, which was a ceiling on action, not a foundation.(Applause)   

 There's been quite a lot of talk about mandates in the past day or so, and obviously you have and will have a  mandate of your own in the Senate. But there is any limit to the use of your mandate? You sbeek speak as though  perhaps there's not. Do you regard the Senate as absolutely equal to the House and do you think that the Greens'  arm twisting of Labor over the past three years has in fact produced some of the backlash we've seen against the  Greens?I'd just like to say what John Howard had to say about mandates in September 1987. He said when  people vote at an election they do not vote on only one issue. The mandate theory of politics from the point of view  of proper analysis has always been absolutely phoney. It's one of the few occasions where I actually agree with  John Howard.(Laughter)But to come back to Michelle's bigger question - the Greens will have a mandate on  carbon pricing. It is the law. We will uphomed the law and we won't see the law repealed when it comes to carbon  pricing but we will work to improve legislation, whoever is in government and we'll work with all sides of politics to  achieve that as we always have. In the Tasmanian context, who would have thought when I was in balance of  power with a Liberal minority government in Tasmania, we secured gay law reform, gun law reform, the apology to  the Stolen Generation and a vote for Australia to become a republic. So on that basis, let's see whether we can't  deliver marriage equality in this period of government. As to the question about the backlash, because there has 

 been shared power, I think the backlash is far more about the instability in the Labor Party, about the mash nations  of stabbing and leaking and so on that has gone on in the Labor Party - machinations . What is an interesting  analysis that I don't think it is carbon pricing is that the issue. The issue became that that was link ed to a Prime  Minister who said one thing before an election and did something after the election. It was turned into an issue of  credibility of the leadership and it could've been any policy position, it just happened to be the carbon policy  position. So I think a lot of the backlash has been about instability in the Labor Party and some of it has been about  a group of people in Australia who could never accept a woman as a leader. And they still can't accept as a  woman as a leadered and it's that now interesting to me now to see that now you've got two men leading the old  parties, both married, both three children, that that demographic is more than happy that the choice Australians  have is that choice. I say the choice Australians have is broader than that. They have got a strong woman in  leadership and a great team with the Greens.(Applause)   

 Can I take you to the advice that you released today from the clerk of the Senate about the Clean Energy Finance  Corporation? Isn't that advice rather arbitrary given the director of the chair of the board has herself said if a  coalition forms government the FEFC will welcome the opportunity to consult with responsible ministers in the  context of the leg late tiff framework prior to undertaking any further action and section 64 of the investment  mandate of the board says that responsibility ministers can use regulations to direct the board about their  investment man date?First I think the board of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation has being a fantastic job. It  would be normal for the of a board to consult with the government of the day. That doesn't mean to say that they  won't proceed to actually deliver on the mandate, the legislate tiff mandate that they V they're an ind ppt statutory  authority. The money will flow to them unless the legislation is repealed and they will then under their mandate  have an opportunity to disperse it. Yes, there will be an opportunity for the government to discuss an investment  mandate but it won't be as easy as Tony Abbott thinks to destroy the Clean Energy Finance Corporation because  you've got an incredibly well qualified board in terms of financial responsibility and they will not abuse their own  professionalism if you like in order to deliver for Tony Abbott. I'm confident of that.I wanted to expand on something  that sir ra asked you about earlier. You did say you don't have regrets about voting against the CPRS Rudd  scheme in 2009-10. Would you at least con steed there is a possibility a Labor opposition may wave through the  changes to the carbon price? If that's the case, wouldn't that CPRS be a better outcome for environment than  having none at all? It's effectively none at all because there's no capacity, there would've been no capacity to  increase it and the price would be so low that it's having no transformative effect at all. I come back to an earlier  question about the level of urgency. We are in a global climate emergency. We have no time to lose. All the  scientists say this is the critical decade that we have to reduce global emissions this decade or we are not going to  make it in terms of getting anywhere near 2 degrees let alone less than 2 degrees. We have no time. That's why  I'm saying the aim here is to roll out more investment with the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, increase the  level of the renewable energy target and go to the world saying we are prepared to increase the level of our  emissions reduction fast. That is our obligation, I don't make any regrets about that. As to what Labor might do in  opposition, yes, that's why the Greens need to be there in numbers and in strength because I know that the  community groups around the Greens to take strong climate action and I know business around the country once  they've secureed what they want, which is some of them, but not all of them. They will be working for that outcome  and we need the Greens there in force to keep Labor honest and keep them on track, because frankly, in  opposition, who knows who will lead them or what policy position they will take. But we will be there to basically  drive them to hold the line on climate.   

 Could I also go back to an issue raised by my two colleagues, because you seem to be in the unique position of  the Greens being the only party that hasn't made a mistake over the past six years which is difficult to accept. Isn't  it a fact that if you had supported that initial ETS program and perhaps built on it, there wouldn't have been the  instability referred. Kevin Rudd will now be going for a third term and there'd be no doubt about the political  sanctity of a genuine policy on emissions.I would argue my job is not to secure government for the Labor Party, my  job is to get strong action on climate change and that is why I do what I can whomever I can to make sure we get  that outcome. In terms of Labor, let me tell you this: that Labor made a decision to negotiate only with the coalition,  because they wanted to brown down the scheme. They did not want to strengthen it. They browned it down  considerably so that its effect as I said would have been a virtually irrelevant price that wouldn't have driven  change. After Copenhagen the Greens went back to Labor while Kevin Rudd was still the Prime Minister with a  compromise proposition that interestingly was a $23 price and a hybrid scheme not unlike what we now have.  Labor refused to even consider it, because what we found out afterwards is a gang of four had decided to dump  carbon pricing an instead pursue a super profits tax, so much for any commitment to addressing the greatest moral  challenge of our time. So I would suggest that the only political party who have consistently and always dealt with  climate change as a global emergency are the Greens.(Applause)   

