---
title: "Australia Country statement: address to Bali Process ministerial meeting"
date: "2013-04-02"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Bali Process"
  - "People trafficking"
  - "People smuggling"
  - "Immigration controls"
  - "International cooperation"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392713
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2343088%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  BALI PROCESS MINISTERIAL MEETING  AUSTRALIA COUNTRY STATEMENT (3 minutes)  Tuesday 2 April 2013   

 Co-Chairs, Ministers, distinguished delegates, it is a great pleasure to be here today, and I would  like to extend Australia’s thanks to Indonesia for its generous hospitality.   

 As a region we are better placed to respond to the evolving challenges posed by human  trafficking and people smuggling as a result of our participation in the Bali Process.   

 The Regional Cooperation Framework which we agreed at the last Ministerial Conference has  paved the way for source, transit and destination countries to work together to reduce irregular  movement in the region.   

 Australia is working towards the goal of an integrated regional framework for the processing of  asylum claims.  Australia has agreements with Nauru and Papua New Guinea which have  resulted in regional processing centres in those countries.  Australia sees potential to engage  other Bali Process members in the arrangements as they develop.  Australia also has an  agreement with New Zealand to resettle 150 refugees annually as part of a regional approach to  irregular migration.   

 The establishment of the Regional Support Office in Bangkok will provide a policy and  operational hub to support the implementation of the Regional Cooperation Framework.   

 The continued success of the Office will depend on our joint commitment to participating in  activities, proposing projects, seconding officials or providing funding.   

 Australia strongly endorses the proposal for formal cooperation between the Bali Process and  regional centres of excellence, including the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation.   In particular, Australia supports the Regional Support Office developing a program of  cooperation.   

 Australia welcomes and support Indonesia’s proposal for a working group on trafficking in  persons.  It could be useful in enhancing cooperation on human trafficking and we suggest that  it be open to all Bali Process members.   

 We commend Thailand for hosting a workshop on the ratification and implementation of the  United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime.  Australia supports the  proposal arising from this workshop that the Regional Support Office develops regional policy  guides on migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons.   

 Sharing information and immigration intelligence is critical to us all gaining a better  understanding of the irregular movement of people, and how we can respond.   

 We can encourage Bali Process members to continue strengthening information and intelligence  sharing through the Bali Process secure web portal and the Voluntary Reporting System on  Migrant Smuggling and Related Conduct.   

 

 Australia will continue to strongly support cooperative measures to improve border integrity  and law enforcement, including through workshops on border security, biometrics and  immigration intelligence sharing. We will also continue to work with our regional partners to  build our capacity to combat trafficking, strengthening legal frameworks and boosting the  capability of criminal justice agencies and civil society.   

 Australia will continue to work with our regional partners to combat people smuggling activities  through biometric data exchanges, supporting registration and refugee status determination of  asylum seekers; and providing technical assistance with border controls.     

 Australia also supports the continuing work of the Ad Hoc Group to address irregular migration.   We welcome the United Arab Emirates and the United States as new members of the group and  the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as a new member of the Bali Process - the  regional response to people trafficking and people smuggling can only be strengthened by your  membership.   

 Finally, I take the opportunity to reiterate the Australian Government’s strongest support for the  Bali Process.   

 Thank you.   

 ENDS  Maria Hawthorne  Media Adviser  Office of The Hon Brendan O’Connor MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Telephone: 02 6277 7860  Mobile: 0407 015 986  Email: maria.hawthorne@immi.gov.au   

 

