---
title: "Children and families will suffer the most in Rudd's latest cruel and absurd Nauru proposition"
date: "2013-08-03"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398152
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643050%22
---

 Children and families will suffer the most in Rudd’s latest cruel and absurd Nauru proposition   

 The Australian Greens have condemned Kevin Rudd’s latest cruel manoeuvring and bribery of  Nauru.    

 Australian Greens Leader Senator Christine Milne said: “The Prime Minister is caught out by his own  rush to cruelty.    

 "Kevin Rudd said there would be no exceptions, but when it became clear he couldn't send children  under seven or pregnant women because of malaria, he had to hurriedly cobble together a new  cruel punishment for them.    

 “Kevin Rudd has come up with Nauru not only as a place of punishment, but as a place of  resettlement. It is cruel and absurd.    

 “A five minute assessment of the logistics will tell you that a 21 square kilometre island with a  population of 10,000, that has no food, an insecure water supply and inadequate services cannot  resettle thousands of refugees.    

 “Exactly how many millions of dollars does he expect Australia will spend flying food, water and fuel  to Nauru indefinitely?    

 “This race between Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott to out do each other in cruelty to refugees and in  defiance of international law, not to mention abandoning overseas aid commitments, must stop. It is  demeaning to all Australians and it tarnishes our global reputation.    

 “Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott need to admit there is no border security crisis, what we have here is a  humanitarian crisis.    

 "It is people who are suffering, not faceless, nameless ‘unauthorised maritime arrivals’ as they would  have Australians believe."   

 Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, Australian Greens’ immigration spokesperson said:  "This is just more  cruelty at the cost of Australia's generous heart and it is trashing our global reputation.   

 "Dumping young children, mothers and children who are all alone on Nauru is heartless and  irresponsible.    

 "There is a genuine alternative where refugees are treated humanely and fairly.  The Greens’ plan to  assess refugee claims in Indonesia and increase our humanitarian intake would stop fathers,  mothers and children coming by boat.    

 "The Greens plan is also much cheaper, saving more than $5 billion and could be done today.”   

 Media contacts:  Senator Milne - Peter Stahel 0437 587 562  Senator Hanson-Young - 0427 604 760   

