---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Launceston: 27 March 2013: Launceston Migrant Resource Centre; asylum seekers"
date: "2013-03-27"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
  - "Launceston Migrant Resource Centre"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211392607
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2333071%22
---

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  LAUNCESTON  WEDNESDAY, 27 MARCH 2013   

 SUBJECT: LAUNCESTON MIGRANT RESOURCE CENTRE, ASYLUM SEEKERS 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: I’m here with Geoff Lyons in this wonderful part of Tasmania talking to newer 

 communities who are making their contribution to this wonderful part of Australia. So I’m here 

 talking with those communities to make sure that they are able to engage productively and that they 

 add to the economy and to the social fabric of this part of Tasmania. 

 I’m here with Geoff Lyons and we’ve been talking to particular groups, and looking at ways in which 

 we can provide support so that they can help themselves. This is all about ensuring that people have 

 full lives, that they have a chance of contributing and that their lives and their children’s lives are 

 happy ones and that they blend in. 

 The great thing about Australia is that we all want to work together, that we have a cohesive society 

 and that we are richer for having people from different parts of the world. And I think that’s the 

 same for Launceston as it is for other communities around this great country. 

 I’m happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think groups like the Migrant Resource Centre need more funding to continue 

 their work? 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We’ll always assess the funding requirements for these very important 

 institutions. It was a Labor government that created the Migrant Resource Centres. It’s to ensure 

 that we enable people to help themselves. This is about ensuring that they can get on their feet and 

 become productive members of society,  that they engage fully. 

 So, we provide sufficient resources generally, I’m always open to hearing what might be needed or 

 how we should shift resources around to cater for new challenges. But I think it’s fair to say that 

 generally that Labor governments will always provide that type of support, because if you invest in 

 that way, you get much more out of the community and it’s the right thing to do. 

 JOURNALIST: Is it true that asylum seekers are being released from community detention on bridging 

 visas? 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We do have, of course, some people on bridging visas already. I think the 

 question has been put to me as to whether in fact we would have families on bridging visas. That is 

 something for the government to consider.  

 We will not make any decisions if we believe it will encourage people smugglers to lure people on 

 unseaworthy vessels on perilous journeys. We do not want to see any people die at sea. There’s 

 already been too many tragedies. And we call upon the Opposition to agree with the experts on the 

 Houston panel and help the government implement the 22 recommendations which will see a 

 reduction and ultimately a cessation of those vessels coming in that manner. 

 JOURNALIST: Would that be a cost-saving measure to put those families on bridging visas? 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: The first decision we make about the issue as to where people are detained, 

 or are in the network, is whether in fact we can ensure firstly their wellbeing and we deter people 

 getting on those boats. That’s the first thing we’re concerned about. 

 Other issues re costs and so on are things we will contemplate, but the threshold question first is, 

 will this deter or encourage people to take their life, to risk their life by getting on these vessels, 

 these very dangerous vessels. Too many of which of course have foundered, have sunk, and we have 

 seen too many lives lost. That’s why we go back to the original question we ask of the Opposition, 

 stop putting their political interests first, listen to the experts, listen to the former Chief of the 

 Australian Defence Force Angus Houston, Michael L’Estrage and Paris Aristotle. Listen to them and 

 we will, I think, see a better way forward on this very complex area. 

 Next week I’m in Indonesia talking to 40 countries, countries or origin, transit and destination, about 

 these matters. We need a regional response. The implementation of the Houston panel’s 

 recommendations is absolutely critical and we want the Greens Party and the Liberals to stop 

 playing politics and support the government and support the experts. 

 JOURNALIST: It would be a cost saving measure though, wouldn’t it, those bridging visas? Is there 

 any other reason why it would be done? 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well, where people are placed in the community is obviously not just about 

 the matter of cost. If you detain people - we have people now that are on the bridging visas. So it’s 

 not that it’s not happening now.  

 We provide what we think is the most appropriate form of detention, or indeed whether we need a 

 form of bridging visa. Those decisions we made, but let me just make it clear, the first decision that 

 we make will be one of will this encourage or deter people getting on these very dangerous vessels. 

 And if the answer is it will deter people, we would contemplate it. 

 If we think it will lead to people being lured onto these vessels, on these very unseaworthy vessels, 

 then certainly we wouldn’t be making a decision in that area. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you have figures of the number of people on bridging visas currently? 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: I haven’t got the specific number, but of course they’re on the public record. 

 What we do is we have people in detention, in community detention and people on bridging visas. 

 That is something we are very transparent about. And we’ll maintain that. We’re not willing to do 

 anything other than ensure that we make decisions that deter people getting on vessels.  

 That’s why we decided that from the 12th of August last year that people would not get an 

 advantage just by coming to Australia. They will not be processed any quicker and we’ve also made 

 clear that they might be transferred to either Manus Province or Nauru. We do that because we 

 want people to take the regular path. We’ve increased the actual places to 20,000 so that we can 

 take our fair share, like other first world nations. But we will not encourage people to endanger their 

 own lives. It is not the right way for people, if you like, to come to seek asylum. And for that reason 

 we make no apology about accepting the expert panel recommendations. We only wish that the 

 Opposition stopped opposing things, stopped getting in the way of the experts’ views, and helped 

 the government deal with this complex area of public policy. 

 JOURNALIST: What progress is there on introducing all the recommendations of the experts?  

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: We’ve made significant process. In fact we’ve either implemented or in the 

 process of implementing all but one recommendation, which is of course the Malaysian 

 arrangement. This is something which is innovative and would deter people because we would 

 safely return them to the transit country. It was an agreement we struck with, of course, the 

 Malaysian Government. It’s a perfectly good, innovative, effective model. The reason why I believe 

 Tony Abbott will not support this approach is not because he thinks it won’t work, it’s because he’s 

 afraid that it will.  

 He is putting his interests ahead of the national interests to implement the panel’s reports. We’ve 

 got Angus Houston, Michael L’Estrange and Paris Aristotle who have 75 years of experience in 

 border protection, refugee settlement and foreign policy. These are the people we should be 

 listening to. Instead we have the Opposition Leader constantly referring to a slogan with no fix to 

 this issue. And of course we have a Shadow Minister who is walking away from that slogan. 

 When asked five times in an interview only a week ago, the Shadow Minister refused to say whether 

 he could stop those vessels because they know they do not have the right policies in place to deter 

 these vessels. They must get on board with the government, implement the expert panel’s 

 recommendations and we will see some very good progress here, but if they fail to do that, then 

 they are just encouraging boats and that is a terrible thing given the consequences for some people. 

 JOURNALIST: And why is it that there have been no asylum seekers sent to Manus Island since the 

 ninth of February? Is it because of claims about corruption? 

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Absolutely not, I reject any attempt to sully the reputation of PNG. I find that 

 it is absolutely extraordinary that the Opposition will go around attacking our friends in the region.  

 First we had the Shadow Minister visit Malaysia and abuse the government and abuse their 

 reputation while in that country. Now we have to work with the transit countries of Indonesia and 

 Malaysia. How stupid is it that a Shadow Minister would actually traduce the reputation of one of 

 our friends in the region. And then of course also the fact that their turn back the boat policy is put 

 forward in the media but the Opposition Leader did not even raise it with the President of Indonesia 

 when he met with him. That’s how fair-dinkum he takes this issue. He is not serious because he 

 knows it won’t work, but he is actually causing problems with our relationships with Indonesia and 

 Malaysia.  

 And now we have the Shadow Min attempting to imply some impropriety in PNG. I mean, this is just 

 outrageous efforts by the opposition causing problems between their relationship and the 

 relationship with those three countries in the region and I would advise them not to act in that 

 manner.  PNG has been a perfectly good friend, has worked with us together on dealing with this 

 matter, we have an MOU with them and the transferees will continue as agreed between our two 

 governments. 

 Thank you. 

 

