---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Canberra: 22 January 2013: Nova Peris, discuss her candidacy for the Senate; NT intervention; Newstart payments; the inauguration of President Obama; National Security Strategy; Climate change and recent extreme weather; Anti-discrimination legislation exposure draft, and the Manus Island Supreme Court challenge regarding the detention of asylum seekers."
date: "2013-01-22"
creators:
  - "Gillard, Julia"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Nova Peris, discuss her candidacy for the Senate"
  - "NT intervention"
  - "Newstart payments"
  - "the inauguration of President Obama"
  - "National Security Strategy"
  - "Climate change and recent extreme weather"
  - "Anti-discrimination legislation exposure draft, and the Manus Island Supreme Court challenge regarding the detention of asylum seekers."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211388025
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2179515%22
---

 PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  22 JANUARY 2013 

 

 E & O E - PROOF ONLY   

 Subjects:      Senate candidacy of Nova Peris; Newstart; NT intervention;  Inauguration of President Obama; National Security Strategy; Climate  change; Anti-discrimination legislation exposure draft; Manus Island  Supreme Court challenge   

 PM: I’m here today to say that as Federal Labor leader I am very proud of the  Labor Party's track record in working with and for indigenous Australians.    

 From the days in which Gough Whitlam trickled dirt into the hand of Vincent  Lingiari to signal our understanding of land rights, I believe our political party has  much to be proud of.   

 Gough Whitlam's work was carried on by other Labor Governments.    

 We all remember Prime Minister Hawke handing Uluru back to back to its  indigenous owners.    

 We all remember the work of Prime Minister Keating after the Mabo and Wik  decisions and his powerful Redfern speech.    

 We all remember the remarkable moment when Prime Minister Rudd apologised  to the stolen generations and when he launched the Closing the Gap strategy,  which focuses on indigenous disadvantage and changing lives.    

 As Federal Labor leader I am very proud of that work but I have also been very  troubled that we have never been able to count amongst our number an  indigenous Australian.    

 There has never been an indigenous Australian who has served as a federal  Labor representative.    

 I am determined that at the 2013 election we change that.    

 And that’s why I am very proud to be standing here with Nova Peris and to be in  a position to announce that I have invited Nova to join the Australian Labor Party,  and I have invited her to seek preselection for the Senate in the Northern  Territory.  

 

 I have asked the Federal National Executive of the Labor Party to work with me  on achieving this.    

 Nova is a household name. Many would remember Nova's sporting triumphs.    

 I think what they show is grit and determination to get things done and I am very  admiring of that grit and determination.    

 I believe Nova will make a great contribution in the federal parliament; for the  Labor Party, for the Northern Territory and for the nation.   

 Not just because of that grit and determination but because of the work she has  done since her sporting career on building opportunities for young Australians, on  focusing on the health of children, on focusing on the educational opportunities of  children.    

 Nova was the first Aboriginal Australian to win an Olympic gold medal.    

 With the support of the people of the Northern Territory, I want her to be the first  Aboriginal woman to sit in the federal parliament.    

 And I’m very pleased that she is here with me today, along with her family and  friends and I thank them for being with us.    

 I would like to say a few words about Senator Trish Crossin, who has served for  the Labor Party as the Northern Territory Labor Senator.    

 Trish is a remarkable woman who has achieved some amazing things during her  federal parliamentary career since she was first elected in 1998.   

 She is a fiercely proud Territorian and she's spent a lot of time making sure that  this parliament never forgets the views and perspectives of the Northern Territory  as we make policies and plans.    

 She's someone who has travelled relentlessly throughout the Northern Territory  so she could always ever an ear to the ground to get the views of Territorians  and bring them to the federal parliament.   

 She has served with distinction on many parliamentary committees, the Senate  having such a big committee load, and indeed she is doing that work even today  as we stand here.   

 She has a lot to be proud of across her federal parliamentary career and there  are many Australians with a passion for social justice who have pursued their  causes with the help and support of Senator Trish Crossin.  

 

 She will of have course continue to serve as the Northern Territory Senator until  the next election.    

 Now without further ado, I’d invite Nova to say a few words.   

 NOVA PERIS: Thank you Prime Minister.    

 Firstly, I want to say thank you for this amazing opportunity, having been asked  by the Prime Minister to contest preselection for the Northern Territory Senate.    

 I stand here before you all today not only as an Australian but as a proud  Aboriginal woman; proud of my heritage and culture.    

 I certainly understand the significance of this opportunity and I am very honoured  and humbled. Thank you Prime Minister.    

 I firstly just want to acknowledge my family, my husband Scott, Destiny, Jacky-boy, my nephew Dante, Danny and Dion.   

 I am very honoured and humbled, thank you Prime Minister.    

 Today, with this announcement I want people to know that I am a Territorian, a  proud Territorian who is extremely passionate about health, education and our  youth.    

 I understand the significance and enormity of the challenges that I face and I’m  the first person to put my hand up and say I don't know everything. I’m here to  learn.    

 I believe I can also help regain the faith in the future and especially of my fellow  indigenous Australians.    

 With this Labor Government I want to be able to help the Australian youth to live  constructive and fulfilling living and to also become healthy and educated citizens  of this fantastic and brilliant country of ours.    

 In my life I’ve never taken anything for granted.    

 I believe in hard work and I will be doing everything in the weeks and months  ahead to get the opportunity to represent all Territorians in the Senate.   

 Thank you.   

 PM: We’re happy to take some questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did Trish Crossin offer her resignation or did you  ask for it?   

 PM: I made an approach to Nova to stand for us in the Northern Territory.    

 Trish Crossin is today serving for us on a parliamentary committee getting about  the work of the Government. She’ll make her own statement in her own time.   

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is obviously a process to go through. Can  you guarantee that Nova will be at the top of the ticket?    

 Also people will observe that you have had to ask Nova to join the Labor Party  and they may draw the conclusion that there is no Aboriginal member of the  Labor Party who is deemed to be a suitable candidate for this. What would you  say to that?    

 PM: Firstly, on process, the National Executive Committee has met today and  National Executive will meet tomorrow and I have asked the National Executive  to work with me on ensuring that Nova is eligible to stand for preselection and  that she is preselected as our number one candidate for the Senate in the  Northern Territory.    

 On membership of our political party, we very proudly have amongst our number  a number of indigenous Australians in the Northern Territory and in other parts of  the country.    

 But as Prime Minister, as Labor Leader, I have decided on this occasion to  engage in a captain's pick and I think that Nova, particularly, has a track record  which shows she will make a great contribution in federal parliament.    

 Now that isn’t to diminish the work of others. The reality of seeking preselection  for the Labor Party in the federal parliament is that there are many people willing  to serve with capacity and ideas and interests.   

 Many people who could make a contribution seek to be preselected and don't  ultimately get to come here.    

 I know what it is like to fight a few preselection battles myself as it happens;  probably fought more than most.    

 So it always is difficult, judgements have to be made and I’ve made one.    

 PM: We’ll just go one at a time. I have promised Nova that it is a new year and  you will all be on your absolute best behaviour. So I don't want to see anything  that lets me down.    

 JOURNALIST: The sitting senator, Trish Crossin, has been involved in the  debate over single mothers, moving people from the parenting payment over to  Newstart when their youngest child reaches the age of eight.    

 You have trained with your oldest daughter I think when you were a single mum,  are you concerned about any of those changes?    

 Do you think it is too early to be forcing mums off of those parenting payments  that are higher, onto Centrelink payments when their youngest child reaches  eight?    

 NOVA PERIS: I understand wholeheartedly how hard it is to be a single mother. I  have been down that road before.    

 And my understanding is it is actually set up to support the younger mothers to  move them back into the workforce.    

 JOURNALIST: Again Nova to you, just about your motivation to do this. We saw  at last year's Northern Territory election a strong rejection of Labor by indigenous  Australians in the Territory. They embraced the CLP for the first time really.    

 Why do you think that was? Is Labor getting something wrong when it comes to  indigenous Australians in the Territory in particular? What sort of change do you  want to see in how the party approaches these issues?    

 NOVA PERIS: From my view I truly believe Labor pretty much took their eye off  the mark.    

 I guess there was a lot of work done by the CLP with regard to working hard in  the bush and they got a lot of voters to vote, probably a lot of voters who have  never voted before in their life.    

 I think the way that the CLP is now, there is a lot of things that are unravelling,  there is a lot of broken promises.    

 As an Aboriginal woman, I’ve seen and I’ve been around the ropes long and hard  enough to know that Aboriginal people have been disappointed with government  for a long time and hence the intervention.    

 I was at the midst of that and I saw first-hand that you could have policies, but if  you don't have the right people implementing it, it’s never going to work.    

 So I am proud and honoured like I said, and humbled to be part of this  Government and we are working very hard to win the next election and get the  right people working.    

 JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, one of the problems that's been identified in the Labor  Party has been the disillusionment of branch members at executive and  administrative committees overriding the branches and making choices.    

 What do you say to those in the Northern Territory who say that they should have  had a vote in this matter? And secondly, will you be using your prerogative as  captain to get in some other local champions?    

 PM: I am a huge respecter of our own internal processes and consequently it has  not been my track record to intervene in those processes.    

 I respect that our members around the country in part join the Labor Party  because they want a say about who then goes on to contest elections for the  Labor Party.    

 So it is not my intention to be a federal leader who routinely intervenes in party  processes.    

 I have though taken a different view on this occasion because I believe Nova's  selection is a matter of national significance, as well as a matter of significance  for the Northern Territory.    

 A matter of national significance because it would be the first time that our  political party has put forward an indigenous Australian in a winnable position at  a federal election; has said to Australians indigenous and non-indigenous, that if  you elect this Labor team, you will see amongst its number an indigenous  Australian.    

 I think that is a nationally important question and that is why I have determined to  take this course of action.    

 JOURNALIST: And local champions?   

 PM: And so, Michelle I think I have answered your question. I am not going to  make it a routine for me to intervene in party processes. I am a big respecter of  party processes.    

 But I think there is a national significance here, a national significance for our  political party, a significance too for the nation generally because we have not, in  the building that we are standing in a courtyard of today, seen an indigenous  woman serve in this parliament. I think it is time that changed.    

 JOURNALIST: Nova, do you fully support the NT intervention and all of its  programs?    

 I do believe that something needed to be done.  

 

 Without a doubt, like I said, I have done a significant amount of work, not only in  the Northern Territory but at an Australian level, and worked in many remote  communities across Queensland and also WA.    

 Women in particular; children, were crying out for some sort of change and like I  said before, the way that the intervention was implemented was wrong.    

 I now know that this Government has the Stronger Futures legislation which now  hopefully I will be a big part of that to ensure that voices of Aboriginal Australia is  actually heard here now at the federal level and I can ensure that these new  programs are implemented the correct way.    

 JOURNALIST: Are there any changes you would like to make?    

 NOVA PERIS: There is a lot. I could be here, I mean, education, essential  services in remote communities, getting kids to stay at school. There is a number  of things.    

 Health, I am a big advocate for health. There is a lot of issues around Aboriginal  health. So I’m an advocate for all those and I would love to see big changes.    

 JOURNALIST: Nova, when and how did the Prime Minister approach you? And  what was your initial reaction? 

 NOVA PERIS: I actually was approached about seven or eight years ago. At that  time, as you can see, my two young kids were babies at the time.    

 I wasn't ready then. I have always been a Labor voter, so has all my family. And I  didn't think I was ready.    

 I wanted to get the runs on the board and I know that to be given - not given a  position - but to be put into a position where you have a voice for Aboriginal  Australians, I had to do a significant amount of work.   

 So I have been doing an enormous amount of work at a national level for the  past seven or eight years.    

 JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, you weren't a member of the Labor Party until the  Prime Minister approached you or have you been a member before?    

 PM: Nova is not currently a member of the Labor Party, so that is a matter that  National Executive will resolve for me.    

 Just in terms of process here, I obviously knew a bit about Nova Peris like all  other Australians. She's a familiar name and someone whose history I knew a bit  about.  

 

 So I think many of us have watched her on the sporting field. Many of us have  followed her journey since, all of the work she's done for reconciliation.    

 She was a Young Australian of the Year. Nova's been a public figure for quite  some time now. So of course, I knew about Nova.    

 I did form the view that Nova would be a great person to run for the Labor Party.    

 I asked our National Secretary to make some enquiries of Nova about her  preparedness to serve.    

 It is not all that routine to get someone knocking on your door talking to you  about running for federal Labor. Nova had that experience and out of those  discussions we are standing here today.    

 JOURNALIST: What was the timeframe for those discussions, and Ms Peris can  you tell us whether you have had any discussions with Trish Crossin at all about  your candidacy?    

 NOVA PERIS: I was actually approached formally about six to eight weeks ago.    

 George Wright, the Secretary of the national Labor Party, I had several  discussions with him, and this is a big step that I have had to make. It is life  changing.    

 This affects everyone in my family but in a way that we have all said yes I am  ready, we're ready.    

 And like I said, there are a lot of challenges ahead but I have been a person  that's overcome a lot of things in my lifetime and I am ready to step forward in  this new role.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have told us why you think it is important to  have an Aboriginal woman in parliament.    

 But Trish Crossin, as you’ve said yourself, was a hardworking member of the  parliament. What do you say to people who will view this as a ruthless decision?    

 PM: Inevitably there is change in politics. Our political party selects new people.  We change, that is appropriate.    

 And so over time, people come to the parliament, serve in the parliament, move  from the parliament and new people replace them.    

 Trish is someone who is continuing to work now. When she goes at the next  election she will go with my thanks.    

 She will have served the Labor Party for 15 years in the federal parliament.    

 And of course there are only so many positions and that makes tough choices,  inevitably tough choices.    

 But choices need to be made about the Labor team and about the people that we  put forward.    

 None of that diminishes the significant work that Trish Crossin has done across  her political life.    

 And I am sure, knowing Trish, that she will continue to find ways to serve the  social justice causes that she holds so dear.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you personally spoken to Senator Crossin?    

 PM: Yes, I have.    

 JOURNALIST: About this, how long ago was that?    

 PM: Look I’m not going to go into private discussions but yes, I have.    

 JOURNALIST: It is one thing for a Prime Minister to make a captain's call on who  should be preselected.    

 Isn't it another thing for a Prime Minister to suggest a serving Member of  Parliament should hang up their hat and move on?    

 PM: Well I have made a decision and that’s it.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you planning to move any other senators on?   

 PM: I have answered Michelle's question.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that you believe in a party process but it  has also been unable to preselect a female indigenous candidate.    

 So you obviously didn’t believe it could do that as you move forward. Why is  that?    

 PM: I think around the nation, when you look at preselections, people inevitably  view them as individual contests. So they’re looking at the person in their seat on  their senate ticket.  

 

 And there has been times in our party's history where we have had to say, across  our political party, let's broaden the view.    

 That is what we did with the affirmative action agenda where we said people  making up their minds in their individual contests, some great people are being  selected.    

 But when you add it altogether, what it means is that we are getting a lot of men  and not that many women. And we need to find a way of balancing that up.    

 Because if you believe as I do, fundamentally, that merit is distributed equitably  across the population, across genders, across races, then if you're looking at an  outcome where you are seeing lots of men or not many indigenous Australians,  then people of merit are missing out.    

 And so, our whole political party had to have a look at that for women and I think  this is a moment when our whole political party needs to look at it too so that we  are joined by an indigenous Australian in our Federal Labor Caucus.    

 So there are times when you have got to step back and have a look at the whole  picture. That is what I ever done on this occasion.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just ask on climate change, President  Obama spoke quite a bit about it in his speech overnight. What do you make of  his remarks?    

 What are you expecting and what would you like him to do on climate change?    

 And just reflecting on the summer as well, heatwaves, bushfires, did they have  anything to do with climate change?    

 PM: On the first, a great speech, absolutely great speech. People wouldn't  expect anything less from President Obama and it was a wonderful speech.    

 What I was taken by in the speech was all of the work that President Obama has  committed himself to which matters not only to the nation he leads, but matters to  the world.    

 We have got work to do with the United States to strengthen the global economy.    

 We have got work to do on climate change and President Obama was very  forthright about the need to tackle climate change.    

 We have got work to do together in our region of the world as increasingly the US  focus sharpens on our region of the world.  

 

 So I saw all of that in the speech, the shared agenda that we have as two  nations.    

 I also saw in the speech some domestic public policy issues that are obviously at  the forefront for both of us.    

 President Obama, very focused on education. President Obama too, making  reference to better circumstances for people with disabilities.    

 So as we go about improving our education system, as we go about building a  National Disability Insurance Scheme, I think we will be able to have a lively  public policy exchange with the United States.    

 On the specifics of what President Obama is committing the United States to,  that is clearly a matter for President Obama.    

 But I think his statement reinforces climate change is real and pretending it is not  or pretending that there are slipshod solutions to it is not good enough.    

 And here in this nation we have resolved for ourselves that we are going down  the most effective path for reducing carbon pollution and that is putting a price on  carbon.    

 On the extreme weather events that we have seen over the summer, I have got  family in Adelaide so I have heard at length about sweltering Adelaide. I was in  Sydney the day that the records tumbled. I have been to bushfire grounds in two  states.    

 You can't ever put down one weather event and say this is climate change, but  you can accept the science that the scientists are telling us.    

 They are telling us very clearly climate change means more extreme weather  events.    

 I am not a scientist, but from a layperson's point of view it is a pretty startling day  when the weather bureau says that they have had to pick a new colour for their  map because they don't have a colour that tells us about a land temperature of  50 and above.    

 I think that is a pretty startling day.    

 So you can't look at one weather event but you can look at the broad sweep.    

 Our scientists do and just like we accept the science when they tell us smoking  and lung cancer are related, when they tell us standing in the sun too long and 

 melanomas are related, we should of course accept their science that carbon  pollution, what we are doing on the planet, is making a difference to our climate.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you share the concerns of Japan about the  incursions by China into its airspace over the Senkaku Islands as something  you're attending to address when you look at national security for our nation?    

 PM: I will make a statement about national security tomorrow and I will be  launching our National Security Strategy so I will ever an opportunity to address  some of these questions then.    

 On the tensions between China and Japan, we have made it clear, indeed some  of these discussions I have done personally myself, we have made it clear that  we don't take a position on contesting territorial claims but we do have a very  clear view about matters being resolved peacefully with no provocative action.    

 That is in the interests of China and Japan. It is in our interests, it is in the  interests of the world.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Victorian police have been travelling around  the country interviewing people about the Australian Workforce Reform  Association. Have they spoken to you at all since the Christmas break or in the  last few weeks?    

 PM: No, they have not.    

 JOURNALIST: Back to President Obama's speech, what do you make of the  portion where he says our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and  sisters are treated like anyone else under the law?    

 PM: I don't think it is of any surprise to people that President Obama has  announced and did in the run-up to the election his support for same sex  marriage, so I presume he's referring to that.    

 JOURNALIST: You say this election is going to be about supporting the families  of Australia. Will you be looking at increasing Newstart and by how much?    

 PM: I have dealt with this question before.    

 I do recognise it is very, very tough for people when they lose a job, incredibly  tough, incredibly tough to get by on a low or fixed income and our job is to keep  creating jobs, whatever the global economic conditions throw at us.    

 We have kept creating jobs, even during the biggest meltdown since the Great  Depression, and a key focus this year will be on the future of our economy and  creating jobs.  

 

 I want us to be a nation with a diverse economy that doesn't have its eggs all in  one basket; that is tapped into the growth in Asia and is ready for the future with  things like the NBN and clean energy sources and a better focus on skills and  education.    

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)   

 PM: Well look, I’ve answered your question.   

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) several Australian lawyers including Julian Burnside  has said could have a decent chance of success?    

 PM: This is a matter for the PNG judicial system now and I’m not going to start  predicting the outcome of a court case which I don’t believe has even been  formally filed yet.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition has criticised the proposed  reforms of anti-discrimination laws. Do you share any of their concerns about  there has been a possible incursion on freedom of speech?    

 PM: Well, let's take a step back and perhaps clarify all of the tenses we should  be using in that question. I don't like to lecture on grammar, but perhaps I will.    

 What is happening is there is an exposure draft that has been put out for public  commentary because we're interested in the public commentary.    

 So before anybody concludes that anything has happened to anyone, it's not  possible for anything to happen to anyone because an exposure draft is out for  public commentary.    

 What is possible is that people can put their views in and they will be considered.    

 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think of Mr Windsor's public  commentary this morning on the proposed anti-discrimination (inaudible)?   

 PM: Tony Windsor, like any other Australian who wants to have a say, the reason  you put out an exposure draft is you're expecting people to have things to say.    

 People are saying things. There is a parliamentary committee process. All of that  feedback is wanted.    

 We would not have gone down an exposure draft route if we didn't want people's  feedback, so we will get the feedback and consider it.    

 JOURNALIST: So you do have a genuinely open mind on the fundamentals of  that bill, not just around the edges?    

 JOURNALIST: We put out there what we thought was most worthy of  consideration, so we're not starting from a blank page.    

 We put out there what we thought was most worthy of consideration, but we put it  out there for feedback and we'll consider the feedback.    

 JOURNALIST: Nova, can I ask you before you go, it was obviously tough for you  to come out here today on a personal level-   

 PM: And we will go and this is a long time to stand on very hard stone, for young  people.    

 JOURNALIST: If you are successful, what would be, given the significance that  the Prime Minister spoke about, what would be the greater achievement, that or  winning an Olympic gold medal?    

 NOVA PERIS: Do you know what, this is amazing, amazing part of my life and,  and it's certainly up there and I guess in a way through my sporting successes,  I've always been in control of my own journey.    

 When you lose you take it on the chin, whereas here, I'm all about being  successful, I want to be the best person that I can possibly be for the Australian  youth and also Aboriginal Australia and I'm going to give it one hell of a go.    

 I'm determined to be successful, like I said, and this without doubt would have to  cap it off.    

 PM: Thanks very much.    

 [ENDS] 

