---
title: "Mini-budget exposes further $1.3 billion boat blow out and PNG arrangement as election fix"
date: "2013-08-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211398113
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2643178%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Mini-budget exposes further $1.3 billion boat blow out and PNG  arrangement as election fix 

 Friday 2nd August 2013  

 Labor’s mini budget has exposed a further budget blowout on boats of $1.3 billion and provided further 

 evidence that Kevin Rudd’s PNG arrangement is just another Labor election fix, Shadow Minister for 

 Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today. 

 “The economic statement (p36) reveals today that asylum seeker costs will increase by $1.3 billion over the 

 next four years, over the record levels reported in May, with an additional $351 million this year alone,” Mr 

 Morrison said. 

 “This means that in 2013/14 the asylum budget for the Department of Immigration will be more than $3.2 

 billion, almost twice the entire Budget for the Department just four years ago, and almost 40 times higher 

 than the level of expenditure inherited from John Howard. 

 “Prior to this statement Labor's cumulative budget blowout on boats for immigration was $10.3 billion. This 

 figure now jumps to $11.6 billion. And this is just the blowout for immigration. 

 “This is the price Australians will have to pay for Labor's border failures with increased taxes. The bad news 

 is, based on Labor's form, there will be more blowouts to come as Labor has no real plan to stop the boats 

 in this future, just an election fix in PNG that is unravelling by the day. 

 “We already know that there was nothing in Kevin Rudd’s two page arrangement with PNG to back up his 

 big claim that no one arriving by boat will be resettled in Australia. However, the release of the mini budget 

 has revealed further limits to this ill thought through plan. 

 “Based on the costings for the Malaysian people swap, Labor’s $236 million budget for keeping boat 

 arrivals in PNG would only cover around 3,000 people, which is the upper limit on capacity confirmed by 

 the PNG Prime Minister. 

 “More than half of this 3,000 capacity has already been taken up by those who have arrived on illegal boats 

 since the arrangement was announced just two weeks ago. 

 “This comes as the PNG National Planning Minister was reported to have said today that his government 

 is: ‘not expecting large numbers of people settling in Papua New Guinea’. 

 “There is also no forecast for the ongoing costs of resettlement. The reason for this is simple, Labor has no 

 binding resettlement agreement with PNG, it's just all talk from Kevin Rudd, it's not real. 

 “This makes Labor’s misleading $30 million taxpayer funded ad campaign on Kevin Rudd’s PNG election 

 fix, targeted predominantly at mainstream Australians who vote, rather than people smugglers and their 

 passengers, all the more shameful. 

 “Labor is also forecasting to spend $194 million on expanding accommodation for a maximum 3,000 people 

 on Manus Island, yet a 600 person permanent facility was costed at $171 million earlier this year. 

 “There is also no costing for expanding Nauru, proving that Kevin Rudd is locking himself into an all or 

 nothing solution with his PNG election fix. 

 “As the PNG arrangement unravels by the day, it demonstrates why you cannot limit your response to 

 people smuggling to just one thing. 

 “A comprehensive response means you have to do everything, expand offshore processing at both 

 locations - PNG and Nauru, turn boats back where it is safe to do so, introduce temporary protection visas, 

 and bring together the 15 agencies working on people smuggling under a single operational command to 

 fight this problem all the way up the chain as the Coalition will do under Operation Sovereign Borders. 

 “The Government's claim that they can realise more than $420 million in savings onshore is also hard to 

 believe, given there are still 30,000 people in the system, still being processed, still drawing down welfare, 

 with large populations still in the detention network. 

 “The 30,000 people still in the system are the legacy of Labor's failed policies to date and Labor can’t 

 simply just assume their costs away. The cost legacy of Labor's failures to date will remain with us for some 

 years. 

 “We have seen time and again that Labor desperately try to bank savings from what routinely turn out to be 

 failed policies, only to see those costs soar again when the reality of yet another Labor failure on our 

 borders hits the bottom line. 

 “The farce of Kevin Rudd’s election fix just grows by the day, as do the taxpayer bills to pay for his ongoing 

 failure on our borders,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

