---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Senate Doors: 28 February 2013: Prime Minister's visit to Western Sydney; placement of refugees into the community"
date: "2013-02-28"
creators:
  - "Abetz, Eric"
source: "Office of ABETZ, SEN ERIC"
subjects:
  - "Prime Minister's visit to Western Sydney"
  - "placement of refugees into the community"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211391276
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2262498%22
---

 

 

             - TRANSCRIPT -     SENATOR ERIC ABETZ     Leader of the Opposition in the Senate     Shadow Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations 

    Liberal Senator for Tasmania     

 

 Senate Doors 28th February 2013   

 Senator Abetz: The dysfunctionality of the Gillard Government will be there for all to  see when she undertakes her tour of western Sydney because in 2010 very firm  promises were made, not only to the people of western Sydney, but indeed all of  Australia.   

 Those promises were a cut in company tax, that there would be community  consultation in relation to a carbon price.    

 All sorts of promises were made, none of which have been delivered.   

 There was the promise of a surplus. Why? Because the best thing that could happen  for working families was delivering a surplus because a surplus would reduce cost of  living pressures.   

 These were all promises made by the Prime Minister.    

 So fast forward three years and she will return to the scene of the crime where she  misled the Australian people to gain re-election in 2010.   

 She will have to explain to the Australian people why she made those promises and  broke those promises.   

 That is something that I think will be on display for all Australians over the next week  when Ms Gillard goes to western Sydney.   

 Bill Shorten also needs to explain why is it that the only person that has come out in  support of his visit to the MUA conference celebrating militancy is Dean Mighell,  another militant trade unionist?   

 What this shows, and, the editorial in The Australian shows, is that the Government  is clearly losing track of what it should be doing as a Government of Australia.    

 A Minister of the Crown really does have to rise above it all and Bill Shorten has  shown himself as being incapable of doing that.     

 He is the most partisan Minister for Workplace Relations we have seen and that of  course is destructive to the fabric of a good co-operative workplace relations system  in this country.        

 Journalist: inaudible.   

 Senator Abetz: Russell Broadbent’s views are very well known, he holds them  sincerely.    

 Scott Morrison has been doing an excellent job on behalf of, not only the Coalition,  but the Australian people, in keeping the Australian Government to account in  ensuring that the concerns of the Australian people are being given expression.    

 That will be another issue that Ms Gillard might like to address when she is in  western Sydney in relation to her promises about border protection.   

 Journalist: inaudible.   

 Senator Abetz: If you want a cohesive society I would have thought it would be a  good idea to say that if somebody’s moving next door to you that might not be able  to have all the English language skills that you might normally expect or that they  come from a traumatised background it would useful for the local police, for the local  health authorities etc. to be told as well so that the appropriate support can be  provided if necessary.    

 It’s a two way street. But to deliberately hide this information because of gross  embarrassment by the Government over its failed border protection policy is  unfortunately a recipe for a lack of social cohesion.    

 That’s what Scott Morrison has been prosecuting and prosecuting exceptionally well.   

 Journalist: inaudible.   

 Senator Abetz: In a fair democratic society I thought we might actually be allowed to  know what the Government is doing.    

 When they are placing people next door to you who mightn’t have the language skills  that most people would expect to be able to engage in the community I say that as a  migrant myself to this country, nothing wrong with it but it’s helpful that people know  that there are difficulties in language or other skills in relation to the community so  that people can provide assistance, that people can understand the circumstances,  local police, local authorities know in the event that there is an incident. All these  make good sense for a good cohesive society.    

 

 

 The reason the Government seeks to hide this information from the rest of the  community, to which the rest of the community is entitled, is not because of some  concern for democracy, indeed it is the antithesis of free and open society, it’s simply  because they want to hide their failed border protection policy.        

 Journalist: inaudible.   

 Senator Abetz: There is a register in relation to sex offenders and the community has  spoken in relation to that. And communities do want to be notified. And if I might say  I wouldn’t put the two in the same category.         

 ENDS      

 

 Media Contact: David Allender 0457 590 881  www.abetz.com.au 

 

