---
title: "More boats met by more talk"
date: "2013-07-08"
creators:
  - "Keenan, Michael"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, CUSTOMS AND BORDER CONTROL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396828
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2719314%22
---

 Michael Keenan MP - Federal Member for  Stirling MORE BOATS MET BY MORE TALK July 08, 2013

 The arrival of yet another illegal boat, this time with 130 people on board, means almost 1,000 people have arrived on  illegal boats under Kevin Rudd’s all talk, no action policy on border protection, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Shadow Minister for Justice, Customs and Border Protection, Michael Keenan said today.

 “Almost 1,000 people have already arrived since Kevin Rudd resumed both his Prime Ministership and his failed border  protection policies that he instituted in 2007,” Mr Morrison said.

 “This is a government that wants to keep talking but not act. There is a very clear distinction becoming clearer by the day  between Kevin Rudd who wants to talk and Tony Abbott who wants to act to stop the boats from day one if elected.

 “While boats continue to arrive and asylum seekers force merchant vessels to divert to Australia in a reverse Tampa,  Kevin Rudd does nothing. People smugglers are rediscovering the Kevin Rudd soft touch on our borders.

 “Kevin Rudd should be judged not on his talk or his smile, he should be judged on his record and his record on border  protection is there for everyone to see.

 “Over 46,000 illegal boat arrivals, cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders and a water taxi service for people smugglers  are what Kevin Rudd created. If Mr Rudd is elected people smugglers would not have only won the battle, they would  have won the war as well,” Mr Morrison said.

 Mr Keenan said: “In the first six days of July there have already been 10 illegal boats, carrying 865 people, arrive on  Australia’s shores courtesy of people smugglers.

 “This Labor Government has no direction and no answers when it comes to border protection - they have failed to stop  people smuggling and have instead chosen the path of least resistant every time.

 “This policy direction was the creation of Kevin Rudd when he was first Prime Minister and his failure on border protection  was one of the reasons that he was removed.

 “The Coalition has always been clear on where we stand on stopping people smuggling - if elected we will employ the  same policies that established the robust system of border protection under the Howard Government, which in turn  stopped the boats from coming,” Mr Keenan said.

 © Authorised by Michael Keenan MP, 203 Wanneroo Road, Tuart Hill WA 6060

 www.keenan.net.au

 Page 1 of 1 MORE BOATS MET BY MORE TALK > Michael Keenan MP

 11/09/2013 http://www.keenan.net.au/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20-%20NewsArticles/Print.as...

