---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 19 April 2013"
date: "2013-04-19"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211393711
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2389766%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  ADELAIDE  FRIDAY, 19 APRIL 2013 

 SUBJECT: RETURNING IRREGULAR MARITIME ARRIVALS TO SRI LANKA 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There is no more powerful message to then returning people to the  country of origin when they do not engage their obligations under international law, and we will  continue to combat this challenge. 

 We are a fair nation. We, of course, have increased our humanitarian program places to 20,000  per annum. That's a good thing, but at the same time we are going to ensure that those 20,000  places are made up of people who are fleeing persecution. And that is why the department, in  dealing with this matter in such a way, has ensured that we have sent a very strong message.  People should not risk their life at sea, and indeed people should not provide money to  transnational criminals such as people smugglers, and we will continue to act in this manner. 

 There's been now 1004 Sri Lankan nationals return home in the last few months, and we will  continue to act in a way that is consistent with our obligations under international law. 

 QUESTION: What has happened to the remaining Sri Lankans? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There has been a process where we have ensured that the 38 of those  that were on the vessel that arrived at Geraldton do not engage our international obligations in  accordance with the Refugee Convention. There are, of course, those that remain that we are  processing to determine whether or not they can be deemed to be refugees. So we are not, of  course, acting in an injudicious manner. 

 We are ensuring that our obligations, in accordance with the Refugee Convention, are fulfilled,  but this is sending a very powerful message that if people are getting on unseaworthy vessels,  taking very dangerous journeys, paying large sums of money to people smugglers, that will not  guarantee that they will come to this country and be settled here. Particularly, of course, if they  do not engage our obligations under international law. 

 QUESTION: I believe some weren't given - they weren't going to need legal advice. Why was  that? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, as I've been advised, those that have not been provided legal  advice did not seek legal advice, and it was very clear in that process that insofar as those 

 individual circumstances they were not engaging our obligations. That is, they were not fleeing  persecution, and they were not, for that reason, fitting within the category of one that would be  - of a situation where they might be deemed to be a refugee. 

 Now, as I say, we have one of the most - we have one of the fairest humanitarian program  places in the world. We have 20,000 places, that is the highest per capita, the second-highest  globally, and that's a good thing. But those 20,000 places must be made up of people that are  genuinely fleeing persecution. This is a global problem, and it needs - and we have a regional  challenge, but as a fair nation, like other first world nations, we will take our fair share but we  must ensure that those people that seek to fill those places are genuinely fleeing persecution. 

 QUESTION: But surely just because they didn't ask for legal advice doesn't mean that they  shouldn't have been provided with it? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: We've had a very rigorous process where they've been engaged, but let's  be very clear here; what we've said from the beginning, that if a person is fleeing persecution,  then they will be afforded protection pursuant to the Refugee Convention. But, if they do not  engage our international obligations, they will not fill those 20,000 places. I think most  Australians would think that was the fair thing to do - do the right thing by those that are  genuinely fleeing persecution, return those home who do not engage that obligation. 

 QUESTION: In relation to another boat, was there one detected southwest of Darwin yesterday?  Is there an update on that? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No. The only information that I've received is that a caller called Bob rang  into an ABC studio and unfortunately the ABC decided to report the vessel arriving northwest of  Darwin. There is no evidence to suggest that is the case and again it just points to the fact that  on occasion the media should confirm these matters before reporting them in the manner in  which the ABC did on this occasion. 

 QUESTION: In relation to those that are remaining here in Australia at the moment, have you  got a breakdown? Are they men, women, children? What is the situation? 

 BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The actual numbers - there were 66 that arrived on the vessel that  arrived at Geraldton. That was men, women and children. Of those that returned, it was a  combination of men, women and children. As I say, those people that have been returned home  did not engage our obligations. That is, I think, reasonable. For those that are remaining, we are  of course going to treat them in the manner that they deserve, with dignity, with respect, and  we'll of course consider through that process whether in fact they will be determined to be  refugees or not. That's a fair approach. 

 Let's remember here we have 46 million people displaced around the world. We have millions in  our own region. As a wealthy nation we have an obligation to assist, as all first world nations do,  but we must ensure that when we dedicate resources to provide places for people fleeing 

 persecution, that those places must be filled with people who are genuinely fleeing persecution,  otherwise we have a situation where people miss out who are, of course, in a very desperate  situation. 

 Now, I can sympathise with people who might seek to come here, but if they do not engage our  obligations, if they are not to be afforded protection, what that means is that others in very dire  situations will not be one of those places, and I think we take a firm but very fair approach. But  insofar as returning the vessel to - returning those home to Sri Lanka, it is the most powerful  message of all: do not get on dangerous vessels. Do not pay money to criminals. This is the best  way we can show that we are fair dinkum about treating this issue seriously, and it sends a very  strong message for those who are contemplating spending their life savings, endangering their  lives and the lives of their children. 

 Now we, of course, also have people who do flee persecution, and we understand what that can  happen. What we say to them is do not take that journey. If you find yourself in another  country, engage with the UNHCR. Engage with the International Organization for Migration.  We've increased the amount of places from 13,750 to 20,000 so people can take a safer route,  but they must be people who are determined - but they must be people who require protection,  pursuant to our obligations under international law, and if they're not, they will be returned  home. 

 QUESTION: Thank you Minister. 

 

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 

