---
title: "Immigration Department confirms Labor's fiscal farce on boat budget"
date: "2013-02-11"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211390367
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2224460%22
---

 Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Scott Morrison 

 Immigration department confirms Labor's fiscal farce on boat budget 

 11/02/13 

 The Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship today confirmed at Senate  Estimates that Labor is engaged in a fiscal farce by presenting a budget that assumes that Labor has  stopped the boats, despite consistently refusing to implement the full suite of Coalition border  protection policies necessary to get the job done, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,  Scott Morrison said today. 

 “Department of Immigration and Citizenship Secretary Martin Bowles told Senate Estimates that  Labor’s revised asylum budget had fantastically assumed that they had stopped the boats in its  Portfolio Additional Estimates Statement released last week. The revised budget claims spending on  illegal boat arrivals would plunge by $1 billion next financial year and another billion dollars the  following year,” Mr Morrison said. 

 “When asked by Western Australian Liberal Senator Michaelia Cash whether the Portfolio Additional  Estimates were produced on the basis that boat arrivals would stop, Mr Bowles said: ‘Yes, yes  senator’.  

 “This government hasn’t stopped the boats and they are not about to either. To prepare a budget on  the basis that they have stopped the boats is pure fiscal fantasy. 

 “Labor have lost control of our borders and they have lost control of the budget. Every year the  blowouts have got larger and larger starting at just $2.4 million back in 2008/09 before exploding to  a $2.15 billion blowout in the current year. And now they want us to believe the costs are going to  fall.   

 “Labor can no more be believed on their asylum budget than they could be believed on their now  broken promise to deliver a surplus. 

 “Mr Bowles’ evidence has stripped back Labor’s spin on its asylum budgeting. Today in question time  the Prime Minister was clearly embarrassed by it - refusing to make any reference to Labor’s  fantastic claims of a cut in expenditure of almost $2 billion in the next two years. 

 “Labor’s budgeting is about trying to claim savings they will never achieve. In 2014/15 and 2015/16,  their revised budget claims savings of $915 million from the budget released in May. You can’t claim  the savings of stopping the boats, if you don’t implement the polices needed to stop the boats, but  this is what Labor have done. 

 “Labor has set record after record over the last 12 months on illegal boats including the arrival of  almost 18,000 in 2013 and almost 13,000 people this financial year - with four and a half months  still to go. 

 “Every boat that arrives from now on will just add further to Labor’s budget blowout, that already  stands at more than $6.5 billion,” Mr Morrison said. 

 

