---
title: "New Ministry, same old Labor: It’s ‘the Self-Preservation Society’..."
date: "2013-07-01"
creators:
  - "Truss, Warren"
source: "Office of TRUSS, WARREN, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211396545
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2562948%22
---

 1 July 2013            

 

 New Ministry, same old Labor: It’s ‘the Self-Preservation Society’   

 NATIONALS leader Warren Truss has dubbed the newly sworn in Rudd Ministry ‘the Self-Preservation Society’.   

 “It was the theme song to the original The Italian Job, now Labor is trying to hijack an election.   

 “Labor remains split and in chaos but they were all smiles for the cameras today. Labor’s lurch to the  past, recalling Rudd for a second shot at mediocrity, is a transparently desperate and cynical bid to  trick voters into believing everything has changed.   

 “The guy the public saw through as a hollow man and whose colleagues publicly pilloried as ‘a  psychopath’, ‘untrustworthy’, ‘chaotic’ and ‘not having Labor values’, is back.   

 “Last week’s events prove that Labor has learnt nothing. Today’s charade does not mask that fact. It  is because of the Labor Party’s penchant for political assassinations, shifty backroom deals and  putting themselves above the people that Australians have lost all trust in all of them.   

 “The problem is Labor itself. This latest leadership coup, cut along entrenched and bitterly divided  lines, banks on people having short memories… that no one will notice that only Labor’s captain and  a few players have changed but the team remains a rabble and goalless after almost six years.   

 “And what if Labor wins the election? Voters will be wondering who the faceless men might sub into  the PM’s office after the election. A vote for Labor is a mystery ticket.   

 “Rudd’s resurrection is no saving grace for long-suffering families and businesses. Labor’s policy  failures, scandals, public brawls and wasteful mismanagement are matched only by its treachery,  which, by its actions over the past week, is a poison that infects all in this dysfunctional government.   

 “For six years Labor has been, and remains, at war with itself. Today it is just as divided. Once more,  on the back of bleak polls, Labor’s faceless men have broken faith with the Australian people.   

 “Regardless of the figure head, Labor is rotten and split at its core. Its preoccupation with self-interest makes it incapable of governing in the national interest, now pulling a prime ministerial  switcheroo in a last ditch bid to save their own necks.   

 “This is the mob that imposed a carbon tax they promised not to, created a surge of 45,000 asylum  seekers, brought in a mining tax that undermines investment and jobs but raises no revenue, set  peoples’ homes on fire with their roof batts scheme, paid way over the odds for school halls,  produced the live cattle fiasco, squandered the $70 billion in the bank they inherited and then sent  us hurtling towards $300 billion in gross debt.   

 “Today, Labor is trying to play people for fools, hoping they will forget all that has come before  amidst the hubbub of a leadership change.   

 “Kevin is at the helm of a still empty Labor vessel. Rudd mark II will promise anything to cling onto  power and, as sure as night follows day, those assurances will be worthless.”   

 [ENDS]   

 Media Contact: Brett Heffernan on (02) 6277 4482 or 0467 650 020 or brett.heffernan@aph.gov.au   

