---
title: "Great public schools deserve full Gonski funding"
date: "2014-07-31"
creators:
  - "Bird, Sharon"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR VOCATIONAL EDUCATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411855
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3492019%22
---

 

 

 Sharon Bird 

 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 

 

 

 Great Public Schools Deserve Full Gonski Funding 

 

 Posted by Sharon Bird 5pc  on July 31, 2014 · Flag 

 Sharon Bird and Ryan Park today congratulated Woonona East Primary School on their 

 50th Anniversary. 

 Woonona East Primary School today held their 50th Anniversary celebrations which included 

 a morning tea, Acknowledgement of Country, choir and band performances, a visual 

 presentation of school memories and the cutting of a birthday cake. 

 “Public Education Week has been a great opportunity for Ryan and I to get out and visit our 

 public schools and see the great work and different programs that our local schools are 

 involved in and meet the school communities,” Sharon Bird said.  

 “Earlier in the week I had the opportunity to visit the Refugee Challenge program at 

 Heathcote High School and have attended a few performances of the Schools Choral Festival 

 at the Town Hall.  

 “Our schools deserve to be funded properly.  Figures released today have revealed that Tony 

 Abbott’s cuts will leave local schools in Cunningham $199 million worse off over the next 

 decade,” Sharon Bird said. 

 The Abbott Government’s Budget has cut $80 billion from schools and hospitals - with $30 

 billion of that coming directly from schools. 

 “$199 million is a massive cut to our local schools and the impact at a local level will be very 

 real - every student will get $1,000 less support, every year. This means that our kids will 

 miss out on literacy and numeracy programs and music and sport programs,” Sharon Bird 

 said. 

 Mr Park said that Education week was an opportunity to acknowledge the thousands of 

 dedicated teachers and staff across our public schools that ensure we have one of the 

 strongest education systems in the world. 

 “Tony Abbott’s cuts are being felt in our classrooms now.  Principals are unable to start new 

 programs because these massive cuts are hanging over their heads,” Ryan Park said. 

 “Our teachers want to be working to improve our schools, not spending their time and 

 energy planning for how they will cope with these cuts.” 

 He said that cuts from the Federal Government were being felt in classrooms across the 

 Illawarra and also called on the State Government to deliver on the promised 60 Literacy & 

 Numeracy Teachers. 

 “The NSW Government needs to let our community know when they will be delivering the 60 

 promised literacy and numeracy teachers for our region, as to date only a handful are in our 

 local schools,” he said. 

 “Both state and federal Labor will fight so that every child can get the individual support they 

 need, no matter where they go to school,” Ryan Park said. 

 31 JULY 2014 

 Do you like this 

 

