---
title: "Ambassador to Lebanon"
date: "2014-11-27"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415601
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3528820%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 27 November 2014 

 AMBASSADOR TO LEBANON   

 Today I announce the appointment of Mr Glenn Miles as Australia’s Ambassador to the  Republic of Lebanon.      

 Australia enjoys warm bilateral relations with Lebanon, underpinned by strong  community and cultural links.  Australia is home to many people of Lebanese descent  and thousands of Australians live in Lebanon.     

 The Australian Government is a strong advocate of Lebanon’s sovereignty and of efforts  to build an enduring peace in the Middle East region.  I visited Lebanon in April to  highlight Australia’s continuing support during a period of heightened insecurity in the  region.     

 We have provided $135.8 million in humanitarian assistance to those affected by the  Syria conflict to provide shelter, food, water and sanitation, health and medical services.   This includes $71.3 million to help refugees and host communities in neighbouring  countries, including Lebanon.     

 Lebanon’s economic development provides opportunities for growth in trade and  commercial ties.  Lebanon’s prospective oil and gas industry - as well as its growing  demand for education, infrastructure development and financial services - offers  particular opportunities for Australian companies.     

 Mr Miles is a career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and was  most recently Acting High Commissioner to Fiji and High Commissioner to Tuvalu for  nearly three years.  He has also served as Ambassador to Kuwait and Australia’s  Representative in Ramallah, with earlier postings in Amman and Riyadh.  Mr Miles was  a member of the Baghdad Embassy opening team in 2003 and served with the Peace  Monitoring Group in Bougainville.  Mr Miles is a graduate of Deakin University and  speaks Arabic.  He is married with three children.     

 Mr Miles is expected to take up his appointment in January 2015.  I thank former  Ambassador Lex Bartlem for his valuable work in strengthening Australia’s relations with  Lebanon.    

 

 Foreign Minister’s Office:   Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874  Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340 

