---
title: "Getting on with the job on offshore processing and resettlement"
date: "2014-11-06"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211447256
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3492003%22
---

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Getting on with the job on offshore processing and resettlement 

 Thursday, 06 November 2014 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said further  positive progress on the Nauru and Papua New Guinea resettlement arrangements  highlights the fact the Coalition is getting on with the job of fixing the mess that was  left behind by the former Labor government on their offshore resettlement  arrangements. 

 'Labor was dragged kicking and screaming to restore offshore processing before the  last election. Their lack of commitment to these policies and understanding of the  issues involved was demonstrated in the practically non-existent arrangements for  implementing regional resettlement in both PNG and Nauru,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'Not only had Labor not funded the ongoing management of the offshore processing  centres, they had failed to conclude any practical arrangements for how resettlement  in PNG and Nauru would actually be implemented. 

 'Once again, the regional resettlement deal announced by Labor before the election  was a case of all announcement and no policy. The heavy lifting on how to run the  offshore processing centres and put actual resettlement arrangements in place with  our regional partners was all left to the Coalition.   

 'As promised, the Coalition Government has got on with this job and after much  positive cooperation from the governments of Papua New Guinea and Nauru, we are  now making real progress with offshore processing and resettlement arrangements. 

 'The Australian and Nauruan Governments have agreed the Regional Processing  Centre on Nauru will transition to an open centre model. The transition will begin  early next year with family groups the first affected. The Australian Government is  working closely with counterparts in Nauru to effect the transition. 

 'The open centre model will permit freedom of movement of transferees across  Nauru. Transferee services will continue to be provided at the centre as normal  including food, accommodation and medical services. The Nauruan Police Force,  community groups and service providers will assist in managing transition to the  open centre model. 

 'The Government of Nauru is keen to welcome refugees into their community. It will  provide assistance to the Nauru community to understand any racial or cultural  differences of refugees and the talents and benefits the individuals bring to Nauru.  This will also assist refugees for their longer term stay in the Nauruan community. 

 'To this end the Australian Government will assist the Nauruan Government to  recruit, train and employ Community Liaison Officers who will act as a contact point  between settled refugees, the Nauruan community and facilitate services refugees  may require. The Community Liaison Officers will also act as go to points for  Nauruans who wish to understand the benefits of refugee settlement in Nauru. 

 'I also welcome the Papua New Guinea Government's decision to activate the next  stage of the resettlement process that will enable people found to be refugees to  leave the processing centre on Manus Island and live in the community in the  purpose built East Lorengau facility. 

 'The decision demonstrates the positive partnership that exists between Australia  and PNG on implementing the resettlement arrangement and the progress that is  being made. 

 'Thankfully our turn back policy has ensured that only a single venture has arrived in  Australia this year, which has given us the space to get these resettlement  arrangements in place. This would not have occurred under the previous  Government. More work will now be done on permanent arrangements in the months  ahead. 

 'Without turn backs offshore processing centres would have been quickly  overwhelmed and resettlement in PNG would have been over before it even began.  That is why you need the full suite of measures to stop the boats. 

 'Labor's rejection of turn backs would not only disable them from stopping the boats,  but it will also undermine the only other measure they are still prepared to continue -  namely offshore processing. 

 'The Government is doing what we said we would do - the boats are stopping, border  integrity is being restored, and resettlement is being effectively established,' Minister  Morrison said. 

 

