---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 19 August 2014: Hockey foot in mouth; vacant Assistant Treasurer ministry; Tony Abbott's unfair Budget; Clive Palmer; Australia-China relationship; Budget savings; asylum seekers; taxing bank profits"
date: "2014-08-19"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Hockey foot in mouth"
  - "vacant Assistant Treasurer ministry"
  - "Tony Abbott's unfair Budget"
  - "Clive Palmer"
  - "Australia-China relationship"
  - "Budget savings"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "taxing bank profits"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211412462
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3346480%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 SHADOW TREASURER 

 MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  

 DOORSTOP 

 SYDNEY  

 TUESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2014 

 SUBJECT/ S: Hockey foot in mouth, vacant Assistant Treasurer ministry,  Tony Abbott’s unfair Budget, Clive Palmer, Australia-China relationship,  Budget savings, asylum seekers, taxing bank profits. 

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks for coming everybody.  

 The Treasurer emerged from hiding this morning only to put his foot right back in  his mouth.  

 The Treasurer in Geelong this morning claimed that his words, his insulting words  about petrol tax had been twisted. Apparently his words are someone else’s fault yet  again.  

 The Treasurer has proven yet again, if any more proof was needed that he just  doesn’t get the impact of his own policies on Australian families. And he just doesn’t  understand how fundamentally unfair his own budget is.  

 Treasurer, your words have not been twisted. Your policies are twisted.  

 The Treasurer continues to be in denial about the impact of his budget. Last week  he made insulting and inaccurate comments about the impact of his petrol tax  changes. He went into denial for days, was slapped down by the Prime Minister and  then issued a humble apology. Now today he’s denying that he even said those  words and that they were twisted and misreported.  

 It’s not the fault of the media for reporting what the Treasurer said on camera and  on radio. It’s the fault of the Treasurer for misunderstanding the impact of his own  policies and his own words. No amount of spin and denial from Joe Hockey can hide  or change the fact that his unfair budget remains on the table and remains the  policy of the Government of Australia.  

 Joe Hockey’s budget has been a fundamental failure of substance, of fairness and of  salesmanship. It’s time for the Prime Minister to take control of the Budget, to take  over the process of dealing with this budget and it’s time for the Prime Minister to go  back to the drawing board and start again on this budget.  

 Can I also say it’s time for the Prime Minister to appoint an Assistant Treasurer.  Australia hasn’t had an Assistant Treasurer for months. The saga of the ICAC  hearings rolls on and we still don’t have an Assistant Treasurer. The Prime Minister  needs to appoint a new Assistant Treasurer to help the Treasurer because we all  know he needs it.  

 Happy to take some questions.  

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, how damaging are the Palmer United Party’s comments  about China on Q&A last night?  

 BOWEN: Well Mr Palmer has received some criticism for those comments and  rightly so. The Chinese-Australian relationship is a vitally important one and I think  all Australians understand it. It’s vitally important economically and strategically. And  it’s important that while we all engage in proper free speech and debate that we  treat Chinese companies and individuals and government with respect. All of us in  public office as well as those in the business community have to have a view  towards a strong and robust relationship with China. I think Mr Palmer’s comments  were helpful in that regard. While it’s matter for him, they aren’t comments that  could be in any way endorsed or agreed with. 

 JOURNALIST: Senator Jacqui Lambie came out today defending his comments.  Would you call on them to apologise? 

 BOWEN: Well I’ve said what I’ve said about those comments. I think they are  unfortunate. They are a matter for him and there’s an intersection here between his  business dealings and his role as a member of parliament, but they aren’t comments  that can be endorsed, supported or regarded in any way, I think, as appropriate. 

 JOURNALIST: Are you going to suggest any Budget savings as the Treasurer has  asked? 

 BOWEN: Well the Treasurer seems to want us to write his Budget for him, or re-write the Budget for him. But that’s not how the Parliament works. A Parliament 

 votes and the parties within the Parliament vote on the Budget placed before it at a  particular time. The Treasurer has placed the Budget before the Parliament and we  are voting on measures in that Budget. And there’s a whole lot of them that we  don’t like one little bit and we will oppose. Now the Labor Party will be providing  detailed policies including savings options in due course, but parliaments - just as  they did when Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey were in Opposition did - vote on particular  measures as presented to the Parliament as we speak, and that’s what we are  doing.  

 JOURNALIST: Are you pleased that children are being released from detention?  

 BOWEN: Well of course, this was the policy of the previous Labor Government.  There was no reason for this Government not to just continue with that. It's been on  hold - I've seen those comments from Scott Morrison this morning saying there was  some need for months of planning and work. This was happening under the  previous Labor Government. This is something of a Clayton's announcement from Mr  Morrison. He commented on it at the time when the previous Government had done  it. He couldn't make up his mind whether he was against it. He made some criticisms  of the policy of releasing children and at other times claimed credit for it and said it  was John Howard's policy. He didn't know what his position was in Opposition but in  Government he could have simply kept it going. Instead he's kept children in  detention for months and now he's claiming some sort of credit for a program which  is just a continuation of what the Labor Government did. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you consider a tax on bank profits? 

 BOWEN: No, banks pay corporate tax and that’s what appropriate for banks to pay. 

 Okay? Thanks very much. 

 

 ENDS 

 

