---
title: "Morrison blames Manus victims after repeatedly ignoring warnings"
date: "2014-05-26"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408751
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3188343%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 26 May 2014   

 Morrison blames Manus victims after repeatedly ignoring warnings   

 The Immigration Minister has shamefully used a whitewash report into the brutal attacks  on the Manus Island detention camp to blame the victims for the violence, the Australian  Greens have said.   

 “Scott Morrison’s attempt to blame the victims of this violent attack is shameful,” the  Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.   

 “Criticising the very people who had their throats slit by machetes while they ran for their  lives was deceitful and grotesquely insensitive.   

 “The Immigration Minister is desperately trying to blame anyone but himself, even  though responsibility for what happened that night falls squarely at his feet. This report  makes it clear that Scott Morrison should resign as the Minister for Immigration.   

 “The Abbott Government repeatedly ignored warnings from service providers on the  island about rising tensions and a lack of security but, tragically, those concerns were  ignored.   

 “During the attacks, refugees were left to defend themselves against a machete and  shotgun wielding mob and some were forced to barter for their lives. The Australian  Government cannot keep people safe on Manus Island and the centre must be shut  down immediately.   

 “The fact that people who carried out the attacks may still be working inside the centre  shows just how disinterested the government is when it comes to the safety of refugees  in their care.   

 “The Greens’ Senate inquiry into the violence will find the actual truth about that night’s  vicious attacks.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

