---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Darwin: 18 February 2014: Manus Island incident; Navy mistreatment allegations; Operation Sovereign Borders"
date: "2014-02-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Manus Island incident"
  - "Navy mistreatment allegations"
  - "Operation Sovereign Borders"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404253
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3006308%22
---

 Minister for Immigration & Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Tuesday, 18 February 2014, Press Conference, Darwin 

 Minister Morrison: Thank you for joining me this morning. I can confirm that there  was a more serious incident at Manus Island processing centre last night which  involved further perimeter breaches. That incident involved persons at around just  after 11 after some demonstrations, noise and various things being able to break  through the fence. The incident ran to around 2am their time, early this morning. At 3  am order was completely restored to the centre. As I noted in my statement, I refer  you to the statement which was issued earlier this morning which goes through the  key details of the incident as we knew it at the time. At all times the G4S staff who  were involved were involved directly in maintaining order within the centre itself and  to protect key parts of the infrastructure and accommodation within the centre. The  security situation outside the centre was the domain of the PNG police. Now I want  to come specifically to the matters of the injuries of those involved because there are  some very serious issues there and it is my great regret to report. 

 There were 77 persons who received treatment since early this morning. 40 of those  have since been discharged, 22 suffered minor injuries, and they are also still  receiving treatment. There were 13 serious injuries. There was one critical injury and  there is one person who is deceased. The deceased person involved a head injury  and that person passed away on transfer to the Lorengau Hospital. The injury was  sustained outside the centre. The critical injury involves a probable base of skull  fracture and that person is being medevacked to Australia. There is a serious injury  to one transferee which involves a gunshot wound to the buttock and that person will  also be transferred to Australia, I understand, for treatment for their injuries. An air  ambulance is already on its way to Manus and a second air ambulance has been  arranged and will depart later today from Port Moresby. The gunshot wound  occurred also outside the centre itself and I note that there was reports of a gun  being fired at around 1am this morning. There are no other reports that we are aware  of, of any gunshot wounds or certainly any other reports of gunshots being fired or  heard of that we are aware of at this time. 

 I also want to stress that the actions taken by our people there overnight showed a  great deal of courage, showed a great deal of strength, and a great deal of  application and determination to maintain a situation which was very tense and very  stressful. The people who serve in these centres do so under a great deal of stress  and I particularly want to thank all of those who are involved with our service  providers and all those who involved with the Immigration department and the IHMS  team and they have been up there caring for people all morning. 

 The news of a death is a great tragedy and our sympathies are extended to the  transferees of that person's family and friends who would have been in the facility as  well. This is a tragedy but this was a very dangerous situation where people decided  to protest in a very violent way and to take themselves outside the centre and place  themselves at great risk. In those situations our security people need to undertake  the tasks that they need to undertake to restore the facility to a place of safety and 

 equally those who are maintaining the safety of the security environment outside the  centre need to use their powers and various accoutrements that they have available  to them in order to restore in the way that is provided for under PNG law. 

 So this is a very distressing situation but it is not a situation sadly that was not  anticipated. The government has been taking steps over recent weeks to increase  our security presence at that centre. The government has learnt the lessons from  previous attempts to take down centres on Nauru which were very successful where  those centres were completely destroyed. On this occasion the centre has not been  destroyed, the centre will be able to resume operations as it has this morning.  Breakfast has been served. 

 I should also note that the vast majority of transferees in that facility did not  participate in that protest last night, that disturbance. They were removed for their  safety to the oval just down the road and non-essential staff who were running the  centre were also evacuated prior to things escalating last night. So this is a very  unfortunate incident, this is a very tragic incident at least in one case. What the  government will be doing today and over the course of the days that follow is will be  updating information as it becomes available to us and we can confirm that  information. There are all sorts of rumours that are put around in this environment  and sometimes those rumours are designed to create further instability and further  unrest. The government won't be entertaining those we will be seeking to provide the  correct information once that information can be confirmed. So again I want to thank  the staff that have been hard at work trying to protect people overnight and trying to  save people's lives overnight. I want to thank the PNG Government for their  cooperation who were part of the command centre last night in handling this very  difficult situation. I have been in contact with our High Commissioner there this  morning. I have also put in a call to the Immigration Minister for Papua New Guinea  and I expect to be speaking with him later today about all of these matters. I have  also before this press conference contacted the Opposition spokesperson on  Immigration to brief him on these issues as well and will continue to do that over the  course of the day. 

 The government understands that there will be those that will seek to take down our  policies, to take down our processing centres, to try and destroy the regime. We  have put in place to deal with this very difficult issue of illegal arrivals to Australia.  What they will find is a government that has a very strong resolve to continue with  these policies and to resist any effort to do just that. In this case this incident has had  a tragic outcome and that is not an outcome we wish to see repeated in any way,  shape or form, and the appropriate investigations and inquiries will be launched into  those matters. 

 But it is very important that in our centres that we provide the support that is  necessary to ensure these places are safe, that they are secure, where people are  appropriately cared for. They will have frustrations about being in a centre that they  don't wish to be in because they wanted a very different outcome than being in either  Manus Island or Nauru for that matter. 

 But that is the situation in which they find themselves, their claims will be processed  there according to the policies that have been put in place and we will continue to  manage this issue going forward in the way that we have. Are there any questions? 

 Journalist: Were police and locals involved in attacking the asylum seekers at the  centre? 

 Minister Morrison: G4S I understand are issuing a statement very shortly on that  point that refutes those claims. 

 Journalist: Was a generator failure what sparked the incident? 

 Minister Morrison: The incident was a rolling incident that takes on from last night  and some earlier protests which were largely peaceful at the centre going back over  a number of weeks, so this has been if you like a rolling series of protests  orchestrated by people within this centre. That is of no surprise to us, that is why the  government was increasing security at the centre, and that's why, frankly, we were  able to, last night and the night before, able to prevent destruction of the centre and  to ensure that it was able to operate today. 

 Now in the case of the one individual who is deceased that is a tragic outcome which  no one would welcome and is one that we express our sincere regret and sympathy  for. 

 Journalist: So do you feel the incident demonstrates a lack of authority at the site? 

 Minister Morrison: No, these environments can be very difficult and when the  previous government put the processing centre in place they were very well aware of  that as well. When we came to office one of the first things we did was put a force  protection review in place through General Campbell which was to assess a lot of  these security issues. In situations like this, if you're able to restore order promptly  which was done within a matter of hours and ensure the facility is maintained and  able to resume operations then that is an outcome which is positive. 

 But clearly the outcome where someone has absconded, gone outside the safety of  that facility and put themselves at risk, resulting in such a tragic outcome is terrible. 

 Journalist: Do we know where the demonstrators got the weapons from? 

 Minister Morrison: I haven't reported on the presence of any weapons. 

 Journalist: Excuse me, refugee advocates have said that people in Mike compound  saw mobs of 30 to 40 strong police and local PNG people coming through with  weapons. Are you going to be investigating that even if they tell you that in fact there  were no PNG or locals involved in the attack? 

 Minister Morrison: Well it's not just G4s, my statement early today made it very  clear there were no PNG police inside the centre last night. That is the report that  was provided to me overnight. That is the information that I have available to me. So  the suggestion that PNG police were in the centre is not correct on the information  that I have. 

 G4S have advised that there was no one who came from outside and sought to  disrupt or attack people on the inside which lead to the perimeter fence being  breached. 

 Journalist: Is it true someone was thrown from the roof? 

 Minister Morrison: I have no report on that whatsoever and I would add this word of  caution to all of the reports and rumours that are being put around by people today.  We will work through the details of what took place last night and I will report on  those details, whether it's here or in Canberra later this afternoon or elsewhere over  the course of the week and we will confirm what took place. 

 But I would caution people to be very wary of unsubstantiated reports that may be  put into the public domain. 

 Journalist: What will be the future of the people at that centre, how will they be  processed and then let go, is the centre viable given incidents such as this, and what  is the implications does this incident have on our relationship with PNG? 

 Minister Morrison: Well the centre is viable, the centre is operating this morning.  People who have come to Australia illegally by boat will be processed offshore, there  is no change to that policy. The people who are in that centre will be processed in  PNG according to PNG law. That's the policy, there is no change to the policy and  our relationship with PNG is as strong as it always has been. 

 Journalist: Excuse me, what about our relationship with Indonesia? I'm sure you  would be familiar with Dr Natalegawa's comments… 

 Minister Morrison: Well today's incidents have nothing to do with our relationship  with Indonesia, I'm here reporting on a very serious incident in relation to Manus  Island and that's what I'm happy to discuss this morning. 

 Journalist: What is the government going to do to prevent this happening in the  future? 

 Minister Morrison: Pardon? 

 Journalist: What is the government going to do to prevent this happening in the  future? 

 Minister Morrison: Well what we've been doing over the last few months. I mean  the risk of these things occurring in these centres is always present and what you do  is you take steps to ensure the security is in place to ensure that you can deal with  any threat that may present. 

 And how that was done last night was done to ensure that the centre was able to be  maintained and that many, many people were able to be removed to safety. And  those who remained in the centre were able to be brought under control and the  centre was able to be restored by 2am so that's a period of approximately 3 hours  that this incident took place. 

 You can't remove the risk or threat of incidents like this but you can prepare to deal  with them when they arise. 

 Journalist: You mentioned earlier that you believe that the government was aware  that this was sort of brewing over time, so surely more could have been done to  prevent these two incidents happening over the space of 48 hours? 

 Minister Morrison: Well we have put a large number of additional security people in  place last week and if that hadn't been done then I think that the incident that we saw  over the last two nights could have resulted in even more unfortunate result. 

 Journalist: How did someone come to be shot in the buttocks and who shot them. 

 Minister Morrison: Well we don't have the answers to those questions at present  and I can confirm that someone was shot in the buttocks. It did occur outside the  centre and how that occurred and particularly the circumstances of the individual  who was deceased who died as a result of an injury, a head wound. That is also not  clear at the moment and that incident in particular will obviously be the subject of an  inquiry. 

 Journalist: You said there were no weapons inside the compound so. 

 Minister Morrison: I made no comment on weapons, one way or the other. 

 Journalist: But you said that someone was shot. 

 Minister Morrison: I said that took place outside the centre. 

 Journalist: So what happened there. 

 Minister Morrison: Outside the centre, where that event took place and that will  obviously be the subject of an investigation into that person's death. 

 Journalist: Minister… 

 Journalist: Minister, sorry (inaudible) 

 Minister Morrison: We'll come over here then we'll 

 Journalist: Minister, will the Federal Government continue to send West Papuan  refugees to Manus Island for resettlement when PNG has now got an extradition  treaty with Indonesia. 

 Minister Morrison: Well, look I think that is going into other issues beyond the  scope of this press conference this morning 

 Journalist: Minister, you said that detainees or you said that transferees put  themselves at great danger by leaving the centre, can you explain what you meant  by that? 

 Minister Morrison: Well the centre is built to ensure people remain safe within that  centre, I don't know if you've visited Manus Island or you've been to PNG, but we  have built that complex in a way where people are most secure and most safe inside  the centre, so if people chose to remove themselves from that centre then they are  obviously putting themselves at a place of much greater risk and in an environment  like that where there is violent behaviour on the part of those who are breaching the  perimeter fence and going out of the centre then this is a disorderly environment in  which there is always great risk. 

 Journalist: Minister (inaudible) 

 Minister Morrison: When there are people who are charged under Papuan New  Guinean law to maintain law and order in that situation, now if you behave in an  unruly way and in a disorderly way then you subject yourself to the response of law  enforcement. 

 Journalist: Do you believe that any of the injuries that you've described were  inflicted by police or locals around the centre? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, as I've said I have no information to confirm how the  injuries took place. I do know in the cases of the most serious ones, particularly in  the case of the deceased person, their injuries occurred and the shot being fired was  outside of the centre. But who and when and where, that information is not available  to me. 

 Journalist: There are reports that tensions have been fuelling with locals around  Manus Island for some time, has the government been aware of this or tried to put  any measures in place? 

 Minister Morrison: Well the government is regularly in contact with locals on Manus  Island, it's part of the process of managing that centre, there have been a range of  issues going back over several years now and those issues are typically managed  and resolved by engaging with the local community and that's the way we will  continue to manage these issues, but the reports about the conduct of any local  Manutians at the moment are the subject of rumour and not the subject of any sort of  substantiated report or fact. 

 Journalist: And what's the latest with the government's negotiations with the PNG  government about permanent resettlement of those asylum seekers. 

 Minister Morrison: Well, they're ongoing. 

 Journalist: Will there be an enquiry into the burns at sea claims. 

 Minister Morrison: Sorry? 

 Journalist: Will there be an enquiry into the burns. . 

 Minister Morrison: Well again, we're here today to talk about the Manus Island  incident. I have addressed that question in other forms and in other places and my  response is the same. 

 Journalist: You said that there would be an enquiry into exactly what happened  outside the centre, will you make everything that is discovered in that enquiry public,  particularly who fired this shot? 

 Minister Morrison: Well, first of all this took place in Papua New Guinea and any  such enquiry would be done under Papua New Guinean law by Papua New Guinean  authorities so that is really a question that is best directed to the government of  Papua New Guinea and I think at this stage what's important is that we deal with the  initial situation there on Manus Island. 

 There are still people who are being treated we have Immigration and G4S and other  service provider staff who have been under great strain now for two nights running  and their welfare is also paramount to me and as I noted in my statement earlier  today I am very pleased that they are all safe and are all accounted for. We are still  not in a position to account for every transferee which is in that centre and I hope to  provide further information on that today, but until I have that actual face-to-photo  confirmation, then I don't think it is wise for me to be speculating about that. 

 Journalist: If tensions escalated, at what point does the government say it's  untenable to put asylum seekers on Manus Island? 

 Minister Morrison: The government's resolve when it comes to our policies I think is  very clear and that resolve won't break. 

 Journalist: Even in light of a fatality and serious injuries? 

 Minister Morrison: The government's resolve is absolute. 

 Journalist: Is the government prepared to hear reports by the UN and Amnesty  International around the toxicity of the environment around… (inaudible). 

 Minister Morrison: I meet regularly with human rights groups and others who are  given the opportunity regularly to visit the centres, and parliamentarians and others  and where people have constructive suggestions and observations that can be  substantiated then I'm always happy to address those and have done on quite a  number of occasions. 

 Journalist: Minister …(inaudible) 

 Minister Morrison: Are there any other questions on this incident because we have  to return to Canberra to receive further briefings. 

 Journalist: Minister, I beg your pardon. You said the government's resolve is  absolute. Are there any circumstances under which you would consider revising or  reviewing the turn back the boats policy and measures. 

 Minister Morrison: The government's position is absolute, we've made that clear  over a very long period of time and it's the resolve of the government that has been  the major change in what we have seen occurring with the illegal arrival of boats to  Australia. Let's not forget that over 1100 people died on those boats and for the last  more than eight weeks not one single people smuggling venture has been  successful in getting to Australia because the suite of policies that this government  has put in place. These policies will be tested, these policies will be challenged,  they'll be criticized, people will seek to undermine them, people will seek to tear  detention centres down as they have done in the past, people will make false and  wild allegations about the conduct of our officers in the maritime environment and  any number of things. But what those seeking to send boats to Australia need to  understand and those who may seek to get on one of those boats is this  government's resolve is absolute. 

 Thank you. 

 

