---
title: "Changes to resettlement another blow to people smugglers"
date: "2014-11-18"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536202
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3514311%22
---

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Changes to resettlement another blow to people  smugglers 

 Tuesday, 18 November 2014 

 Asylum seekers who registered with UNHCR in Indonesia on or after 1 July 2014 will  no longer be eligible for resettlement in Australia, Minister for Immigration and  Border Protection, the Hon. Scott Morrison said today. 

 Minister Morrison said the change was part of the Government's ongoing work in the  region to strip people smugglers of a product to sell to vulnerable men, women and  children. 

 'While nine of ten months of 2014 have passed without a successful people  smuggling venture to Australia, we know smugglers continue to encourage asylum  seekers to travel illegally to Indonesia for the purpose of seeking resettlement in  Australia,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'These changes should reduce the movement of asylum seekers to Indonesia and  encourage them to seek resettlement in or from countries of first asylum.' 

 Australia will continue to resettle some refugees who registered with UNHCR in  Indonesia before 1 July 2014, however there will not be as many places allocated,  meaning the waiting period in Indonesia to be resettled in Australia will be much  longer. 

 Minister Morrison said the Government does not support asylum seekers travelling  illegally to transit countries in search of more favourable resettlement destinations. 

 'The Government's policies under Operation Sovereign Borders have not only saved  lives at sea, but also allowed more places under our humanitarian programme for the  world's most desperate and vulnerable refugees. It is important that these places are  not taken up by people seeking to exploit the programme by shopping for  resettlement through a transit country.' 

 In 2014-15, Australia's Humanitarian Programme will provide 13,750 places. These  will include 11,000 places for people overseas, nearly all of whom will be in countries  of first asylum. 

 The Indonesian government has been briefed on this decision, which is designed to  reduce the burden, created by people smugglers, of asylum seekers entering  Indonesia 

