---
title: "Ambassador for People Smuggling Issues"
date: "2014-11-24"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536416
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3523625%22
---

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION 

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP

 24 November 2014 

 AMBASSADOR FOR PEOPLE SMUGGLING ISSUES 

 Today we announce the appointment of Mr Andrew Goledzinowski AM as Australia's next  Ambassador for People Smuggling Issues. 

 The Ambassador for People Smuggling Issues plays an important role in promoting  effective and practical international cooperation to counter people smuggling in support of  Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB).  Mr Goledzinowski will work closely with the OSB Joint  Agency Task Force to ensure that international elements of OSB are effectively coordinated  across government. 

 The Ambassador will take forward key elements of the government’s regional deterrence  framework, including through the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons  and Related Transnational Crime, which Australia co-chairs with Indonesia.  

 Mr Goledzinowski is a senior career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade.  He is currently Assistant Secretary of the Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central Asia  Branch.  Overseas Mr Goledzinowski has served as Ambassador and Deputy Permanent  Representative to the United Nations in New York, with earlier postings in Wellington,  Pretoria, Port Vila, Geneva UN and Baghdad.  He has also held senior positions with the  United Nations and World Bank.  In Canberra Mr Goledzinowski has previously had  responsibility for counter terrorism, United Nations, and Pacific regional issues.  

 Mr Goledzinowski will take up his appointment in December 2014. 

 The Government thanks outgoing Ambassador Craig Chittick OAM for his work on  promoting Australian and regional efforts to combat people smuggling and trafficking since  2012.  Mr Chittick has been an integral part of the Operation Sovereign Borders team who  have worked hard to implement the government’s policies to stop illegal boat arrivals. His  dedication and efforts in this role was strongly appreciated by the Government and the  personnel of the Operation Sovereign Borders Joint Agency Task Force. 

 Minister Bishop’s office: Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874 Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340  Minster Morrison’s office: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253,  

