---
title: "Greens call for reprieve for Iraqi asylum seekers"
date: "2014-06-18"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409804
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3229276%22
---

 Wednesday, 18 June 2014   

 Greens spokesperson for immigration, Senator Hanson-Young   

 Greens call for reprieve for Iraqi asylum seekers    

 The Senate will vote on a Greens motion today calling on the Abbott government to rule out sending  Iraqi asylum seekers home and allow them to apply for protection in Australia.     

 “In the last week over 500,000 people have been displaced and hundreds of others killed due to the  deadly conflict unfolding in Iraq”, Greens spokesperson for immigration, Senator Hanson-Young said.     

 “Given the worsening situation in Iraq, the Australian Government must issue a moratorium on  returning Iraqi refugees to the dangers at home.     

 “There are over 500 Iraq refugees locked up in Australian detention centres and several thousand  more in the community who have been unable to apply for protection.     

 “Iraqi asylum seekers already in Australia must be given an assurance they will not be returned to  their homeland where they will face imminent danger and be offered the opportunity to apply for a  protection visa.     

 “There is no doubt that this is a humanitarian crisis which requires a humanitarian response.    

 “Just as Bob Hawke did after the Tiananmen Square massacre, Australia can offer a reprieve to those  Iraqi refugees here in Australia.      

 “We have done it before and we should do it again by extending a helping hand to Iraqi asylum  seekers in need.     

 “Those currently in detention on Manus Island, Nauru and Christmas Island are living in fear of being  sent home as they are unable to apply for protection.    

 “The Minister must lift the bar and allow Iraqi nationals who are currently detained in immigration  detention to apply for the protection we know they deserve”.    

 

 Notice of Motion  Senator Hanson-Young  

 

 17 June 2014                                                                    

 

 I give notice that on the next day of sitting I shall move:                                                                    

 That the senate:  1)             recognises that over 500,000 Iraqis have been displaced in the past week due to the  ongoing deadly conflict in their country. 

 2)             recognises that this is a humanitarian crisis that will have flow on effects in our region.  

 3)             calls on the Government to issue a moratorium on the return of any asylum seekers  back to Iraq and offer a reprieve to those detained in immigration dentition on Manus  Island, Nauru and Christmas Island to allow them to apply for protection in Australia.  

  Katie Milanowicz  Constituent Liaison and Caseworker  Level 7 / 147 Pirie St, Adelaide, SA 5000  TEL +61 8 8227 0425   |   FAX  +61 8 8227 0426   |  EMAIL katie.milanowicz@aph.gov.au     

 

 

