---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 9 July 2014: Abbott Government's unfair budget; Tony Abbott and Campbell Newman's cut's to health; carbon price; Senate; climate change; G20; asylum seekers"
date: "2014-07-10"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's unfair budget"
  - "Tony Abbott and Campbell Newman's cut's to health"
  - "carbon price"
  - "Senate"
  - "climate change"
  - "G20"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410808
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3283335%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&EO TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  WEDNESDAY, 9 JULY 2014  BRISBANE   

 SUBJECT/ S: A bbott Government’s unfair budget; Tony A bbott and  Campbell New man’s cut’s to health; Carbon price; Senate; Climate  change; G20; A sylum seek ers.   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everyone. It’s  fantastic to be here at the hospital with Anthony Lynham, Labor’s candidate in the  Safford by-election, the upcoming state by-election. We’re here because there are  few things more important for state or federal governments than providing quality  health care to Australians and to Queenslanders. We’ve seen Campbell Newman shut  hospital beds, sack highly trained hospital staff. We now see a debate about  Campbell Newman putting out to tender important health services and jeopardising  therefore the quality of care which Queenslanders would receive. And the triple  whammy has been Tony Abbott’s unfair budget. Not only is he making  Queenslanders, or Brisbane people living on the north side, pay a new GP tax, pay  more for their petrol and a new petrol tax, we’re seeing the pensioners who live here  seeing their pensions cut. But what we’re also seeing is tens of billions of dollars  being slashed by Tony Abbott from the money he gives the state governments to  help adequately fund hospitals across Australia including Brisbane. In effect over the  next 10 years Tony Abbott withdrawing money from the hospital system in  Queensland is the equivalent of closing 1 in 5 hospital beds. The Queensland  hospital system does a great job, but it’s already borne the brunt of Campbell  Newman’s job cuts, his privatisation and now you get Tony Abbott. Anthony is a  respected medical practitioner in this community; we have an opportunity at the  Stafford by-election, to send a message, not only to Campbell Newman, but to Tony  Abbott on behalf of the whole of Australia that Tony Abbott’s health cuts are the  wrong direction for Australian’s healthcare. I might hand over to Anthony to make  some further points.   

 ANTHONY LYNHAM: Thanks Bill. I’m standing up for Stafford because as most  people realise Stafford has the highest concentration of health workers in it than any  other electorate in Queensland. The electorate of Stafford is more affected by these  cut from Newman and from Abbott than any other location in Queensland. I’ve  doorknocked Stafford at length for these past six weeks and every health worker I  come across has the same concerns. 420 jobs cut here at the Royal Brisbane and  Women’s hospital, 250 jobs lost at Prince Charles and 30 beds cut. I mean  Queensland’s and Stafford can’t take anymore. I mean, don’t forget with those job  losses comes losses to the community, it’s a flow on effect. The mechanic, the  grocer, the butcher, they’re all eventually affected as well. These health services we  have now are stretched to the limit. The metro north service has a further $2 billion  worth of cuts to absorb over the next 10 years. We’re stretched to the absolute  limits, cracks are starting to appear. You would have seen the news over the  weekend and last few days and the whole thing is going to come down like a house  of cards and all Newman’s hoping for is that it doesn’t come down before the next  election. He’s just hoping he can hold on until then and I can tell you what, it’s not  long before we see real problems with Queensland health.  

 SHORTEN: Thanks everyone, we might just see if there’s any questions.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of the Federal Governments tactics this morning  trying to gag and guillotine the debate on the repeal of the carbon tax?   

 SHORTEN: I’m happy to do the other federal issues so are there any questions on  the health care or we’ve got the point across? Okay, in terms of the carbon debates  in the Senate, Tony Abbott and the Liberals are up to their old tricks again, they  want to stifle debate, they want to gag debate. The Senate is the house of review in  Australian politics. Tony Abbott mightn't like the majority of Senators but that  doesn't mean that he should be trying to stop them from having their say.  The Senators were elected by Australian people along with Mr Abbott so we should  have a proper debate in our parliament, not some sort of rushed through debate  which Tony Abbott is trying to gag Senators from having their say in a democracy.   

 JOURNALIST: The gag's been used by both sides of parliament before,  what makes it different on this occasion to what’s happened in the past?   

 SHORTEN: We've got a new Senate where you've got a group of crossbenchers  along with Labor, the Liberals haven't been in Government before putting this stuff  through the Senate with this new Senate composition. So what makes it remarkable  is that Tony Abbott’s trying to bully new Senators into submitting to his will. Tony  Abbott shouldn't be picking on individual Senators and trying to gag debate. He  should instead win his argument, win the debate by the strength of his arguments  not just the strength of his numbers.   

 JOURNALIST: Apparently Rick Muir sided with Labor, does that give you some  hope that’s he’ll support the [inaudible]?     

 SHORTEN: I make no judgment about individual Senators but the point here is that  Senators have been elected to be the house of review in Australian politics, that's  what our constitution, our founding fathers established the Senate to do. Now we've  got Tony Abbott complaining when people don't do as he says. The  Abbott Government should stop trying to bully their way on matters including  climate change, or the Budget, and listen to people and try and convince people  rather than relying on numbers to turn unfair arguments into fact.   

 JOURNALIST: What's your view of the Palmer United Party’s suggestion in terms of  an emissions trading scheme, is that something you’d support?     

 SHORTEN: We're waiting to see what their amendments are. Labor's position is  very clear, we believe climate change is real, we believe that you need to have  effective action on it. We know that a lot of rest of the world is moving to  take action on climate change. We are, want to make sure that we have a policy for  clean energy, for renewable energy, we believe that Labor has got a good plan for  dealing with climate change. We will look carefully at the amendments from the  Palmer Senators and we’ll see what they have to say but we'll be judging  them against our long-held principles.    

 JOURNALIST: Is a policy that sets the price at zero until all our major trading  partners come to the party, does that fulfil your sort of baseline criteria for what we  need to do?      

 SHORTEN: Well, apparently there's 300 pages of amendments coming. I'd rather  wait and see what they're actually proposing. But Labor does stand for the principle  of an Emissions Trading Scheme. We do want to see effective action to reduce our  carbon emissions, carbon pollution. We will take a stand against carbon  pollution. When it comes to questions of detail about what crossbench Senators are  going to do, I think we'll have to wait and see what they actually put up before I can  give a definitive answer on our voting intentions.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]    

 SHORTEN: Well, the G20 is a marvellous opportunity for Australia, the previous  Labor Government managed to secure it. We hope it goes well. In terms of  the security arrangements, we'll have to see how our professionals are going  on that. I wouldn't wish to second guess their arrangements at this point.    

 One other issue which  certainly has been coming out loud and clear in the last few  hours is Mr Abbott's terrible comments about reports of asylum seekers, women,  seeking to self-harm from their circumstances on Christmas Island and elsewhere.  Let me just say this - these comments by the Prime Minister of Australia are a new  low even for him. We say to Mr Abbott, you mightn't wish these people were in our  care but they are in the care of the Australian Government, and we've got to treat  these people as human beings, not just points on a political scoreboard. I said this  morning to the Government, Mr Abbott you cannot wash your hands of these  matters, Australia owes a duty of care to people. If we have them in our care, to 

 make sure that they are treated safely, decently and humanly and that will be  our position. Thank you.    

 JOURNALIST: Aren’t your asylum seeker policies similar to the Governments  though?    

 SHORTEN: We're not the Government. This is the Government who’s enacted  them   and no they're not similar in this regard and these are always tough issues but it  doesn't show any moral leadership of the Prime Minister just to simply say that these  are issues of blackmail and I think we need to just make it very clear that when the  Australian Government has people in their care, that we do owe them a duty of care  to do everything we can to make sure they're safe and that is our approach.  Last question.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, this is a Government who shrouds their policies  in secrecy. We're getting reports from the Refugee Action Centre, we're seeing  intemperate comments from our Prime Minister. Again, I just say on  immigration matters they work best when we see Australians being treated with  trust and openness, rather than relying on second hand reports but it is important  that we treat people decently, that is the right thing to do, it's the Australian way.  Thank you very much everyone.   

 ENDS 

