---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parkville: 30 May 2014: cuts to pensioners; GP Tax; cuts to education and science; Abbott Government's budget of broken promises; flight MH370; Senate; government advertising; hospital waiting times; cuts to the Refugee Council, Paul Keating"
date: "2014-05-30"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "cuts to pensioners"
  - "GP Tax"
  - "cuts to education and science"
  - "Abbott Government's budget of broken promises"
  - "flight MH370"
  - "Senate"
  - "government advertising"
  - "hospital waiting times"
  - "cuts to the Refugee Council, Paul Keating"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408984
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3201547%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP  FRIDAY, 30 MAY 2014  PARKVILLE    

 SUBJECT/ S: Cuts to pensioners; GP Tax; Cuts to education and science;  Abbott Government’s budget of broken promises; Flight M H370;  Senate; government advertising; hospital w aiting times; Cuts to the  Refugee Council, Paul Keating.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Today we've seen some of  Australia's brightest 15 and 16-year-olds deepening their love of science. This is  a great school with great teachers and fantastic students, supported by parents  who want to see their kids get the best start in life. But the unfair budget of  Tony Abbott, full of broken promises, based upon lies and lies and lies before the  last election, means that these great kids are going to face far greater crippling  debts and fees to go to universities.    

 Not every child in Australia comes from a very privileged background. Parents  make big sacrifices to send their kids to primary and secondary school. One of  the dreams every parent has in Australia for their children, is that their kids can  go on to have a successful and secure and stable adult life. Part of the dream of  Australian life is the opportunity to get a trade, to learn a trade or to go to  university. Tony Abbott's unfair budget will mean that these students, if they  want to study science and follow their passion at university, instead of it being  capped at $34,000, these children and their parents are going to face debts of  up to $100,000 just to study science. The Abbott Government is making life hard  for our young people and their families. Young Australians should not have to  choose between being able to pay a mortgage or to pay to go to university. That  is an unfair choice by Tony Abbott's unfair budget.  

 

 But it's not just the students studying science, the future generation of scientists  in Australia that are in jeopardy. We've seen cruel and heartless job cuts to the  CSIRO, to the Australian Institute of Marine Research, to the Australian Research  Council, to the DSTO and other science organisations. Tony Abbott's recipe for  the future of Australia is to sack scientists, is to decrease funding to science and  to make it harder for the future generation of Australian scientists to invent the  next fantastic invention which will make Australia a more successful country.  Labor will oppose cuts to science. Labor will oppose increasing university fees  and making it hard for children from all backgrounds to go to university. And I'd  now like to hand over to my shadow spokesperson to talk further about some of  these really important issues.   

 SENATOR KIM CARR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION,  RESEARCH, INNOVATION AND INDUSTRY: Well under Mr Abbott's ruthless,  callous budget, over 1,000 scientists are being taken off the public pay roll. We  have cuts to our scientific institutions and our commercialisation programs of  $1.4 billion, so students will be faced with massive debts, crippling debts, their  parents may well have to take out a second mortgage to assist them and you will  have less employment opportunities in the Commonwealth as a direct result of  this government's budget cuts.    

 On top of that, if you're a scientist working in industry there will be less  opportunity because this government has taken away the incentives to  encourage our business to change the way they do their business, by applying  the very best of Australian scientific knowledge. So this is a job-destroying  budget, a budget that will cripple Australian families and will cripple the hopes  and aspirations of a generation of Australian students seeking to do what I think  every Australian expects them to do and serve this nation.   

 SHORTEN: We're happy to take questions. Thank you.   

 JOURNALIST: Did the Prime Minister jump the gun on MH370?   

 SHORTEN: Well, like every person in the world who flies, we've all been  touched by the tragedy and the disappearance of MH370. What I think we need  to do is have less running commentary and more letting the professionals get on  with the job of trying to answer this terrible question. There can be disasters  around the world which are tragedies, but this disaster has touched people in  Australia, not just because of Australians being on MH370, but every person who  flies in an airplane can feel the concern about why did this plane disappear. This  is a tragedy which has touched everyone in the world and Labor's position is that  we continue to support efforts to try and answer these terrible questions to bring  some comfort to the family and to everyone else who flies. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think he tried to gain political advantage from that  situation?   

 SHORTEN: It's not for me to speculate on the motives of the Prime Minister.   

 JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott is meeting with Senate crossbenchers. Will you be  doing the same?   

 SHORTEN: I don't know if Tony Abbott is meeting with Clive Palmer over a meal  of duck but in terms of Labor's approach, we know what we stand for. We do not  believe in $100,000 university degrees to study science. We do not believe that  the way that Australia becomes a smart country is to sack scientists. We will  apply our principles and values. There is nothing that Tony Abbott can say or can  do, no amount of finger wagging or foot stamping or shouting will divert Labor  from opposing the new GP Tax, from standing up for pensioners, from standing 

 up for bright kids from modest backgrounds to be able to go to university, and  standing up against a new tax on petrol.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you be meeting with Senate crossbenchers?   

 SHORTEN: We meet with Senate crossbenchers on a regular basis, but what  I'm also stating here is when we meet with crossbenchers, what will we talk  about? We will talk about, Labor is on the side of pensioners, we're on the side  of people who want to see their kids go to university, we're on the side of sick  people who shouldn't have to pay tax to go to see the doctor. We don't need to  sit behind closed doors with Clive Palmer and Malcolm Turnbull to tell Australians  what we think. People know what Labor stands for, it’s for a fair go for all.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you speak to Senators to convince them to vote for Labor?   

 SHORTEN: Well we believe that, it's not about Labor, it's about what's in the  best interests of the future of Australia. We need in Australian politics a  government who doesn't think about their own political skin but thinks about the  future of Australia. It is not good for the future of Australia to go down the  Margaret Thatcher path of cutting and slashing. It is not good for Australia to  have new taxes put on sick people. It is not good for Australia to have  pensioners worried about whether or not their income will keep up with the cost  of living. It is not good for Australia to have the bright fantastic kids we've just  met at University High in Melbourne, we've got future scientists, engineers, who  knows, Nobel prize winners. Tony Abbott does not have a right to wreck this  country with his unfair budget and broken promises.   

 JOURNALIST: Who's doing that for Labor? Who's negotiating with the  crossbenchers?   

 SHORTEN: We've got a Senate Leadership team and a leadership team of the  parliamentary party. But also it's not just a matter of talking to the Senators. In  the next two months Labor will go out and talk to Australians. Everyone knows  that this budget is sinking and is in disarray. Everyone knows that we've got  Coalition backbenchers who lack the intestinal fortitude, lack the guts to stand up  to Tony Abbott, but privately they're shocked by this budget.    

 A budget is not about itself. A budget should be brought down to make sure that  Australia is a better place. Australia is not a better, fairer destination if our kids  can't get to university without crippling debts, if our sick can't see the doctor  without paying more taxes, if our pensioners who have worked hard their whole  life to contribute, have to worry about paying, you know, getting caught up in  cost-of-living pressures because this Government doesn't know, is out of touch  with pensioners.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there any form of compromise that you're going to accept in  terms of changes to university fees?   

 SHORTEN: Labor has a very straightforward principle. With Labor what you see  is what you get. We want to make sure that children, regardless of what  postcode, regardless of how much money their parents have got, we want kids  to have the chance to go to university.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask you what you made of the surgery waiting list stories  this morning and the fact that the Liberal Party is saying that Labor's made up  those figures?   

 SHORTEN: The Liberal Party, every day at their office of factory lying, they  make up a new lie. The issue here is that this Abbott Government is so arrogant  that they've already got the Medicare telephone line saying to people that people  will be paying a new $7 tax. Tony Abbott shouldn't get ahead of himself, he  needs to wake up to himself. The GP Tax is a bad idea and Labor will fight it with  every breath in our body.   

 JOURNALIST: There was cuts to the Refugee Council revealed today that  weren't outlined in the budget. What do you make of that?   

 SHORTEN: This is a government who I think has got hard explaining to do  around the way it's handling people and the regional settlement centres. There's  no doubt that this government's addicted to secrecy. This government wants to  cut off its critics. Everything from Legal Aid funding to the disability 

 discrimination commissioner. This is a government who will punish its critics. It's  not the right way in the Australian democracy. The Abbott Government should  get out and talk to the real people, the people who are filling their cars with  petrol, paying for it themselves this morning, the pensioners worrying about how  they're going to keep pace with the cost of living. Research shows that  pensioners are going to lose, courtesy of this budget and its future decisions,  $160 a fortnight over the next number of years.    

 These are crazy priorities. On one hand this is a government who will pay a  millionaire $2,000 a week in terms of their - a fortnight in terms of what they  pay them for a parental leave and yet they're going to cut money off pensioners.  This is a Government with crazy priorities which are out of touch.   

 JOURNALIST: Why did the Labor Government abuse government advertising in  its final days?   

 SHORTEN: I'm not even going to that. This is just, again, the government  trying to point the finger at everyone else. I have never seen a government so  ready to run the Opposition. This is a government who throws mud at everyone.  They don't like the scientists, they don't like the critics, they don't like people  who criticise their budget, they don't like their backbench when they criticise  their budget. This Government knows it's got an unfair budget based on broken  promises, systemic lies before the last election.    

 Australia will never forget that Tony Abbott was the Opposition Leader who said  if you vote for Tony Abbott you'll get a Prime Minister who won't break his  promises. But then he said, no cuts to health, well that was a lie. No cuts to  education, that was a lie. He said no changes to pensions, that was a lie. He says  that Medicare, he's their best friend, well that's clearly a lie. So this is a Prime  Minister who cannot be trusted with the finances of this country.   

 JOURNALIST: You're not really in a position to be able to criticise government  advertising spending though, are you?   

 SHORTEN: If this government wastes taxpayers' money selling this unfair  budget, I think that is a disgrace and yes we will criticise them, and merely  because Tony Abbott doesn't like being criticised, well if he wants to fix up his  budget he should buy a mirror and look at the problem.   

 JOURNALIST: Was your budget reply speech written by Paul Keating?   

 SHORTEN: The budget reply speech was a statement of Labor values. I was  very grateful for the great reception it had and I’m very grateful for the ongoing 

 advice of many in my Caucus and many former great Labor people including Bill  Kelty and Paul Keating.   

 JOURNALIST: Is he wittier than you?   

 SHORTEN: I beg your pardon?   

 JOURNALIST: Is he wittier than you?   

 SHORTEN: I think that Paul Keating was a great Prime Minister and one thing’s  for sure, when he was Treasurer I think he was much better than Joe Hockey  will ever be. I'm a big fan of Paul's. Thanks.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053 

 

