---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 2 October 2014: cuts to foreign aid; asylum seekers; Ebola; Victoria Police investigation; burqas"
date: "2014-10-02"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
  - "cuts to foreign aid"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Ebola"
  - "Victoria Police investigation"
  - "burqas"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414650
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3425432%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  THURSDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2014    

 SUBJECT/S: Cuts to Foreign Aid; Asylum Seekers; Ebola; Victoria Police  Investigation; Burqas    

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: Reports in the paper  today that the Government are planning further cuts to the aid budget are  extremely concerning. Reports suggest in order to pay for the humanitarian  assistance being offered to Iraq we would further cut humanitarian assistance to  other places. It makes absolutely no sense for Australia to be involved in  protecting the people of Iraq from the threat of IS and at the same time say, to  those same people, ‘we can’t help you with food and water and shelter and  education for your children if you should choose to flee your homes’. Already, the  Australian aid budget’s been cut by $7.6 billion, the largest single cut in the  Federal Budget. One dollar out of every five - cuts in the Federal Budget are  from the aid budget, on the back of the world’s poorest people. The situation in  Syria is critical too, with 200,000 people now dead, with almost half the  population of Syria having fled their homes. Australia should be doing more in  humanitarian assistance for Syria, not less. Syria now has lost millions of  refugees to neighbouring countries, countries like Lebanon and Jordan and  Turkey. Those countries that are looking after millions of Syrian refugees need  more assistance from Australia, not less. In fact, the United Nations has  launched a $6.5 billion appeal for Syria, asking countries around the world to  help the Syrian population displaced from their homes cope. And what’s Australia 

 given? So far, just $31 million, to that $6.5 billion appeal. If what the Prime  Minister and the Government say is true, that IS is a disastrous organisation that  must be stopped because of the effect they’re having on the lives of Syrian and  Iraqi people, then surely our responsibility goes beyond military assistance to  also include humanitarian assistance. If you look at the situation in Iraq, in  particular, we are there offering humanitarian assistance to protect the people of  Iraq from threat of mass atrocity crimes, at the same time, the Government cut  the aid budget to Iraq last year from $7.7 million to zero. So it is important that  government rule out, firmly rule out today, any further cuts to the aid budget.    

 JOURNALIST: I understand that’s already happened, Julie Bishop has just said  there’s been no discussion in Cabinet about foreign aid and the Government will  still keep its commitments on aid. So does that satisfy you?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I’d like to hear it from the Prime Minister and the Treasurer.  They’ve put it into their newspaper of choice this morning, into The Australian,  they’re doing that for a reason. I think that the Prime Minister and the Treasurer  should make clear today that there will be no further cuts to the Australian aid  budget. This is the largest single cut in the May budget. The world’s poorest  people cannot afford any further cuts.    

 JOURNALIST: If- is there any danger of these cuts to go ahead that could have  implications for the asylum seeker boats?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I can’t comment on whether it will have implications for  asylum seeker boats, what I would say is you can’t on the one hand say that  there’s a humanitarian crisis in Iraq that we have to send our military to help,  and on the other hand say that we’re not going to help in other ways, that we’re  not going to help with shelter, with food, water, with health services, with  education for people who fled from their homes.    

 JOURNALIST: So what would be a better way to fund this then?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think that’s up to the Government. The Government set out  in the May budget a whole series of cuts, cuts to health, education, ABC and  SBS, cuts to pensions and family payments. It’s not a new thing that the  Government’s looking around for cuts, they’ve already cut the aid budget  massively. It’s up to them to balance the budget.    

 JOURNALIST: Yesterday the Finance Minister was talking about speedy  passage of bills that Labor and the Government have agreed on, has there been  discussion on this amongst the Labor leadership team?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well for some time Labor has been saying to the Government that  there are measures that we will support. Measures such as further means testing  of family tax benefits. We’re happy to pass them and were happy months ago to  pass those. The Government refused to split the bills, they were absolutely tied  to cutting pensions and to cutting other family payments, to cutting benefits to  young, unemployed people. If the Government splits the bills, we’re happy to  pass the measures that we’d been publicly on the record as saying we agree  with.    

 JOURNALIST: There’s reports today that the woman who accused Bill Shorten  of rape is unsatisfied by the police investigation and she feels that they’ve cut  corners because of his position in power. What is your response to that?    

 PLIBERSEK: My response is that this has been thoroughly investigated by the  police. Bill Shorten cooperated fully, and that should be an end to the matter.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you have any sympathy for David Leyonhjelm’s argument  that the taxes on smoking are too high and that vulnerable people are being  targeted by the increases?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well absolutely not. One of the things we know is that, when  you’re talking about vulnerable people, poorer people are more responsive to  price increases in tobacco and more likely to give up when prices go up. I’ve  made no apology for being part of the government that made it more expensive  to smoke, than to quit smoking. We put a number of smoking cessation aids like  nicotine replacement therapy onto the pharmaceutical benefits list so that it was  cheaper to give up, you had all the assistance to give up, making it more  expensive to smoke has led to decreases in the number of smokers in Australia  combined with the other measures that we took so that Australia has one of the  lowest smoking rates in the world and we’ve basically halved the rate of smoking  in the last twenty years. That’s a good thing. About half of all regular smokers  will die from smoking related causes. I don’t think there’s any freedom and  liberty in being allowed to smoke yourself to death.    

 JOURNALIST: There’s reports Medecins Sans Frontieres has rejected $2.5  million from Australia, yesterday Julie Bishop said it was impractical to have  health workers evacuated from West Africa because it would take 30 hours to  get them home.  What do you see, I guess the Government’s next step?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well nobody is suggesting that if an Australian health worker  became sick that they’d have to be airlifted to Australia. We should be able to  make arrangements with the United States, the UK or European countries to  evacuate our health workers should they become ill. We know that there are  already around 12 Australian volunteers in different African countries where the 

 ebola virus is prevalent and I’d like to think that if one of those got sick that we  could look after them properly and make sure that they’re airlifted to an  appropriate country in Europe or the United States for treatment. But what’s  more important here is that the $8 million contribution to fighting ebola, that’s  welcome but it is an absolute drop in the bucket of what’s needed. At the  moment, there are about 6500 people who are ill. About 3000 people have died.  But this disease is spreading so quickly that the estimate is by January, about 1.4  million people could be affected by ebola. If Australia does not act now, if the  world does not act now, this situation will only worsen. Australia is one of around  130 countries of which through the United Nations supported a UN Security  Council Resolution that said yes, more money’s necessary but more personnel,  more expertise, more supplies are also necessary. Australia has the capacity to  help and it’s very important that we do so, not just for the people who are  affected in those African nations now but for peace and security in the world. If  1.4 million people have ebola by January, we have lost control of this disease.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think it will take having a case in Australia for the  Government to take this issue seriously?    

 PLIBERSEK: I don’t think that there’s a risk of a case in Australia but I am very  confident that if we should have a case in Australia as we’ve seen in Dallas Fort  Worth in the United States that we could contain it because we have an excellent  health service here, we have highly professional staff, we have excellent  methods for dealing with people who have communicable illnesses. But that is  not, that is not the risk here. The risk here is of millions of people becoming  infected with this disease and then how does the world cope with containing  that. No other questions?    

 JOURNALIST: If you’re happy to answer a question on the burqa?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well, now that you’ve asked it…do you want to ask me a question?    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I’d prefer if Tony Abbott didn’t get about in his Speedos, but  it’s a free country.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

