---
title: "Greens call for urgent increase in support for Syrian refugees"
date: "2014-01-22"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403365
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2956403%22
---

 OFFICE OF SENATOR SARAH HANSON-YOUNG  AUSTRALIAN GREENS SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Wednesday, 22 January 2014   

 Greens call for urgent increase in  support for Syrian refugees   

 The Australian Greens have called on the Federal Government to increase Australia's  refugee intake in the wake of the Syrian conflict and to bolster the foreign aid committed  to supporting Syrian refugees in the Middle East.   

 "Australia must follow the lead of other countries around the world when it comes to  supporting those who have suffered the most in this tragic Syrian conflict," the Greens'  immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said after inspecting Syrian  refugee camps in Beirut over recent days.   

 "The Coalition has refused to increase the humanitarian intake despite the breathtaking  scale of this war and has only pledged to take 500 refugees out of Syria when other  countries have been far more generous. Germany has recently committed to resettling  15,000 people out of Syria. Tony Abbott should show Australia's generous spirit and  commit to resettling 5,000 Syrian refugees immediately.   

 "The Coalition has pledged to donate $10m while other comparable nations have gone  much further.   

 "I am calling on Tony Abbott to commit an additional $6m to build a sewage system for  the Za'atari camp in Jordan which is currently home to 120,000 Syrian refugees."   

 With women and children making up the vast majority of people who are fleeing Syria,  Senator Hanson-Young believes all governments should be doing everything that they  possibly can, and that includes Australia.   

 "The scale of this conflict and the resulting humanitarian crisis is almost unbelievable,"  Senator Hanson-Young said.   

 "If we work together though, we can keep these vulnerable men, women and children  safe."   

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

