---
title: "Address to the Migration Institute of Australia, Canberra"
date: "2014-10-30"
creators:
  - "Rowland, Michelle"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURALISM"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211446959
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3477203%22
---

 

 MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR 

 COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY    

 SPEECH    

 MIGRATION INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA  HOTEL REALM, CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2014   

 *** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY *** 

 

 Good morning ladies and gentlemen.    

 I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land and paying my  respects to their elders, both past and present.    

 It gives me great pleasure to speak at this year’s conference and say a few  words about the significance of immigration to our nation.    

 This conference’s theme of ‘Valuing Australian Immigration and Citizenship’ is  one which encapsulates my abiding interest as a public office holder at the Local  and Federal level; as a life-long resident in one of the most diverse regions of  Australia, namely Western Sydney; as an active member of a political party for  over 20 years, who views diversity in its membership and representation as  compulsory rather than merely desirable; and whose life experiences reinforce  on a daily basis the fundamental principle of equality of opportunity.    

 In my electorate of Greenway, 41.5 per cent of residents were born overseas  and 40 per cent of residents speak a language other than English at home.  My 

 hometown of Blacktown, which falls within both the electorates of Greenway and  Chifley, is home to more than 30 different ethnic communities making it a  wonderfully diverse and vibrant part of Australia.    

 The most common surname in the Blacktown Local Government Area is not  Smith or Jones, but rather the Punjabi, or Sikh name, Singh.    

 In 1901, one in four of us were born overseas and today that figure remains the  same, but the nations we come from are very different.    

 We proudly define ourselves as a nation of immigrants - a nation that welcomes  and encourages all those who wish to embrace our national values and add their  culture. That’s why millions of people, ancestors to most of us, took the decision  to leave old ties and familiar surroundings, to depart from families and kinships  and venture into the unknown - so they could be free to work, worship and live  their lives in peace.    

 This flow of immigrants has helped make this country stronger and more  prosperous. We can point to the pioneering genius of Dr Victor Chang, the  business prowess of Frank Lowy and the sporting talent of Hazem El Masri to  name a few.    

 And then there are the quiet acts of countless migrants, which may not have  resulted in fame, but were no less consequential in forging our nation.    

 That’s the promise of our nation - that anyone can write the next chapter of our  story. It doesn’t matter where you come from; what matters is that you believe  in the ideals on which we were founded. In embracing Australia, you can become  Australian. And that enriches all of us.    

 At times, there has been fear and resentment directed toward newcomers,  particularly in periods of economic hardship.    

 And because these issues touch on deeply held convictions - about who we are  as a people, about what it means to be an Australian - these debates often elicit  strong emotions.    

 But the recent Scanlon Foundation Survey found a surprising and refreshing  change in the correlation between unemployment and views on our immigration  intake. In 2014 there have been heightened economic concerns off the back of  increased unemployment and high profile job losses, and with this would be an  expectation that immigration intake is too high.    

 But according to the survey, the reverse occurred with just 35 per cent of  respondents agreeing that the intake is ‘too high’ and 58 per cent considering it  ‘about right’ or ‘too low’.    

 Our challenge therefore is multifaceted. We need to make it possible for people  to live safe and productive lives in their own countries so that migration can be a  choice, not a necessity. And we must make sure that those who are on the move  because of repression and violence can reach safety and find the protection to  which they are entitled.    

 At the same time, we need to work to ensure that economic migration benefits  both sending and receiving countries. Managed properly, migration can benefit  everyone but with global growth slowing and unemployment rising, we need to  be even more focussed in our objectives.    

 We must also do our utmost to promote social harmony and keep tensions  surrounding immigration from turning into discrimination.  Already, the political  discourse has become discouragingly negative in many places, but the recent  Scanlon Foundation Research points to overall positive sentiments towards our  multiculturalism.    

 One year ago I gave my first public speech on Labor’s approach to multicultural  policy.  The general themes have not changed, but my appreciation of the issues  facing ethnic communities has grown. As we now move into the drafting phase  of our policies to take to the Australian people at the next election, we must  inform ourselves from the ground-up; to listen to those who work in the myriad  of institutions and services in their respective fields; to digest the research of  individuals and look for ways in which the substantive findings of important  reports can be implemented.    

 The integration of successive waves of immigrants into our society and workforce  with relatively minor social friction is a remarkable achievement. The reality of  everyday life in a multicultural Australia is that we all have family members,  friends, colleagues and neighbours who have come from widely diverse origins.  And although most of us — including immigrants — want to be accepted as  Australians and have a firm commitment to the institutional framework of our  political and legal system, there is a growing recognition that this does not  preclude us from maintaining those aspects of our cultural heritage which give  meaning to our lives. Indeed it is the vigour of our diversity, and the degree of  interaction between different cultures, that contributes so much to the  uniqueness of the Australian identity today.    

 We must, however, ensure that our immigration program facilitates the  processes of continuing adjustment in the future. Australia’s population will 

 continue to change and we need to create an environment that can  accommodate those changes — so that the rights of the individual are  recognised and the interests of the community advanced.    

 Labor’s policies seek to maximise the contribution — the experience, job skills  and entrepreneurial talents — of all Australians to the economic life of the  community.  They seek to make better use of the qualifications of Australians  born and trained overseas, and to remove the barriers of language, culture,  gender, race or religion which many people from non-English speaking  backgrounds face.    

 By seeking to improve the management and use of our human resources, and  thereby actively contributing to a sustained improvement in our standard of  living, settlement policies serve the interests of us all.    

 The path to this, however, involves a considerable political shift. It means  confidently embracing immigration and moving away from the misguided notion  that the Australian public won't support or accept an increase in migration levels.    

 Multiculturalism does not entail a rejection of Australian values, customs and  beliefs. When you say you’re pro-immigration, this does not negate the values in  Australia of equity, fairness and individual initiative.    

 There remains a need for even more targeted measures in order to ensure that  all members of the community regardless of background are able to make their  maximum contribution to Australia’s development.  I see too many constituents,  many of whom are from Sub-Continent or African backgrounds, who are under-employed.  I have had too many conversations with PhD holders and IT  professionals who are driving taxis around our major cities.    

 An additional problem that is likely to present itself soon and affect the course of  the next ten to forty years is Australia’s aging population. It is estimated that by  2050, almost a quarter of the population will be aged over 65, compared to the  14% recorded at the 2011 census.    

 The large number of baby boomers is set to cause a great drop in workforce  participation rates as their imminent retirement looms, and this age group is  further expected to increase demands in both health and aged care services.    

 The evidence, including the findings of the latest Scanlon Report, supports the  view that immigration is a sensible economic decision that allows us to maintain  our standard of living and care for our ageing population.    

 We must all recognise the deeply important role immigration has played in  helping determine who we are as a nation and as a people.    

 We must all acknowledge that migration is an essential economic asset, which  needs to be flexible enough to adapt to the economic climate whilst also take  into account factors such as skills gaps and an ageing population.     

 Labor is committed to having a real and constructive economic debate around  immigration that will inform the size, composition and framework of the future  program which, in turn, will shape our nation.    

 A skilled migration program - temporary and permanent - will be critical to  ensuring the continued success and prosperity of the Australian economy.    

 We need to only look at our past for evidence of this.    

 Australia’s post-war immigration policy was one of the greatest strategic  decisions this country has made.    

 It was the Chifley Labor Government who opened the doors of Australia to a  great wave of migration.    

 It was a decision that allowed old cultures to flourish again in a new land,  enriching and diversifying Australian society.    

 It was also a decision that provided a great new engine of manpower, a mass of  workers whose energy, experience, and expertise helped build Australia's post-war prosperity to new levels.    

 The changes stemming from this decision are permanent and, whilst we may  have seen a consequent period of general uncertainty and unease, they are, in  my view, almost universally for the better.    

 And it is incumbent that governments set the example for the rest of the nation.    

 The fact is that it is the responsibility of governments to protect the national  interest against the tide of prejudice.    

 Labor has welcomed the Abbott Government’s announcement that Australia will  take 4,400 refugees from Iraq and Syria.  However, given the unfolding  humanitarian crisis, we believe that intake should be new places in addition to  the existing 13,750 places in the Abbott Government’s scaled back humanitarian  refugee program.    

 Australia is only one of about twenty countries worldwide that participates  formally in the UNHCR’s refugee resettlement program by accepting quotas of  offshore, UNHCR-referred, humanitarian entrants each year.    

 For decades Australia has offered a generous resettlement program - the highest  in the world on a per capita basis - even though, of course, the Convention  imposes no requirement for us to do so.    

 Under the former Gillard Labor Government, Australia’s humanitarian program  increased the number of places from 13,750 to 20,000 in line with the  recommendation of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.    

 We did this not because we had to but rather because Labor fundamentally  believes we are a humanitarian nation.    

 We also believe the refugee resettlement program is the best policy approach,  both for Australia and for asylum seekers, providing, as it does, a clear  deterrence to people getting on precarious boats and risking their lives.   

 This increase showed that people can pursue regular options and be safely  referred to resettlement countries such as Australia as part of an orderly  humanitarian program.    

 By reversing this decision, the Abbott Government has flagged that asylum is  simply an issue to be exploited for political gain, regardless of the broader  consequences.    

 While the generosity of Australia’s annual humanitarian intakes is widely  acknowledged, the magnitude of the issues arising from the growing number of  people seeking protection globally poses huge challenges to all destination  countries, including Australia.    

 One of the biggest challenges for the government of any destination country is  to develop asylum policy that focuses on international concerns, not merely  domestic political advantage, and offers sustainable long-term solutions.    

 For Australia, it involves genuine engagement with the key transit countries in  our region such as Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia.    

 It involves collaborating with the UNHCR and other international organisations.    

 And it involves creating and expanding those safer pathways to migration from  persecution and danger to safety.    

 Labor continues to stand for compassion in doing all that is necessary to bring an  end to the loss of life at sea. Labor continues to stand for fairness by working  with bodies such as the UNHCR to determine where best to deploy our  humanitarian program for greatest benefit. And Labor continues to stand for  generosity by advocating an increase in the size of our humanitarian program.    

 There is, however, nothing humanitarian about this Government’s decision to  reduce the scope of a program which helps people who are genuinely in need.     

 There is also nothing humanitarian about the Government axing the Non-contributory Parent visa and Other Family visa category earlier this year.    

 This is a visa which, at very low cost, gives hardworking migrants the hope and  opportunity for their parents to one day join them in Australia.    

 Without this visa category the only other option for migrants' parents to come to  Australia is through the contributory visa category. The contributory parent visa  category can reportedly cost up to $120,000.    

 Given that such a figure is simply unaffordable for most of us, the Abbott  Government slammed the door on thousands of families ever being reunited.    

 Not only was this an unfair act, the Minister for Immigration, snuck this move  through by legislative instrument without any consultation with the community.    

 Labor has always recognised how important these visas are to families on low  and middle-incomes.    

 And that is why Labor moved in the House of Representatives and supported the  successful disallowance of the Abbott Government’s callous abolition of the non-contributory visa and other family visa categories in the Senate.    

 This government seriously underestimates how important these visa categories  have been for Australians. For people to have the right to bring their relatives,  especially their elderly parents out to see out the last years of their lives with  their families in Australia.    

 And these people contribute vastly to Australian society. They perform a variety  of functions. They spend money in our communities, they use local services and  they assist with childcare and homemaking. So the notion that they are a drain  on society is absolutely wrong. They are tremendous contributors to our  Australian community and our economy.    

 I close by urging everyone here to use this conference to focus on the real  questions which will define our future - what kind of Australia do we want to live  in and pass on to our children? And in what ways can an immigration program  help us build that kind of Australia?    

 Having posed these questions let me give you my vision.    

 I want to see an Australia with a modern growing economy; an Australia that is  confidently embedded in the global economy and embracing the dynamism of  our own region.    

 And an Australia renowned for its quality of life which vibrantly reflects our  tenets and belief that all people are entitled to equal opportunity irrespective of  race, colour or creed.    

 With these aims, there is no doubt in my mind of the positive and enriching  contribution to be made by a continuing immigration program, harnessing the  skills of the people of the world to build a stronger Australian economy and  drawing on the strength of their cultural traditions to build a confident, dynamic  and wonderfully diverse Australia.    

 Thank you.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: NICK TRAINOR 0407 078 139   

