---
title: "Address to the 2nd Australia-Sri Lanka Joint Working Group on people-smuggling and transnational crime, Canberra"
date: "2014-04-23"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406907
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3126471%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Address to the 2nd Australia-Sri Lanka Joint Working Group on  people-smuggling and transnational crime 

 Tuesday, 22 April 2014 

 Hyatt Hotel, Canberra 

 Sri Lanka and Australia are committed to working together to combat people  smuggling. People smuggling is an insidious crime which risks the lives of vulnerable  people and threatens the integrity of national borders. 

 Sri Lanka and Australia are working together to disrupt people smuggling syndicates  to deliver strong messages that Australia will not resettle anyone who arrives illegally  by boat, and to improve capacity to address people smuggling and improve border  management. 

 The Sri Lankan authorities are committed to combatting people smuggling and  continue to disrupt people smuggling ventures all over the island. We are very  grateful for the enormous efforts of the Sri Lankan Navy, the Sri Lankan Police Force  and other law enforcement and prosecuting agencies. 

 As Australia's Prime Minister Tony Abbott said during his time in Sri Lanka for  CHOGM, Australia's cooperation with Sri Lanka in the region is as important as it is  effective. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders is Australia's military-led border security initiative.  Operation Sovereign Borders has been set up to stop the boats, to prevent people  risking their lives at sea in the hands of criminals, and to preserve the integrity of  Australia's immigration program. 

 Under this new policy people who seek to illegally enter Australia by boat will not  only never be resettled in Australia but, as a result of our extensive interdiction  policies both on land and at sea, undertaken often in cooperation with our regional  partners such as Sri Lanka, they will not get here. 

 It has now been more than four months since there was a successful maritime  people smuggling venture to Australia. During the same period last year there were  around 100 such ventures with more than 6000 people on board. 

 Our polices are clearly working. Despite the fact that the boats are clearly stopping,  the Australian Government will maintain the intensity of our border operations. 

 Australia will not be changing any of the policies that we have put in place. 

 We will continue to turn back boats where it is safe to do so, which our new  operations have ensured can be done on each occasion. 

 We will continue to invest in our regional partnerships that underpin our regional  deterrence approach. An approach based on the principle that Australia's borders  are stronger when our region's borders are stronger. 

 Those who have arrived previously with refugee claims have and will continue to be  transferred to either Papua New Guinea or Nauru. Those found not to be refugees  have and will continue to be returned to their home country or a country in which  they have a right of residence. 

 From the last boat that arrived in Australia from Sri Lanka, carrying 79 Sri Lankans of  Tamil and Sinhalese ethnicity, all were promptly returned to Sri Lanka, with the  support of the Australian government. 

 We appreciate the assistance given by Sri Lanka in facilitating the return of Sri  Lankan nationals found to have no lawful right to remain in Australia. 

 We both recognise the vital importance of returns in our joint fight against people  smuggling and deterring those at-risk of attempting the dangerous boat journey to  Australia. 

 There is more to be done on this front as there remains in Australia a cohort of  persons claiming Sri Lankan nationality, who arrived under the previous government  after transiting through other countries, and were found not to be refugees, who have  not yet been returned to Sri Lanka. I trust the work of this forum will enable us to  move forward on these issues. Ensuring prompt removal of those who have no  lawful basis to be here, is a critical component of any serious border protection  regime. 

 To address the issue at source, Australia also funds non-government organisations  to implement projects to reduce incentives for displaced Sri Lankans to attempt to  travel to Australia by boat. In 2012-13, DIBP provided $2 million in total to CARE  Australia and the International Organization of Migration (IOM) for projects aimed at  improving health, shelter and livelihood opportunities for displaced persons in Sri  Lanka. The IOM project includes awareness sessions on the perils of irregular  migration to at-risk groups. 

 For those who had already arrived in Australia prior to offshore processing being  restored, we will continue to deny permanent residence to those found to be owed  protection and who entered Australia illegally. 

 These are the policies that are stopping the boats, and they will not be changed. 

 Anyone contemplating joining one of these illegal maritime ventures needs to clearly  understand that people who attempt to come to Australia by boat without a valid visa  will not get what they paid for. There are no exceptions to this. 

 To demonstrate our commitment to our regional partners, today we have signed the  Deed of Transfer of the Bay Class vessels, which is the culmination of a great deal of  cooperation between Australia and Sri Lanka. 

 Gifting of these vessels to the Sri Lanka Navy is as important for Australia as it is for  Sri Lanka, because it strengthens our joint capacity to combat people smuggling in  our region. 

 Not just now, but well into the future. This is about making sure the boats do not start  again. 

 I would like to thank the Government of Sri Lanka for their commitment and support  for this project in making available very senior Sri Lankan Navy staff. This has  included hosting an ACBPS delegation which visited Colombo and toured your very  impressive Naval Base at Trincomalee. 

 The Sri Lankan Navy has demonstrated its high level of professionalism and  commitment throughout the process. Commander of the Navy, Vice Admiral  Colombage recently attended the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) in Perth,  and then travelled to Cairns to inspect the Bay Class vessels and participate in the  flag transfer ceremony for the first vessel. His Excellency the High Commissioner for  Sri Lanka, Admiral Thisarra Samarasinghe, was also able to participate in the  ceremony in Cairns. 

 Senior Sri Lanka Navy officers and crew members have also travelled to Cairns to  undertake familiarisation training as well as operational knowledge transfer. 

 I would like to thank the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, in  particular the hard-working crew members who have been deployed to work with Sri  Lanka Navy to prepare the vessels for transit to Colombo. 

 I want to emphasise that this is much more than a transfer of physical assets. The  process of transferring the vessels to Sri Lanka has provided many opportunities for  relationship building and knowledge transfer in both directions. 

 As I understand it, this even extended to a cricket match between crews in Cairns,  with the Sri Lankan team outperforming the ACBPS crew on the day. 

 The first vessel, formerly Australian Customs and Border Protection Vessel Corio  Bay, now Sri Lanka Navy ship P350, departed Cairns on 5 April. The vessel will  shortly arrive in Colombo. 

 The second vessel, currently ACV Hervey Bay and soon to be SLNS P351, will  transit to Sri Lanka in June. This voyage and its preparation will continue to provide  similar opportunities for bilateral cooperation. 

 The Bay Class vessels have served Australia extremely well, and we trust that they  will provide the same high level of service to the Sri Lankan Government. 

 In concluding my remarks today I also want to reflect on issues that go beyond  people smuggling and address the issues of transnational crime, which is also the  focus of today's discussions. 

 We are very excited about the advances that have been made in our regional trade  and we want to see those changes and those advances continue. 

 Our Trade Minister, our Prime Minster, and our Foreign Minister have just returned  from a very successful visit to Asia and these discussions continue throughout the  region. We are obviously very keen to ensure that we maintain and build on the  commercial relationships that exist between Australia and Sri Lanka. 

 I see great things ahead for the Sri Lankan economy. When we are meeting together  not just to talk about people smuggling, but we are meeting to talk about trade  opportunities and commercial opportunities between our two countries, then we  know the work we have been doing on border security has been paying dividends  and that is really the point. 

 We cannot expect to have a strong trade relationship if we don't have the  fundamentals of strong border controls in place. Because all of the advances that we  are making in communications, transport, technology, all of the things that have  facilitated opportunities for legitimate trade and travel between not only our two  countries but countries throughout the region are providing the same opportunities to  organised criminal networks, as I remarked at the same conference that the  Secretary and I attended last week in Malaysia focusing on those issues. 

 The roads, the fibre, the telecommunications, infrastructure, the internet, all of these  things don't distinguish between a criminal and a legitimate traveller or someone who  engages in legitimate trade. 

 They provide the same opportunities. So while we are increasing the opportunity for  our commercial exchanges. Our risks and our vulnerabilities are also increasing at  the same time. 

 One thing that can really, I think, undermine the economic opportunities that we have  going forward is the ability for transnational criminal networks to undermine and  erode all of the opportunities that are there. These problems come with prosperity.  We hope for a very prosperous future for Sri Lanka but that will also bring up another  element, where criminal networks seek to engage not only in Australia but they will  seek to engage with other countries in the region, and particularly around the Indian  Ocean, and South East Asia where there are also massive changes taking place. 

 As we work on ways to strengthen border management, I know that the Immigration  and Border Protection Department here in Australia is working closely with the Sri  Lankan Department Secretary to ensure that the border management environment,  the border management tools and practices that are deployed in Sri Lanka can only  strengthen. Because when we have strong, safe channels for legitimate travel and  trade then I think they are most effective for sustainable partnerships between the  two countries. 

 On people smuggling we have found a partnership and set of policies that have  worked. I think the challenge for us now is to take those successful partnerships for  people smuggling, maintain them and see the same level of discipline, focus, and  commitment now extended to these many other challenges on our borders, whether  it is for trade or whether it is for travel. 

 So thank you for your participation in this forum today. I thank you for the spirit in  which it is engaged in by all participants and I look forward to the outcomes of this  exchange. 

 

