---
title: "Labor and Greens once again vote to honour people smugglers' promise"
date: "2014-03-27"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211405793
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3077249%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

  Scott Morrison 

 Labor and Greens once again vote to honour people smugglers'  promise 

 Thursday, 27 March 2014 

 Labor has once again joined in the Senate with their partners in border failure the  Greens, voting to fulfil the people smugglers' promise of permanent visas for illegal  boat arrivals, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison  said today. 

 'The government won a thumping endorsement from Australians to restore our full  suite of border protection policies including temporary protection visas, yet Labor and  the Greens remain welded to supporting the promises of people smugglers,' Minister  Morrison said. 

 'Labor's reckless vote in the Senate today to allow illegal boat arrivals to receive  permanent protection visas was irresponsible and shows they have learnt nothing  after their five years of unprecedented cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders. 

 'Labor claims to actually want to stop illegal boat arrivals and yet they don't actually  support the measures that are necessary to achieve this, be it the government's  maritime operations under Operation Sovereign Borders or temporary protection  visas. 

 'It has now been 98 days since a successful people smuggling venture to Australia. 

 'It is critical that people smugglers be prevented from boasting about success in  having people they placed on boats receiving permanent visas. Labor does not  understand this. They want to re-open the pandora's box on border protection failure,  reintroducing the pull factor of permanent residency in Australia for illegal boat  arrivals. 

 'Despite Labor and the Greens' determination to give people smugglers what they  want, the Coalition Government will not be providing permanent visas to illegal boat  arrivals. 

 'The government has capped the number of places available to onshore applicants  under Australia's refugee and humanitarian programme consistent with our proposed  planning levels. This will ensure the government can, for the 2013/14 refugee and  humanitarian programme year, set aside 11 000 resettlement places for offshore  applicants which includes an additional 4000 places for the Special Humanitarian  Program. 

 'Our refugee and humanitarian programme is now back under the control of the  Australian people, not people smugglers. The government makes no apology for 

 prioritizing places under our programme to those whose quest for resettlement in  Australia was impossible under Labor,' Minister Morrison said. 

