---
title: "PM Abbott must sack Scott Morrison and close Manus Island"
date: "2014-02-22"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404449
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3017273%22
---

 The Australian Greens   

 Sunday, 23 February 2014   

 PM Abbott must sack Scott Morrison and close Manus Island - Greens    

 The Australian Greens have called for Scott Morrison to be sacked from the Ministry following  revelations that the violent attacks on Manus Island took place inside the refugee prison camp,  resulting in the death of asylum seeker Reza Berati.         

 “The Prime Minister must sack the Minister and close his cruel refugee prisons immediately,” Greens  Leader Christine Milne said.    

 “Tony Abbott must take personal responsibility for the failure of the morally bankrupt and cruel  offshore processing regime that was started by Labor and embraced by his government.    

 “Tony Abbott had a direct line of duty of care to Reza Berati and he is now dead. He must take  personal responsibility. Blaming the victims of this tragedy is cowardice.    

 “We will continue to see tragedy, cruelty and unrest in these refugee prison camps until Tony Abbott  shuts them down.”    

 Greens immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said: "It is clear that the  government are trying to cover up how brutal the attacks on refugees inside the Manus Island camp  really were. This is an appalling abuse of government power, and Scott Morrison should be forced to  resign.     

 "The Greens will move for a Parliamentary inquiry into the incident as soon as the Senate resumes  because we all know that the government’s internal investigation will be a white wash.    

 "Keeping the gulags open is untenable. They must be closed, they must be closed now.    

 "The security of refugees and staff can not be guaranteed, even inside the camp. There must be an  immediate halt to all further deportations of refugees to Manus Island."    

 Media contacts:  Senator Milne - Peter Stahel 0437 587 562   Senator Hanson-Young - Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760    

 

 

