---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 2 December 2014: UN World Food Program; aid cuts; UN Environment Programme cuts; ADF wages"
date: "2014-12-02"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
  - "UN World Food Program"
  - "aid cuts"
  - "UN Environment Programme cuts"
  - "ADF wages"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415966
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3541767%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2014    

 Subject/ s: UN W orld Food Program, Aid Cuts, UN Environment  Programme cuts, ADF w ages.  TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: We’ve heard very  disturbing reports today that the UN’s World Food Program has run out of  money. Effectively, that means 1.7 million Syrian refugees are going into the  worst part of winter with no help to buy food. At the moment, vouchers are  provided to refugees in Lebanon, in Turkey, in Jordan, Iraq and Egypt, a very  modest amount each month to help refugees buy food in local stores. There  are about 3.5 million refugees displaced from Syria and about six million  internally displaced. The burden on neighbouring countries has been  enormous with over a million people, for example, moving to Lebanon which  is a country of just over four million people. It is like a million people moving  to Sydney and having to find accommodation, food, schooling, health facilities  and so on for all of those refugees. The UN World Food Program was  providing some assistance in the form of vouchers so that those families could  go to local stores and buy food locally just to help them get by. The World  Food Program's run out of money. They need $64 million to be able to  continue supporting those 1.7 million refugees to the end of the year. Without  that money, these people will go hungry. They will go hungry if you can  imagine these countries going into winter, in some places snow-bound, in  many places in very insecure accommodation, facing no ability to feed  themselves. Unfortunately, Australia has been pretty poor in its response to  the Syrian crisis. In the last year, we have provided around $35 million. When  Labor was in government that figure was $100 million. So Australia's  assistance to the refugee crisis in Syria has actually declined as the crisis has  worsened. We see the effect of the cuts to the aid budget in our inability to 

 provide a level of funding to these desperately needy people. When Labor  was in government we doubled the aid budget. We went from around $2.9  billion to around $5.8 billion. Since the Coalition has been in government,  they have cut $7.6 billion from the aid budget and in the last couple of days,  you have heard talk that even more money might be cut from the aid budget.  It shows up in our inability to meet the needs of Syrian refugees through the  UN World Food Program and other appeals for funding. It shows up also in  cuts like the one that has been reported today to the UN Environment  Programme. This is a program that helps developing countries develop in a  way that is environmentally sustainable. For example, one program in India  that has helped 100,000 people in 18,000 households get access to solar  power, obviously good for the environment but also good for the family  budget to have those families relying less on very expensive fuels for  electricity production in their local communities. So, you see the effect of the  aid cuts to our inadequate response to the Syrian refugee crisis. You see the  effect on programs like the UN Environment Programme which also  incidentally helps countries around the globe measure how they are going in  terms of carbon pollution reduction. It is pretty hard not to draw a link  between Tony Abbott's spectacularly unsuccessful effort to keep climate  change off the G20 agenda, the Government's refusal to contribute to the  Green Fund that many of our partner countries have contributed to and this  very petty cut to the UN Environment Programme that cuts 80 per cent of the  funding of this organisation. Any questions?  JOURNALIST: The Government would argue that if it was to increase that  target, the funding would have to come from elsewhere. Where would Labor  get that extra funding from?  PLIBERSEK: If you mean specifically if it were to increase funding to Syria,  where would the money come from? It should come from an aid budget that  is not cut to the bone in contrast to the clear commitments made before the  election by the Abbott Government. The Abbott Government said before the  election that they would continue to index aid funding by the CPI, consumer  price index, that it would continue to increase. They have cut to the bone,  $7.6 billion cut, which is the largest single cut in the Federal Budget. So  where should the money from? It should come from fewer cuts to the aid  budget. If you're talking about more broadly this notion that Julie Bishop  mentioned at the World AIDS Day meeting where she said well, if we can't  get our cuts through the Senate then we will come back for another bite at  the aid budget, then I think it is very important to say that Labor has already  supported about $20 billion worth of measures that improve the bottom line  for this Government. We have supported measures for example that tighten  means testing on a number of programs. It is a bit rich for the Government to  continue to blame everyone but themselves for the worsening state of the  Federal Budget. We had before the election both Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey  saying no surprises, no excuses. Joe Hockey saying very clearly, the Budget's  our responsibility from day one, no excuses. I take full responsibility for the  Budget. Now they are looking around for anyone to blame but themselves.  But you’ve got to remember this is the Government that has basically doubled  the deficit, they have given for example, almost $9 billion to the Reserve Bank 

 of Australia. Money that the Reserve Bank didn't ask for, and didn't need, and  is now repaying in the form of dividends. They have changed the Budget  parameters to blow out the deficit. They have - [divison bells ring] is that a  green or red bell? That is a green bell. Just let me start that section again.  This is the Government that has doubled the deficit since coming to power.  They have given, for example, $9 billion to the Reserve Bank, money that the  Reserve didn't ask for and doesn't need and is now repaying in the form of  dividends. They have made massive spending commitments like a $20 billion  paid parental leave scheme and all the while they are looking around for  someone to blame for their economic mismanagement.  JOURNALIST: Most of the Government's budget measures have delivered  damaging political domestic political consequences for the Government. The  aid budget cuts, despite being among the biggest, have barely caused a ripple  domestically for the Government. Is cutting the aid budget a short of  consequence-free option for any Government and if so what does that say  about the Australian public's attitude towards aid and how much they actually  care about it?  PLIBERSEK: I don't think it is a consequence-free cut because cutting the  aid budget contributes to insecurity and instability in our region and around  the world. Of course Australians have been extremely concerned when they  see, for example, the girls that were kidnapped in - by Boko Haram in Nigeria.  There is an outpouring of community response to events like that, to natural  disasters and so on. Cutting the aid budget seriously compromises our ability  to respond to those crises. So I think that the Australian community do want  to respond generously and effectively to the crises they see around the world.  The Australian community also understands that the best way that we can  have a stable and peaceful environment is for countries that are dealing with  poverty and instability to be lifted out of that poverty and instability and that  Australia has a role in doing that. We have trading partners today, like South  Korea for example, that used to be aid recipients from Australia are now  countries we are signing trade agreements with because of the way that they  have developed their economies over time. That is our hope for all of the  countries that we have an aid relationship with. I think it is also very  important to look at countries like the United Kingdom, where there has been  very clear bipartisan support for reaching aid targets. There has been political  leadership on both sides and I think sadly, we used to have that in Australia.  It was John Howard who committed Australia to the 0.5 per cent of gross  national income target for our aid budget. John Howard committed Australia  to helping achieve the millennium development goals. That bipartisanship has  been lost under Tony Abbott. Unfortunately, Julie Bishop looks like she is  going to be rolled a third time in ERC when it comes to cuts in her own  portfolio. It is disturbing to see how far backwards Australia has gone.  JOURNALIST: Labor wants to spend more on defence pay and more on the  ABC and more on education and more on foreign aid. What priority do you  give foreign aid in that mix?  PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s - there are certainly a number of calls that we  will have to make closer to the next election. There have been a massive  number of cuts under this Government, higher education, school education, 

 hospitals, GPs, foreign aid is obviously a very serious one of those. But here is  a couple of things to remember. I said earlier that Labor has supported the  Government in improving their Budget bottom line by $20 billion. It is worth  noting also that the Government has actually reversed around $20 billion  worth of Labor savings and revenue measures from when we were in  government. You look at things like the high income superannuation changes  that we made and other savings measures over our period of government.  The tax avoidance measures that we tried to introduce to prevent companies  offshoring their tax liabilities. And these are savings that Labor was making in  government that the Government, the now Government, has reversed. So it’s  not-  JOURNALIST: So will you return that measure?  PLIBERSEK: I’m not going to start talking about individual measures. The  point is, that we have supported tens of billions of dollars’ worth of the  Government’s savings and they have reversed billions of dollars of savings  that Labor made when in government.  JOURNALIST: You’re happy to talk about individual measures when it comes  to government legislation that you don’t like, why won’t you speak about  individual measures that you may bring back to pay for those things?  PLIBERSEK: Well, because we’re a long way from having those discussions  right now.  JOURNALIST: The cuts to UNEP were actually announced in the budget -  PLIBERSEK: Sorry, the cuts that -  JOURNALIST: The cuts that United Nations Environment Program were  announced in the Budget. Why is Labor reacting to it now?  PLIBERSEK: Well because it’s been drawn to our attention amongst a  number of cuts in the foreign affairs portfolio. It has been extraordinarily  difficult to get straight answers out of this Government on where the cuts will  be; $7.6 billion worth of cuts. We can get country by country figures, we’ve  had extraordinarily difficult times getting program by program answers from  this Government, we’ve had two lots of Senate estimates where we’ve put  questions on notice, there have been delays and obfuscations from day one  about the real effect of these cuts.  JOURNALIST: On Syria, the Government has announced some 4,000  positions for refugees from Syria and Iraq that arguably wouldn’t have existed  under Labor’s policy where all those places went to people who came on  boats-     

 PLIBERSEK: That is simply not the case. The number of positions that the  Government have announced, 2,200 from Iraq and 2,200 from Syria actually  increase the number that came virtually not all. This is pretty close to the  numbers that were coming from those countries in any case. They come as  part of the existing 13,000 odd places, they’re not additional to the number of  humanitarian entrants that the Australian Government is proposing to take.  There’s some - fact there’s a decrease in the number from 20,000 under  Labor to 13,000 or under this Coalition Government. So arguably there are  fewer people coming from those countries.  JOURNALIST: But wasn’t that quota filled with people coming by boat?  PLIBERSEK: And some of those were Iraqi and some of those were Syrian. 

 JOURNALIST: But 4,000 of them?  PLIBERSEK: I can’t tell you the numbers for the last year but I can tell you  that from our Immigration spokespeople, the numbers are very little different  to the numbers that were reported in any case and they are part of the  existing quota, they are not additional to the quota. And you’re talking about  3.5 million people who are now displaced from Syria, 6 million internally  displaced. Countries like Lebanon, with a population of 4.3 million with over a  million refugees. Jordan, a population of something over 6 million, over a  million refugees.  JOURNALIST: So, obviously the $7.6 billion in cuts in foreign aid over the  last year or so have set us back considerably on reaching the 0.5 per cent of  GNI target. What sort of trajectory would Labor be looking at in government  to get us back on track for that target? What kind of years? How many years?  PLIBERSEK: It will depend on whether there are further cuts announced as  we fear in coming days to the aid budget, but I can say that we are already  very, very far away from anything near the 0.5 per cent of GNI. We’re looking  at less than 0.3 per cent in coming years, perhaps 0.28 per cent or 0.29 per  cent of GNI. We are a long way from 0.5 per cent and it will be difficult to  reach that target.  JOURNALIST: So are we talking about another decade?  JOURNALIST: On another matter, can I just ask about the Greens? It’s very  gender specific. [inaudible] As a parent, can you see any harm in girls playing  with Barbies and boys playing with toy guns?  PLIBERSEK: I think parents can make  whatever decisions they like, I trust  parents to make those decisions. What I can say as my experience as a  parent is kids make up their own minds and you can try not giving guns to  boys but they pick up any little bit of stick or lego or newspaper and use them  to play gun games and it’s - good luck to parents who think they are actually  going to change that.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]    

 PLIBERSEK: Well if the reports are correct, I think any Australian would be  absolutely appalled to think that that would be the case. I think any  Australian would expect the full force of law to be used against anyone who  has allowed or facilitated a nine year old girl being taken out of Australia for a  forced marriage. There is no excuse, no explanation that is acceptable if  indeed the reports are true. As to any government program, I haven’t seen  the details of the proposal, but anything that strengthens the legal framework  that would prevent such a thing happening, and anything that strengthens  the hand of many people campaigning in our communities to ensure this does  not happen of course would be welcome.    

 JOURNALIST: Finally, one more question. Defence pay - Labor's decided to  [inaudible] why is that and is it going to go further?  PLIBERSEK: Well Labor has been saying all along that defence personnel  deserve to have their wages at least keep pace with the cost of living. What  the Government’s proposed is a cut to the leave and conditions of defence 

 personnel and insultingly the wage increase that doesn’t even keep up with  the cost of living increases that defence families are facing. We took  yesterday a petition of 60,000 signatures to that effect in the Federal  Parliament. Labor has been very strongly opposed to this completely  inadequate pay offer to defence personnel, particularly when we know that  those people are often facing the risk of traveling overseas, risking their lives,  leaving their families behind at Christmas and difficult times like that. The bill  in the Senate is a reflection of Labor policy which is that this pay offer was  inadequate- Thank you everybody.  ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

