---
title: "Foreign Minister's visit to Jordan and Lebanon"
date: "2014-04-23"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406884
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3126415%22
---

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  

 FOREIGN MINISTER’S VISIT TO JORDAN AND LEBANON     

 In my first visit to Jordan and Lebanon as Foreign Minister I have highlighted Australia’s  strong and continuing support for Jordan and Lebanon as they address the challenges  caused by Syria’s tragic and continuing humanitarian crisis.     

 Jordan is host to over half a million Syrian refugees and I was provided with first hand  stories into the ongoing crisis during a visit to a UNHCR refugee registration centre, which  receives thousands of refugees on a daily basis.     

 In Lebanon, where over one million registered Syrian refugees make up one fifth of the  country’s total population, I met with UNHCR and UNICEF to discuss Australian support  for those affected by the Syrian crisis.     

 During the visit I announced $20 million in funding from the Australian Government to be  provided to the United Nations’ ‘No Lost Generation’  initiative to help build better futures  for these children by improving their education and addressing the violence and  displacement they have faced. [Press release 21 April 2014]     

 In Jordan I met His Majesty King Abdullah, Prime Minister Abdullah Ensour,   Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh and the Director of the General Intelligence Department,  General Faisal Al Shoubaki.     

 We discussed Australia’s close work with Jordan on the UN Security Council, including to  address the humanitarian crisis in Syria. We also discussed developments in the Middle  East Peace Process, in which Jordan plays a key supporting role.     

 In Lebanon, where I welcomed the formation of a new Lebanese Government in February,  I met President Michel Sleiman, Speaker of the Parliament Nabih Berri, Prime Minister  Tammam Salam and Foreign Minister Gebran Bassil.     

 Australia has a strong and established relationship with Lebanon, underpinned by close  community ties with 400,000 Australians of Lebanese descent.   I reaffirmed to the new  Government Australia’s close cooperation with Lebanese authorities in countering people  smuggling, as well as our cooperation on law enforcement and counter-terrorism, which  remain of concern to both countries.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office 02 6277 7589   DFAT Media 02 6261 1555  

