---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 25 September 2014: Tony Abbott's broken promise on submarines; push to weaken the Racial Discrimination Act; national security; Cory Bernardi's comments; Temporary Protection Visas; NAPLAN; Senate; George Christensen's comments; George Brandis"
date: "2014-09-25"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Tony Abbott's broken promise on submarines"
  - "push to weaken the Racial Discrimination Act"
  - "national security"
  - "Cory Bernardi's comments"
  - "Temporary Protection Visas"
  - "NAPLAN"
  - "Senate"
  - "George Christensen's comments"
  - "George Brandis"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414441
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3447455%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  THURSDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2014  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA    

 SUBJECT/ S: Tony Abbott’s broken promise on submarines; Push to  w eaken the Racial Discrimination Act; National Security; Cory  Bernardi’s comments; Temporary Protection Visas; NAPLAN; Senate;  George Christensen’s comments; George Brandis.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I’ve just had an opportunity  to talk to Australia’s shipbuilding workers, their representatives. It is a disgrace  that the Abbott Government is so cynical that they think they can get away with  lying to the Australian people before the election about building ships and  submarines in Australia. Then after the election just totally changing the whole  deal and misleading Australians. We should be building our submarines in  Australia in the future.   

 I also just want to make a couple of brief comments about the unhelpful  intervention by number one Liberal Senate candidate and representative, Senator  Cory Bernardi in South Australia. We know these are difficult and challenging  times for Australians at the moment with national security and domestic terror,  but Australia’s had challenging times before and we’ll have challenging times  again. What the Australian people expect from their elected representatives is  calmness, is wisdom, is sensible guidance for the future.    

 Senator Bernardi re-opening a proposition to water down protections against  hate speech in Australia at this time is dramatically unhelpful to maintaining  calm. We know that we can’t defeat terrorism by military action alone. That  terrorism wins when hatred and tolerance spread their wings. We cannot at this 

 time be talking about watering down protections against hate speech when what  we're trying to do is defeat the hateful ideology that we see in domestic  terrorism and the international events in northern Iraq and Syria.    

 So I call upon the Abbott Government to ask Senator Bernardi who's a Liberal,  he’s not a member of the crossbench, he's not an individual independent  senator, to withdraw their support for watering down laws which currently  protect all Australians against hate speech. Happy to take any questions people  have.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, would you back Cory Bernardi's other point that the  Burqa should be banned from Parliament House?    

 SHORTEN: No, this is a red herring debate. We know and every reasonable  Australian knows that there is a very few, a very few misguided Australians for  reasons we can't fully understand, brought up in this marvellous country, who've  been attracted to an extreme and fanatical ideology. There's no honour in crime  and violence. There's no dignity in inflicting death here. But on the other hand, if  we want to starve extremists of oxygen, we don’t, this country doesn't have  time to play cheap, rabble-rousing games. What we need now from  the mainstream political parties of Australia is moderation, not extremism, is  tolerance, not intolerance, is compassion, not just trying to divide this community  further.    

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible question]    

 SHORTEN: Yes, the Prime Minister should pull Cory Bernardi into line, whether  or not he does it privately or publicly, I really don't care. What I want them to do  though is to disassociate, this is the Government of Australia. The Government of  Australia needs to disassociate itself from the actions of a senior member of its  Senate team. They need to disassociate themselves. Whether or not they ring  up privately and say, you know, yank Cory off the stage and say you're not doing  this mate, or whether or not they do it publicly, for me it's the result that counts.  We need unity in Australia at the moment. We don't need people who should  know better fuelling and fanning flames of intolerance.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Prime Minister in New York has said that the air  strikes that the US has done in tandem with Middle Eastern countries in Syria are  justified by collective self-defence and he’s left the door open for us to consider  our involvement. Do you still believe there should be no Australian involvement  in air strikes in Syria? Or are you open to developing as the situation changes?    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, in all my discussions with the Prime Minister, and  I again put on record as he has done with me, I put on record my appreciation 

 for his cooperation and forthright nature of our individual discussions and I think,  I will come to your question but I think this point should be made anyway.  Australians should be reassured that no matter what disagreements Tony  Abbott and I have about the Budget or other matters in Australia, he and I have  been working very well together about exchanging information and working  towards the best interests of the nation. Going to your specific question about  Syria, the Government have said to me that there is no case for  military intervention in Syria, and they haven't told me anything to the contrary.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, if the Government signs some kind of deal  with Japan or Germany on submarines is there anything you could do if you won  power? Would you unravel such a deal and go back to committing 12 subs in  Adelaide?    

 SHORTEN: If I could just go to the basis of that question Tory to begin with:  part of our concern is that the Government doesn't seem interested in letting the  Germans tender or indeed our home-grown Australian Submarine Corporation  tender. I think you raise a very relevant point at the outset of this whole  discussion, which is why on earth is the Government not getting the people  who currently build the submarines to submit costings? Why on earth, if the  Germans have got a submarine which may be viable for our uses here, are they  not asking them to submit propositions? Going to the further issue which is I  think about contracts - this would be a 40-year commitment. The contracts  would be in many different phases. Labor will respect any contracts which  are signed, but let's not kid ourselves that there is no, this Government does not  have a single-page contract for 12 submarines, for $30 billion and that's the end  of the matter.    

 We'll of course honour any contracts that they enter into but I get the impression  that a lot of homework hasn't been done about this whole Japanese  sub proposition. And I mean I think the question has to be asked of the  Federal Government: why did they stand up last year, I remember at least one  date, May the 8th,  David Johnston the Defence Minister, then opposition minister  who said they would build the submarines here. Tony Abbott has also said they’d  build the submarines here. How on earth have we got to such a low level in this  country that a Prime Minister of Australia can say and do anything in  Opposition and then tries to pretend that he never said those things when  he gets into Government. It's not good enough for jobs, it’s not good enough for  our technology, it's not good enough for the future of our submarines in  Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: On temporary protection visas and the announcement today,  do you think that the proposal will see many people get permanent residency?    

 SHORTEN: I'd be interested to know what Scott Morrison said in answer to  that question. As he, I think he said no-one will get permanent residency. What  worries me is that the government's just come up with keeping 30,000 people in  limbo, just prolonging the uncertainty of what happens to them. Labor  in principle doesn't support keeping tens of thousands of refugees in limbo, and  that's what these TPVs do. We're always interested in what is the pathway to  citizenship; now I don't know if Morrison's conned Palmer or if Palmer has  conned Morrison or there's a meeting of the minds. I don't know. We'll wait and  see the detail. But for us, Labor's got a principled position, how on earth can this  country have 30,000-plus people stuck in limbo and that's what Morrison's telling  us this deal will continue to do.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, a new report has showed moving NAPLAN on-line is  feasible and beneficial for students. Does the Opposition support that?    

 SHORTEN: We'll have to see the detail of that report. In terms of NAPLAN, we  do believe that NAPLAN was a good idea. We're pleased that the  Government seems to be moving away from its traditional opposition to it. But  we'll consider this matter in this report in due time.    

 JOURNALIST: You have got an AFP officer 30 metres behind you carrying  an assault rifle, do you think that’s going to be a permanent feature of security  at Parliament House now?    

 SHORTEN: First of all, it’s a good opportunity - and I thank you for your  question - to talk about the AFP. The AFP don’t always get some of the attention  and credit that their state police colleagues get. But there are thousands of AFP  officers both here and overseas who do a remarkable job in difficult  circumstances. So I am a big supporter of the AFP. I had the privilege of talking  to the wounded officer’s family yesterday. They’ve been, well the AFP have  certainly been supporting their wounded officer, just as VicPol has been  supporting their Victorian police officer. In terms of the security arrangements of  Parliament, we will just go on the best advice of the experts, and that’s as it  should be.    

 JOURNALIST: Your Senator Joe Bullock, who is incidentally just over there on  the phone, has said that he plans to support legislation banning Medicare-funded  abortions based on gender selection. Are you comfortable with that?    

 SHORTEN: It’s a conscience vote, we know that, and I think it’s important that  MPs get a chance, all the Senators gets a chance, to have their say in the Senate  -  

 

 JOURNALIST: You expect there will be a vote? 

 

 SHORTEN: I might ask my colleague, Senator Conroy, who is our Deputy  Leader in the Senate, to update people on this more.    

 SENATOR STEPHEN CONROY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Look,  there’s a debate around a number of issues that are very relevant there, but it’s  a conscience vote, it’s always been a conscience vote and so we have people  who have very strong views on both sides of this argument. So this is normal, it  happens all the time in the Senate on issues involving life, so there’s no angst  between Senators even in the same parties. Everyone respects -    

 JOURNALIST: Do you expect there’ll be a vote?    

 CONROY: I’m not sure, I haven’t seen the speakers list. I would anticipate that  there’ll be a lot of interest and a lot of people wanting to speak on this issue, but  how long they speak for, how many are speaking, that’s just a matter for the  Senate and the Senators’ consciences.    

 JOURNALIST: Is this a debate that’s warranted in the 21st century?  CONROY: Well people have strong views on this and what the Labor Party have  done and I think the Liberals have the same position is that we respect the  conscience vote on these issues that the fundamental issues that the ALP’s  National Executive has ruled on and so people are entitled to raise this. There  are people in the community who have strong views on this and people in the  Parliament who represent those views and that’s as it should be.    

 JOURNALIST: How will you vote Senator Conroy, if there’s one?   

 CONROY: I haven’t had a chance to consider the issue yet. I’ve always  supported the right for there to be abortions on Medicare, so I myself wouldn’t  be supporting any attempt to ban that. But I respect the right of my colleagues  and good friends who have a different position on this.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, George Christensen has likened [inaudible] Far  North Queensland to terrorists that are trying to protect the Great Barrier Reef,  what do you think about his comments?     

 SHORTEN: I think the Government’s used the term ‘Team Australia’ a lot. I’m  worried about emergence of ‘Team Idiot’. Bernardi, Christensen, people who are  just, I don’t know what book they’re reading from but it’s not any book that I’d  want to pick up. I’ve got no time for high handed extreme green tactics, but let’s  face it, this week our focus has been on national security and terrorism,  I think  they’re very unwise words from this chap. I don’t know if he’s just a headline 

 hunter but I just caution that Australia’s got serious issues to deal with in this  Parliament and we don’t need an outbreak of ‘Team Idiot’.       JOURNALIST: On that point, George Brands said yesterday that Australia’s  facing a more immediate threat than possibly during the Cold War, do you think  that’s, that’s true or helpful that comment?  SHORTEN: I’m not sure that the Cold War immediately is an easy comparison to  make to the current conflict based on extreme sectarianism. What I would just  say in closing is what people expect from their Parliamentarians is that we help  guide them sensibly through complex times. Intolerance is not defeated by being  more intolerant. Hatred is not defeated by being more hateful. I would just  encourage, it doesn’t matter if you’re Liberal, Labor, Green, whatever,  crossbencher; just if your comments not value adding about where this  community needs to go perhaps you should go into a room on your own and say  it to the mirror and spare the rest of us your thought bubbles. Thanks.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

