---
title: "A new force protecting Australia's borders: address to the Lowy Institute for International Policy, Sydney"
date: "2014-05-09"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3155321%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 A new force protecting Australia's borders 

 Friday, 09 May 2014 

 Address to the Lowy Institute for International Policy, Sydney 

 Good afternoon. 

 Today I am announcing sweeping new changes to how we protect and manage our  borders, building on our success to date in stopping the boats. 

 These reforms will both enhance our national security and create an even stronger  national economy. 

 Our border is not just a line on a map. Our border is a national asset. It holds  economic, social and strategic value for our nation. 

 Our borders define a space within which, as sovereign nation states, we can apply  the rule of law, operate our democracy, conduct our commerce, foster free markets,  establish property rights, create the space for civil society, enable expression of  culture and provide for the freedom and liberties of all of our citizens. 

 Our border creates the space for us to be who we are and to become everything we  can be as a nation. 

 Border security is the platform upon which we enable the seamless flow of people  and goods legitimately across our borders that is critical to Australia's success as an  open trading economy and that has arguably made us the world's most successful  immigration nation. 

 Maintaining our border as a secure platform for legitimate trade, travel and migration  is what border protection is all about. 

 Protecting our borders requires a range of functions to manage the flow of people  and goods across a border continuum, not just a border entry point. 

 An end to end approach to process is needed with actions occurring pre-border  (offshore) where authority for entry is sought, at the border where verification of that  authority and other checks such as identity occur and post border (onshore) where  compliance with the entry authority is enforced. 

 These functions range from seeking to shape the offshore environment that can give  to rise to border risks through prevention and disruption activities, international  cooperation, intelligence gathering and analysis, through to operations on the border  including inspections, identity checks and maritime patrols and enforcement and  compliance activities on shore. 

 Like national defence, protecting Australia's borders is core business for any national  government and has always been afforded a top priority by the Coalition. 

 Under the Abbott Government, immigration and customs have been combined into a  single Cabinet portfolio that has permanent status on the National Security  Committee of Cabinet. 

 We are a national security portfolio, with a strong focus on law enforcement that  delivers a significant economic dividend to the nation. 

 Our most immediate border task upon coming to government has been to stop the  boats. 

 Prior to the election, many said the Coalition's border policies would not work and  could not work. They said the boats couldn't be stopped, the push factors were too  strong, it would never be safe, the smugglers would always find a way around it.  They were wrong. Our polices are clearly working. 

 We are doing what we said we would do and we are getting the results we said we  would. The boats are stopping. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders was established, bringing together 15 different  agencies under a central operational command, ably led by Lt General Campbell, to  direct and drive the implementation of our plans. 

 We are turning back boats where it is safe to do so. By placing safety at the top of  our operational requirements, we have established safe and lawful operational  procedures, consistent with our international obligations and domestic laws and  ensured a safe platform for return on each occasion. 

 Asylum claims for illegal maritime arrivals are being processing off shore by the  Papua New Guinean and Nauruan Governments at processing centres on Nauru  and Manus Island, where I can confirm that refugee status determinations have now  been handed down at Manus Island and are imminent on Nauru. 

 We have had to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in additional facilities and  services, ignored by the previous government, to expand and bring these facilities up  to standard, especially for families and children, and with particular reference to  health and security. We have radically changed the contracting arrangements and  replaced the contracted service providers put in place by Labor. 

 We are denying permanent visas to those who had already arrived illegally by boat  and are part of the backlog of almost 30 000 legacy cases, that were not resolved by  the previous government, who had not progressed processing of claims for people  arriving as far back as August 2012. 

 We are engaging comprehensively in our region - with both source and transit  countries. We have committed over $100 million in regional collaboration initiatives,  including law enforcement collaboration, immigration systems and gifting patrol  vessels, that have one simple objective - deterrence. We have been implementing 

 the regional deterrence framework that I announced and outlined in Opposition in  this very room. 

 This is now the fifth consecutive month during which there has not been a single  successful maritime people smuggling venture to Australia. 

 A year ago this would have been unthinkable, which was true under the previous  government. Their last two immigration Ministers, at their best, could not stretch this  achievement to a full calendar week - even months after the introduction of their  PNG announcement. 

 Immediately after the introduction of our turn back policy in late December, the way  to Australia was closed and it has remained closed. 

 This is not to say that from time to time some may try. Try they will and have, but  they have also failed and will continue to fail, so long as we keep the policies and the  resolve that has delivered us this success. 

 The smugglers are telling their prospective customers to wait for a change of policy.  Any change in any of these areas, creates a product for the people smugglers to sell.  There will be no such change. 

 Our success to date has delivered significant dividends, in both humanitarian and  economic terms. 

 People are no longer dying at sea. There were almost 1200 deaths at sea following  the Labor Government decision to abolish the successful border protection policies  of the Howard Government. 

 20 000 additional places within our refugee and humanitarian programme for special  humanitarian visas have been freed up over this year and the next four years, by  ensuring their places are not taken by those who came illegally by boat. More than  15 000 people were denied these places under the previous government as their  permanent visas were given to those who came by boat. 

 This is the humanitarian dividend of the Coalition's stronger border policies. 

 In the budget there will be $2.5 billion in savings following the collapse in illegal boat  arrivals to Australia as a result of our polices. This is in stark contrast to the  cumulative budget blowouts over the forward estimates under the previous  government of more than $11.5 billion. 

 In addition we will close a further 6 detention centres, opened by Labor as result of  their border failures. This will save a further $280 million over the budget and forward  estimates. This is in addition to the closure of the four other centres we have already  announced. 

 We will be closing centres at Berrimah in Darwin, Darwin Airport Lodge,  Inverbrackie, Aqua and Lilac compounds at Christmas Island and Curtin in Western  Australia. All of these centres were reopened by Labor as part of a border failure led 

 detention centre revolution. I will be shutting these centres down over the next twelve  months. 

 This is the fiscal dividend of the Coalition's stronger border protection policies. 

 But there must and will be another dividend - a reform dividend - reforming not just  how we continue to protect against the threat of people smuggling in the future, after  Operation Sovereign Borders is stood down - so the boats don't come back - but to  sustainably address our many other border threats and challenges into the future. 

 Border protection does not start and stop with stopping the boats. 

 Organised criminals will pedal anything from which they can profit - people, drugs,  guns or other illicit substances. And not everyone who comes and goes through our  airports every day visits with benign intent. 

 We also know that the sophistication of criminal activity, particularly trans-national  organised activity, continues to evolve. It is placing pressure across our borders and  is searching for a weak point through which to pass. 

 The threat of transnational crime is real, and growing. 

 The Australian Crime Commission, in its Organised Crime Threat Assessment, has  found that globalisation has been embraced and is being exploited by transnational  organised criminal groups, which are increasingly able to capitalise on the way in  which globalisation is greatly expanding international communication, cross-border  linkages, trade, travel, investment and financial flows. 

 Dr David Kilcullen, a leading Australian counter-insurgency expert and practitioner  recently outlined the four powerful mega-trends that are the driving forces behind  the expansion of transnational crime; global population growth, urbanisation, coastal  settlement and global connectivity - all prevalent in South-East Asia. 

 Just as we offer economic opportunity to legitimate traders, investors and the  communities we service across the region, we also create opportunity for those who  would seek it for their own criminal gain. 

 Criminals use the same fibre, the same ships, the same mail, the same containers,  the same ports, the same roads, the same internet as legitimate traders. 

 The internet enables global networking, and has been the primary technological  driver behind the significant increases in legitimate trade that have emerged over the  last decade. This development has enabled the establishment of global 'virtual black  markets' for illegal and illicit goods such as drugs, firearms, identity documents and  child exploitation material. The Australian Customs and Border Protection Service,  for instance, is seeing an alarming rise in what are termed 'scatter importations' of  drugs, ordered through online forums and delivered unwittingly by legitimate  distributors such as air express couriers and Australia Post. 

 And where high-tech crime options fail, traditional cash movements are employed. 

 We witnessed this in January when the Australian Crime Commission, together with  the Australian Federal Police, unveiled a year-long covert money laundering  investigation—Project Eligo—following a record $5.7 million cash grab in Sydney. 

 Supply of illicit goods, and more specifically illicit drugs, is growing to meet an ever  increasing demand from a using population in Australia prepared to pay higher and  higher prices. 

 According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the annual prevalence  rate for cocaine use in Australia for the population aged 14 years or older more than  doubled from 1 per cent in 2004 to 2.1 per cent of the adult population in 2010; that  figure is higher than the European average and exceeds the corresponding  prevalence rates in the United States. 

 The UNODC World Drug Report states that rising levels of heroin seizures in several  countries in South-East Asia and Oceania supports the assumption of a growing  opiate flow through these regions to known consumer markets, such as China and  Australia. 

 The Australian Crime Commission's Illicit Drug Data Report showed a  commensurate increase in seizures both at the border and within our borders. 

 Rising seizure rates do not necessarily mean success, they can simply reflect the  increase in the trade. The real benchmark is are we really hurting the crooks? Or are  we just a minor irritant or a manageable logistical risk for their business model? 

 Transnational criminals are in the border busting business. It is their job to violate our  borders to conduct their trade. It is our job to put them out of this business, and at  the very least make it as difficult as possible. 

 Australia's border protection agencies are not just about fighting crime, they are also  the facilitators of Australia's economic gateways. 

 We are in the middle of a significant period of global trade growth. The volume of  passenger movements and commercial transactions completed across borders is  increasing exponentially, as is the complexity of these interactions and systems. 

 As global supply chains diversify, we are also facing a situation where many imports  are incorporated into value-added goods and re-exported to customers across our  region and the world. 

 In just four years we are facing forecast growth of 85 per cent in air cargo  consignments, 20 per cent in sea cargo consignments and a 25 per cent lift in  international travellers. 

 Australia's border protection agencies must facilitate the legitimate movement of  people, travelling from an ever increasing range of origin countries, growth promoted  to a significant extent by the expanding number of low-cost airlines now operating in  our region. 

 The Coalition Government recently concluded two significant free trade agreements  with Japan and Korea, of tremendous importance to our nation and the region, and is  actively working on another with China. 

 To facilitate the expansion of trade that these agreements support, our border  processing capabilities must be as efficient and transparent as possible. 

 A better border protection operational model will ensure that Australia's border  systems support, not inhibit, our economic growth by ensuring the swift facilitation of  legitimate trade and highest possible detection and interception rates of illegitimate  activity. 

 We need to be competitive at the border, just as we need to be in the workplace. Our  management of the border must contribute to the national productivity task. 

 The conclusion is that strong borders are vital to both delivering economic benefit  and challenging the threat of transnational crime. 

 The Abbott Government has already made a start by integrating immigration and  customs into a single portfolio and honouring our election commitment of an initial  $88 million in additional funding to expand our intelligence capability and increase  front line screening of high-risk cargo. 

 But there is far more to be done. 

 Over $700 million has been stripped out of the Australian Customs and Border  Protection Service over prior years and over the forward estimates by the previous  government. We must reverse this trend, and in next week's budget, we will start  doing just that. 

 However, the National Commission of Audit rightly reminds us in very stark terms  that no matter what public policy goal we are seeking to advance, our fiscal  circumstances dictate that we need to do so in a way that respects the taxpayer.  This is the approach we will be taking. 

 We have to strive for the most efficient and effective ways to get the job done, the  smartest business models, supported by good technology and good people with a  sharp focus on results. 

 We will reverse the erosion of our border resources by reinvesting the fiscal dividend  of our successful border protection policies and further reforms back into border  protection, and back into a more integrated, effective and efficient border protection  operation. 

 That is why I am pleased to announce today that on July 1, 2015 we will establish  the Australian Border Force, a single frontline operational border agency, to enforce  our customs and immigration laws and protect our border, as supported by the  Commission of Audit. 

 The Australian Border Force will be established as part of the Department of  Immigration and Border Protection and bring together the people, capability and 

 systems from across my portfolio that protect the border and facilitate the lawful  passage of people and goods. 

 The ABF will be led by a Commissioner, whose role will be enshrined in law and will  report directly to me as Minister. 

 The Commissioner will have the same standing as other heads of key national  security related agencies, such as the Commissioner of the Australian Federal  Police, the Chief of the Defence Force and the Director General of ASIO. 

 Like these other such agency heads, the ABF Commissioner will sit alongside  Departmental Secretaries, and for the purposes of the Financial Management and  Accountability Act and other administrative issues, there will be a reporting link to the  Secretary of my Department, to ensure clear accountabilities are in place. 

 Placement of the ABF within the department will ensure that the focus of the agency  will be on border operations. Corporate services and policy functions can be more  appropriately, efficiently and cost effectively provided by the department, removing  unnecessary duplication and providing savings that can be transferred from the back  office to the front line. 

 The Commissioner of the ABF will not be an administrator, they will be our most  senior border law enforcement officer, leading a professional team of highly trained  and experienced officers tasked with using their powers under our customs and  immigration laws to protect and manage our borders. 

 The ABF will encompass not only those people who staff the air and sea borders at  airports and ports, but also those involved in investigations, compliance and  enforcement in relation to illicit goods and illegal visitors. This includes management  of detention facilities and removal activities. It also includes those who serve beyond  our borders, working in operational roles with our regional partners. 

 Visa and trade service functions will be conducted within the department to ensure  minimum disruption to these important activities and to ensure they continue to  receive a high priority from senior departmental management. Under Labor's border  failures, border protection swamped the department, negatively affecting almost  every aspect of their operations. Consideration will be given at a later stage as to  whether visa and customs services operational functions, would be better placed in  the ABF. 

 The creation of the Australian Border Force is about strengthening our borders. It is  a reform measure, not simply a savings measure. 

 The hundreds of millions in savings that will be achieved in the creation of the  agency will all be re-invested back into the agency. This will be supplemented by  further investment from the fiscal dividend of our stronger border protection policies  that are stopping the boats and saving the budget. 

 The measures to support the new agency will also result in improved revenue  outcomes for the government. Our customs officers are the second largest revenue  collectors in the Commonwealth. Improved resources, more integrated processes 

 and better intelligence will result in being able to crack down more successfully on  revenue evasion. These proceeds will go back to Treasury to address the broader  budget challenge. 

 This is the reform dividend of stopping the boats. 

 Establishing a single border agency is not new. It has been a theme of global border  reform for decades, in particular in the United States through the Homeland Security  Department and a series of reforms at the UK Home Office. 

 In bringing together this reform we have studied their failures and their successes.  The model proposed is a hybrid of the current UK Home Office model, that has also  evolved from their experience in dealing with these issues. 

 We have learned and applied the lessons of their reform processes. For me this  goes back to visits I undertook in Opposition both to the UK and the USA. This  reform has been in the Coalition policy gestation process for several years. We  believed it was important to further test and improve the proposal in government,  with the benefit of the Operation Sovereign Borders experience. 

 These lessons have highlighted the need to adopt a measured pace of  implementation and to properly conceive the scope of the organisation and to  provide the capability to incorporate additional functions at a later time. 

 We have avoided establishing a stand alone agency, instead incorporating the ABF  into the department, as a stand alone model denies administrative efficiencies and  savings while also isolating the agency from its broader strategic policy environment  that is appropriately driven at the departmental level. 

 There must also be clear lines of authority and accountability for operations,  administration and governance. Above all the person tasked with running the show  must be able to get on and do their job, without being caught in a web of endless  bureaucracy. They have to be able to take decisions and act. This has been a key  factor in the success of Operation Sovereign Borders. 

 The reform can also not be driven by the savings agenda. Savings will be realised  but design and implementation decisions must be assessed by asking a simple  question, does this make our borders stronger? 

 The Australian Border Force will be established in two initial stages. 

 In 2014/15 we will begin implementing a series of reforms and capability  improvements to the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. These will  include continuing with initial reforms commenced by the previous government on  anti-corruption. 

 However, I note that the measures announced and funded by the previous  government will account for less than 10% by value of the reform programme that  will be included in next week's budget. 

 Having established a strong platform within the Australian Customs and Border  Protection Service, it will then cease to exist on July 1 2015 and be superseded by  the Australian Border Force. 

 Reform measures and investments will then continue to be rolled out within the  Australian Border Force across the full spectrum of its operations. 

 These reforms are focussed on employing an intelligence led, mobile, technology  enabled force, operating under a Strategic Border Command, ensuring our assets  and resources are deployed to greatest effect. 

 The combination of enforcement resources from both immigration and customs,  together with retraining, will enable us to boost our ground capacity over time.  However, the immediate priority, given the budget constraints, will be to tool the  agency up to work smarter and more effectively. 

 The investment will directly target and improve our capability to handle growing trade  and travel. 

 A trusted trader model will be funded to foster legitimate activity and make it easier  for the trading community to deal with government and transact the border. 

 We will implement a system to allow digital processing of forms, further reducing the  paperwork and red-tape burden on business—a key aim of the government's  deregulation agenda. 

 And we will replace an ageing traveller processing system. 

 Our enforcement capability will be boosted, funding the establishment of a Strategic  Border Command to monitor our border environment in real time. 

 The Strategic Border Command will support effective decision-making, resource  allocation and respond to border incidents as needed. 

 Disciplined, uniformed Border Force officers, some armed, will carry out these tasks  and will be supported by mobile and other portable technology which will enhance  their ability to clear cargo, remotely access data and information, and wirelessly  report back to Strategic Border Command. 

 It will also streamline the deployment of officers, allowing for real-time re-tasking of  officers so they can be directed to areas and task of greatest priority. 

 We will acquire six fast inshore patrol craft designed to support tactical response  operations and routine maritime patrol activities in rivers, bays, coastal and island  locations. 

 Our vast coastline, with its thousands of islands, requires specialist patrolling  capability, including shallow-draught patrol vessels that can access bays, estuaries  and rivers and the treacherous reefs of our borders. 

 Three of these vessels will be deployed in the Torres Strait, which I visited last week,  a region of strategic significance for border control, to support local patrol activities  and joint operations with our friends in PNG. 

 Such patrols not only provide the necessary physical deterrent, but are important  enforcement and intelligence gathering operations. 

 The acquisition will supplement the current replacement programme of the ageing  Bay class long range, offshore patrol fleet with Cape class patrol vessels. 

 It will deliver a flexible, capable patrol fleet to the Australian Border Force. 

 Intelligence and systems improvement will also be delivered. This will support the  new National Border Targeting Centre, which will be established within Customs and  Border Protection from 1 July this year. 

 It will bring together the range of agencies contributing to our border security, into a  next generation profiling and targeting environment. 

 The use of 'big data' analytics, to target organised criminal activity threatening our  border will become increasingly common—legally and lawfully bringing together  information from both domestic and international law enforcement partners. 

 More than 85 per cent of Customs and Border Protection detections at the border  come from intelligence. 

 The enforcement, intelligence and systems capabilities of the Australian Border  Force will be co-ordinated from a new Headquarters to be established in Canberra. 

 The Headquarters will also be home to Strategic Border Command and the National  Border Targeting Centre, which will complement and work hand in glove with Border  Protection Command, which will continue to protect our interests in the maritime  domain. 

 To ensure we have the trained, professional and committed officers we need, we will  establish an Australian Border Force college. 

 The College will deliver the professional, technical and operational training border  force officers will need in the border environment of the future. 

 For staff, it will deliver the same support and opportunities possible in our other  federal law enforcement agencies, establishing a much overdue parity, and creating  exciting new professional development pathways for those who have made  protecting our borders their career. 

 The new arrangements will improve intelligence and enable increased ICT capability,  and automate high volume transactional functions to deliver further savings. 

 Further details will be provided in next week's budget, but I am confident we have the  right mix of investment and savings to protect our national interest. 

 The changes will not just occur within the Border Force. Changes will also occur  within the host department. 

 Departmental staff working in immigration compliance, enforcement, detention  services and other operational functions, not including visa services, will make their  way into the ABF. Policy, strategy, planning, trade facilitation and customs services  officers from the ACBPS will come into the department. 

 This will combine staff with significant experience in dealing with border movements  of both goods and people. Their learnings in how to manage the border from these  two perspectives can now be combined, providing a far more comprehensive picture  and understanding of our border. 

 We will realise a department of state that is now truly focused on border policy and  strategy in an integrated and holistic way, rather than in the traditional silos of  immigration and customs. 

 It will also enable bringing together an integrated international engagement strategy  within the department, that can maximise our effectiveness in working with our  regional partners, that under Operation Sovereign Borders has proved to be a key  element in our success. 

 This reform will ensure an even greater dividend from those posted in our overseas  missions in customs and immigration roles. 

 It will also enable us to pursue our regional cooperation in the broader context of  transnational crime and even counter terrorism, rather than keeping once again to  the demarcation between people and goods. 

 Regional engagement is a key part of our border protection strategy. Stronger  regional borders means stronger domestic borders. These reforms will provide a far  more effective way to achieve this goal. 

 The department will also face the challenge of ensuring its corporate and  administrative service functions and systems are scaled to integrate and host the  new arrangements. Their success will in large part condition the broader success of  this initiative. 

 This is an ambitious move. 

 The changes I have announced today are about one thing; our nation's interest. 

 Stronger, well managed borders facilitate, rather than impede, legitimate trade, travel  and migration. Facilitation and stronger borders are not mutually exclusive, they are  mutually reinforcing. 

 In closing, I wish to acknowledge the work of the officers and staff in both existing  organisations, under the strong leadership of Department Secretary Martin Bowles  and CEO Michael Pezzullo, and their executive teams. 

 Developing and implementing these types of reforms require a selfless commitment  and professionalism and the vision to see the benefits and embrace the change for  the broader public good. These attributes have been on copious display. It is these  same qualities that will now be critical across these organisations as we now  implement these reforms. I know I will not be disappointed. 

 In recent years both organisations have displayed extraordinary loyalty and  dedication to their tasks, carrying out their duties with great professionalism and  compassion, under extremely stressful and challenging conditions - not of their own  making - consistent with their institutional tradition. 

 The customs and trade facilitation function has existed in various guises since  Federation, and has served the nation well over more than 110 years. 

 Those who have served within the various customs departments over the years,  deserve our thanks and praise. 

 I also recognise the proud history of the Department of Immigration and Border  Protection, dating back to its establishment after the Second World War. 

 It has played - and continues to play - a key role in nation-building, managing an  orderly migration programme which has delivered a vibrant, confident nation. 

 Since 1945, we have opened our arms as a nation to more than seven million  migrants, of whom more than 800 000 were refugees. 

 More than four and a half million people have taken up the opportunity to become  Australian citizens since the Nationality and Citizenship Act was passed in 1948. 

 Our country, our nation and our communities are immeasurably richer because of  this. 

 The combination of the functions of these two key agencies will be a powerful  multiplier in our efforts to both protect our borders and deliver the strong, prosperous  and generous society all Australians want. 

 The new agency I have announced today will be at the forefront in delivering the  solemn promise of our government: to secure and protect our borders; to deliver  certainty and prosperity to our nation and her people. 

 The Abbott Government has taken this promise seriously, fundamentally believing  that secure borders are a national asset, possessing real economic, social and  strategic value. 

 We've taken on this task with determination and drive and there will be further reform  to address other areas of our operations, particularly visa services and visa reform,  that are not the topic of today's announcement. 

 We are resolved to make policy decisions that will support, not hinder, the  magnificent efforts of the thousands of men and women who protect our borders on 

 a daily basis from the significant and increasing threat posed by those who would  seek to do us harm, threaten our sovereignty and undermine our way of life. 

 I am sure there will be those who will once again say that what I have announced  today cannot be done, just as they did when we outlined our polices to stop the  boats. Once again we will demonstrate our resolve and commitment by just getting  on with the job. Once again Australia will be better off for our efforts. 

 Thank you for your attention. 

 

 

