---
title: "Government closes Labor's Inverbrackie detention centre"
date: "2014-12-12"
creators:
  - "Briggs, Jamie"
source: "Office of BRIGGS, JAMIE, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211417317
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3575102%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Government closes Labor's Inverbrackie  detention centre  Friday, 12 December 2014 

 Joint media release with The Hon. Scott Morrison MP Minister for Immigration  and Border Protection and The Hon. Jamie Briggs MP Federal Member for  Mayo 

 In keeping with our pre-election commitment, the Inverbrackie detention facility will  be closed by the end of this year with the last of the detainees having now been re-located. 

 In October 2010, Prime Minister Gillard imposed this facility on the Adelaide Hills  community, without any consultation. 

 The announcement followed an expansion of the immigration detention network,  which ballooned under the Labor Government at significant cost. 

 In fact, the Inverbrackie detention facility has stood as a constant reminder of Labor's  failed border protection policies, budget blow outs and broken promises. 

 The Coalition Government's success in stopping illegal boat arrivals means detention  centres like Inverbrackie that sprung up around the country under Labor's border  chaos can now be shut. 

 Inverbrackie is the tenth detention facility the Government has closed this year. 

 Labor's cost, chaos and tragedy on our borders saw over 800 illegal boats with more  than 50,000 people arrive in Australia. This gross mismanagement and failure has  ended and South Australian taxpayers do not have to wear the bill for it anymore. 

 Should Labor ever return to government Bill Shorten will turn back on turn backs of  illegal boats, abolish temporary protection visas and once again illegal boat arrivals  will come in record numbers, with South Australia foisted with new and reopened  detention centres whether at Inverbrackie or elsewhere in the State. 

 The last remaining detainees left the Inverbrackie centre this week, with the majority  released into the community on bridging visas. 

 The community has been consulted throughout the closure process and the site will  be handed back to the Department of Defence in due course. 

 The Department of Defence will review options for future use of the site to ensure  taxpayers get value for the millions of dollars already invested in the facility. 

 

