---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 21 June 2014: High Court finds Abbott Government's policy unlawful; reintegration payments to asylum seekers"
date: "2014-06-21"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "High Court finds Abbott Government's policy unlawful"
  - "reintegration payments to asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409996
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3238949%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  MELBOURNE   SATURDAY 21 JUNE 2014   

 SUBJECT/ S:  High  Court  finds  Abbott  Government’s  policy  unlaw ful,   Reintegration payments to asylum seekers.   

 RICHARD MARLES: Thank you for coming this morning. Yesterday the High Court  found  the  Abbott  Government’s  policy  of  refusing  to  process  people  who  are  on   bridging  visas  in  Australia  is  unlawful.  We  welcome  that  decision.  Faced  with  the   rejection of Temporary Protection Visas by the Parliament, Scott Morrison’s decision  to  close  up  shop  was  always  an  act  of  petulance  and  it  was  an  act  of  petulance   which has caused untold misery throughout communities in Australia. Scott Morrison  has been slapped down by the High Court and his processing policy is in disarray,  the High Court has made clear that those persons who are on bridging visas must  now  be  processed  and  we  would  expect  that  the  Abbott  Government  and  Scott   Morrison now act in accordance with the law. Last week we saw new heights of self-congratulation from the Abbott Government, Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott could  barely  stop  themselves  from  high  fiving  each  other,  now  we  have  seen  the   incompetence of this minister exposed by the High Court.    

 This is a minister who is very happy to beat his chest on the good days but there are  silence on the bad, and we need a minister who is more substance than showman.   

 REPORTER: The Government has said it will look at other ways it will cap the visas,  would you support that?   

 MARLES: What we need to see in Australia now is people being processed, this was  an act of petulance of the part of the Abbott Government to stop processing people,  in  effect  to  close  up  shop  in  circumstances  where  the  Parliament  had  rejected  its   policy of Temporary Protection Visas. There is no deterrence value associated with  Temporary Protection Visas, particularly in a context where Australia was taken off  the table through the PNG Arrangement in July of last year. What we need to see is 

 this  Government  simply  acting  in  the  Government’s  own  best  interests,  in  the   nation’s own best interests and start processing people.    

 REPORTER: Should they try to reintroduce Temporary Protection Visas?   

 MARLES: Labor utterly opposes Temporary Protection Visas, TPVs put people in a  state of limbo, Temporary Protection Visas only prolong this whole issue, what we  need  to  see  is  people  who  are  in  Australia  now,  being  processed  and  if  they  are   found to be genuine refugees then they should be resettled in Australia and if they  are not they should be facilitated back to their original country. That is what ought  to  occur  in  the  national  interest  and  it  is  as  simple  as  that. Temporary  Protection   Visas  have  no  deterrence  value  whatsoever  in  circumstances  where  Australia  has   already been taken off the table through the PNG Arrangement.   

 REPORTER:  The  situation  this  week  in  Geelong  with  the  asylum  seeker  who  self   immolated and the Government’s refusal to grant a visa to his family, do you think  there was capacity for the Immigration Minister to intervene in that case?   

 MARLES: I think what we saw this week from the Government in refusing to grant  visas  to  Leo  Seemanpillai’s  family  to  attend  their  own  son’s  funeral  reaches  new   heights  in  meanness.  There  is  absolutely  no  doubt  that  Scott  Morrison  as  the   Minister,  if  he  wanted  to  allow  Leo  Seemanpillai’s  family  to  attend  his  funeral  he   could have done that. Compassion is one bridge which is too far for this Minister.   

 REPORTER: You  describe  their  asylum  seeker  policy  as  being in disarray  but you   know they say that what Labor couldn’t do is stop the boats..   

 MARLES: Well the basis of which we see a reduction in the flow of asylum seeker  vessels from Indonesia has principally been because Scott Morrison has prosecuted  Labor’s own arrangement with PNG. That has unquestionably been the policy which  has resulted in the reduction of asylum seeker vessels from Indonesia, but when we  are  considering  those  people  who  are  already  in  Australia,  who  were  in  Australia   before the 19th of July last year. We need to have a sensible policy in the national  interest which gets people off the Government tab, which sees people be processed  and  if  they  are  found  to  be  genuine  refugees  then  allowed  to  be  resettled  in  this   country and if they are not, then they are facilitated in their transport back home. It  is as simple as that. Temporary Protection Visas play no role in deterrence and they  only put a whole lot of people in this country in a state of limbo, which causes untold  misery in communities throughout Australia. And the decision by Scott Morrison to  close up shop faced by the Parliament’s rejection of Temporary Protection Visas was  an act of petulance and that has been struck down now by the High Court.   

 REPORTER: Does this mean we could see more boats starting again?   

 MARLES: This decision has no bearing on whether or not we will see asylum seeker  vessels come to Australia, it has absolutely no bearing on that at all. What we have  seen  which  has  demonstratively  brought  about  we  hope  an  end  to  the  flow  of   asylum seeker vessels from Indonesia and Sri Lanka to Christmas Island, we hope  has brought an end to the loss of life at sea is principally the PNG Arrangement that 

 Australia negotiated with the government of PNG under the then Labor Government.  It was that agreement which took Australia off the table, it is that agreement which  has  made  the  difference,  now  from  that  moment  on  it  became  clear  that  no  one  would be offered a visa in Australia if you came by boat to this country. So in those  circumstances whatever you do in relation to the people who are already here can  be neither deterrence nor an incentive to those who are yet to come. So what we  need  to be  doing  is  dealing  with  the  group  that  are  already  here  in  the  national   interest. The government stubbornly acted with petulance in its policy of closing up  shop and that has  been  utterly  repudiated by  the  High  Court and Scott Morrison’s   policy is now in total disarray.    

 REPORTER:  Should  the  Government  be  offering  asylum  seekers  thousands  of   dollars to go back to dangerous places?   

 MARLES:  We  don’t  need  blank  cheques,  we  need  people  being  processed.  But  I   would remind you that when Scott Morrison was in Opposition, he opposed Labor’s  own  reintegration  packages  and  now  he  is  offering  sums  which  are  triple  the   amount.  In  Opposition,  Scott  Morrison  opposed  the  PNG  Arrangement  and  now  it   forms part of his own strategy, there is no bridge of hypocrisy that Scott Morrison  will  not  cross,  but  in  a  week  in  which  we  saw  this  Government  deny  visas  to  Leo   Seemanpillai’s  family  to  attend  their  own  son’s  funeral,  for  Scott  Morrison   compassion is one bridge which is too far.   

 REPORTER: What do you make of the reports of Australian jihadists fighting with  ISIS and getting involved in some of those shocking massacres?   

 MARLES: I’m obviously very concerned about that, what is more concerning is that  one of those jihadists, who was on a no fly list, left this country last year on his own  brother’s  passport  to  fight  in  Syria.  It  is  just  another  example  of  Scott  Morrison’s  

 incompetence in presiding over that affair. And this is a minister who has presided  over that, he has presided over one of the largest data breaches we have seen in  the  Australian  Government’s  history,  he  has  presided  over  the  melting  down  of   Manus  Island, where  we  saw the  loss  of  Reza Berati’s  life  in  an  Australian  funded  facility,  he  has  presided  over  a  policy  which  is  eroding  our  relationship  with   Indonesia by the day and he now has his own policy of suspending processing for  people on bridging visas utterly repudiated by the High Court, that is a score board  of incompetence that you will not hear from Scott Morrison. Thank you.    

 

 ENDS 

