---
title: "Australia and United Kingdom partner to prevent sexual violence in conflict"
date: "2014-06-02"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409047
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3201589%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 

 2 June 2014

 

 AUSTRALIA AND UNITED KINGDOM PARTNER TO PREVENT  SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN CONFLICT 

 Australia and the United Kingdom are working together to prevent and respond to sexual  violence in conflict and other situations of armed violence.  

 The Australian Dialogue on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict, held today at Parliament  House in Canberra, unites experts across government, non-government organisations and  academia to discuss ways to address and respond to sexual violence.  

 At today’s dialogue I announce that $3.3 million of Australia’s $17.7 million program to help  end violence against women in Afghanistan will support the Afghan Women’s Network and  its member organisations.  

 Australia will also provide $1 million in partnership with UN Women in Timor Leste, Liberia  and Uganda to support women’s engagement in decision-making on peace-building and  gender responsive security sector reform. 

 An additional $1.65 million will be provided in assistance to humanitarian and emergency  initiatives through ProCap and Gencap, the Women’s Refugee Commission as well as the  United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Population Fund  (UNFPA). 

 The outcomes of the Dialogue will feed into the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in  Conflict to be held next week in London. This will be the largest ever international gathering  to discuss the issue and will be co-chaired by UK Foreign Secretary William Hague and  Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Australia’s  Ambassador for Women and Girls, Natasha Stott Despoja, will represent Australia.  

 We are proud to be champions of the UK’s Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative. Sexual  violence in conflict is one of the most destructive weapons of war, its impact can be as great  as any bomb or bullet. 

 The recent kidnapping of more than 200 girls in Nigeria by the terrorist group Boko Haram is  a stark reminder of the threat faced by women and girls in conflict affected areas and  underlines the importance of global commitment to this issue.  

 

 

 

 “Sexual violence in conflict is a major global problem,” said His Excellency Paul Madden,  British High Commissioner to Australia. “It happens wherever we find conflict, and affects  millions of women and children as well as men.”    

 “We want it to achieve a dramatic effect on the way people around the world think about this,  so that we create a sense of irreversible movement towards ending the use of rape and  sexual violence in conflict.” 

 Today’s dialogue will help Australia to set directions for addressing sexual violence in  conflict, focusing on strengthening accountability and access to justice, and responding to  sexual violence and services for survivors. 

 Foreign Minister’s Office: Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874  British High Commission: Sarah Corcoran 0427 542 080   

