---
title: "Australia's vocational education and training stars recognised at national awards"
date: "2014-11-21"
creators:
  - "Macfarlane, Ian E."
source: "MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211536370
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3523583%22
---

 

 

 THE HON IAN MACFARLANE MP  Minister for Industry   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 21 November 2014 

 

 AUSTRALIA’S VOCATIONAL EDUCATION & TRAINING STARS RECOGNISED AT NATIONAL AWARDS   

 Australia’s leading vocational education and training students, teachers and institutions have been  recognised at the 2014 Australian Training Awards held at the Adelaide Convention Centre tonight.   

 “These awards highlight the achievements in skills and training that are vital for Australia’s young people,  businesses and future prosperity,” Industry Minister Ian Macfarlane said.    

 Mr Macfarlane congratulated all winners and the many individuals, businesses and registered training  organisations that were finalists across the 18 award categories.   

 “These finalists demonstrate the tremendous opportunities provided by Australia’s vocational education  and training system,” Mr Macfarlane said.   

 “The Australian Training Awards recognise the best in skills and training ranging from people just starting  out with their careers, to others who are upgrading their skills and those who have made a career-long  contribution to the sector.”   

 For the first time this year’s awards recognised excellence in the Disability Training Initiative area.   Victorian-based business Train 2 Learn was awarded for their work in championing industry-led  qualifications in hospitality and warehousing for disabled students.     

 Other award winners included Berwyn Clayton, who received the Lifetime Achievement Award for her  work in developing VET teaching, learning and research, recognised in her appointment as Emeritus  Professor at Victoria University.    

 Melinda Lethbridge was named Apprentice of the Year. While completing an Australian Apprenticeship in  fitting and machining at Hargo Engineering in Melbourne Melinda won academic awards, competed at the  2014 WorldSkills Australia National Competition and now tutors students and refugees.   

 The Australian Training Awards is the peak, national awards for the vocational education and training  system in Australia. It is held each year in November.    

 A full list of winners is attached. More information is available at www.australiantrainingawards.gov.au.    

 Photographs of the winners can be provided on request by contacting the Department of Industry below.   

 Minister Macfarlane’s media contact: Kylie Barron 0408 508 673  Department of Industry Media:  02 6213 6308 or media@industry.gov.au      

 

 

 THE 2014 AUSTRALIAN TRAINING AWARDS WINNERS    

 Category Winner 

 INDIVIDUAL  Lifetime Achievement Award   

 Berwyn Clayton 

 National Leadership Award   

 Michelle Weaver,  Queensland 

 Excellence in Language, Literacy and Numeracy Practice    

 Freya Merrick dos Santos,  Victoria 

 VET Teacher/Trainer of the Year    

 Steven Atkins,   New South Wales 

 Vocational Student of the Year   

 Rachel Dudok,   Queensland 

 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Student of the Year    

 Sally Moylan,   ACT 

 Australian Apprentice (Trainee) of the Year    

 Joshua Lodge,   New South Wales 

 Australian School-based Apprentice of the Year    

 Eylish Perry,   ACT 

 Australian Apprentice of the Year    

 Melinda Lethbridge,   Victoria 

 BUSINESS  Australian Apprenticeships - Employer Award   

 Just Better Care Canberra,  ACT 

 Disability Training Initiative    

 Train 2 Learn,   Victoria 

 Small Employer of the Year    

 Arafura Tree Services,  Northern Territory 

 Employer of the Year    

 Westpac,   Victoria 

 Industry Collaboration    

 Oothungs (Sisters) in Mining  Program, Queensland 

 REGISTERED TRAINING ORGANISATION  School Pathways to VET    

 St Columban’s College,  Queensland 

 Small Training Provider of the Year    

 Seafood Training Tasmania  Inc, Tasmania 

 International Training Provider of the Year    

 Central Institute of  Technology,   Western Australia 

 Large Training Provider of the Year    

 Chisholm Institute,   Victoria 

 

