---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Queenstown, Tasmania: 16 September 2014: Abbott Government's broken promise on jobs; Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians; Iraq; Clive Palmer; Renewable Energy Target"
date: "2014-09-16"
creators:
  - "Collins, Julie"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's broken promise on jobs"
  - "Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians"
  - "Iraq"
  - "Clive Palmer"
  - "Renewable Energy Target"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414024
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3411092%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 JULIE COLLINS MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT SERVICES  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN 

 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  TUESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2014  QUEENSTOWN   

 SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s broken promise on jobs;  Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians; Iraq; Clive  Palmer; Renewable Energy Target.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s great to be here in  Queenstown, affectionately known as Queenie, on the West Coast of Tasmania.  I’m accompanied by our Shadow Minister for Regional Affairs Julie Collins and  also Senator Anne Urquhart who helps represent northern Tasmania and West  Coast Tasmania in the Parliament of Australia.  Today we’ve been talking to  small business, to leaders of the local community how to make sure that this  amazing special part of Australia has a viable and sustainable future. Like  millions of Australians who visit Tasmania, when you visit special, historical,  resilient towns like Queenstown you get a glimpse of the way that Australia was  and indeed I believe the way that small towns in Australia can be going forward.  It’s clear that this is a resilient community, there are opportunities here still in 

 mining, in aquaculture, in tourism. There is still plenty to be done here which  means that people don’t have to leave this region to find good work. But  it's important that the Abbott Government doesn't neglect the regions  of Australia, doesn’t neglect Tasmania. The number one issue here is jobs  and the related issue of training. So whilst I believe that the West Coast of  Tassie has the resilient population and a strong future, it is appropriate that the  Federal Government doesn't leave all the hard decisions and hard work to the  local communities and state governments. I might pass over to my colleague,  Julie Collins, to talk further about Tasmania and what the Abbott Government  hasn't been doing in this region.    

 JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT &  LOCAL GOVERNMENT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  SERVICES: Thanks Bill. What we know about the West Coast of Tasmania, as  Bill has said, is that it is a resilient community, but every now and then regional  communities do need a hand-up. They do need support from governments,  and it's about time that the Abbott Government and the local member, Mr  Whitely, stood up for Queenstown and actually provided some support to those  workers who’ve been stood down from their jobs at the mine and to the local  community who really needs employment. We’ve seen Labor when we were  in Government support local industry, support the aquaculture expansion at  Macquarie Harbour, support the railway, support local communities to create  jobs locally for locals, to stay here in this community. It is so important, and  it’s important that the Abbott Government and the State Hodgman Government  support this community and listen to this community about what is required here  to give them the jobs that they so need.    

 SHORTEN: Thanks very much.    

 JOURNALIST: What is actually required here to do that do you think?    

 SHORTEN: Well, it all starts with jobs and training. So I think that it doesn't  require a lot of financial intervention, but it clearly requires a plan. As I said in  my introduction, this is an amazing part of the world to come and visit. I  would certainly recommend to all Australians to put a visit to the West Coast on  your next holiday plans. And of course, it's not just Queenstown, its Tullah, its  Rosebery and its Zeehan. There are many small parts and small towns in this  region which are well worth a visit. The scenery's amazing, the  hospitality outstanding and the people are the way that Australians, I believe,  see themselves. But when it comes to jobs, what we’ve got to do is make sure  that our young people and even not so young have the ability to retrain. 350  people have lost their jobs at the Henty and Mount Lyell mines. Whilst there’s  every chance that the mining will continue or start up again, some of these  workforces require displaced workers; require training so they can move into 

 aquaculture. We need the Government to provide certainty about  renewable energy. Local farmers are exercising entrepreneurial qualities and  ‘give it a go’ attitudes which should be supported by the Abbott  Government. They want to build 33 wind turbines to catch what is one of the  world’s most remarkable wind traps on the coastline of Western Tasmania. Yet  the Abbott Government is messing around and providing uncertainty and holding  up the future for jobs for people who are otherwise unemployed and don’t have  opportunities. So it's all about jobs, jobs, jobs.    

 JOURNALIST: The Government says it will help but it's waiting for some  solid recommendations from a state-based taskforce. Is that a sensible move?    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all the Federal Government isn't involved in the  local taskforce. This is a Government who - it's all care and no responsibility.  They say all the things that matter but they don't actually turn up when  the going gets hard. You know, there’s $16 million going to Cadbury, but what  are the Government proposing to do here? I think people in the North-West,  people on the West Coast, can reasonably say why is it that the Abbott  Government, when they wanted our votes they are prepared to promise us no  cuts to education, no cuts to training, no changes to pensions, but as soon as  they get elected they’ve been missing and now you've got a region which  is resilient. But just, the people of West Coast Tasmania and the companies here  have paid lots of taxes to Canberra over the years, I think it is appropriate that  there’s jobs and training support here, clear policy decisions which encourage  investment.    

 JOURNALIST: What sort of jobs, what sort of training, specifically, are you  talking about?    

 SHORTEN: Well I think that there's opportunities in terms of people getting  training in tourism, in customer service, in aquaculture. There will be labourers  and operators in the mines who can do more trades training. It doesn't require a  Rhodes Scholar to work out that what people need is to be as multi-skilled as  possible. This is a resilient community, you spend five minutes with any person  here, these are not people who sit down on their bottom and say the world is too  hard. They want to give everything a go, they’re a tight-knit community and  that’s why the story here is not all bad, but it is a difficult time and people, it's  not a question of promulgating bad news, it's just every level of government  needs to roll up their sleeves and back in people who’ve always backed in  everyone else.    

 JOURNALIST: Who have you been speaking with here so far this morning?    

 SHORTEN: We have met with the local Mayor, Robyn Gerrity, local  small business people, representatives of the workforce and we'll be doing  a community forum in a very short while. I might ask Julie to add a little bit  further about some of the ideas in terms of this part of Tasmania.    

 COLLINS: Thanks Bill. Something the Federal Government could do  almost immediately is to reinstate the local employment coordinator for northern  Tasmania. They axed the employment coordinators across the country. Geelong  got theirs back but of course northern Tasmania has not had our  local employment coordinator reinstated. The Federal Government could do  that straightaway. It could also provide stream three services to those people  that have lost their jobs immediately. Those stream three services have  been provided in other parts of the country where large number of workers have  lost their jobs, such as this, and the Federal Government could provide  those services immediately. So there are things the Federal Government can do  and should do immediately, and of course people here in Queenstown and on  the West Coast deserve the same support that the people in Geelong do when  their industries shutdown and Mr Whiteley and Tony Abbott should be standing  up for the West Coast and should reinstate the employment coordinator now.     

 JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, when do you think a referendum on  Indigenous constitutional recognition should be held?    

 SHORTEN: It's more important to succeed on getting constitutional recognition  of our first Australians than rushing it. It's important on one hand, that  Aboriginal Australians feel the changes are meaningful and speak to their lives  and their hopes and dreams for the future of this country. It's also  important that we bring all Australians along in the process of change. We have  got an experts report which has made recommendations, there is more work  going on, there is another meeting in Adelaide today. So constitutional  recognition of our first Australians is an important issue, but rather than rush and  get it wrong, we should take our time and get it right. It needs to be bipartisan,  it needs to be meaningful, and needs to be something which all Australians can  get behind and say at last, we are going to let our constitution catch up to  the world we live in.    

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister says he's not in favour of a clause banning  racial discrimination. Would you be happy if that was left out?    

 SHORTEN: Well, the Prime Minister’s entitled to his view and we'll negotiate.  For me what matters, ultimately, is not what I think or what Tony Abbott thinks,  it's what Australians think. It's also what our Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islanders think. So for me that's the test I set. I will work with Tony Abbott, this  issue should be beyond politics. 

 

 JOURNALIST: How united is the Labor Party on military action in Iraq given the  comments of Melissa Parke?    

 SHORTEN: The Labor Party is united. I understand the anxiety of Australians  about the commitment of Australian Defence Forces into harmful and dangerous  situations. So I think expressing anxiety is entirely legitimate. But what I also  know - sorry, I'll just take a little longer on this - what I also know is that  from the briefings that I have had from Australia's best intelligence service  experts, and our security experts, is that the organisations, the terrorist  organisations in northern Iraq do present a danger, not only to the people living  in that country, a genocide danger, a danger of mass-violence, terror and crime,  they do represent a danger to Australia's security too. So I don't see any  alternative but to standing up and protecting Australia. Labor's made it really  clear; we don't support sending up formed-up combat units to fight on the  ground directly against IS but if the Iraqi national Government, in pursuit of  protecting innocent civilians, through the United States, is requesting some  Australian assistance, I think that's appropriate for both our security and also  the humanitarian principles which have underpinned Labor's response so far.    

 JOURNALIST: How quickly will your support for this mission evaporate,  though, if it's not clearly defined?    

 SHORTEN: Well, I think there is fairly clear definition of the objectives of  this. First of all, we want to see that it's about preventing mass population  murder in northern Iraq. We want to see it stem the flow of foreign fighters from  Australia who in some misguided beliefs are going there and learning how  to commit crimes and acts of violence. It is important that we constrain our  operations to Iraq where the Government has asked us to intervene. Certainly  we don't see that anything is going to be solved by sending battalions of  Australian troops to fight on the ground over there. We'll keep working through  with the Government. Let me be really clear, going back to the earlier question,  as well. When it comes to terrorism we are all in this together, both Labor and  Liberal and national security is upper most consideration for us when  we consider these matters.    

 JOURNALIST: Have you got a limit in mind for the number of troops that can  be deployed?    

 SHORTEN: I'm not going to put a limit but I think I have been really clear about  the nature of our engagement. I think as we are having a humanitarian debate  it's also worth recognising that through this longer conflict in Syria and now more  recently in northern Iraq, there are millions of refugees throughout the  Middle East. There are over a million people in Lebanon, there’s a 

 million refugees in Jordan. What we see here is a humanitarian crisis which has  been going for some time. So I've certainly believed - and I'll be talking to my  colleagues about whether or not Australia can take some more refugees. Our  humanitarian is assistance shouldn’t just take the form of aeroplanes; it should  take the form I think of more foreign aid to help people who are dislocated by  these evil acts and also possibly refugees in Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Given Melissa Parke's comments, though, are you concerned  that other backbenchers could break ranks?    

 SHORTEN: No.    

 JOURNALIST: Will you be disciplining other MPs if they speak out and  don't support Labor?    

 SHORTEN: Let's be really clear here, I get why some people say what they  say. But I also know that the IS organisation would actively not just cause harm  in northern Iraq, or would bring its twisted version of violence and crime to  Australian shores. So I believe that most Australians, nearly all Australians, don't  want to send our troops in harm’s way but definitely the same proportion of  Australians don't want to see us stand by and do nothing and then later on  regret that we failed to act.    

 JOURNALIST: Can I ask about Clive Palmer, he has attended 19 out of  202 parliamentary votes. What do you think about that?    

 SHORTEN: That's a matter for Clive Palmer.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think it's acceptable?    

 SHORTEN: It's a matter for Clive Palmer. My view is if you want to get the best  representation possible you should vote Labor at the next election.    

 JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Robyn Gerrity about the importance of the  Renewable Energy Target to the region?    

 SHORTEN: Full credit to the Mayor of the West Coast, Robyn Gerrity. She raised  it with us. It beggars belief that you have got up to 200 jobs just waiting to role -  33 wind turbines in one of the windiest areas in Australia. The community  want them, they don't share Joe Hockey's view that somehow wind farms are  sick making. The locals want the jobs, they want the wind farms but what they  need is a Government in Canberra who understands that renewable energy is  not some green plot; instead it’s a sensible part of our energy mix and  sustainable energy mix going forward. I'll be carrying the message back to 

 Canberra even if the local Tasmanian Liberals won’t. The Government should  take their hands off the renewable energy scheme, stop wrecking investment  and jobs and hope for the future of this most remarkable part of Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: The United States is taking out its first air strikes on Iraq today,  how do you feel about that?    

 SHORTEN: I take no satisfaction in that, but, on the other hand, we need  to oppose and stop Islamic State, the terrorist organisation. We are lucky in  Australia,  a lot of the troubles in the rest of the world pass us by. Certainly,  though, based on the briefings that I have received, I and the Labor leadership  have formed the view that we at this - that this problem is not going to simply  pass us by. I reject the proposition that doing nothing somehow makes us safer,  it does not.     

 Thanks everyone, cheers.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053    

 

