---
title: "Humanitarian assistance to Somalia"
date: "2014-09-10"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211413746
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3385481%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP  10 September 2014   

 HUMANTARIAN ASSISTANCE TO SOMALIA    

 The Australian Government will provide a further $5 million in humanitarian assistance  to Somalia. The funding will be delivered through the United Nation's Somalia  Common Humanitarian Fund to provide Somalis in need with emergency food, water,  sanitation, shelter and medical assistance.    

 This contribution brings Australia’s total humanitarian and state-building assistance for  Somalia to $15 million in 2014.   

 A combination of delayed rains and ongoing conflict has had a devastating impact on  food security in Somalia.  Almost three million people require humanitarian assistance  and over 200,000 children under five are acutely malnourished.  There are 1.1 million  internally displaced people in Somalia and one million Somali refugees in neighbouring  states.   

 As well as responding to urgent humanitarian needs, supporting stability and state  building in Somalia is consistent with Australia’s strategy to combat global terrorism,  piracy and people trafficking.  Enhancing security in the Indian Ocean Rim also helps  to protect major Australian trading routes.   

 Australia supports the African Union and United Nations missions working with the  Federal Government of Somalia to help build security and consolidate state  institutions.  Australia welcomes the recent territorial gains made by the African Union  Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) against the Al Shabaab terrorist organisation and we  are working in the UN Security Council to ensure that military gains are accompanied  by humanitarian and livelihood benefits for Somali citizens.  Australia urges AMISOM  and the UN missions in Somalia to cooperate closely with humanitarian actors to  facilitate humanitarian access to those in need.     

 On 13 August, Australia joined the other members of the UN Security Council on a  visit to Somalia, where the Security Council stressed the importance of the  international community’s continued political, security and humanitarian support for  Somalia’s state building and reconciliation processes.     

 Foreign Minister’s Office:   Catherine McDonald 0478 488 874        Gabrielle Young 0408 275 340 

