---
title: "Restoring integrity and public confidence in Immigration and Border Protection"
date: "2014-09-10"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211413770
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3387230%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Restoring integrity and public confidence in Immigration and  Border Protection 

 Wednesday, 10 September 2014 

 Address to the National Press Club, Canberra 

 Thank you for joining me here today and thank you very much to the Press Club for  hosting us this afternoon. 

 A year after the election of the Abbott Government, I would like to reflect on what we  have done to restore integrity and public confidence in Australia's borders and our  immigration programme. 

 In short, we have done what we said we would do, we have done it in the way we  said we would do it and we are getting the results we said we would get. 

 When successfully managed, a strong border yields key dividends for our nation - in  national security, economic, social and humanitarian terms. 

 The loss of control of our borders under Labor significantly undermined the extent to  which any of these dividends could manifest. 

 Under the Abbott Government, stronger borders are delivering a more safe and  secure Australia. Stronger borders are also delivering a stronger economy and more  prosperous Australia. 

 Stopping the boats 

 Our priority upon coming to government has been to stop the boats, and that's  exactly what we have been doing. 

 Under Operation Sovereign Borders we introduced the most comprehensive suite of  border protection measures ever established by any Australian government. 

 We are turning boats backs where it is safe to do so, we are processing and  resettling illegal maritime arrivals offshore, we have put in place a regional  deterrence network with our partners to prevent smugglers using our region as a  transit point and we are denying people smugglers the product they seek to sell, a  permanent protection visa and citizenship in Australia. 

 Prior to the election the previous Labor government and a chorus of advocates said  that the Coalition's border policies would not work and that the boats could not be  stopped. 

 Before the election last year, the former Immigration Minister, Brendan O'Connor  stood up in parliament and announced that the Coalition's policy to stop the boats  and turn them back where it is safe to do so was 'fraud'; he said that the 'turn back  the boats' policy does not exist except in the minds' of Coalition members. 

 He was wrong, and all those who shared that view have now been proven wrong. 

 Our border protection policies are very real, they are working and no one knows that  better than the people smugglers who have been put out of business. 

 At least one smuggler we know of is now driving a taxi in Jakarta, rather than running  deadly boats to Australia. People smugglers have crawled back under the rock they  came from. But they will emerge again if given the opportunity, which Labor would  certainly provide. 

 Labor's failure in government and denial in Opposition has proved they have learned  nothing. Labor remain internally divided on border protection and opposed to the full  suite of measures we have introduced. 

 If Labor are not convinced now of the effectiveness of the Coalition's border  protection regime, and they are not, they never will be and I believe the Australian  people know this. 

 Immediately upon our election, the government established the Joint Agency Task  Force or JATF to manage Operation Sovereign Borders, bringing together 16  different agencies under a central operational command led by Lt. Gen Angus  Campbell. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders is stopping the boats. There has been a substantial  and sustainable reduction in illegal boat arrivals. 

 In the first eight months of 2014, just one people smuggling venture made it to  Australia, compared to 268 and more than 18 800 people over the same eight month  period last year under the Labor government. It has been 45 days since the last  people smuggling venture was brought to Australia. 

 Stopping the boats is stopping the deaths at sea. 

 Without question it has been the safe and successful implementation of turn backs  that has been the dominant factor in stopping the boats. 

 As we argued in Opposition and have now practiced in government, to stop the  boats you have to be prepared to actually physically stop and turn boats back. 

 The outstanding service of the men and women in our civilian agencies and defence  forces that make up Operation Sovereign Borders have ensured the success of the  government's policies. 

 These policies have also seen a reduction in the number of children in detention by  more than 40%. There are now 560 fewer children in detention today than when we 

 were elected and we intend to have the remaining 150 who arrived before July 19  out by the end of the year. 

 We are reversing Labor's building the detention centre revolution, where Labor's  border failures became an economic stimulus programme. We are closing the  detention centres Labor opened, with ten centres to be closed by the end of 2014/15,  saving the taxpayer $283 million. This is in addition to the $2.5 billion saved through  the dramatic reduction in illegal boat arrivals. 

 Our success has also enabled us to free up our offshore humanitarian programme  for those who have been waiting in the queue for years under Labor. 

 In 2012/13 there were just 503 places provided in our special humanitarian  programme. This year there is 5000. Overall, our refugee and humanitarian  programme will deliver 4400 places to those affected by the conflicts in Syria and  Iraq this year alone. This is made possible by our border success. No longer are  places in this programme being taken by those who have come illegally by boat. 

 Offshore processing and resettlement has also been implemented. However, this  has not been without its challenges. 

 The death of Reza Berati in PNG was a terrible tragedy. A full and independent  inquiry was undertaken into this incident and released in full. PNG authorities have  charged two persons in relation to Reza Berati's death. 

 I was also saddened by the death last Friday evening of Hamid Kehazaei, I am  advised as a result of septicaemia. 

 My Department's chief medical officer is reviewing the clinical treatment provided to  Mr Kehazaei and there is a Coroners inquiry underway. This is appropriate,  necessary and will inform our action. 

 Where there are issues that need to be addressed at the processing centres, the  government has taken action to support the PNG and Nauruan Governments who  run these centres. 

 Labor left behind a $1.2 billion dollar deficit in services and facilities that were  needed to properly support the centres at Manus Island and Nauru, in particular  health and medical services and facilities and services for children. We have filled  this hole. 

 On Manus, the Australian Government has delivered a significant upgrade to the  Lorengau Hospital, including supply of a range of dental and medical equipment,  including a digital x-ray device, a machine to test blood samples quickly and an  incubator. We are upgrading security infrastructure. The exterior fencing upgrade  has been completed and work continues on the interior fencing, lighting and CCTV.  We are also currently refurbishing ablution blocks, staff housing, establishing a new  medical facility and relocating the logistics block. 

 On Nauru, we have provided the funding to expand our accommodation capacity.  We have delivered recreation spaces, dining areas, medical and religious facilities.  We have completed construction of accommodation for family groups and  unaccompanied minors, with a range of facilities, including air conditioning in  sleeping areas, recreation spaces, a children's playground, dining, medical and  religious facilities. 

 We have provided $500 000 per annum for additional maternity and paediatric  specialist medical staff on Nauru and $2 million per annum for additional psychiatry  resources. $11 million per annum have been provided for a fully staffed in-patient  facility with general surgical capability on both islands. 

 This is our record. 

 Under Labor no one was processed offshore and no one was resettled offshore. 

 To date, more than 1000 people transferred to Nauru have commenced their claims  assessment and 206 people found to be refugees have been resettled on Nauru. 

 There remain difficult and frustrating problems with PNG in relation to the  resettlement programme. 

 Kevin Rudd and Tony Burke signed over $430 million in taxpayer's funds in  additional aid and infrastructure funding to the PNG Government as part of their  panicked announcement before the last election in return for a blank sheet of paper. 

 It made the five for one Malaysian people swap deal look well considered. 

 Issues regarding the practical and political difficulties of resettling refugees in PNG  were ignored by Labor in their search for a quick fix. 

 Without the critical and complementary support of turn backs, denying permanent  visas and our regional deterrence measures, Labor's cobbled together PNG  arrangement would been overwhelmed within months, if not weeks, had Labor been  re-elected. 

 In Opposition I said we would seek to salvage from the PNG arrangement what we  could, and that is what we have been seeking to do. 

 We have made progress. 78 assessments have been undertaken in PNG, and more  than 600 have commenced the formal assessment process. We appreciate the  commitment from Minister Pato and Prime Minister O'Neill in achieving the progress  we have made to date. 

 The resettlement plan has now been before the PNG Cabinet for several months,  following the extensive consultations conducted by their Expert Panel led by Dame  Carol Kidu. It is important that this now proceed. 

 We remain committed to working through the remaining issues with the government  of PNG to ensure that the agreement delivers the resettlement of refugees in PNG in  return for the increased aid and infrastructure funding that is being delivered. 

 Our international relationships and regional partnerships, beyond Nauru and PNG,  remain essential to the regional deterrence framework we have established. To date  the Australian government has committed over $100 million dollars in regional  collaboration initiatives, including law enforcement collaboration and immigration  systems. 

 We have also directly increased the capability of maritime patrols in Sri Lanka with  the gifting of two bay class vessels now in service off the Sri Lankan coast and will  transfer two more vessels to Malaysia next year. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders has also greatly benefited our region. The number of  transit arrivals coming into Indonesia has fallen dramatically and the backlog of  persons remaining in Indonesia has now fallen below 10 000 for the first time since  before the last big surge of ventures in the middle of last year. 

 The substantive defeat of people smugglers has also largely removed a debilitating  distraction in our regional relationships, allowing us to resume some normal  transmission in these engagements.  Our regional engagement is also seeking to extend the refugee resettlement club. 

 Refugee resettlement is not an economic upgrade programme. It is about providing  protection from persecution. If this remains simply the responsibility of first world  nations then not only will the number of places remain limited but the programme  itself will become a pull factor for people smuggling. 

 The attraction of first world economies and first world welfare is understandably  strong. 

 The refugee convention and refugee resettlement is supposed to be for asylum  seekers not Centrelink seekers. 

 It is well known that we are in discussions with Cambodia to resettle refugees from  the regional processing centres. Those discussions have not been completed. 

 It is important to stress that any arrangement with Cambodia would only deal with  voluntary resettlement, which has never been a concern for Australia; people will  have freedom of movement and work rights along with the standard entitlements of  other residents of that country. 

 This arrangement seeks to serve the policy position that persons transferred to  regional processing centres will never be resettled in Australia. 

 The other major challenge is to address the almost 30 000 people left behind by the  previous government who entered Australia illegally by boat and whose claims had  not been processed or finally determined at the time of the last election. 

 All those who arrived after July 19 are being transferred to Manus Island or Nauru for  offshore processing and resettlement in accordance with the policy established by  the previous government. For those who illegally arrived by boat before July 19,  2013, it is the government's policy not to provide them with a permanent visa. 

 Since this policy was introduced a year ago more than 400 people have decided to  go home. It was not the visa they were promised by the smugglers. Under the  previous government at total 155 elected to go home over six years. The contrast is  stark. 

 Denial of permanent visas is critical to ensuring that, at all levels, Australia  undermines the people smuggling trade, by never honouring a people smugglers  promise of permanent residency and citizenship in Australia. 

 The government has so far pursued this latter element of the policy without the  advantage of temporary protection visas, for which we received a thumping mandate  at the last election which has been denied by Labor and the Greens, needlessly  preventing the government from processing asylum claims. 

 Had TPVs been available, many people would have already been processed. Those  found to be refugees would now be on temporary visas, with full work rights and  parity of benefits. 

 The reintroduction of TPVs will enable the government to introduce new  arrangements to get all of those who had already arrived under Labor processed. 

 Combined with other measures, TPVs will also give the government an alternative  option for those who arrived after July 19 and before the end of last year, including  over 450 children. Seventy five per cent of this group, in including children, turned up  under the previous government and had not been transferred to offshore processing  centres. 

 Now while it will continue to be the policy of the government that anyone who arrives  illegally by boat will be transferred to offshore processing, as the 157 passengers on  the recent Indian venture discovered, the government is open to alternatives for the  earlier July 19 - December 31, caseload, but not those who may arrive now or who  have already been transferred. 

 Labor and the Greens have made themselves irrelevant to this discussion through  their opposition to TPVs. 

 We will continue to engage the cross bench in the Senate on these issues and I  have been encouraged by their response to date. 

 A temporary protection visa would ensure that the people smuggler's promise of  permanent resettlement would not have been honoured, maintaining the integrity of  the government's border protection regime, while providing an alternative to the  costly and avoidable transfer of people, including families with children to Nauru. 

 For those who have already been transferred to offshore processing the policy of  offshore resettlement will remain in place. 

 As Operation Sovereign Borders approaches its first anniversary in just over week,  any fair assessment would acknowledge the extraordinary results that have been  achieved. Some have said that it has been at too high a price. They have clearly not  spoken to the customs and naval officers that I have spoken to who had the  gruesome task of scooping the corpses of children out of the water. 

 At the last election the Australian people decided that enough people had died at  sea. It was time to restore the policies that worked. 

 The grand policy experiment on border protection is over. It is the Coalition's policies  that effectively stop the boats and you remove them at a terrible price. That  argument, that debate, l believe, is settled. It's time to move on. 

 Reversing Labor's Cuts to Border Protection 

 Across the broader remit of the Immigration and Border Protection portfolio, the  reforms I have announced over the last twelve months reflect where the  government's focus will increasingly be. 

 Through to 2016/17, international sea and air traveller numbers are expected to  increase by 25%, inbound sea cargo by 20% and inbound air cargo by nearly 85%. 

 Alongside the growth in legitimate trade and travel, the sophistication of criminal  activity, particularly trans-national organised crime is evolving and searching for  weak points at our borders. 

 Criminals use the same ships, the same mail services, the same containers, the  same ports, the same roads and the same online technologies as legitimate traders. 

 The threat of transnational crime is real and growing and Australia's border  protection systems must be able to both manage these threats, whilst ensuring that  the legitimate border transactions that support our participation in global economic  systems, are facilitated. 

 Border protection is not just about stopping the boats. We also need to do all we can  to stop the drugs, the guns and the gangs. 

 To this end I note my decision in May this year to cancel the visa of Rebels  Motorcycle Club National President, Alex Vella; a visa that was renewed, without  contest, by the previous government. 

 Under the previous Labor government, more than $700 million in funding was ripped  from the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. 

 In January I announced $88 million in additional funding to increase screening of  international mail, air cargo and sea cargo. This involved everything from increased  intelligence capabilities to mobile and static x-ray and detection technology and an 

 additional 15 detector dog teams to support the increased inspection and  examination of cargo. 

 In May this year I announced the Australian Border Force would be established on  July 1 2015. This announcement was backed up by an investment of more than  $700 million in the budget over the next six years to expand our capability on the  border, including a new central strategic border command and 5 regional commands,  the stand-up of the National Border Targeting Centre, next generating profiling and  targeting capabilities, a new Border Force College and six rapid response vessels to  patrol remote areas, such as in the Torres Strait. 

 Stopping foreign fighters 

 We also must stop the terrorists. 

 The barbarous conflict we are witnessing in Syria and Iraq has attracted foreign  combatants from across the globe, including 60 Australians. 

 The young Australians who now either engage directly or provide material support to  the extremist terrorist violence of IS, are our citizens, they come from our suburbs,  our communities, and were born in our country. 

 There is a real and serious risk that they will return as recipients of terrorist training,  even more radicalised than before, and at the very least seek to propagate the  heinous, hateful and intolerant messaging of terrorist groups back to Australia. 

 Technology has allowed terrorist and extremist groups to become increasingly  decentralised, to organise in discrete groups and cells and to share training materials  and to fundraise online. 

 On August 5, the Prime Minister announced that the government would provide $630  million in additional funding over the next four years to counter the threat of terrorism  both in Australian and overseas, including $154 million for immigration and border  protection. 

 As announced this includes specialist counter terrorism units at our airports and  installation of an additional 62 e-Gates for departures processing at all of Australia's  eight international airports. 

 As part of this package I announce that the government is also introducing a $34.8  million expansion of our Advance Passenger Processing systems to now cover  travellers departing Australia. 

 APP is currently used by airlines to send inbound traveller data to relevant law  enforcement and border agencies and as part of the eGates trial, industry partners  Qantas and Air New Zealand have already been running a trial of the APP  departures system. 

 In addition I can confirm today a $13.7 million expansion of our global Airline Liaison  Officer or ALO network that works with partner countries and airlines around the 

 world to extend our border all the way to the embarkation points of those seeking to  enter Australia. Australia has one of the most experienced, respected and effective  ALO networks in the world. The package strategically extends their reach and  coverage and will provide a further layer of protection against terrorists and other  threats. 

 All of these initiatives will be boosted by the introduction of the legislative package to  be introduced into the parliament. Identifying and stopping people is one thing, but  giving our people the stronger powers they need to prevent their entry or departure  from Australia in our national interest is essential to getting this job done. These  legislative changes will include: 

  addressing shortcomings in the Customs Act 1901 to detain persons of  interest,   changes to the Migration Act to better support the use and retention of  information captured from automated border processing technology and 

 requiring carriers to provide information in advance on departing travellers  through an approved reporting system, and   providing the Director-General of Security under the ASIO Act with the power  to issue an interim prejudicial security assessment, and under the Migration 

 Act to enable any visa held by that person to be cancelled. 

 Contributing to the national economic task 

 The job of immigration and border protection is not just about national security. The  portfolio makes a significant economic contribution as well. 

 Enhanced, efficient screening of passengers and goods at our airports and sea  ports, with smart, intelligence driven targeting of risks, will make sure that legitimate  travel and exchanges can occur at a faster rate, with minimum interference. 

 The Australian Customs and Border Protection Service is currently funded to  develop and implement a Trusted Trader Programme, that will work alongside  enhanced targeting and risk management processes to ensure that Australia's  border facilitation processes foster growth in trade and works with evolving  international supply chains. 

 This programme will add real value to the outstanding work of the Minister for Trade,  who is delivering new and long overdue trade architecture for Australia. 

 This scheme will be based upon the World Customs Organisation's Authorised  Economic Operator or AEO concept and will offer a more flexible border clearance  process for eligible traders. For those with designated Trusted Trader status, the  movement of goods will be facilitated more quickly, offering associated opportunities  for marketing and reputational enhancement. 

 In order to remain an attractive destination for non-permanent migrants, tourists and  international students, Australia must continue to develop competitive visa products  that suit the needs of international visitors. 

 To this end we have expanded access to streamlined visa processing to private  colleges offering tertiary degrees and extend the programme to all institutions  providing diploma level courses. 

 66% of visitor visa applications from China are now finalised within 5 working days of  lodgement and 80% within 10 working days. Chinese business visitors are now  eligible to apply for a three year multiple entry visa and eVisa online lodgement  services are now available in 118 more countries, than one year ago. 

 The government is also committed to ensuring that the Significant Investor Visa or  SIV scheme realizes its full potential. 

 After being announced in May 2012 and commenced in November 2012, only 28  applications, with a total value of $140 million Australian dollars being directed into  local investments had been approved by Labor the time of the election. 

 Since our election, an average of $150 million dollars of complying investments have  been approved every single month. 358 grants have been approved since  September 2013 and significantly, at least $1.79 billion in complying investments. 

 I am pleased with these results, but I think we can do better. Minister Cash  commissioned a review of the SIV in March this year. The Prime Minister and  Minister Cash will have more to say about our response in the weeks ahead.  However, I specifically wish to flag today that I will be supporting proposals to  prevent the recycling of investment funds used to qualify for the scheme, by requiring  complying investments to remain unencumbered for the entire duration of their  provisional visa. 

 Finally, the 457 visa scheme allows businesses to fill short to medium term skill  shortages by recruiting qualified workers from outside Australia when an equivalently  skilled Australian resident cannot be found. 

 The 457 programme came under direct attack from Labor in government, as they  attempted to suffocate the programme with regulation at the urging of the unions. 

 457 workers make a contribution from day one. They come the right way, they pay  tax and support themselves from day one. 

 Skilled workers on sponsored programmes are not a substitute for Australian jobs  but they an integral part of the economic machinery that creates Australian jobs. 

 Skilled migrants create Australian jobs. 

 To restore some economic common sense to this policy area, Minister Cash  established an independent panel led by John Azarias to conduct a review into our  457 programme. I thank John and his fellow panel members, Professor Peter  MacDonald, Jenny Lambert and Katie Malyon for the excellent work they have done. 

 The panel engaged in extensive consultations, with stakeholder groups across the  country from employers, unions and individuals. 

 The panel has completed their review and the report has been released publicly on  line today by Minister Cash. 

 I note that the panel found no evidence to back claims of widespread rorting of the  programme made by the previous Labor government. 

 The government will provide a formal response to the report in due course. It is a  report to Government not from Government. 

 However, today I wish to note that I believe the report proposes a balanced and  measured set of reforms that would give businesses access to the skilled workers  they need to grow their businesses and employ more Australians. 

 In doing so, I believe the panel's recommendations keep faith with the necessary  requirements for a robust integrity framework to support the 457 programme, while  recognising and addressing the need to increase the skills capability of the domestic  workforce. 

 The Review has recommended that the market rate framework continue to operate  as a core component of the 457 programme. I support the continuation of the market  rate framework, but will, in line with the recommendations of the review, look  favourably on introducing a deregulation measure that brings the income bar for  exemption from market rate assessment in line with the top marginal tax rate of  $180,000. 

 I am also attracted to the proposals that support trusted legitimate sponsors and help  them manage their compliance and reporting obligations more effectively, whilst  making it more difficult for those with dishonest intent to make fraudulent application. 

 I agree that there is a need to simplify the process of sponsorship renewal, extend  reporting time frames and bring forward legislation to make it unlawful for sponsors  to be paid by visa applicants for a migration outcome, reinforced by a robust penalty  and conviction framework. 

 The English language requirements are unnecessarily restrictive, serving more as an  industrial lock out rather than an honest attempt to ensure appropriate language  skills which the government does believe is important. There are more practical ways  to achieve what is needed here and moving to an averaging system would remove  much unnecessary cost and complexity. 

 The government will also look at ways in which Labour Agreement negotiation time  can be improved to enable demand-driven and responsive pathways for temporary  migration, where standard 457 programme arrangements are not suitable. The  Designated Area Migration Agreement recently announced by Minister Cash will go  a long way to facilitating a streamlined process model around which future pathways  of this type may be shaped. 

 To help support compliance enforcement, we must explore opportunities for greater  collaboration with the Australian Taxation Office as recommended. Greater  information sharing between the two agencies will ensure that the department is 

 optimally positioned to detect non-compliance in the 457 programme swiftly, and in  doing so use less resources, whilst minimising the burden on those businesses  doing the right thing. 

 We must be as tough on enforcing our immigration laws in the workplace as we are  on our borders. Our record on people smuggling should serve as a warning on the  resolve of this government to ensure that the integrity of our immigration programme  is secure. 

 To date, we have already achieved a significant escalation in compliance,  investigation and integrity activities, across a broad range of immigration and visa  product areas. 

 Since the federal election there has been a 14% increase in compliance actions  across the board, whilst field actions have increased by 27%, criminal investigations  are up 7%, Employment Awareness visits up 41%, location of illegal workers up 18%  and there has been an over 200% increase in the issuing of Illegal Warning Notices. 

 Through Operation Tricord, a multi-agency effort across both state and federal  jurisdictions, hundreds of illegal workers and non-compliant workers have been  disrupted. In one operation alone that took place in May, 122 illegal workers and visa  over stayers were identified and located in Northern Perth. 

 Operations such as these should serve as a warning to illegal workers and the  employers who allow them to work illegally. 

 In 2013-14, the Operational Integrity cancellations network cancelled 42 600 visas,  representing an increase in cancellations by approximately 45% on cancellations  made during the previous year. 

 In March this year I strengthened our ability to act where it is suspected that bogus  documents or information have been used to identify an individual making an  application by imposing a ten year ban on the grant of another visa. 

 Our border is a strategic national asset. 

 This government is restoring the value of this asset for the Australian people and is  delivering the dividends that result from stronger borders. 

 It is against the delivery of these dividends that we measure our performance and for  which we are accountable. 

 At the next election the Australian people will be able to make a clear judgement on  our achievements on the border. 

 The Australian people had to learn the hard way during the six years of Labor about  what happens when policies that work on our border are abandoned. The  consequences were deadly, costly and chaotic. Labor's border failures paralysed  their government. 

 They can never be given the opportunity to do this to the Australian people again,  and they will, if given the chance 

 

