---
title: "Budget 2014: Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 27 May 2014: Eric Abetz fiddling the figures in Department Report on jobs; offshore detention; Tony Abbott's Budget lies and broken promises"
date: "2014-05-27"
creators:
  - "O'Connor, Brendan"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408782
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3190034%22
---

 

 THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 27 MAY 2014   

 TOPICS: Eric Abetz fiddling the figures in Department Report on jobs;  Offshore detention; Tony Abbott’s Budget lies and broken promises.   

 BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: This is the Australian jobs document that was  released by the Department of Employment. This document reveals that the  signature promise of the Prime Minister to create one million jobs in five years is  utterly, utterly wrong. In fact, in March this year we had the office of the Minister  for Employment, Eric Abetz, seeking to doctor the forecasts in this report. But it  clearly shows that this document - this document here - provided for and  developed by the Minister’s own department will ensure over the next five years  that there would be 160,000 fewer jobs as a result of the Government’s failure to  act.   

 What we’ve seen over the last little while is a government that has actually had  no plan for jobs. We’ve seen this occur during the last few months where the  Treasurer of the country goaded Holden to leave. We’ve seen this in terms of its  failure to respond to Qantas. We’ve seen this with its failure to respond to  Toyota leaving our shores. There is no jobs plan for manufacturing. We have an  Industry Minister without an industry policy. This Government needs now to clear  up the difference between the departmental advice about the jobs loss - about  the jobs growth, over the last five years. A failure to fulfil the one million promise  by 160,000 - as clearly articulated by this report - and the Prime Minister’s own  promise before the election that there will be one million jobs as a result of the 

 initiatives of this government. There’s a huge, yawning gap between the  department’s own forecasts and the Prime Minister’s own promise.   

 I’m happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: The Immigration Minister says that he aspires to guarantee the  protection of people offshore. If that’s only an aspiration should Labor continue  to be supporting the transfer of asylum seekers offshore?   

 O’CONNOR: Well look, I understand that this was a very sensitive and  comprehensive report that was released yesterday. Clearly, there are some  serious questions to be answered by the Government and the Minister in relation  to the events that took place most recently, particularly the death of a person in  detention. It is incumbent upon the Minister to explain given that there was 

 evidence that that riot was anticipated, why not everything was in place to  respond effectively to ensure the safeguard of those in detention.   

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of this situation? [Clive Palmer’s arrival]   

 O’CONNOR: Well, I didn’t turn up in a Rolls Royce which was once owned by  the Queen, so I can understand the interest. But I think more importantly of  course is the Government’s failure to deliver on jobs. What the Australian people  are concerned about is whether in fact they or their children have jobs over the  little while, particularly at the time when we have a Government that is cutting  off Newstart for young jobseekers for six months. I mean, how are they  supposed to live? How are they supposed to feed themselves? In fact, how are 

 they supposed to have the wherewithal to find a job if they don’t have any  income at all? And that just really goes to the heartlessness of this government  that’s clearly outlined in the Budget.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned with Labor taking an approach where it will  block most measures put forward by the Government, will look to Clive Palme  after July - are you happy to leave it up to him with the balance of power?   

 O’CONNOR: We’ve made clear that we will highlight the unfairness, the attack  on vulnerable Australians, and at the same time we will ensure that we will be  fiscally responsible and look at these measures methodically, and work out what  we can best do.    

 There is no doubt that this Government has chosen to place the burden of these  cuts on the most vulnerable. Taxing you if you go to the doctor. Taxing you if  you are going to the petrol bowser. I mean, taxing - cutting over the long term,  cutting pensions. Cutting off any benefit whatsoever for the unemployed under  the age of 30, even if they’re looking for work. Clearly this is a sign of a 

 government that wants to impose those measures on the most vulnerable  Australians. And of course we will stand up for lower income earners.    

 JOURNALIST: The Government is undergoing an advertising campaign at the  moment. Is that right given the cuts we saw in the Budget a couple of weeks  ago? 

 O’CONNOR: There’s times when you obviously have to look at government  measures but you shouldn’t take money out of schools and hospitals to pay for  sending a message to the Australian people because the Prime Minister and  Treasurer is unable to sell their own Budget. Clearly, the reason why this  government would have to spend taxpayer’s dollars and take that from places  like schools and hospitals to sell the message is because Joe Hockey and Tony  Abbott cannot sell this Budget. The reason they cannot sell this Budget is  because it’s a Budget of broken promises, a litany of lies, by the Government  imposing cruel measures upon the Australian people. 

 JOURNALIST: On the cuts to schools and hospitals [in audible] the Prime  Minister used, we’ve got them here from some Labor staffers. Cuts to schools  and hospitals is that just what government’s do? 

 O’CONNOR: Well it’s clear, I think, from Budget night that this government is  not up to the job of governing. The Budget is cruel. The message is not getting  out. Even if they were good salespeople the Australian people will not wear the  lies that are contained within this Budget.  

 I mean this is not just some sort of manipulation of a number of things that were  said before the election and after the election; this is an utter contradiction  between what the Prime Minister promised the Australian people and what he’s  now delivering. This is a fundamental breach of faith between the Prime Minister  and the Australian people and he will wear this. He will wear these decisions, as  he ought to.  

 I say one other thing and I send a message to the Coalition MPs. The Coalition  MPs would’ve gone back to their electorates since the Budget. Today is the first  day that these Coalition MPs have an opportunity to tell the Prime Minister and  Treasurer what the people of Australia think of this Budget. Now it’s no point  being heroes in the electorates and cowards in the party room. It is time now for  the Coalition MPs to stand up in the party room and tell the Prime Minister and  Treasurer of this country that what they have done is a fundamental breach  between the Government and the Australian people.  

 What they must tell the Prime Minister and Treasurer is that this Budget will  inflict untold damage on pensioners, on families on low and middle incomes, on  young job seekers - you name it, everyone who has been targeted by this  government. So here’s an opportunity. This is indeed the first opportunity for the  Coalition MPs to stand up to the Prime Minister and Treasurer at this party room  because if they choose not to do that, if the Coalition MPs turn up to the party  room today and choose not to say anything to the Prime Minister and Treasurer  they should hang their heads in shame.  

 They’ve been in their electorates around the country since Budget was  announced last Tuesday. They know what the constituencies are telling them  about the broken promises and the cruel measures that are in this Budget. So, if  they’re true to their name, if they are truly representing the constituents in the  Chamber, in the House of Representatives, then it is incumbent upon them today  to tell the Prime Minister and the Treasurer that they’ve got it wrong, that this  Budget is a cruel Budget, that this Budget is a litany of lies and that the  Government and indeed the Prime Minister and Treasurer must change the  course of this Budget because if they fail to do that they do not deserve to be  representatives of the constituencies who elected them in September last year.  

 JOURNALIST: Four months after the Immigration Minister approved upgrades  to security on Manus they hadn’t been delivered, did they get distracted stopping  the boats at the expense of people in detention? 

 O’CONNOR: Look, I understand Richard Marles will be giving a speech at the  Press Club later today and I think it’d be better for him to answer the questions.  I’ve not read the report in full. Clearly the report does outline, however, the  Minister has questions to answer about the preparations that were not in place  leading up to that tragedy.  

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: GLEN ATWELL 0428 434 709   

