---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 4 September 2014: CliveBank farce; Abbott Government freezing Super Guarantee for nine million Australians; cars; asylum seekers; Senate debate"
date: "2014-09-04"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "CliveBank farce"
  - "Abbott Government freezing Super Guarantee for nine million Australians"
  - "cars"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Senate debate"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211413204
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3374321%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  THURSDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2014    

 SUBJECT/ S: CliveBank farce; Abbott Government freezing Super  Guarantee for nine million Australians; cars; asylum seekers; Senate  debate.    

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning. Well as each day  emerges, more details emerge of the dirty deal done by Tony Abbott, Joe Hockey  and Clive Palmer to reduce the retirement incomes of ordinary Australians. Tony  Abbott and Joe Hockey have been lecturing Australians for a year about the age  of entitlement, about companies not receiving tax breaks. They goaded Holden  to leave Australia, the refused to intervene to help the people of Shepparton with  SPC. But to get Clive Palmer’s vote to reduce the retirement incomes of  Australians, to help nine mining companies, Joe Hockey’s agreed to look at a  special fund at Clive Palmer’s suggestion. A special fund of Government and  taxpayers’ money which would provide support for businesses that may  otherwise go out of business, debt guarantees and other support.    

 On behalf of the Labor Party today, I say the Labor Party will not support any  such fund.    

 I call on Joe Hockey on behalf of the Government to do the same.    

 Joe Hockey has agreed to an inquiry about this fund, this must mean the  Government is prepared to consider it. Well the Labor Party knows that this is  not an appropriate use of taxpayers’ money, Joe Hockey should do the same.    

 There are no lengths that Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott won’t go to, to get Clive  Palmer’s vote, to help nine mining companies, to take away the Schoolkids  Bonus, to take away the Low Income Superannuation Contribution, and to freeze  the increase in superannuation, which will take $100,000 by the time of  retirement off a 25 year old on average wages.       

 JOURNALIST: The Government would argue though that they’re just doing the  right thing by looking into this, they’ve been negotiating and listening to  suggestions from the crossbenchers.    

 BOWEN: Well Joe Hockey is a hypocrite. Joe Hockey is a hypocrite. He says he’s  been lecturing Australians for 12 months about how he would never do such a  thing, and now he personally negotiated with Clive Palmer on the floor of the  Senate, this deal.    

 Joe Hockey should today say the Government will not support such a fund.    

 JOURNALIST: Is it a bit pre-emptive for you to rule out entirely without  knowing any of the details?    

 BOWEN: Well, I know enough of the details to know it’s a bad idea and the  Labor Party will not support it.    

 JOURNALIST: The Government is releasing a discussion paper ruling out  importing wholesale second hand cars but leaving open the option of individual  buyers, picking up second hand cars from overseas. What’s your response to  this? Is it a good -    

 BOWEN: I’m aware of this issue, and people in the motor industry have raised it  with me as I’ve travelled around the country. We would have a look at the  discussion papers before announcing further responses.    

 JOURNALIST: But at a first sort of glance, would you support -     

 BOWEN: Look it’s a serious issue, called grey imports, the grey factor in the car  industry. I’ve heard arguments put to me on both sides, we would look at the  discussion paper and make further comments then after seeing the way that the  discussion is framed in the discussion paper. I don’t believe they’ve issued the  discussion paper yet, they’re talking about it. We would wait to see the details  and then respond in full.    

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of criticism that Labor’s scheduled increases  for super were going to happen too quickly, that 2.5 per cent over 5 years is too  just rapid? 

 

 BOWEN: Well that’s just nonsense. That is just complete nonsense. The  increase in the superannuation guarantee was carefully calibrated to ensure that  it could be delivered over time. That it was, did not come as a shock to the  economy and half a percent a year, starting at a quarter of a percent a year and  then half a percent a year, getting to 12 per cent over a long period of time is  the appropriate way to do it. But these were the same arguments the Liberal  Party ran when Paul Keating took superannuation from 3 per cent to 9 per cent.  This is a record we’ve heard before. The Liberal Party hates superannuation.  They’ve always got an excuse. Now’s not the right time, it’s too fast, but at their  core they hate superannuation. And the father of superannuation, Paul Keating,  said yesterday and I think very eloquently pointed out the flaws in the Liberal  and National party’s approach; “they do not believe because of their prejudice in  Australians saving for retirement through superannuation.”    

 And let me make this point; Joe Hockey beats his chest and huffs and puffs  about Australians working longer and the need to cut the age pension because of  the aging of the population but superannuation built up over time means that  people are less reliant on the age pension, less people on the full pension, more  people on the part pension or no pension because they’ve been able to build up  their superannuation savings. Joe Hockey is undermining, undermining the long  term viability of our age pension by making it harder for people to save for their  future through superannuation by freezing the superannuation guarantee. And  importantly abolishing the low income superannuation contribution.    

 Joe Hockey thinks that low income workers, people on $37,000 or less should  get zero in tax concessions at the same time as he has reversed the Labor  party’s changes which ensure that people getting $100,000 in interest from their  superannuation, so you would have to have more than $2 million in your account  in most instances, he wants them to get a bigger tax break. This just shows his  priorities are wrong, it shows his values are out of touch.    

 The Labor party will stand up for low and middle income earners who are trying  to save for their retirement through superannuation. We believe that every  Australian should have a dignified retirement. If they’ve worked hard all their life  they deserve a dignified retirement whether they be on a low, middle or high  income.    

 JOURNALIST: What does the situation of the brain-dead asylum seeker say  about conditions offshore?    

 BOWEN: Look, I’ve seen the report this morning on Sky News, I’ve not seen any  further detail. Obviously, anything like this would appear to be a tragedy. As for  further details I’m sure that Richard Marles will be seeking a briefing from the 

 Government as to the situation and what steps can be taken further. I don’t have  any further information other than what I’ve heard in the media this morning.    

 JOURNALIST: What do make of criticisms from Nick Xenophon and John  Madigan about the way the Government’s handled negotiations with the  crossbenches in the Senate about breading a culture of distrust?    

 BOWEN: Well, ultimately that’s a matter for Senators Xenophon and Madigan  but I will say this. The Government arrogantly introduced their unfair Budget and  then just lectured the parliament and the people about how it should pass. It  took Joe Hockey three months to get around to talking to the crossbench. That’s  not the approach we took in office, that’s not the approach we would take in  office, that Bill Shorten would take as Prime Minister or I would take as  Treasurer. You’ve got to treat your colleagues in the parliament with some  respect. And Joe Hockey clearly lectures the Australian people and lectures the  Australian parliament and if Senators Madigan and Xenophon have made those  comments they are reflecting their views of the Government.    

 JOURNALIST: We’ve heard both Labor and the Government say that it’s each  other’s fault giving Clive Palmer power. In terms of these negotiations have you  gone to the Government much? Offered some ground or policy (inaudible)    

 BOWEN: Look, I’ve made consistently clear the position which is this; that Labor  will vote based on our values and our principles. If the Government wanted to  talk to us about particular measures and see if there was common ground then  we would listen to that. The Government has not attempted to do that.    

 JOURNALIST: So you wait to be approached?    

 BOWEN: Governments can from time to time can talk to oppositions - that’s the  process. It happened when the Labor party was in office. It’s not happened  under this Government very much at all, certainly on economic policy. They  know where we stand on matters of principle and values. If there were particular  matters they wanted to talk to us about we would always listen.    

 Alright, thanks guys.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879    

 

