---
title: "Budget 2014: Streamlined arrangements for external merits review"
date: "2014-05-13"
creators:
  - "Brandis, George"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407859
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3176893%22
---

 Attorney-General for Australia  

 Senator the Hon George Brandis QC  Streamlined arrangements for external merits review   13 May 2014  The Abbott Government announced today its intention to streamline and simplify  Australia’s external merits review system. The reforms will remove unnecessary  layers of bureaucracy and deliver an improved and simplified merits review system  for all Australians. This is in line with the Coalition’s commitment to streamline  government and reduce duplication to deliver efficient, effective government. The  measure is expected to save $20.2 million over four years.  From 1 July 2015, key Commonwealth external merits review agencies will be  amalgamated—namely, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT), Migration  Review Tribunal and Refugee Review Tribunal, Social Security Appeals Tribunal and  the Classification Review Board. Merits review of Freedom of Information (FOI)  matters, currently undertaken by the Office of the Australian Information Commission  (OAIC), will also be transferred to the AAT from 1 January 2015.   The merger of merits review agencies will provide an accessible “one stop shop” for  external merits review and will ensure that end-users have a review option that is  fair, less confusing, just, economical, informal and quick.   Most states and territories have now established a similar ‘super tribunal’ for merits  review, with considerable success.  The complex and multilevel merits review system for FOI matters has contributed to  significant processing delays. Simplifying and streamlining FOI review processes by  transferring these functions from the OAIC to the AAT will improve administrative  efficiencies and reduce the burden on FOI applicants. The AAT will receive a funding  boost to assist with the backlog and to better meet acceptable timeframes  Under the new arrangements, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner will be  established as a separate statutory office and will continue to be responsible for the  exercise of statutory functions under the Privacy Act 1988 and related legislation.  The Government acknowledges the valuable contribution of Professor John McMillan  AO as the Australian Information Commissioner and Dr James Popple as the  Freedom of Information Commissioner and the staff of the OAIC.  The Government is committed to an external merits review system that is more  efficient, less complicated and more effective.   The Budget is part of the Government’s Economic Action Strategy to build a strong,  prosperous economy and a safe, secure Australia.   

