---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Canberra: 28 October 2014: Tackling alcohol-related harm; Tony Abbott’s Petrol Tax; Tony Abbott’s broken promise on the GST; Asylum seekers; Live exports."
date: "2014-10-28"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Tackling alcohol-related harm"
  - "Tony Abbott’s Petrol Tax"
  - "Tony Abbott’s broken promise on the GST"
  - "Asylum seekers"
  - "Live exports."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211446811
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3473721%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2014   

 SUBJECT/S: Tackling alcohol-related harm; Tony Abbott’s Petrol Tax; Tony  Abbott’s broken promise on the GST; Asylum seekers; Live exports.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everyone. Great to  be here at the AMA Summit on the impact of alcohol-related  harm. I’m here of course  with my Shadow Minister for Health Catherine King. It is good that the representative  body of Australia’s medical practitioners is standing up on a matter of great public  importance. Alcohol-related harm has a massive cost to Australian communities, most  importantly to Australian families and individuals. The AMA are supported by the Labor  Opposition, in starting an appropriate national conversation about what Australia can do  together to tackle the ravages of alcohol-related harm.    

 I might also just briefly turn to some breaking news that I have heard that Senator  Cormann has got up today in the last hour or half hour and announced a new sneaky  tax on Australian motorists. Tony Abbott, on 33 occasions before the last election, said  there will be no change to GST. Tony Abbott said before the last election in fact there  will be no new taxes and no changes to taxes under a Government he has led.  Yesterday, Tony Abbott said, somewhat unusually for him, that he wanted to be positive  and work with all the political parties to have a mature and sensible long term  conversation. The Victorian Premier Napthine, the Liberal, was clearly unhappy that  Tony Abbott's flagged a new GST during the State election. But anyway Tony Abbott  said we must have a mature discussion about taxation with all Australians. Less than 24  hours after Tony Abbott said this in Parliament, Senator Cormann has announced that  the Liberal Party, the Abbott Government are going to bypass the Parliament of  Australia to impose new petrol taxes on every motorist in Australia.    

 What is going to happen now is that Tony Abbott, who lied about no new taxes before  the last election, who lied about no new GST, is now bypassing the Parliament of  Australia, the elected representatives who are put there by Australians to oversight the  actions of a Government. He is so addicted to new taxes, Tony Abbott is so addicted to  new taxes, he is so addicted to telling lies before the election and breaking his promises  afterwards that he has now decided to bypass the Parliament of Australia. What it  effectively means is that every motorist who ever goes to a petrol station, every time  they get out the petrol pump and put it into the car is paying a new Tony Abbott Petrol  Tax. Every motorist in Australia is now a new tax collector for Tony Abbott's increased  petrol taxes. These are increased petrol taxes that Tony Abbott said would never  happen under a Government he led.    

 Tony Abbott yesterday says he wants a mature debate and yet today, he ambushes  Australian motorists, he ambushes the Parliament of Australia and through the back  door he has launched a sneak attack on the wallets and cost of living of every  Australian. This is outrageous. He doesn't have the courage to take his new taxes to an  election. He is desperate to prop up his unfair Budget, so now he is ambushing  Australians and through the back door, slugging every motorist with Tony Abbott’s new  Petrol Tax. Happy to take any questions people may have.   

 REPORTER: This process has happened before though. The Rudd Government did it  with the alcopops tax.   

 SHORTEN: Tony Abbott is one thing in Opposition and another thing in Government.  We all know that Tony Abbott’s got an unfair Budget that is sinking fast. Australians  don't like the cuts to pensions, the cuts to schools, the cuts to hospitals. The case hasn't  been made by Tony Abbott or Joe Hockey to ask middle and lower income Australians  to bear the cost of his changes because they can't run a Government. Now what they’re  doing is they are ambushing people with a Petrol Tax. This Government cannot sell a  message at all and they're now not even bothering. The Budget has got so hard for the  Government, they aren't even bothering testing it in the Parliament, they are just trying  to sneak it through ambushes and back door stunts. The Australian people will not  forgive Tony Abbott for lying about making them tax collectors for Tony Abbott.    

 REPORTER: You just spoke about leaders tackling the hard decisions. What is your  view as ALP Leader on boat turn backs, do you think the policy should change to  consider it, and do you support Richard Marles' view that they have had an impact in  stopping deaths at sea?   

 SHORTEN: Labor's policy on boat turn backs has not changed. It remains the same in  terms -    

 REPORTER: But should it be?   

 SHORTEN: In terms - no, the case hasn't been made out for change and furthermore,  when we look at what has effectively helped discourage the people smugglers, the 

 origin of the success of this measure is in Labor's regional settlement negotiations and  regional processing.    

 REPORTER: You don't think boat turn backs have had any impact on stopping deaths  at sea?   

 SHORTEN: No, we don't see that the argument has been made or the evidence has  been made out about boat turn backs. Labor's policy hasn't changed.    

 REPORTER: Has Richard Marles gone rogue on you?   

 SHORTEN: No, he was engaging in a debate about hypotheticals. And what I would  say very clearly is if we want to look at the source of the success of dealing with people  smuggling, it was regional processing arrangements put in place by the last Labor  Government.   

 REPORTER: The Greens are saying that there should be an overhaul of the way  alcohol is taxed and also labelling for - on bottles to try and help educate people about  alcohol consumption. Would you agree with that?   

 SHORTEN: This is a summit to start talking about ideas to deal with the problem of  alcohol-related harm. I am not about to start giving answers, I am not here to start  dictating my views, I am not here to talk about new taxes. The only people with new  taxes today are Tony Abbott and his team. When it comes to dealing with the problems,  I felt it was important that the Labor Opposition took a principled position to attend this  summit. We're disappointed that the Government hasn't turned up on day one. They  might send a junior minister kicking and screaming on day two to be here. Anyone who  thinks alcohol-related harm is not a matter which should be debated at the national  Parliament is kidding themselves.   

 REPORTER: Can I ask you about the class action on live cattle exports, I know it is  before the courts, but Joel Fitzgibbon said this morning that it was an unsettling time in  history. Obviously Labor was in charge of that ban.   

 SHORTEN: And the question is?   

 REPORTER: What is your view on that class action and your view of that period of time  when the ban was in place, was it unfair to cattle producers and exporters?   

 SHORTEN: In terms of a mooted legal action underway, I think it will be most unwise of  any political figure to start playing judge and jury on these matters so I will decline your  very kind invitation. I spoke at the National Farmers Federation last week and I made  clear that I believe what happened with live cattle export bans was a problem, has been  a problem and I think all of us have learnt lessons from that.   

 REPORTER: What do you think of the Prime Minister’s call to medical researchers to  lobby crossbenchers for the medical research future fund and the GP co-payment?   

 SHORTEN: Frankly I’m sick and tired of Tony Abbott using other people to try and get  up his unfair Budget. He’s using medical researchers to justify a tax on the sick. If Tony  Abbott really cares about medical research he’d dip into consolidated revenue and fund  it, he wouldn’t use if to justify an attack on the sick and the poor and the destruction of  universal access to Medicare. Tony Abbott’s got form about asking other people to do  his dirty work for him. Just ask Premier Napthine in Victoria who’s got a state election.  The Victorian Liberal Party must want Tony Abbott like a new hole in the head. Tony  Abbott yesterday after 20 years of being the hard man boxer of Australian politics  decides to start becoming some sort of mature basket weaver and he’s going to start  talking to Australians in a sensible, mature way. Denis Napthine and the others must  have gone what on earth did they do to deserve Tony Abbott having a thought bubble  about a GST, unveiling plans, and what he’s really doing - a bit like he’s using medical  researchers - is he’s cutting $80 billion, that’s right, $80 thousand million, from hospitals  and schools. So he’s blackmailing the states into demanding a GST. Gee the Victorian  Liberal Party - I just wonder how many times they’ll be asking Tony Abbott to campaign  for them in Victoria.    

 REPORTER: Just going back to the fuel tax, during the press conference Mr Cormann  put a question to you and Christine Milne asking in terms of the revenue that will come  from the tax. Would you support it going to fuel manufacturers or creating job  productivity?   

 SHORTEN: Now we’ve got the prospect of Senator Cormann asking the Opposition  how to do his day job. What I’d say is Senator Cormann, don’t break your promises.  That’s a good start.    

 REPORTER: You said in your speech that there wasn’t much point in getting elected to  Parliament if you weren’t prepared to make big decisions at a national level. What  exactly is your position on alcohol? We know that governments need to do something  about taxation of alcohol, we know that governments need to do something about  closing alcohol sale venues earlier in the evening. Is the Labor Party prepared to do  anything at all to solve this problem?   

 SHORTEN: The very fact that we’re here today shows that Labor recognises this is a  national conversation that needs to take place. As you’d probably be aware, when  Labor was last in power it was Labor who pioneered the national binge drinking strategy  to deal with the effects in terms of alcohol. In terms of where we go from here, and all  the views on possible policies and measures, that has to be done in a sensible way  working through with the experts, the law enforcement, the community workers, the  health practitioners. But Labor is committed to making sure that national issues - and  what I said is that national issues shouldn’t be ignored by the national Parliament - and I  would call upon the Abbott Government to send a senior representative to show that 

 they’re at least aware and interested in the challenge of alcohol related harm. Thanks  everyone, see you in Question Time.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

