---
title: "Manus Island incident reports, a litany of misery"
date: "2014-01-07"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403089
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2935221%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 Tuesday, 7 January 2014 

 Manus Island incident reports, a litany of  misery  A catalogue of incident reports from the detention centre on Manus Island, covering a period of  four months in mid-2013, paint a picture of misery and cruelty the Australian Greens have said.  

 “These reports reveal a secretive world of torture and trauma that is being overseen and  actively enforced by the Australian Government,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson,  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said. 

 “With almost daily incidents, a brutal and chaotic situation has developed on Manus Island and  the lawless nature of the camp is risking the lives of more than a thousand refugees. 

 “The Coalition Government has quadrupled the number of people in these horrific conditions  since these incidents were logged and I hold grave fears for those who are currently locked up  there. 

 “The previous government repeatedly lied and told the Australian people that conditions on  Manus Island were acceptable for refugees, including children. This government is combining  similar lies with sinister secrecy and it is the refugees who are suffering as a result. 

 “Surely no one thinks that children should be forced to live in an environment where they are  threatening to commit suicide. When on Nauru recently I heard directly from children who had  witnessed self-harm incidents.  

 “A recent Amnesty International report has shown that the Coalition is maintaining these  terrible conditions in the Manus Island detention centre. 

 “It is only by leading a genuine regional solution of increased processing and resettlement that  we will be able to save lives at sea while caring for refugees. 

 “Tony Abbott is pouring billions of tax payer dollars into these chaotic camps of cruelty, but  there is an increasing number of compassionate Australians who are standing up and saying ‘not  in my name’.” 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760 

 

 

 NOAH SCHULTZ-BYARD MEDIA ADVISER   

