---
title: "Diary of a Manus Island guard: "they went into tribal mode""
date: "2014-05-01"
creators:
  - "Wilkie, Andrew"
source: "Office of WILKIE, ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407204
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3141993%22
---

 

 1 May 2014   

 

 DIARY OF A MANUS ISLAND GUARD: “THEY WENT INTO TRIBAL MODE”   

 

 

 The  Independent  Member  for  Denison,  Andrew  Wilkie,  has  made  a  submission  to  the  

 parliamentary inquiry into the riots at the Manus Island detention centre, revealing shocking 

 new insights into the violent and tragic events of February. 

 

 The submission to the Legal  and  Constitutional  Affairs  References Committee contains the  

 experiences of an Australian security guard working at the detention centre during the riots. 

 

 The submission presents troubling new information about the terrifying and chaotic incident 

 of  16  February  to  18  February.  It  also  includes  unseen  until  now  photographs  of  smashed  

 doors, blood splatters and gunshot holes as well as video footage of asylum seekers protesting 

 in the days before the riots.  

 

 The  security  guard,  who  has  chosen  to  remain  anonymous  and  was  not  included  in  last  

 Monday’s ABC Four Corners program, has written his account of the riots.  Excerpts of his 

 recollections in the submission follow.  The submission can be viewed in full here: 

 http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Aff airs/Manus_Island/Submissions 

 February 16 

 The expat guards were like mediators in the middle. We were without weapons or protection 

 and looking back I think we were quite lucky we did not suffer any serious injuries.  At one 

 point two clients snuck behind the PNG guards.  When they were eventually seen, five to six 

 PNG guards dragged each client to the ground with head shots - as in head punches, knee 

 thrusts.  Once on the ground, the PNG guards started to kick the clients in the head, torso, 

 legs  and back.  Another  expat  guard and I ran to assist  the clients. We had to jump on the 

 clients to stop the PNG guards kicking them.  Initially the PNG guards didn’t stop kicking. I 

 remember being struck many times but my adrenalin level was quite high so I didn’t feel pain 

 until  later  that  night.  The  client  who  I  was  on  was  falling  in  and  out  of  consciousness.  I  

 remember checking his pulse, then looking at his eyes. They seemed to be rolling backwards. 

 I knew this client was in a bad way so I called for a stretcher to evacuate him straight away.  

 The problem with the PNG guards was they went into a tribal sort of mode. They were in a 

 trance-like state of mind and nothing was going to get in their way. They wanted to drag all 

 of  the  clients  out  and  maybe  not  kill  them,  but  show  them  that  this  is  our  country.  They  

 wanted to teach them a lesson.   

 February 17 

 Mike Compound started to riot….Radio reports were coming in that PNG locals and on/off-duty  PNG  G4S  guards  were  outside  the  Mike  Compound  on  the  main  road.  They  were  

 agitated  by  the  clients.  Basically  the  types  of  slurs  the  clients  were  using  were:  “we  are  

 going to rape your daughters and mothers” and telling the locals to “fuck off”.  The locals 

 were  trying  to  entice  them  to  “come  out  here  and  have  a  go”.  A  barrage  of  missile-type 

 weapons started to get thrown.  The clients for days had been collecting empty water bottles 

 and filling them with rocks.  They had green storage trunks filled with their missiles and once 

 it kicked off they bought these green trunks down so they had more missiles.  

 They entered the accommodation area of Mike Compound. Again they went into tribal mode.  

 Although this time it was quite different. The PNG were more brutal and savage. I’m under 

 the  belief  they  wanted  to  kill  every  single  one  of  the  clients.  At  the  rear  of  Mike  

 accommodation, an Australian G4S guard was shot at, as the PNG police yelled out ‘traitor’ 

 because he was trying to help wounded clients from being attacked further. 

 We heard two gunshots. I looked at a couple of other G4S expat guards and stated “this is 

 not good”.  Approximately 20 to 40 shots were fired from different locations in the vicinity of 

 Mike Compound. 

 

 Mr Wilkie said the guard’s testimony is more dramatic proof that the asylum seeker policies 

 of this and the previous federal government are deeply wrong and must be abandoned. 

 “Australia has a legal and ethical responsibility to give protection to people claiming to flee 

 for  their  lives,  promptly  hear  their  claims  and  provide  permanent  refuge  if  the  claims  are  

 accurate,” Mr Wilkie said. 

 “Refugees  arriving  by  plane  or  boat  should  be  quickly  given  health  and  security  checks  

 before being released into the community for full processing of their claims. 

 “Any credible policy on asylum seekers must look at issues in source countries, countries of 

 first  asylum  and  transit  countries  such  as  Indonesia  and  Malaysia.  All  policies  must  be  co-operatively developed at a regional level and fully sanctioned by the United Nations. 

 “The off-shore detention centres are clearly unsafe, not only for the asylum seekers but also 

 the Australians who risk their own safety to protect the detainees.  The centres simply cannot 

 be allowed to remain open.” 

 

 For more information:  0407 376 936   

