---
title: "Greens speak out against Newman's G20 crackdown"
date: "2014-07-14"
creators:
  - "Wright, Penny"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410895
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3278248%22
---

 Senators Penny Wright & Larissa Waters   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 14 July 2014   

 Greens speak out against Newman’s G20 crackdown   

 The Labor and Liberal parties have shown disregard for human rights by passing federal  legislation to back up Campbell Newman’s draconian G20 laws, say Australian Greens  Senators Penny Wright and Larissa Waters.   

 Senator Wright, Australian Greens spokesperson for Legal Affairs, said the Queensland  laws were a gross breach of human rights.   

 “A vote in favour of this legislation is a vote to take away basic freedoms and rights,”  Senator Wright said.   

 ”Legitimate security concerns have been manipulated for political convenience - why  else would banners expressing a differing point of view to Tony Abbott be banned?”   

 “Campbell Newman’s G20 laws are unreasonable, unnecessary and disproportionate.  The Australian Greens will never support him in his agenda to tear away human rights.”   

 Senator Larissa Waters, Australian Greens Senator for Queensland, said:   

 “The safety of everyone, including protesters, at these types of events is crucial but  Campbell Newman’s draconian restrictions go far beyond sensible safety measures.   

 “Instead Campbell Newman is trying to clamp down on democratic rights, in cahoots with  Tony Abbott, so that they can continue to block their ears to community opposition to  brutal budget cuts, inaction on global warming and brutality toward refugees.   

 “Not only are these laws designed to silence free speech but they will severely  inconvenience Brisbane residents and can be used to exclude people from their own  homes or businesses.   

 “We’re particularly concerned about the impact of these laws on homeless people in  Cairns, during the September session of the conference, as the rate of homelessness in  Cairns is significantly higher than the Queensland average.   

 “It’s shameful that the Newman Government would rather impose temporary laws to hide  homelessness than to work proactively to solve this pressing problem,” Senator Waters  said.   

 

 Media contacts:               Senator Penny Wright - Danielle Forsyth 0417 173 508                                            Senator Larissa Waters - Monique Vandeleur 0419 626 725 

 

