---
title: "AHRC inquiry reveals shocking cruelty"
date: "2014-07-31"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411836
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3311393%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Thursday, 31 July 2014   

 AHRC inquiry reveals shocking cruelty   

 A sinister picture of secrecy and cruelty within the detention network is emerging from the  Australian Human Rights Commission inquiry into children in detention today, the Australian  Greens have said.   

 “This damning evidence, detailing shocking cruelty, explains why the government doesn’t want  people to know what’s going on,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah  Hanson-Young said.   

 “A sinister culture of cruelty and cover-up has taken over in Australian detention centres and it’s  high time the children were released.   

 “The suffering of children denied medication, traumatised by lengthy detention and forced into  physical and mental distress has clearly gone too far.   

 “Using the ‘stop the boats’ mantra to justify the abuse of children is immoral and senseless. The  best way to ensure the suffering of children comes to an end is to release them from detention.   

 “Rather than recognising that this cruelty is unacceptable, the Immigration Minister is simply  trying to discredit his opponents. His attempts to avoid scrutiny by blaming the eyes that  uncover ugly truth are shameless.   

 “Less than a day after the Immigration Minister’s extraordinary attack on AHRC President Gillian  Triggs, she has been vindicated by the expert witnesses at today’s hearing. A government  obsessed with secrecy and cruelty is simply not capable of caring for young and vulnerable  refugees.   

 “It’s clear that the Immigration Minister must be stripped of his guardianship of unaccompanied  refugee children.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

