---
title: "Budget 2014: An-Ad-Hockey Budget that is hostile to families: Joe's slash and burn book-keeping is all (cigar) smoke and mirrors"
date: "2014-05-13"
creators:
  - "Madigan, John"
source: "Office of MADIGAN, SEN JOHN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211407776
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3165268%22
---

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Press Release 

 AN AD-HOCKEY BUDGET THAT IS HOSTILE TO FAMILIES  For immediate release 

 Tuesday, May 13, 2014   

 Joe’s slash and burn book-keeping is all (cigar) smoke and mirrors   

 Victorian Senator John Madigan today called the Abbott Government budget a sham package of  homilies, lies and a betrayal of Australian families.   

 Senator Madigan said the budget hit hard Australia’s most vulnerable - pensioners, families, the  unemployed and asylum seekers - while sucking up to big business, consultants and even China.   

 “It’s very hard to see any method in Joe Hockey’s madness,” Senator Madigan said.    

 “People earning $190,000 are paying a miniscule amount of $200 a year in the budget repair levy,  while low-to-middle income families have to dig much deeper.   

 “They will lose thousands every year when the Family Tax Benefits are cut, when they have to pay  for GP visits, and when they are forced to support their children who are ineligible to receive  Newstart.   

 “This is a typical blue-blooded Liberal-Coalition attack on Australia’s poor. Mr Hockey said  tonight that prosperity isn’t a matter of luck. I have news for Mr Hockey - neither is poverty.   

 “People are suffering in Australia and he has just made their day-to-day struggle that much  harder, while hitting our biggest earners with all the force of a feather duster.”   

 Senator Madigan said the budget restricted Australia’s ability to respond to asylum seekers with  compassion and independence.   

 “Stationing customs and border protection personnel out of Indonesia, Malaysia and particularly  in Sri Lanka means we are again ignoring human rights abuses in the hope of maintaining dodgy  diplomatic relations with compromised and despot  governments,” Senator Madigan said.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Senator Madigan questioned why the budget included $10 million for the Australia-China  Science and Research Fund.   

 “What the hell is that all about?” Senator Madigan asked.   

 “Surely a country as rich as China doesn’t need money from our budget while Australian  families suffer. This program is in partnership with the Chinese Government. If we’re  supposed to be belt tightening, why are we giving money to a program that includes one of  the world’s biggest economies?”   

 Senator Madigan criticised reduced funding for assistance for auto component  manufacturers.    

 He said the $618.5 million termination of the Automotive Transformation Scheme by 2018  would contribute to the decimation of manufacturing in parts of Victoria including Geelong,  Broadmeadows, Ballarat, Dandenong, Melton and other areas traditionally supported by the  car component industry.   

 Senator Madigan said it was imperative that companies previously involved in auto  component manufacturing continued to receive a similar level of government support to  help them transition into other innovative areas of manufacturing.   

 “This budget focuses on infrastructure but puts people last,” Senator Madigan said.    

 

 

 

 

 

