---
title: "First refugees settled in Nauru"
date: "2014-05-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408485
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3182174%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 First refugees settled in Nauru 

 Thursday, 22 May 2014 

 The first refugees from the Nauru Offshore Processing Centre have been settled in  the Nauruan community, marking a significant milestone in the ongoing, collaborative  work by the Governments of Nauru and Australia to settle refugees in our region,  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 Thirteen people including families with children have received their positive refugee  determination and are being settled into Nauru. Around 40 people — mostly families  — will be settled by the end of the month. 

 Save the Children Australia and International Health and Medical Services are  assessing the needs of these refugees and accordingly assisting them with services  including health and accommodation support, finding work and accessing education  for their children and cultural orientation. 

 Minister Morrison said a settlement package will be provided commensurate with  living standards in Nauru. 

 'Support will be provided on the basis of need rather than entitlement. To this end,  each resettlement package will take account of the individual or family's own  resources,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'The settlement package will include language and vocational training, connection  with local employment, orientation, initial accommodation and a living allowance as  appropriate. The intention is to have resettled refugees standing on their own feet  within 12 months. 

 'Primary health care will be provided through an IHMS run Settlement Health Clinic  at the local Hospital. Special care, such as torture and trauma counselling will be  referred and delivered through providers at the processing centres. 

 'Children will attend school at the Nauru Kayser College.' 

 Minister Morrison acknowledged the hard work of those involved to reach this  milestone, particularly the Government of Nauru. 

 'The Government of Nauru has been incredibly supportive of Australia's efforts to  combat people smuggling in the region and has been working hard with Australian  government representatives and our service providers to create a well-managed  processing centre and a successful settlement programme,' Minister Morrison said. 

 Transferees found not to be owed Nauru's protection will remain at the centre  pending return or removal to their home country or a country where they have right  of residence. 

 

