---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 23 February 2014: immigration"
date: "2014-02-23"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404465
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3017276%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE   SUNDAY 23 FEBRUARY 2014 

 SUBJECT/S:  Immigration   

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER: Well thank you for  joining me here this morning. Scott Morrison’s management of the Manus Island  detention facility is crumbling. Scott Morrison’s grip on this portfolio is unravelling.  During the week Scott Morrison gave a guarantee that asylum seekers within the  boundaries of the Manus Island detention facility were safe. Where is that guarantee  today? Earlier in the week, Scott Morrison did not speak on advice, he spoke  personally and emphatically when he gave an assurance that the tragic events that  occurred last week did so outside the perimeter of the Manus Island detention  facility. We now know today that that was wrong. This is a man who has no idea  what is going on at Manus Island, this is a man who has no idea of what the facts  are, this is a man who is not in charge of the Manus Island detention facility - and it  raises enormous questions about his ability to continue to manage this issue.    

 His statement last night raises more questions than it answers. It raises questions  about why was he so emphatic last week about the events occurring outside the  facility, it raises questions about when did he become aware that these events  actually occurred inside the facility, such that he needed to make his correction last  night. His correction was made at nine o’clock on a Saturday night. In the dead of  night after the Sunday papers had gone to print. This is the kind of tricky media  management that we have seen from this Government all along. Did he provide the  Australian people information at the earliest opportunity that he was provided it? Or  was that convenient? These are questions we now need to know. This is a man who  has lost his grip in relation to the Manus Island detention facility, this is a man who  has lost his grip in relation to a facility which is the cornerstone of Australia’s  strategy for preventing boats coming from Indonesia.   

 So, we now need to see Minister Morrison be straight with the Australian people for  once, we need to see Minister Morrison come clean and explain to the Australian 

 people why he said what he said last week and when he became aware of the  information which led to his press release in the dead of night last night. Because,  this is a matter of enormous concern to the Australian public and this goes to the  very heart of Australia’s strategy for preventing the boats coming from Indonesia.   

 REPORTER: Do you not believe that he provided this further information when he  became aware of it?   

 MARLES: Well, this is the question which is now raised. I mean, this was a press  release issued from a man who has been managing the media and managing  information for the Australian people in the trickiest of ways from the day he was  sworn in. He issues a press release in the dead of night on Saturday night, was that  convenient - or was that the time he first became aware of this issue? That is the  question which is raised by the timing of the press release which he issued and that  is the question which we need to see answered.   

 REPORTER: Are you accusing him of misleading the Australian public?   

 MARLES: I’m simply saying that in relation to a Minister that from day one who has  not provided transparent government, but done exactly the opposite, that it is  incumbent upon him to explain exactly when he became aware of the information  which led to the statement he made last night. And, more than that, we need to  know why he so emphatically gave the assurances he did about the events that  occurred on Manus Island earlier in the week. These are the obvious questions  which are raised by his actions last night, and he now needs to hold himself  accountable to the Australian people.   

 REPORTER: He is not there, surely he has to act on the advice of those who are  there?   

 MARLES: Well, let’s be clear about the statements that he made earlier in the week.  He did not preface any of his statements based on advice. He emphatically and  personally assured the Australian people about a set of facts which has turned out to  be completely wrong. So what is one fact that we all know and that is that Scott  Morrison has no idea what’s going on at Manus Island, that of itself ought to be a  concern to every Australian.    

 But we also have seen him put out a press release at nine o’clock on a Saturday  night, there needs to be an explanation as to why that information came to light  then. Was that his first opportunity? Or was that simply convenient?   

 REPORTER: What is the significance of this taking place inside the detention facility  as opposed to outside?   

 MARLES: Well, this goes to the safety that is being provided to asylum seekers  within an Australian run detention facility, that is obviously of importance. It is of  importance given that the Minister himself provided that guarantee using that word  earlier in the week, and so that is obviously of enormous significance. But it goes to 

 the very heart of whether this facility is being properly managed and that  desperately matters. It matters because this facility is at the heart of Australia’s  strategy of preventing boats coming from Indonesia, so we need to know.   

 REPORTER: Does it change anything jurisdictionally in terms of who investigates  what went on? Does it now become Australia’s jurisdiction?   

 MARLES: Well, we have said from the outset that there needs to be a full inquiry  into what has occurred at Manus Island and that inquiry doesn’t need to have  artificial boundaries of what happened of being inside or outside the fence. It needs  to be an inquiry that goes to the entirety of events. That is really important, it is  important because it is an inquiry which needs to see the Manus Island facility not  just in terms of what is occurring inside the fence although that is obviously deeply  important as we now know, but in terms of the facility within its context and the  facility within the community.    

 We learn today that Minister Morrison is saying this inquiry is going to take months,  well that is simply too long. We actually need to know what this Government is  doing wrong and what they are doing wrong now, so that steps can be taken  immediately to see the Manus Island detention facility put on a proper and orderly  footing so it can continue to function properly.    

 REPORTER: Do you accept that the turn back the boats policy is responsible for the  slowing in the rate of asylum seeker arrivals?   

 MARLES: The principle piece of public policy which has seen the dramatic slow  down in boats coming from Indonesia which Minister Morrison knows full well is the  arrangement that the then Labor Government entered into with Papua New Guinea.   

 REPORTER: But the boats have slowed significantly since then.   

 MARLES: Well, ninety per cent of the flow of boats stopped as a result of the PNG  arrangement we put in place by the election, by the time of the election. It is the  lynchpin of Australia’s strategy and Minister Morrison absolutely knows that, and it is  why it is so important that we understand what is going on and what is going wrong  at the Manus Island detention facility and that is why this inquiry needs to happen.  He has been dragged kicking and screaming to hold a full inquiry in the way that he  has announced, but we now need to know the answers very quickly and to be  waiting for months is simply unacceptable.   

 REPORTER: Does Labor accept responsibility for the previous riot at the Manus  detention centre as found by Keith Hamburger in his report?   

 MARLES: Well firstly Labor put in place the Manus Island detention facility and it is  an important piece of policy in terms of preventing boats coming from Indonesia and  correspondingly preventing deaths at sea. I have no doubt the Manus Island  detention facility has saved lives by virtue of it being there. So it is a very important  facility. Whenever there have been issues in relation to the facilities that were 

 operated by Labor in power, there was inquiries that were held - full inquiries held  so that we could learn in an open and honest way how to make sure that these  facilities could be run better. There was transparency in the way in which Labor  operated government, now that has been absent from the day the Abbott  Government was sworn in, from the day that Minister Morrison became the Minister  responsible for this area and there is an arrogance in that, because it suggests that  all the answers to these issues lie with the Minister himself and that is of course  wrong. A fresh set of eyes needs to be applied to this, it needs to be applied to it  quickly. This inquiry needs to happen so this Government can learn where it is going  wrong, so the mistakes can be repaired and so that steps can be taken to make sure  the facility runs properly.   

 REPORTER: One of Keith Hamburger’s recommendations was for clearer guidelines  for local police in particular, do you back that idea - would that help do you think?   

 MARLES: Well I think it is very important that local authorities know where their  responsibilities lie, in relation to their interaction with the facility but again this  comes back to the need for a full inquiry which is not founded by artificial terms of  matters only being pertaining to inside the fence or outside it - it needs to be a full  and comprehensive inquiry and it will evidently need to be done in co-operation with  the PNG authorities - that is very important. But clearly, everyone - not least the  Government itself - needs to actually find out what is going wrong at Manus, what  are they doing wrong? What steps do they need to take to fix this up?                                                                                                                        

 ENDS 

