---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Burnie, Tasmania: 15 September 2014: Abbott Government's cuts to universities and $100,000 degrees; pre-selections; Australian Defence Force; Iraq; ISIL; Indigenous affairs; John Howard's comments on Royal Commission."
date: "2014-09-15"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's cuts to universities and $100,000 degrees"
  - "pre-selections"
  - "Australian Defence Force"
  - "Iraq"
  - "ISIL"
  - "Indigenous affairs"
  - "John Howard's comments on Royal Commission."
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211413977
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3414581%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 SENATOR ANNE URQUHART  SENATOR FOR TASMANIA    

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MONDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2014  BURNIE   

 SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s cuts to universities and $100,000  degrees; Pre-selections; Australian Defence Force; Iraq; ISIL;  Indigenous Affairs; John Howard’s comments on Royal Commission.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s great to be in Burnie at  the University of Tasmania Campus here with my colleague Senator Anne  Urquhart. There is real fear on the university campuses of Australia amongst  students, teaching staff and their parents that in fact the dream of going to  university will become harder for many ordinary Australians in the future.  I've just had the opportunity to talk with the senior leadership of this campus  and the university and also to talk to students studying here. Put simply,  students here are worried that by doubling the interest rates that students have  to pay on their HECS loans that a whole lot of Australians are going to be put  into a lot more debt because of the Abbott Government. People are worried  about mature-aged students who are changing careers, who are going to be put  off by paying much higher university fees.    

 There are lot of people at this campus who are the first in their family to go  to university so what we see here is people from poorer backgrounds who are  worried about being discouraged, will they ever be able to afford to go to 

 university? It is wrong that Australians face the university courses, the fees to go  to university doubling and tripling. It will be a great disincentive for  regional campuses in particular around Australia who mightn't have the financial  resources of the very big city universities and lot of ordinary people won't get the  chance to study. And finally, talking to women students, they know that  they'll have periods of broken service where they won't be able to earn because  they're raising a family and all the time their university debts just keep ticking up  and up and up.    

 Tony Abbott needs to drop his university changes because they're anti-education, they're anti-the regions of Australia, they're anti-mature-aged students and they’re certainly pro-putting a lot of ordinary families into  much greater debt. Australians shouldn't have to face the choice between having  a family and going to university, between getting a mortgage and going to  university and Labor will fight these changes. Happy to take any questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you have specific concerns about this campus here in Burnie  and what are they based on?    

 SHORTEN: Well I had the opportunity to talk to the leadership of UTAS and  this campus, I also had the opportunity to talk to some of the student leaders.  There's 1,000 students here and they're doing all sorts of courses from education  right through to science and the arts and engineering. There are 1,000 people  here, though, many of whom are mature age, who will have to have second  thoughts about can they continue their studies because of debt. It's deeply  ingrained in the psyche of a whole lot of people in regional Australia that  they're not going to take on any debt they don't have to. Now there is the very  real prospect that because of the Abbott Government's changes people are going  to have to look at $100,000 degrees, people are going to have to look at  the doubling and tripling of the cost of going to university, people will make a  decision that they won't be able to afford going to university at all so this is a  real problem for Burnie which has had plenty of economic ups and downs  in recent years.    

 JOURNALIST: For an area we heard earlier has some of the highest suicide  rates in the country, how much further do these cuts stem into social effects on  the community?    

 SHORTEN: I might answer that to begin with but I'll ask my colleague Anne  Urquhart whose worked and lived up here for a long time to add to this. There's  no doubt in my mind that education is one of the great enabling parts of the  Australian story. A good education gives people hope for a better life. It is a  real problem that this Government is going to take 20 per cent of the funding  away from universities. In the case of University of Tasmania that's about 

 $113 million. Can you imagine taking $1 in every 5 away from the Burnie  campus? It just means that some people won't bother coming to university  because they think they can't afford it. Others will see their research cut, others  who are mature age will say ‘well maybe I can't reskill and retrain because I  simply can't afford to do that and pay my mortgage.’ So this is absolutely bad  news for north-western Tasmania. I might ask Anne to say a bit too.    

 SENATOR ANNE URQUHART: Thanks, Bill. Look, just in relation to the north-west, I mean one of the things that we have up here is a very dispersed  population. We have, you know, from the West Coast right up through to  Devonport, Latrobe and people access this university campus from all those  areas. One of the last things that we need is for people not to have the  opportunity to do a university degree right on their doorstep where they don't  have to worry about leaving their families. A lot of people are part of their  family culture up here through farming and a whole range of other things that  their families do, so they actually need to be close by and we need to be able to  encourage the youth to get involved in university and have the opportunities that  maybe their parents didn't have.    

 But the problem with the deregulation, the funding, all that insecurity at the  moment, is that we don't know where that’s going to end up if it gets through  and at the end of the day that will stop young people from even thinking about a  university education. So one of the things we need to do is to stop and make  sure that this doesn't get through so that our young people here on the  coast have every opportunity, so that first of all they've got that opportunity but  second we can encourage them to have that opportunity to go to university and  get an education if they so choose to. So that's really what we need to do.    

 SHORTEN: Thanks Anne.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, when do you want to have a candidate in place for  Braddon?    

 SHORTEN: We'll have candidates in place well before the next  election. Obviously getting on with it as soon as possible is very important  because Tony Abbott clearly doesn't like Tasmania. Where he says that the  best thing that perhaps people can do is leave Tasmania, he just doesn't get how  ordinary people in Tasmania live their lives. I think it's remarkable that  when you've got such high rates of unemployment in parts of Tasmania, Tony  Abbott just sort of blithely says, ‘oh well, for hundreds of years people have been  moving so people can move again.’    

 And then you've got Eric Abetz who's the senior Tasmanian politician in  the national parliament, he just says people can go and pick potatoes. Se we’ve 

 got to, Labor has got an opportunity to campaign federally in Tasmania  because they want to cut the universities, they want sick and vulnerable people  to pay more to go to the doctor, they're cutting the rate of indexation of  pensions and they have no jobs plan at all.   

 JOURNALIST: If we could just move to Iraq, do you think the Prime Minister's  been clear about what the objective is in Iraq?    

 SHORTEN: Yes, I do. Let me just state at the outset, this is not an  easy decision to commit Australian Defence Forces to pre-deploy in the Middle  East. The decision I don't believe has been taken lightly. Certainly the Opposition  support for the decision hasn't been made casually or lightly. When it comes to  fighting terrorism we are, all of us, in this together. What I also do stress and  will seek the Prime Minister to reassure me on is that our troops, when they  go into this conflict, have all of the resources they need to do the job efficiently  and return home safely.    

 JOURNALIST: How clear is the mission over there?    

 SHORTEN: Well, you've got this organisation, ISIL, who's emerged out of Syria.  They've taken large parts of northern Iraq. They claim to be acting in the  name of religion but this is no religion which any of us acknowledge. This is  deliberate, ruthless violence and crime. There's an international Coalition led by  America at the request of the Iraqi national Government, so I think the mission  for humanitarian relief is clear, and certainly thus far there's just been a request  and that our Australian soldiers will be pre-deploying. We still haven't seen the  final stages of a decision to intervene in Iraq itself.    

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned you want some assurances from the Prime  Minister, do you have any concerns whatsoever about the deployment?    

 SHORTEN: To the extent that Australian Defence Forces are going in harm's  way, it is of course concerning. This is what our men and women have trained  for. They're amongst the best in the world. The RAAF's already been  doing humanitarian relief of refugees and innocent civilians in northern Iraq. I've  got every confidence in the quality of our Australian Defence Forces and that for  me underpins my confidence, but of course it is important that they have all the  resources they need and to know they have the support - they and their families  have the support of the mainstream Australian political parties, which they do.    

 JOURNALIST: John Kerry says that the effort against Islamic State is  considered a war, would you agree?    

 SHORTEN: I'm not sure that the words greatly matter, mission or war. What I  do know is that ISIL is a dangerous organisation, and it's dangerous not only to  people in northern Iraq or in Syria but it presents a danger to Australians. There  has been misguided Australian foreign fighters leaving Australia, going to fight in  a war which is not appropriate at all for them to be there, and no doubt there’s  some people who've been returning from that conflict to Australia learning all  sorts of wrong and evil lessons. So the idea that we can simply ignore what  happens in the other parts of the world and hope it passes us by is naive.    

 JOURNALIST: What about the prospect that Australian air strikes might kill  Australians who are fighting alongside IS militants?    

 SHORTEN: I think if there's any Australians who are fighting as part of the  ISIL organisation, they should stop, they should leave ISIL. They have no role  there. What on earth are Australians getting engaged with that sort of violence  and crime? I have no idea what would motivate people to do that.    

 JOURNALIST: What is the justification? Why should we be sending troops?    

 SHORTEN: First of all, it's an international Coalition. There are literally hundreds  of thousands of civilians in Iraq who are being made homeless, who are  refugees, thousands of whom have been killed. This is a terror organisation  trying to cause mayhem not just in northern Iraq but if it had its way it would be  causing harm in this country too. The commitment from Australia is relatively  modest, but it is appropriate that we're part of an international Coalition acting  at the request of the Iraqi national Government and so therefore I hope that  the Australian forces - if they're engaged, are able to do so in the most timely  manner possible and come home safely.    

 JOURNALIST: Senator Jacqui Lambie has been talking about having a set  amount of Indigenous seats held by Indigenous people in Australia. What's your  attitude on that?    

 SHORTEN: There's plenty of legal issues and constitutional issues around that  issue. I think it has worked well in New Zealand, so I'm certainly open to  considering the idea but- I'm not going to rule it out of hand but there's plenty  of technical and practical barriers to it. There's no doubt we need more  Indigenous Australians involved in Australian politics, and I take her suggestion  as one idea to encourage Indigenous Australians to be involved in the politics of  their nation, their home.    

 JOURNALIST: Senator Lambie has also made some comments that anyone  wanting to impose Sharia law in Australia shouldn't be entitled to vote. What do  you think about that? 

 

 SHORTEN: I don't think anyone's trying to impose Sharia law in Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that's a fair comment that she's made?    

 SHORTEN: I don't think anyone is trying to impose Sharia law in Australia, so  that sort of answers the rest of the question I think. If there’s one  more question.    

 JOURNALIST: John Howard says he's not comfortable with the idea of a Royal  Commission into union corruption or pink batts. What's your take on that?    

 SHORTEN: John Howard is speaking about a time when there was less politics  from the Liberal Government. I think everyone knows that the Abbott  Government has got a very strong political agenda. I think it's amazing former  Prime Minister Howard has said this, and I think his current colleagues or the  current Abbott Government should think very carefully about the sound advice  that John Howard's given them. Thanks, everyone. Have a lovely day.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

