---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 2 June 2014: Death of asylum seeker on bridging visa; Manus Island"
date: "2014-06-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Death of asylum seeker on bridging visa"
  - "Manus Island"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409062
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3203325%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Death of asylum seeker on bridging visa, Manus Island 

 Monday, 02 June 2014 

 Press conference, Canberra 

 Morrison:As indicated yesterday when further information was available to me I  said, on the terrible and tragic incident on the weekend, that I would provide that  information and I am here to do that today. While police and coroners have yet to  formally identify the deceased my department is satisfied of the identity of the man  given an ID card was found nearby and two friends including one roommate have  since been contacted and were attending at the Alfred Hospital on Saturday night.  The deceased's next of kin is a friend in Australia who has been notified and his  friends are helping to make contact with relatives overseas and there have been  some reports on that. The deceased's name is Mr Leorsin Seemanpillai, he was born  on the 29th of September 1984. He arrived in Darwin on the 9th of January 2013, a  bridging visa E was granted on the 7th of May 2013. A protection visa application  was lodged on the 6th of June 2013 and I note that he arrived not as an offshore  entry person because at that time Australia, as I understand, was not excised  through the migration zone, the mainland that is. A further bridging visa E was  granted on the 16th of June in 2013 in association with his protection visa application  and that bridging visa had work rights attached to it. He was referred to the Asylum  Seeker Assistance Scheme in June 2013 and that month he was also approved  where upon if unable to source work they receive 89 per cent of the relevant benefit. 

 I can confirm that the ASAS service provider Diversitat had spoken to Mr  Seemanpillai's father who is in India and has requested that he be given a Roman  Catholic funeral in Geelong. The two friends in Australia, at least one of them who is  an IMA and lived with Mr Seemanpillai, were at the hospital on Saturday night. I can  also advise that the last case worker contact with Mr Seemanpillai was actually on  Friday May 30, so last Friday, and I am advised that there was no concern or  indication of any suicidal ideation at that time and the case worker had been in  contact with the deceased man now on a fortnightly basis. I have spoken to the  Secretary of the Department yesterday about these matters and have been assured  around the placement of people on bridging visas and the support services provided  that is being assessed again and reviewed this morning and over the course of this  week. But I have every confidence in my department that the placements are  appropriate but if there are any changes that need to be made there then they will  make the appropriate recommendations and again we express our deep sympathies  to Mr Seemanpillai's family and to his friends here in Australia, and we will continue  to work with the various authorities regarding all the appropriate arrangements. 

 Journalist: Mr Morrison this is the second such incident in recent times. What is  wrong with the system that people are under that much pressure that they are doing  this? 

 Minister Morrison: Well you are making some assumptions in the question which I  don't think we are in any position to make. The man on this occasion had been  receiving community mental health support and had been for some period of time  which is commensurate with the programme that he was on. He had not received  any outcome on his protection visa application so he had received no advice that he  was being sent anywhere and that his claim was still being processed and as a result  there was no indication that he was being removed anywhere or that he hadn't been  found to be a refugee or for that matter that he had. This man sadly died as a result  of a very serious set of injuries that were self-inflicted and I don't think we are in any  position, and frankly I don't think anyone else is in a position to draw any conclusions  about what is in a person's mind in that situation. 

 Journalist: Can I rephrase the question then and ask are you concerned that there  is anything in the system currently that is adding to the pressure on people that might  led them to harm themselves in this way? 

 Minister Morrison: Well the purpose of my discussion with the Department  Secretary yesterday was to ensure and to be satisfied that where people are placed  in the community they are being placed and supported in a way that is relevant to  their circumstances and in this case at least at a superficial assessment that appears  to be the situation but I have asked for an assurance on that front as well as others  in the community. This man was in the community, he was on a bridging visa, he  was with work rights, he had been seen as recently as last Friday. He was getting  mental health support and this is just a very sad and very terrible incident. 

 Journalist: Did he have a work history? 

 Minister Morrison: He was not in work at the time. 

 Journalist: But had he been before do you know? 

 Minister Morrison: I couldn't comment on that. 

 Journalist: Some asylum seeker advocates say that many people who have come  to Australia from Sri Lanka have taken a comment of yours last year as an  understanding of where their claims will go. On the 11th of October last year you  said so anyone who may have come from Sri Lanka should know that they will go  back to Sri Lanka, that they don't believe their claims will be fairly assessed and that  people have seized on that statement as believing that their claims won't be properly  considered. 

 Minister Morrison: So what are you alleging? 

 Journalist: There, there is a claim here that this man believed that that is the  trajectory that his claim was headed. 

 Minister Morrison: And what are you basing that claim on? 

 Journalist: What people have told 7.30. 

 Minister Morrison: So the report I just gave you that the man had been visited last  Friday by a case worker and there was no indication of suicidal ideation. That is the  report I have given you today and I think that addresses your question. 

 Journalist: And it has been alleged to us that this man was concerned.. 

 Minister Morrison: You need to make a judgement about whether you believe those  allegations based on the facts that I have presented to you today. 

 Journalist: Do you have any response though to the suggestion that you basically  ruled out sending anybody back and that this might be adding to the concerns of  [inaudible]? 

 Minister Morrison: Claims are assessed in accordance with the process, they are  not assessed by me. They are assessed in accordance with the process. 

 Journalist: As Immigration Minister do you take responsibility for what has  happened to this man? 

 Minister Morrison: This is a terrible and tragic incident and none of us can know the  mind of someone in this situation. I am certainly not pretending to and I don't counsel  others to do that either. 

 Journalist: Minister can I just clarify your answer before, are you saying here today  that there isn't a blanket guarantee as it were that all asylum seekers from Sri Lanka  will be sent back to Sri Lanka? 

 Minister Morrison: Well no one has suggested that. 

 Journalist: Minister friends say that this man was suffering depression for a year.  Was that the department's understanding? 

 Minister Morrison: Well he was involved in an ongoing community mental health  treatment plan. 

 Journalist: So was he flagged as a risk then? 

 Minister Morrison: He was, he was receiving treatment over the period of that time  and he had a case worker and that case worker was I am advised visiting with him at  least on a fortnightly basis and had visited with the man as recently as last Friday,  the day before this incident occurred. 

 Journalist: Did he undergo enhanced screening? 

 Minister Morrison: Pardon? 

 Journalist: Did he undergo enhanced screening? 

 Minister Morrison: At the time of his release from detention he was fully assessed  by mental health nurses at that time. 

 Journalist: You have spoken in the past about the incoming government inheriting a  30 000 backlog of asylum seekers. How are you going working your way through  that backlog? 

 Minister Morrison: Well at present it is a frustrating process because the Senate  has blocked the introduction of the government's mandated, at the last election,  preferred process for dealing with the legacy caseload of which there are some  27 000 people who haven't had their claims looked at yet and that was true going  back as far as August of 2012 and so there had been no processing of those claims  by the previous government at the time of the election. We have a clear pathway that  we want to pursue in relation to this. For those who hadn't commenced the process  we are waiting the outcome of how the new Senate may regard the process that we  are seeking to put in place. For those who aren't part of that process we have been  working through that caseload of the balance of several thousand who are involved  in that process and that is proceeding but the facts are that what the government is  seeking to do is put in place our arrangements for temporary protection visas which  we took to the last election, which we have been consistent on for more than a  decade. That process will allow us to get underway with the processing of some  27 000 people and if they are found to be refugees they will be given a temporary  protection visa with work rights, parity of benefits and living in the community. Now I  would like to get to that arrangement as soon as we possibly can and I think the  needless frustration and delays that is occurring in the Senate is very unhelpful but I  am making absolutely no connection between that and the incident involving this  young man. 

 Question: How many have finished under the old system? 

 Minister Morrison: There are several thousand that are in the process but I can  give you an update on that separate to this briefing if you like Michelle. I am happy to  do that. 

 Question: Minister you said you have spoken to your Department secretary. What  are the options if indeed you feel there might need to change particularly related to  people who are living in the community? What options do you have? Are we talking  greater mental health support? Should they just not be living in the community?  Should they be in detention? What are your options for change? 

 Minister Morrison: Well there are a range of options and the major one is whether  for those in the community and considered to be vulnerable whether they need  further support than is currently there but there is no suggestion at all, absolutely  whatever that that was an issue in this case as it has been presented to me and I  just want to seek an assurance about it Karen that those in the community are in  programmes that give them the necessary support and in this case this young man  was seen by his caseworker as recently as last Friday. 

 Question: Well it does appear he needed some kind of extra support because he  took his own life. 

 Minister Morrison: Well Karen you may want to draw whatever conclusion you wish  about that. I said he was receiving support and the most recent support he received 

 was the day before he took this terrible step and at that point the case worker who  was involved in supporting this young man had been providing regular support to  him. He was part of a community health programme of support and in some cases  these terrible tragedies occur and in cases of persons who are receiving these sorts  of treatment and the reasons they may be receiving these sorts of treatment I think it  would be very unwise for people to make assumptions about this case. We don't  know what finally led this young man to take the decision that he did as sadly in so  many cases whether they are persons who are IMAs or elsewhere in the community,  we do not know. I think if some try and impugn motives in all of this and particularly  when such imputations are made to suit political arguments, I think that is frankly  very unfortunate. 

 Question: [inaudible] 

 Minister Morrison: Imputations have been made by advocates this morning which  you will be well aware of. 

 Question: Can I just ask you about the Christmas Island situation? There are  suggestions of a protest underway on Christmas Island. What can you tell us about  that, is that contained or ongoing? 

 Minister Morrison: It is contained and the reports of the size of this protest are  wildly exaggerated, which is not uncommon when advocates take it upon themselves  to talk up these issues. Why their claims are reported without any inquiry I am  always puzzled by but it is a fairly low level activity. It is not uncommon to have  protest activity in detention centres. It happens from time to time and the matter is  well at hand but it is well observed and monitored carefully but the resources are in  place to deal with anything serious that could happen. 

 Question: What caused this protest? 

 Minister Morrison: I am not in the habit of giving publicity to protest behaviour. If  others want to engage in that they can. You will not get it from me, not from this  podium or anywhere else. 

 Question: Minister how are we supposed to make enquiries about the claims being  made by advocates… 

 Minister Morrison: Well yesterday I said plainly in my press conference that the  events had been dramatized. 

 Question: The consultation that happened with Mr Seemanpillai on Friday, do you  know whether that was a face to face consultation? 

 Minister Morrison: I can't tell you that. His family lives in India so I am not in a  position to advise how that contact was made. Most of the contact to date has been  through friends, as I am advised. 

 Question: But this was a contact with someone you told us about earlier. 

 Minister Morrison: The caseworker is in close contact with the deceased's friends  and they have been speaking to the family in India but making that contact formally  has proved difficult. 

 Question: You also said this person had been in consultation with the gentleman on  Friday. Do you know whether that was face to face or over the phone? 

 Minister Morrison: I can confirm that for you. My assumption would be it would  have been face to face but I can confirm that for you. 

 Question: Are you also able to tell us that of asylum seekers of Tamil backgrounds,  what percentage are being successful? 

 Minister Morrison: Those figures are available on the Department's website. 

 Question: Mr Morrison why did you come out and make this announcement  yesterday. It is fairly unusual for a Minister to come out and make an announcement  about what appears to be a suicide, certainly there was not a great deal of  information in terms of his name or other circumstances. Why did you think you  needed to do that? 

 Minister Morrison: I have done this on more than one occasion. When there is a  serious incident like this I take it upon myself to inform the public of it. 

 Question: Even if it is a suicide? 

 Minister Morrison: I did not say that yesterday. 

 Question: But did you know that… 

 Minister Morrison: I said details have yet to be confirmed that a man had passed  away overnight as a result of very serious injuries and I was very limited in the  information I provided yesterday and now I am standing before you today to give you  further information about the nature of this incident. 

 Question: But a local newspaper had reported a man had set himself alight in the  street and the police clearly were aware, so were you aware of that information at  the time? 

 Minister Morrison: I reported on the information that I felt was appropriate to report  yesterday Karen and I have reported today on the further information that I have  received today. 

 Question: Minister the PNG police put out a statement last week as you know  making some rather remarkable claims including that they had no role in the violence  at the detention centre in February, accusing Australia or suggesting Australia was a  party to a major cover-up. How can you possibly continue to have confidence that  the people responsible for Reza Berati's death and the other violence will actually be  brought to justice in light of statements like that from PNG Police? 

 Minister Morrison: I will refer you to the Cornall report about the incident and the  report on what we understood happened on that dreadful series of nights. I am in  regular contact with authorities in Papua New Guinea. I will actually be there later  this week again as part of our monthly bilateral process and these are matters that  we constantly engage with the government of PNG on. The Cornall report in  particular was a fairly detailed process of consultation with Minsters and their officials  - the timing of its release, the opportunity to review the material that was presented  to them, all the material we gained in the Cornall report and any of what you could  describe as evidence that was collected in terms of interviews and transcripts was all  provided to the police. So that is a process we continue to work through. I will be  meeting with my counterparts again later in this week and we will continue to pursue  those matters there. Paul? 

 Question: Whose obligation is it to provide security for transferees in Papua New  Guinea, is it Australia's or Papua New Guinea's? 

 Minister Morrison: Paul I have outlined the arrangements at a number of these  press conferences. The Government of Papua New Guinea's runs the centre. We  are contracted services to support that arrangement under the MOU. That was the  arrangement that was put in place by the previous government and we are  honouring that arrangement and we are fulfilling our responsibilities as required  under that arrangement. Today I have called this press conference to deal with this  rather serious matter and if there are no other questions on that matter… 

 Question: Minister is the Department aware of a spike in self-harm incidents and  suicides of asylum seekers in the past year? 

 Minister Morrison: I don't comment on those matters. 

 Question: You just had a press conference… 

 Minister Morrison: I don't comment on the issues of self-harm and other matters  and incidents and rates of incidences and things like that. It is not my job to create  an appetite for people to engage in that sort of behaviour and that is why I am very  careful about not publicising that type of behaviour. I seek to clarify incidents where I  am very careful to point out how these incidents occurred and I think to address the  reasonable questions that have been put to me by the media about what occurred  over the weekend. I have sought to clarify those matters today but I am not in the  business of publicising protest activity or other activity which may be designed to  attract a particular response by the government. So that is not the business I am in  but where there are genuine questions about a terrible tragic incident like this then I  think it is only reasonable that I would seek to confirm and clarify the circumstance  around this man's tragic death which I have done today. 

 Question: [inaudible] 

 Minister Morrison: I am not making a comment on that. I think I have responded to  the issue more generally. Any other matters? Sarah? 

 Question: Are you concerned that the Sri Lankan group feel they have been singled  out by the statement that was read out in October last year by you. Are you  concerned they are feeling singled out and are you going to provide any extra  support… 

 Minister Morrison: I do not think there is any substantiation for that view. We are  processing people's claims in accordance with the refugee convention and where  there are legitimate claims there is a process and where there are not legitimate  claims people go home. That is how the process works, that is the way the process  has always worked. Thanks for your time. 

 

