---
title: "Strong partnerships vital to helping job seekers find work"
date: "2014-04-07"
creators:
  - "Hartsuyker, Luke"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406378
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3100856%22
---

 

 

 THE HON LUKE HARTSUYKER MP  Assistant Minister for Employment   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 

 7 April 2014                           BR14-000671 (SR) 

 

 Strong partnerships vital to helping job seekers find work   

 Building strong partnerships to help job seekers into work sooner was the key  message of the AMES Better Together conference attended by the Assistant  Minister for Employment, Luke Hartsuyker today.   

 “The Australian Government is committed to helping people move from welfare to  work sooner so they can build a better life for themselves,” Mr Hartsuyker said.   

 “As I travel around the country talking to stakeholders it’s inspiring to meet providers  like AMES who understand that strong partnerships with employers and other  support services is the key to helping job seekers find and keep a job.   

 “Building local connections and providing tailored support is especially important  in  helping refugees and newly arrived migrants to adjust to living and working in  Australia.   

 “For some people, the way of working in Australia is quite different from what they  have known previously.  It is important that refugees and migrants receive practical  help to ensure they have the language skills, knowledge and technical skills  that  employers are looking for, no matter where they may be living in Australia.”   

 “Our employment services providers are there not only to help people get a foot in  the door with a job, but to keep a job. Understanding what employers need and then  meeting that need is the key to success.”   

 The Government is committed to making sure our employment service providers are  better meeting the needs of employers now and into the future. To help providers  with this task, the Government has announced a range of red tape reduction  measures which will save providers and employers up to $23 million in costs every  year.   

 “Looking ahead, strong, local partnerships will be more important than ever in our  employment services system.  We need organisations that can offer flexible and  holistic services that work for both job seekers and employers,” Mr Hartsuyker said.   

 

 AMES is a specialist Job Services Australia provider in Victoria that provides  assistance to newly arrived refugees and migrants. Between 1 July 2009 and 28  February 2014 AMES and its staff have achieved over 16,000 job placements for job  seekers from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds.   

 

 Media contacts:  Assistant Minister Hartsuyker’s office: Greg Pierce 0408 532 785  Department Media: media@employment.gov.au 

