---
title: "Children at risk: leaked report details shocking mental health disaster on Nauru"
date: "2014-05-30"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408998
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3203299%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Friday, 30 May 2014   

 Children at risk: leaked report details shocking mental health disaster on Nauru   

 More than 200 children on Nauru are being exposed to serious mental health trauma,  the potential for physical sexual abuse and an outbreak of Tuberculosis a leaked  government report has revealed.   

 “There is a mental health crisis in the Nauru detention camp and the Abbott Government  is responsible,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young  said.   

 “This damning report reveals the truth of Nauru and the horrific conditions that children  are being exposed to on a daily basis.   

 “There is no paediatric life support on the island and conditions in the Nauru Hospital are  clearly unacceptable.”   

 Photos taken in December* show the true condition of the maternity and paediatric  wards in the local hospital. At the time the Coalition described the health facilities  available to refugees as ‘more than adequate’ and ‘of a high standard’.   

 “I’m very concerned that local employees are not given child protection checks before  working in the centre, potentially exposing children to sexual assault. I am especially  concerned for the 24 unaccompanied children who are there right now,” Senator  Hanson-Young said.   

 “The government’s 48-hour rapid transfer system is reckless and must be stopped. By  intentionally putting unaccompanied children at risk, the Immigration Minister has failed  as their legal guardian.   

 “All children on Nauru must immediately be brought back to the mainland where they will  be safe.”   

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

 

