---
title: "Australia pledges $12 million to help the Syrian people"
date: "2014-01-16"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403234
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2945573%22
---

 Foreign Minister Julie Bishop 

 Australia pledges $12 million to help the Syrian people  16 January 2014 

 Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has announced Australia will contribute an additional $10 million in 

 humanitarian aid to help people affected by the conflict in Syria and $2 million to support efforts to destroy 

 Syria's chemical weapons. 

 This brings Australia's total assistance in response to the Syrian crisis to $112.8 million since the conflict 

 began in 2011. 

 Australia has played an active role in international efforts to address the Syrian crisis including through the 

 UN Security Council. These contributions reflect the Australian Government's ongoing concern about the 

 worsening conflict, its human toll and the effect on international peace and security. 

 More than 100,000 people have died and 9.3 million people - almost half the population - are in need of 

 humanitarian assistance. Neighbouring countries now shelter more than two million refugees, nearly three-quarters of whom are women and children. 

 The $10 million humanitarian contribution will go to United Nations agencies to provide winter essentials, 

 shelter, health care and schooling to refugees in neighbouring countries, provide polio vaccinations and 

 support humanitarian access inside Syria, and assist with refugees in Jordan and Lebanon. 

 The images of the chemical weapons attack in Damascus in August were horrifying. The use of these 

 indiscriminate weapons of mass destruction is a grave threat to international peace and security. 

 The Australia Government will contribute $2 million to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical 

 Weapons (OPCW) to support their work with the United Nations in overseeing the destruction of Syria's 

 chemical weapons. Australia's contribution to this important international mission reflects our longstanding 

 commitment to the global ban on chemical weapons. 

 Australia was among the first countries to ratify the Chemical Weapons Convention which established the 

 global ban and we have consistently called on Syria, and all countries, to adhere to and implement it. The 

 Syrian conflict needs an urgent political solution. Australia strongly supports the forthcoming Geneva II 

 negotiations and urges the Syrian regime and the opposition to participate constructively in the talks. 

 Media enquiries 

  Foreign Minister's Office: (02) 6277 7584  

  DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555  

 

