---
title: "Transfer of 157 IMAs from Curtin to Nauru for offshore processing"
date: "2014-08-02"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411896
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3317300%22
---

 UNCLASSIFIED 

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 M  EDIA STATEMENT 

 S



 aturday 2 August 2014 

 TRANSFER OF 157 IMAs FROM CURTIN TO NAURU FOR  OFFSHORE PROCESSING 

 The 157 illegal maritime arrivals (IMAs) who were transferred to the Department of Immigration and  Border Protection facilities in Curtin earlier this week have been transferred to Nauru overnight for  offshore processing, following their decision to refuse to meet with Indian consular officials, Minister  for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said today. 

 T



 he Australian Government created a rare opportunity with the Government of India for many of the  157 people who were on that voyage from India, including up to 50 children, to go back to where they  had been living in safety in India, where they have family and friends, rather than go to Nauru. 

 I



 t is very disappointing that after having had access to their legal representatives on July 29, all 157  IMAs coincidentally chose not to talk to Indian consular officials. 

 L



 egal representation for this group is not being funded by the taxpayer. 

 Acco



 rdingly, arrangements were made to transfer all 157 IMAs detained at Curtin to Nauru at the first  available opportunity for offshore processing, consistent with Government policy under Operation  Sovereign Borders. These transfers were undertaken overnight  on three separate flights and all 157  IMA's have now arrived in Nauru. 

 Th



 is decision means that those IMAs who were previously living in India will now be unable to take  advantage of the humanitarian offer being made by the Indian Government, secured by my visit to  New Delhi last week, that would have potentially enabled their return to India. 

 T



 here will also now be around 50 more children on Nauru, many of which, if not all, could have been  going back to India. 

 I



 t is disappointing that this opportunity has been squandered. If these decisions were taken on the  advice of lawyers, then not only have the passengers on this voyage been duped by people smugglers,  it would seem they have also been let down by those who are supposed to be looking after their best  interests as well and claim to be on their side. 

 T



 here were only over ever two options for this group of IMAs - either return to India or be sent to  Nauru for offshore processing. Processing and resettlement in Australia was never an option. The  Government was clear about this, provided the options and have taken action accordingly. 

 The Government has been working to a clear plan in relation to this voyage from India from the day it  was first detected by Border Protection Command. We have been methodically working our process,  which has today resulted in all 157 IMA's now being on Nauru where they will remain. 

 At all times the Government has also honoured and acted in accordance with all undertakings to the  High Court related to the movement and transfer of these 157 IMAs,  in parallel proceedings before  the Court. 

 Should these IMAs be found to be a refugees they will be resettled on Nauru, not Australia. If they are  not found to be a refugee they will go back to Sri Lanka, not India. Going back to India, where they are  likely to have family and friends, is no longer an option for those who were living there. They passed  up that option when they chose not to meet with Indian consular officials in Australia. This is  regrettable and very disappointing. 

 The result of this venture means that, unfortunately, the arrangement with India has now come to an  end. Despite the risk that advocates or IMAs would seek to frustrate the initiative by not cooperating,  the Government does not regret pursuing this option with the Government of India and thanks them 

 for their cooperation. We always seek to do things cooperatively wherever possible. 

 In the event of similar ventures in the future the Government will consider all options that meet our  policy objectives, serve our national interest and are consistent with our domestic and international  obligations. 

 The Abbott Government will always do all within our powers to prevent people smuggling ventures  getting to Australia. There has been just one such venture in more than seven months. That is in stark  contrast to the more than two hundred that occurred under Labor over the same time period last  year. 

