---
title: "Children distressed on Christmas Island"
date: "2014-03-24"
creators:
  - "Australian Human Rights Commission"
source: "AUSTRALIAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211405578
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3070165%22
---

 

 

 Media Release 

 

 Monday, 24 March 2014   

 Children distressed on Christmas Island   

 The  President  of  the  Australian  Human  Rights  Commission,  Professor  Gillian  Triggs   recently returned from Christmas Island as part of her National Inquiry into the impact of  immigration detention on children. Of the 315 children in detention on the island at the  time of her visit, most had been there for six to eight months.    

 The  inquiry team included  a  paediatrician, Dr Karen  Zwi  and  Dr Sarah  Mares, a  child  psychiatrist.    

 Most of the children were visibly distressed. They told the team “this place is hell”, “help  me  get  out  of  here”  and  “there’s  no  school,  nowhere  to  play  and  nothing  to  do.”  The   children also spoke about their distress at living in closed environment with adults who  were sad, angry and self-harming.   

 Dr Zwi and Dr Mares noted that the conditions of detention are taking their toll on the  development  of  children.  They  recorded  instances  of  children  biting  themselves, and  others, and banging their heads.    

 Dr  Zwi  reported:  “If  a  parent  is  depressed,  anxious,  has  any  health  condition  that   impacts  on  their  capacity  to  care  for  their  child,  or  the  environment  is  frightening  (as   would  be  the  case  when  witnessing  self-harm),  then  that  child’s  development  is  often   impacted. This was evident in several of the children we saw, with developmental delay  (usually delayed speaking), and regression such as bedwetting.”   

 Australia has obligations under international human rights law to detain children only as  a measure of last resort and to ensure children are protected from harm.   

 “These  asylum  seekers  are  in  limbo  and  many  are  feeling  the  stress  of  uncertainty.   They have  been  detained  for  long  periods  by anyone’s  measure  and  they don’t  know  when they will go to Nauru or PNG for assessment of their refugee status and potential  resettlement there,” said Professor Triggs.    

 It is understood the families and children detained on Christmas Island will eventually be  transferred  to  a  third  country  for  processing  and  resettlement. One  teenager  told the  inquiry team: “Manus Island is now a very dangerous place. Will I will be safe there?”   

 The visit to Christmas Island was the first undertaken by the Commission in its National  Inquiry  into  Children  in  Immigration  Detention which  is  calling  for  submissions. More  information can be found here -  http://www.humanrights.gov.au/children-immigration-detention   

 Media contact: Sarah Bamford 0417 957 525 or 02 9284 9758  sarah.bamford@humanrights.gov.au   

 1 

