---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: ACL speech, Tony Abbott's unfair Budget, Cost of living, Ebola, NAPLAN, National Security, Cabinet disunity."
date: "2014-10-25"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211446743
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3471943%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN 

 LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  SATURDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2014    

 Subject/s: ACL speech, Tony Abbott’s unfair Budget, Cost of living, Ebola,  NAPLAN, National Security, Cabinet disunity.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everyone. I’ve  been at the ACL this morning, talking about some of my values and the vision which  I have for Australia in the next five to 10 years. I discussed marriage equality under  the law, I discussed the important international role that Australia has to support  refugees and the vulnerable. I also discussed and spoke about the importance of  linking economic growth to equality, and that both growth and equality are not  mutually exclusive but they are twins, and that Australia needs to prioritise both.   

 There was a lot of discussion about also what we do in terms of Ebola and the need  for Australia to take more action. It was a useful exchange of views, and whilst we  didn’t agree on everything, I agree that the political debate was advanced this  morning in Australia. I also just think it’s worth noting that in Australia, we can have  disagreements and we can conduct them in a civil nature, and I am grateful to all of  those involved today.   

 Happy to take questions.    

 REPORTER: Why did you choose a speech to the Australian Christian Lobby to  make plan your views on marriage equality, and in particular faith and the use of  faith in some ways to separate society and gay people from society?   

 SHORTEN: I think I’m like most Australians, we don’t tend to talk about our faith  publicly. The Australian Christian Lobby asked me to speak to them, so it was  perhaps an unusual opportunity to talk about one’s own personal values and views.  Talking about religion is not something I’m going to make a habit of doing. But it  was an opportunity to exchange views. I think it’s important in life to be straight 

 with people about what you think, and whilst the Australian Christian Lobby and I  obviously didn’t have a complete agreement in terms of marriage equality, I’ve voted  for it in the past.   

 I think fundamentally in Australia we’re very lucky to be tolerant and to be diverse. I  do fundamentally believe that Australian families come in all shapes and sizes. I  don’t believe it’s good when people cite some sort of moral authority to criticise  blended families, or say that relationships in Australia should just be constructed and  supported legally limited to heterosexual relationships and nuclear families. There  are mums and dads, there are couples, there are individuals who are raising their  children to the best of their efforts, and I think it is important to speak up for all of  Australia, not just a particular sub-set of Australia.   

 REPORTER: Were you being provocative?   

 SHORTEN: No.    

 REPORTER: Where would you like to see the debate on marriage equality go from  here, and do you think more supporters within the Government for marriage equality  should be speaking publically about their position?   

 SHORTEN: I think Tony Abbott probably needs to allow a conscience vote, I don’t  think it’s going to progress far without that. Whilst the Liberal Party insists that  everyone in the Liberal Party has one view, I don’t see that marriage equality will  advance much further. I think the challenge here is to recognise that people of good  will can have different views on this question, but what is important is that not every  matter should be party political - this is a matter of conscience.    

 REPORTER: Cory Bernardi has tweeted this morning that ‘nobody takes advice on  marriage or morality’ from yourself, what do you make of that statement?   

 SHORTEN: I don’t rate it very seriously at all.    

 REPORTER: Do you think that that is an unnecessarily rude thing to say?   

 SHORTEN: I have ceased thinking too hard about what Cory Bernardi said a fair  while ago.    

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten in terms of the carbon tax, is it time for the Government to  acknowledge that the repeal of the carbon tax hasn’t resulted in Australians having  an extra $550 in their pocket?   

 SHORTEN: Australians have learnt the difference between Tony Abbott before an  election and after an election. He’s broken his promises to Australians on everything  from pensions, to cuts to education, to cuts to health care, to cuts to the treatment  of veterans. So there is little surprise to me that Australians are sceptical about his  election promises around cost of living because his Budget, his unfair Budget, is  seeing a family who would earn - bring in $65,000 a year is losing up to $6000 in  support, so there is no doubt in my mind that when people are asking about cost of  living and do they think Tony Abbott’s helping to reduce it, broken election promises 

 have confirmed in Australians minds that they can’t trust Tony Abbott with cost of  living.    

 REPORTER: Christine Milne says that the Greens are considering a compromise  with the Government supporting Direct Action if it meant that the Renewable Energy  Target would remain as it is. Does that take you out of the climate change debate in  the Senate?   

 SHORTEN: It’s up to the Greens if they want to do a deal with Tony Abbott. One  thing I’d just say to supporters of the Greens is that anyone who trusts Tony Abbott  to be fair dinkum in terms of climate change is kidding themselves.    

 REPORTER: The AMA have said that Australia’s been far too slow to act in the case  of Ebola. Do you think that we should be sending teams and we should be sending  them there?   

 SHORTEN: I don’t believe that Tony Abbott has done enough to deal with this  growing crisis. It’s not a matter of compelling people to go to West Africa, but logic  dictates that you’re better off dealing with the outbreak of a deadly and serious  contagion closer to the source, than waiting til it comes to Australia or comes to  Papua New Guinea. If you want to deal with a contagion, and a disease which is  deadly and spreads very rapidly, you’re better of dealing with it early. Because the  questions in several months’ time if we don’t act now will be ‘why didn’t we act’  now?   

 REPORTER: Should Australia be setting up a facility in West Africa to deal with  Australians who may contract this virus? We haven’t heard the Government talk  about that at all.    

 SHORTEN: A number of other countries are working out solutions to ensure that  their nationals who go and help here are safe and secure. It’s not beyond the wit  and wisdom of the Australian Government to pick up the telephone, to talk to  leaders of other countries and the United States and the United Kingdom and to do  our bit. There are plenty of people in Australia who want to do the right thing and  help. I think that most Australians recognise that if you don’t deal with Ebola in West  Africa and if you wait til it came to somewhere much closer to Australia, then that  will have a lot more deadly consequences.    

 So in terms of the technical solutions, Australia should be working with other  countries. Other countries are capable of coming up with answers to the questions  that you’re asking, I don’t see why Australia can’t work with them.    

 REPORTER: There is of course an outbreak in New York, another health worker  seems to have contracted the virus and then returned home. Is there a concern  though that Australia, being as isolated as it is, is that’s the way that Ebola will get  into our country?   

 SHORTEN: My concern is that if you don’t deal with a problem at its source, if you  put off to dealing with this problem until next week, next month or next year, it will  be far worse, far more deadly, far more costly.  

 

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten, there are reports that our security agencies were having  to investigate some of the 5000 people or so who went to Mecca last month. Is this  the [inaudible]?   

 SHORTEN: I haven’t received any briefing from the Government about this matter  and until I do I won’t’ make any comment.    

 REPORTER: Mr Shorten, what are your thoughts on the NAPLAN testing going  online in 2016?   

 SHORTEN: I think that NAPLAN is a net positive development. You’re always  looking at ways of refining the system. In terms of making it online, there are some  clear advantages to that. NAPLAN, on balance, gives parents a chance to be able to  identify what’s happening with their children’s educational development. But it’s  always important to take the advice of experts and continue to improve it. Last  question thanks.    

 REPORTER: What do you make of the Cabinet reshuffle rumours?   

 SHORTEN: Clearly there’s trouble on the frontbench of the Liberal Party. Rumours  don’t just keep coming out like this unless there is a genuine concern, I suspect, by  some Government Ministers about Joe Hockey’s performance. Clearly there’s a bit of  tit-for-tat and backgrounding within the Government against each other. For me the  real issue though is there are leaks from the National Security Council - it is  important that Tony Abbott gets his ambitious or egotistical Ministers into line.    

 I want the Government, in a time of national security tension, to  be doing their day  job, not to be arguing about which chair someone sits in. It’s too important to lead  to this disunity. Tony Abbott needs to put a line under it and get his Ministers  focused on national security, not leaking to the media. Thanks everyone.  

 ENDS 

 

