---
title: "End of taxpayer funded immigration advice to illegal boat arrivals saves $100 million"
date: "2014-03-31"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211406062
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3083291%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 End of taxpayer funded immigration advice to illegal boat arrivals  saves $100 million 

 Monday, 31 March 2014 

 The government has fulfilled another election pledge with the removal of taxpayer  funded immigration advice and assistance to people who arrived in Australia illegally  by boat, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said  today. 

 'From today people who arrived illegally by boat, as well as illegally by air, will no  longer receive taxpayer funded immigration advice and assistance under the  Immigration Advice and Application Assistance Scheme (IAAAS). This election  commitment will save the budget $100 million,' Minister Morrison said today. 

 'Australia's protection obligations do not extend to providing free immigration advice  and assistance to those who arrived in Australia illegally. 

 'The withdrawal of taxpayer funded immigration advice and assistance does not  prevent those who arrived illegally having access to legal assistance. In addition,  those who wish to provide immigration advice and application assistance pro bono  are free to do so. 

 'Access to any private and/or pro bono immigration advice by illegal boat or air  arrivals will be facilitated by the Department of Immigration and Border Protection,  with all costs to be met by the providers of these services. 

 'If people choose to violate how Australia chooses to run our refugee and  humanitarian programme, they should not presume upon the support and assistance  that is provided to those who seek to come the right way, and they should certainly  not receive additional assistance, as they did under the previous government. 

 'Under these changes the government will provide illegal arrivals clear instructions in  multiple languages setting out the asylum application and assessment process and  will provide interpreters. This is similar to the process employed by the UNHCR  around the world. 

 'Impacted persons seeking Australia's protection and IAAAS providers will be notified  of these changes. Services that have already commenced will be completed,  however the IAAAS will not continue for any additional part of the process that would  incur an additional fee. 

 'The government will provide a small amount of additional support to those who are  considered vulnerable, including unaccompanied minors and the Department of  Immigration and Border Protection is currently considering the most effective and  efficient way to provide this support,' Minister Morrison said.  

