---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 26 May 2014: Manus Island incident"
date: "2014-05-26"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Manus Island incident"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408772
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3190040%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Manus Island incident 

 Monday, 26 May 2014 

 Press Conference, Canberra 

 Minister Morrison: Thank you for coming together. The events of 16-18 February  represented a terrible, tragic and distressing series of incidents that involved serious  and indeed a fatal act of violence and particularly as we now address the issue of the  independent review I am releasing today we must start by expressing once again the  sympathies to the family of Mr Berati who died on that evening and in this report it  provides an account of what we believe occurred on that night not just to Mr Berati  but what happened more broadly. Over the course of not just those few days but of  the weeks and indeed months that led up to those terrible incidents. It is important to  note that the events of 16-18 February and including the tragic incidents that  occurred on that last night did not occur in a vacuum, these events did not occur in  isolation. 

 The review that I am releasing today and will be available to you at the conclusion of  my remarks and will also be posted on the website is a review conducted, as you  know, by Mr Robert Cornall on behalf of my department to independently assess  what occurred over those terrible few days on Manus Island. The review is designed  to simply ask a question and get the answer to it that I think all Australians including  myself wanted to know the answer to and that is what happened, what happened  over those couple of days. And to the best of our ability and through the processes  that Mr Cornall has gone through he has been able to construct an account of those  days and the months leading up to those days. 

 Let me first start by commending Robert Cornall on the job that he has done. It is a  very professional job, it is a very considered job, it is I think a very objective job that  he has done in seeking to look through what is the very understandable emotion that  there is on this issue and to get to an understanding of the facts so we can soberly  assess those and understand what these events must lead us towards. The process  as I said was all about establishing those facts and the facts as they are presented in  the report are as best as he has been able to determine, it was the part of a rigorous  review process, a comprehensive process drawing together the accounts of more  than 300 transferees who are located at the centre. It includes interviews with  relevant Minister's including myself, officials, and service providers and those who  were there and the nights that lead up to the incident. It reviews the submissions that  were both invited to be provided and those that were provided and any information  that was provided to Mr Cornall by those who would seek to do so. And it included of  course an inspection of the site by Mr Cornall to see first-hand the scene on the  ground. All information that has been obtained in the course of conducting this  review has been handed over to the Government of Papua New Guinea and the  relevant authorities, that was done two weeks ago as part of the bilateral meeting  process that we are engaged in and that was done by Mr Cornall directly with the 

 Attorney General of Papua New Guinea as well as the Minister for Immigration and  Foreign Affairs. That is important because I need to stress that the Manus Island  processing centre is run under the governance and under the jurisdiction of the  Government of Papua New Guinea. The Australian Government supports the  Government of Papua New Guinea by providing various support for contractors and  service providers that operate within that facility but this is a PNG facility. PNG was  then provided the opportunity to review that report over the last just over two weeks  up until the close of last week on the Friday. This morning the Prime Minister has  been briefed on the report and I received it on the weekend, the final report. Our  partners have been advised in Papua New Guinea today of the press conference  that I am holding here today and about the release of this report. The report is also  being translated into relevant languages to enable those transferees at the centre to  be able to read this report in their own language and an executive summary is being  prepared in seventeen other languages that go right across the various language  groups that are affected by the centres. In addition my department is in the process  of providing a further brief on the recommendations in this report, of which there are  13, all of which have been accepted by me as the Minister and many of which are  already either implemented or are in the process of being implemented. I should also  note that the family of Mr Berati is being contacted today with the findings of this  report through our Post. 

 I am going to let the facts speak for themselves in this report, Mr Cornall has done I  think an excellent job in drawing together those facts and it is for others to read those  facts and draw what conclusions they wish to draw and I am not seeking to influence  that process today but I will touch on some key issues within the report for the sake  of giving you a report here today. If I can turn in particular to the causes which are  outlined in this report for the incident it says on page 9 of the report that the events  that occurred on 16-18 February with the result of increasing tension in the centre  and the transferees frustration and anxiety caused by anger at being brought to  Papua New Guinea. Anger with the policy that if they are found to be refugees they  will be resettled in PNG not Australia. Frustration at the delay in processing of their  refugee status determinations and lack of information about the likely timing for  completion of those determinations. Further anger and frustration resulting from the  consequent uncertainty about their future including in particular how long they will be  kept at the Manus centre and frustration arising from the lack of information about  what resettlement in PNG would mean for them and their families. I note that in  particular Mr Cornall in the report on page 41 says that simply they were not  prepared to accept that their options are to return home or to be settled in PNG.  Notwithstanding the Minister had made that clear to them in September 2013 and  the service providers had repeated that message over the four months since the  Minister's visit. He goes on to say that those principle causes were aggravated by  the antagonism that had been developed between some transferees and PNG  nationals employed at the centre and their supporters in the local community. Some  transferees treated PNG nationals employed in the centre in a disrespectful and  racist manner and criticised their country that was based on the reports that Mr  Cornall was able to receive from those involved in the centre. And I note that later in  the report he refers to a G4S report on the night, intelligence report that references  that stones and rocks were being thrown at personnel outside the RPC and that  protesters were attempting to insult PNG nationals with shouts of F you PNG and F  you, you baboon and fight, fight PNG. 

 There are other underlying factors that are noted in the report also on page 10 that  contributed to the loss of control during the incidents and the duration of the  disturbance on the second night and they are noted as the physical security  arrangements at the centre were not up to the requirements for managing a large  number of non-compliant transferees and a lack of clarity in the roles and  responsibilities of the Provincial New Guinea Constabulary based at Lorengau and  the mobile squad stationed at the Manus RPC and the coordination of their actions  with G4S. There was a build-up of events, two events, that is outlined in this report  that began particularly around Australia Day where there was an expectation based  on rumour that there was supposed to be some form of amnesty that would take  place on Australia Day. These reports and rumours were obviously false and had no  basis to them whatsoever. There were rumours that were circulated that the report  refers to that were given some encouragement by media reporting here in Australia  about any potential changes to policy and things of that nature. There was  orchestrated protest activity that commenced from that time of Australia Day, this  was coordinated between compounds with a daily ritual of activity and chanting and  various other non-violent activity over the course of that period but it did include and  the report notes there were reports by transferees of intimidation by transferees, by  other transferees seeking to press them into being involved in protest activity.  Demands were made about getting answers to various questions in relation to the  matters that I have actually noted on the causes that are identified from Mr Cornall  those responses were provided at a special meeting on the 16th of February as I  understand. Those answers did not placate the transferees at the centre, the  answers had not changed from anything that they knew previously, and that  particularly went to the core proposition that people would not be coming to  Australia, their claims would be assessed in Papua New Guinea, and if found to be a  refugee they would be resettled there. 

 There was intelligence that was being received throughout the centre which  highlighted the fact that there was a growing tension within the centre and I note in  particular the intelligence report noted here on page 35 of this report of 12 February  which says information was also reported from staff in Oscar compound that suggest  transferees with target expat staff with violence on 16, 17 and 18 February. If  information suggests that they intend to arm themselves and inflict violence,  additionally they intend to breach the fence line to execute an outcome has yet to be  determined. Moreover they intend to coordinate a series of code calls at the allotted  time of the alleged escalation to offset staff across a number of compounds.  Information suggests that they are well aware of the police special taskforce and that  the thought of being engaged with equal force does not bother them. There is urgent  work underway to establish the bona fides of this information' and that intelligence is  referred to by Mr Cornall. Precautionary measures were taken and they are referred  to in the report, not in addition to the fact that 130 additional expat security staff were  sent to Manus before the incident in the response to the request by G4S to my  department and warrants being executed to search for various contraband and  potentially weapons that may have been fashioned. In addition to that it says that  there was a strengthening of intelligence collection, fire crews were trained in fire  fighting techniques and first aid fire response. Wheelie bins were emptied of rubbish  every hour to prevent them being used as mobile fire containers. Those who are  familiar with the Christmas Island and Nauru incidents will be well aware of the  reason for that. All but essential storage containers were taken away from the site.  The contents of the property and trust container were secured on the Bibby or 

 elsewhere. Only six essential and immediately needed vehicles were kept outside  the centre, the ambulance and medical clinic, two fire vehicles and three four wheel  drive vehicles. The incident response teams practiced deploying to pre-arranged  locations around the centre in groups of 8, 16 or 32. Unsuccessful attempts were  made to co-ordinate with the PNG provincial police and unnecessary files and items  were to be removed from administration buildings as staff prepared for emergency  evacuation if it became necessary. Other matters are noted in the report. 

 The events themselves of those terrible nights - and I want to stress these events  occurred across two nights, not one. When you read the report you will be more  familiar with the events that occurred on the second night and of course the terrible  death of Mr Berati but on the previous night there was some significant violence that  also occurred and there is another individual who was very fortunate to be alive who  could have easily been the victim of another serious incident when his throat was cut  from one side to the other but it didn't sever or cut any essential arteries or anything  of that nature and proved fortunately to just be a superficial wound although there  was a lot of blood at the time. If I go to his points on page 57, he notes that a total of  1340 transferees were accommodated at the centre on February 15, that G4S  estimated that over 100 transferees from each of the Foxtrot, Mike, Oscar  compounds took part in the protests that occurred over 17-18 February some of  whom may have been coerced or intimidated into protesting from threats from other  transferees. As a result approximately 70 to 75% of transferees did not participate in  those disturbances. This is a very important point. The vast majority of transferees at  that centre that night were seeking to be taken to a place of safety and security  officers and others that night ensured that a vast majority did get to a place of safety  that night, in some cases at risk to themselves in ensuring that could take place. It  says the belligerent attitude of some of the transferees was at least in part a reaction  to the injuries inflicted on transferees by PNG nationals in Oscar compounds the  night before, that is 16 February. G4S IRT officers were subjected to serious and  violent attacks but they had the benefit of their protective gear which reduced the  injuries they sustained and, it says, all of the serious injuries treated by IHMS  between 16 and 18 February were sustained by transferees and they were generally  consistent with having received a beating, often a severe beating and in the case of  Reza Berati a fatal beating. In relation to the transferees it concludes on page 59 and  I am sorry to go through this at some length but I think it is a report people have  been waiting for, for some time, it says across all of the consultations the accounts of  the transferees have been consistent in relation to the following points: they were  beaten by PNG police nationals and a few expat - but the only expat clearly identified  by the transferees is a New Zealand G4S guard - whether or not they had been  involved in the disturbance. Some of them say they were hiding in their bedrooms  even under their bed when the intruders came in, dragged them out and beat them.  Some transferees attacked in their room were able to buy immunity from a beating  with cigarettes, the centre's currency. When the intruders left their bedrooms they  took any readily available personal items. Some of the transferees have made official  complaints about these attacks but nothing has yet been done. Many of them now  live in the fear of further attacks and this fear affects their ability to sleep and in some  cases the disturbance of gun shots has revived previous trauma and contributed to  post traumatic stress disorder. 

 So that is a summary of events. On the issue of the second night, on the night that  Mr Berati was killed I can confirm that later in that evening the G4S security team 

 withdrew from that section of the compound and the compound at that side from the  external side of the fence was being monitored by the mobile squad. It was at that  time the mobile squad did enter the compound and undertook the various actions  that are outlined in this report in some detail. I should note as Mr Cornall notes in this  report, that it is an offence for a police officer in Papua New Guinea not to undertake  action in relation to an affray. Now that is just noting that point and it is not in any  way getting into the issue of motive or other things like that but Mr Cornall has noted  it so I have noted it here today. What may have else happened that night it is difficult  to determine. Had the mobile squad at that point not taken action in relation to the  riot in the Mike compound, whether it would have spread to other compounds,  whether the facility then would have been completely compromised and overrun as it  did on Nauru and other places, that cannot be determined. But the individuals who  are responsible for fatal acts on that evening and this report makes reference to a  number of individuals whose names have been redacted for the obvious reasons  because the police investigation is hopefully soon proceeding to a position of  charging, notes that Mr Berati was struck from behind by a service provider staff  member, not G4S, it was actually Salvation Army and that other individuals including  a G4S security contractor it is alleged, were involved in rushing past him and kicking  him and then a rock was dropped on Mr Berati's head. Now these are terrible acts  which can have no, absolutely no suggestion of being in any way a proportional  response to the risks that were before that centre that evening or the many other  things that are there and there is a proper process which is underway to deal with  the criminality of any actions that occurred on that night. That is why I have referred  to these events as terrible and as tragic because they indeed are. 

 In terms of the recommendations that are noted in the report there are 13 of them.  They substantively go to five issues - they go to the need to ensure processing is  underway and being completed and as you know that processing is underway and  the first recommendations for decisions have been handed down over the past  fortnight. The upgrades to the facilities was underway prior to, during and since in  relation to these facilities. The upgrades particularly to security infrastructure had  been recommended to the previous government, that action had not been taken on  those items. When I became Minister I visited Manus Island within the first fortnight  and instructed General Campbell to undertake a security review. That again  recommended that that security infrastructure fencing and lighting, CCTV be put in  place. I authorised that immediately. In November the resources were made  available through the cabinet process. It is a source of frustration that these things  take longer frankly than I think they should but that was authorised and that was  endorsed and the action was being taken. There are recommendations in relation to  training of those who are working in the centre. There are recommendations relating  to coordination in relation to the activities of police and service providers at the  centre and there are recommendations that relate to restitution and the way that trust  can again be started to be built up at the centre. All of those recommendations have  been adopted by the government and were either already actioned or in the process  of being actioned or continue to be actioned to this day. This report was  commissioned to find out what happened. This report which is released in full by me  today with the only redactions being those that are necessary in relation to ongoing  police investigations and possible charges has been released in full to the Australian  public. It is being done in a timely fashion as soon as it was practically able to be  done by the government after receiving this information from Mr Cornall. We will  continue to work with our partner PNG as they are the jurisdictional authority over 

 the centre and we will continue to provide the support for the successful and smooth  running and safe management of this facility which remains my top priority. Are there  any questions? 

 Question: Mr Morrison was Mr Berati engaged in the protest activity at all or was he  just an innocent victim? 

 Minister Morrison: Well there is nothing in this report that has been able to  establish that either way. 

 Question: Given you had advanced warning of this and indeed sent additional  security staff, are you saying this tragic incident was unavoidable and if so do you  think it is possible there will be other incidents of this nature? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I am not drawing that conclusion at all and I will invite other  people to draw their own conclusions. In the early part of the report Mr Cornall  makes some very important observations about policy implementation. When the  previous government announced the PNG arrangement on the 19th of July it is clear  that no preparations had been made or planning to ensure the facility was going to  be capable of dealing with the changed security environment that related to this new  policy and very little frankly was done until after the election in terms of moving on a  lot of those issues. So look it is an issue - people can make announcements about  policy but if they do not think through the implications and implementation issues it  can sew the seeds I think for some very destructive things down the track. 

 Question: Minister you say the proper process is underway, do you mean just in  relation to this Salvation Army employee and when you say proper process how  many people were being investigated, will there be further action taken? 

 Minister Morrison: Well they are all matters for the PNG authorities. It is a matter  for them to lay charges and to proceed with prosecutions and I understand that is a  matter that is being handled directly by them and they have everything we have been  able to glean from this review including our transcripts of interviews, we have  facilitated legal support for those who wanted the support of that in providing  evidence also to the PNG police and that will continue. This report was not a police  report. We are not the jurisdictional authority here. This report was to answer my  question - what happened and I believe to the best we are able to do and Mr Cornall  is very distinguished in these areas, he has been able to give us some answers to  that. 

 Question: Minister Morrison in your statement you said 130 extra guards have been  sent to Manus Island detention centre prior to the riots, that contradicts the G4S  submission to the Senate inquiry which included correspondence between your  department and G4S and only 30 extra guards had been sent and your department  had actually denied the request for 100 extra guards. Could you please explain that  inconsistency? 

 Minister Morrison: The advice I received before coming to this press conference  today is those 130 guards were in place before the incidents took place. Now if that  advice is incorrect I am happy to correct the record. As you know I am always happy 

 to correct the record if I have had information provided to me that is incorrect but that  is the advice as provided to me. Mark? 

 Question: Minister do you now regret your early comments suggesting the  detainees placed themselves in peril by going outside the compound when it is now  clear that they were set upon inside the compound by the very people you have  engaged to protect them? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I will go back to what I said at the time Mark. I clarified my  position on that on the same day that I made those comments, not five or six days  later as some alleged. What occurred on that night and the night before this report  goes into some detail about the build-up. I mean there are many transferees that  night and during the course of that day who were concerned and asked to be  removed. They wanted to take no part in the protests that were about to occur. They  wanted to remove themselves to a place of safety and that was facilitated. There  was organised protest activity and there was intelligence suggesting there would be  a violent confrontation, potentially involving weapons and threats to individuals. Now  that is the context of the state of the security organisations that were involved that  night. I stress that on the actions of the mobile squad that they entered the facility  and they engaged in these practices and these actions but remember under PNG  law they also have a responsibility not to stand idle when there is an affray occurring.  So there would have been no incident that night had there been no protests. I think  that is clear to say but the protests in no way could ever justify what happened to Mr  Berati or the other serious violent acts that were perpetrated on that night. Under no  circumstances in my view could that ever justify what happened. 

 Question: You talked about the actions of the PNG police, what it says on page 67 -  'when the police mobile squad entered Mike compound they started shooting.' Are  you concerned that that should be their reaction in response to an affray, that that is  the action of a well-trained police force? 

 Minister Morrison: Well again I am not suggesting their actions were proportionate  and I am not making any comment on that. The report rightly does state that that is  what occurred that night. They were the only persons who had weapons that night.  The security officers from G4S and others were not armed that night but this report is  an honest report Chris, it goes into all of that detail and people can see just what  happened on that night. 

 Question: What specific improvements had been made to security infrastructure  before these events actually happened as per the recommendations of Lieutenant-General Campbell? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I went through the number of preventative actions that were  taken that day in terms of everything from picking up loose rocks and stones and  things of that nature to ensure there were not weapons and potential other missiles  and other things that might have been available for the form of protest. Warrants  were exercised to see if there had been any weapons stashes that had been put  through the centre, additional security officers were deployed to the centre. I am  frustrated that the lighting and the CCTV and the fencing was not in place at that  time. It was in the process of being done. I had authorised that in late November.  The previous government had been advised of that and did absolutely nothing but 

 there is nothing in here and you will see it in the report itself, that Mr Cornall does not  attribute any one thing to what occurred that night and frankly the absence of any  one of those things would not necessarily have led to a different outcome. But the  upgrades continue as we speak. For example the relocation of the logistics hub. Now  that was originally put inside the centre. If you are going to run a centre that has a  higher risk of security issues then you don't go and put the logistics hub in the middle  of the centre where it can be compromised. Now there was no funding provided by  the previous government to address that. We are actually relocating that hub now  but it is not an easy thing to do and it requires resources and planning and work and  contractors and others and we have had to do an enormous amount of work.  Remember there was no ongoing funding to process people offshore at Manus from  1 January this year. We had to remediate that last year. There was no funding for the  additional health services or infrastructure support, all of these things which we are  now doing. Effectively the previous government was dragged kicking and screaming  to introduce offshore processing. They thought it involved just holding a press  conference and then not thinking through the consequences and implications of what  you need to implement such a policy. I will give you a contrast - it is the Australian  Government's policy to turn boats back where it is safe to do so. Now we didn't rush  into that on the 18th of September. We got it right. We understood that we needed to  be able to get it right to do it safely, to do it sustainably, to do it legally, to do it each  time and every time. When the Coalition implements policy we think about the  implementation, not the press conference and I think what we have seen here is a  press conference approach to policy that has left some serious implementation  issues undone. 

 Question: What precisely killed Reza Berati? Was it the blow from behind, the kicks  or the rock in the head? 

 Minister Morrison: None of that can be clearly established but he died of a head  trauma which ultimately ended in a cardiac arrest. You will not in the report here, it is  noted by one of the attending medical personnel on the night, if he had been in  Sydney and incurred those wounds on that night he wouldn't have survived either.  Now that is a tragic incident but it is clear his injuries were very, very severe. 

 Question: Based on the recommendations we obviously have not had a chance to  read through in its entirety at this point but are you satisfied now that in a duty of  care sense that people on Manus Island are safe from here on in, that everything  that has already been put in place will stop this happening again and could you also  just clarify, you mentioned the jurisdictional authority in PNG here, but what is left for  the Australian government to look at in terms of its duty of care issues coming out of  this report? 

 Minister Morrison: Well let me start with the first point, guarantees of safety are  difficult to provide and they certainly should be an aspiration and objective of the  government to the extent that we have a role in providing that. I have noted before  and I think maybe perhaps in this room, on the fourth of September last year an  asylum seekers who was released into the community on a bridging visa under the  previous government's policy was stabbed to death in his room allegedly by another  asylum seeker who had been released on a bridging visa. Now that man died and  his death is obviously as tragic and horrible as that of Mr Berati but no one here is  suggesting we should be shutting down community release. There are risks involved 

 in managing facilities like this and indeed with any of the policies that are associated  with these individuals and these people and the Australian government is fulfilling its  responsibilities to provide the support to the Government of Papua New Guinea  through assistance with the provision of contracting services and various other things  to assist them running the centre for which they have jurisdictional authority. So that  is the role of the Australian Government under this arrangement that was put  together by the previous government and we are exercising that role. 

 Question: You said that had there been no protests that night there would have  been no incident but protests have long been a staple or they have walked hand in  hand with detention, immigration detention, so what does it say about Australia that  this situation was not anticipated, there was a failure to protect an asylum seeker  from being murdered? 

 Minister Morrison: Well what it says is this was anticipated and there were actions  taken over many months to try and mitigate against an event of this nature. You will  note in the report that Mr Cornall makes a very important observation - while the  racial tension between the local PNG engaged staff and others and the transferees  themselves was not the reason for the riot, he does say it contributed significantly to  the nature of the violence. I noted the security report in my opening statement that  they had been aware of the mobile squad and the potential acts and had expressed  no concern about that. Now this was a horrible and terrible event and as I said those  who have engaged in criminal acts will face justice as they should but when events  of this nature I think fall apart to that extent then these places are incredibly  dangerous. That is why you need to take the action you need to take to make sure  they are safe as possible. That is why when you announce policy you need to think  through the implications of that policy. It goes back to the essential point of  disharmony in the centre is that they do not want to be there, they paid a people  smuggler to come to Australia. That is an outcome they are not going to get and as  time goes on this reality dawns on them and that is something people have to  process and that is a difficult thing from a human perspective to process. We  understand that. Attempts were made to mitigate that. In the report you will see that  the service providers did things within the centre like running extra movies and more  excursions and things like that to try and manage the emotional side of what was  happening in the centre but what occurred that night went well beyond that. It is an  extremely regrettable event but one that I think the government had already learned  the lessons of frankly in many cases before it started because we could see it from  the first couple of weeks I was Minister that the risks were there and we took every  action we took as quickly as we could but it is my great regret that some of those  actions were not able to be implemented in time. 

 Question: How much responsibility as Minister do you take? 

 Minister Morrison: I take responsibility for my portfolio every day. I take  responsibility for the fact that for more than five months we have not had a  successful maritime people smuggling venture to Australia and that we are not  seeing people die at sea anymore. I take responsibility for the fact that when 15 000  people were previously denied permanent visas in this country because of people  coming illegally by boat they are now getting those visas and there are 20 000 of  those this year and the next four years. I take responsibility for the fact there is an  over $2.5 billion saving to the budget because of the strong border protection 

 policies that we have been able to introduce. This is a terrible and tragic event and  steps have been taken both before, during and subsequently to improve the security  of this facility and the operation of this place so we can maintain what is and remains  an important part of our border protection policies. These border protection policies  and the backbone this government has shown in border protection is getting the  results we said they would get. We are implementing the policies we said we would  implement and we are getting the results we said we would get. Now what happened  on Manus I think is of great distress to all Australians. What this report does is I think  give many answers to the questions they have about what occurred on that night and  I hope that will provide some comfort at least to those particularly who have  expressed such a strong interest in this issue but importantly to the transferees also  who will get this report in their own language so they can have some understanding  that they know that their accounts have been heard and they have been provided to  government and they are informing the views of this government but one thing I can  assure you of our policies will remain the same today and going forward. I have got  to get to Question Time. 

 Thank you. 

 

