---
title: "Greens urge review to focus on Australian gun laws"
date: "2014-12-18"
creators:
  - "Bandt, Adam"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211417521
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3568172%22
---

 Media Release  18 December 2014   

 Greens urge review to focus on Australian gun laws   

 Following conflicting reports that the perpetrator of the Sydney siege may have had a licensed  firearm, Acting Greens Leader Adam Bandt said the Prime Minister is right to launch a review into  the adequacy of our gun laws but the review must avoid becoming an excuse to attack refugees.   

 "The Greens have been saying for a long time that our gun laws need to be stronger. The tragic  events in Sydney earlier this week only strengthens the case for better gun control," said Mr Bandt.   

 "This review must provide us with clear answers to how someone who had mental health issues and  was charged with accessory to murder got hold of a gun.   

 "In the wake of the Port Arthur massacre, John Howard did the right thing and tightened the  country's gun laws. Tony Abbott must learn from his political mentor and take the review as an  opportunity to strengthen our gun laws.   

 "We are concerned that Mr Abbott's review may be used to justify further attacks on asylum seekers  rather than restricting the availability of guns in our community,” said Mr Bandt.   

 "No doubt the gun lobby will try and argue that Australia needs weaker gun laws. In Victoria, we  have already had the appalling spectacle of a newly elected upper house MP saying the events in  Sydney showed that gun laws need to be weakened, and now Senator Leyonhjelm has said that this  wouldn't have happened in Texas.   

 "The idea we will make Australia safer by becoming more like the US is ridiculous.   

 "A Greens-initiated Senate inquiry is currently reviewing aspects of our gun laws, but it is already  clear we need further reform.   

 "If the review focuses on these questions, it has the potential to make our country safer out of this  tragedy."   

 Media contact: Adam Pulford, 0429 109 054   

 

 

 

 

