---
title: "No illegal boat arrivals for more than three weeks"
date: "2014-01-10"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403133
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2935355%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 No illegal boat arrivals for more than three weeks 

 Friday 10 January 2014  Once again, there have been no persons transferred to Australian immigration authorities during the past  reporting week under Operation Sovereign Borders, who arrived in Australia illegally by boat. 

 It has been more than three weeks since the last group of illegal maritime arrivals were transferred to  immigration authorities by Border Protection Command. 

 While January is traditionally a quieter period of arrivals, the strong policies being implemented by the  government mean that people smugglers are being denied the ability to ply their trade with any success. 

 During the same period last year 419 people illegally arrived and in the two previous years there were 278  and 271 arrivals respectively. This year, none have been successful during this period. 

 The latest weekly report on Operation Sovereign Borders is attached detailing such transfers, as well the  number of persons transferred to our offshore processing centres and the population at those centres as  well as Christmas Island. 

 For operational security reasons, the government does not confirm or otherwise comment on reports of on-water activities in relation to Operation Sovereign Borders or disclose details of any operations. 

 People smugglers have used official commentary on such matters to make dangerous assumptions about  our maritime operations, which puts people at risk. 

 The Government's policy of no public comment on operational matters is based on the advice of border  protection agency and operational leaders to protect the security of our operations and to ensure that they  can be conducted with maximum safety and effectiveness for all involved.  

 The Government considers the illegal entry of boats to Australia as a significant affront to our sovereignty. 

 The Government will continue to take all steps necessary to stop the boats consistent with our  commitments to the Australian people and to work with our partners wherever possible to achieve this  result. 

 The Government has a strong mandate from the Australian people to restore the policies that worked under  the Howard Government to stop the boats that were abolished by Labor and the Greens.  

 Any suggestion that the Government is doing anything other than acting on our long held policies and  commitments, as claimed by the Leader of the Opposition, is ignorant and desperate. 

 We will not be following Labor's failed approach that allowed more than 50,000 people to turn up on over  800 boats and in excess of 1,100 people dead. We are restoring control over our borders that was  surrendered under Labor. 

 It is not the policy or practice of the Australian Government to violate Indonesian territorial sovereignty. Any  suggestion that the Government has acted contrary to this policy is false. 

 Australia respects Indonesia's territorial sovereignty and will continue to do so, just as Indonesia has stated  it respects Australia's territorial sovereignty. 

 I also stress that personnel involved in Border Protection operations associated with Operation Sovereign  Borders conduct their roles with the highest levels of professionalism, integrity and personal courage in  extremely trying and challenging circumstances.  

 Actions and activities are undertaken consistent with Australian domestic law and Australia’s obligations  under international law. 

 Additionally, in the interests of preserving operational security, and to maintain the safety of any person  within Border Protection Command’s care, the procedures and techniques used to effect maritime security  operations are not disclosed. 

