---
title: "Release of independent review of Manus disturbance"
date: "2014-05-26"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408743
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3188318%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection  

 Scott Morrison 

 Release of independent review of Manus disturbance 

 Monday, 26 May 2014 

 The Australian Government is committed to working with the Government of Papua  New Guinea to implement the recommendations of the independent inquiry by  Robert Cornall AO into the events of 16-18 February at the Manus Offshore  Processing Centre (OPC), Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon  Scott Morrison said today. 

 The report, which is being made available to transferees and published on the  department's website, was initiated by the Secretary of the Department of  Immigration and Border Protection (DIBP), Martin Bowles PSM, following the  incidents and was undertaken in cooperation with the Government of Papua New  Guinea. 

 Mr Cornall noted that it is not possible to isolate one factor which could have  mitigated injuries or damage nor is it possible to apportion blame for causing the  incidents directly to one or more of the parties involved. 

 Minister Morrison said he welcomed the report and thanked Mr Cornall for the  thoroughness of the review. 

 'The death of a 24-year-old Iranian man was a tragic event and I again express the  deep sympathies of the Australian government to his family,' Minister Morrison said. 

 'Significant improvements have been initiated at the Manus OPC, not only in terms of  structural improvements to the site but also in relation to increased communication  with the transferees and overall engagement with the wider Manus community. 

 'Accountability for and management of key garrison and welfare services has been  consolidated into a single service provider at both the Manus and Nauru OPCs,  ensuring continuity, consistency and integration of service delivery across both sites.  This change in contracting arrangements has resulted in a dramatic transformation in  how these centres operate. The financial certainty provided by the ongoing funding  arrangements as outlined in the 2014-15 Budget reinforces this continuity. 

 'The Government of PNG has commenced the process of handing down refugee  determinations and I am confident in the country's ability to deliver settlement  programmes that will support refugees to become active, independent and  contributing participants in their societies,' Minister Morrison said. 

 The review is available on the department's website at Independent reviews into  incidents at Offshore Regional Processing Centres. 

