---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 25 July 2014: Operation Sovereign Borders"
date: "2014-07-25"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411583
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3575098%22
---

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 Operation Sovereign Borders  Friday, 25 July 2014 

 Press conference, Sydney 

 Immigration Minister: On June 29 this year a Border Protection Command (BPC)  maritime asset provided assistance to an Indian flagged vessel outside of Australia's  territorial waters, carrying 157 persons who departed from within the vicinity of the  Port of Pondicherry in Tamil Nadu in the south of India and were seeking to illegally  enter Australia. At the time of providing this assistance, while there was no imminent  safety threat to those on board, the vessel had become disabled, requiring persons  to be transferred to the BPC vessel. 

 It is the policy of the government under Operation Sovereign Borders to prevent the  illegal entry of vessels to Australia and their passengers. This is the best way to  ensure that no-one is ever resettled in Australia who seeks to come to Australia by  that method. Our policy of denying the illegal entry of vessels and their passengers  to Australia is first achieved through cooperation with our regional partners - which  includes the Government of India - to disrupt ventures before they depart. In cases  where a venture may depart, the government has a series of highly effective  measures available to it to deny the vessel and persons onboard entry to Australia.  In the absence of being able to effect a direct return, additional options are pursued  to arrange the speedy return of passengers from Australia to their country of  departure or origin. Wherever this option is not available, persons are transported to  Australia and transferred to Nauru or Manus Island for offshore processing. 

 Offshore processing is a backstop measure; it is not a front-line measure. It forms  part of the suite of measures that have been put in place by this government and  practiced by previous Coalition Governments to ensure that people either never  arrive, are sent straight back, or are processed offshore and never settled in  Australia. These are the layered deterrents the Australian Government has put in  place that have so far been so effective. In the last seven months there has not been  a single successful people smuggling venture to Australia and this remains the case  even for the venture that remains at sea. During the same period of time last year,  under the previous government, more than 17 000 people arrived on more than 200  such ventures. 

 In the course of the past few weeks, the government has been working through a  series of options to achieve the outcomes that I have set before you, consistent with  our international obligations and other commitments. It is not our policy to send out a  water taxi as soon as the smugglers put up the whistle as occurred under the  previous government. 

 Part of this process has involved determining the identity of the passengers and the  origin and passage of their voyage. Last week, in the spirit of cooperation between  Australia and India this information was provided to the Government of India  following exchanges between our Foreign Minister and their Minister for External  Affairs and my own engagement with the Indian Minister for Home Affairs. Following  these exchanges, meetings were held in New Delhi earlier this week and have  achieved a positive outcome. At this meeting and in subsequent correspondence the  Australian Government has agreed to bring the BPC vessel with 157 persons on  board to Australia where consular access of Indian High Commission officials will be  provided. The final location for return of these passengers is still to be determined  and is subject to operational considerations. Until this process undertaken by Indian  consular officials has been completed, the persons will remain in Australia and the  government reserves its position to then apply any other measures available to it  under our policy settings and relevant legislation. 

 The Minister for Home Affairs has confirmed to the Australian Government that in  addition to India's standing policy of receiving returns of any Indian citizens, he  indicated to me at our meeting that they will also consider the return of non-Indian  citizen residents who may be Sri Lankan nationals. This is a significant and generous  extension of Indian Government policy on these matters and we greatly appreciate  this consideration and the cooperation that has been extended to the Australian  Government as a result of our meeting earlier this week in recognition of our  partnership, and our shared commitment to work together to stop people smuggling. 

 In the context of this understanding, reached with the Government of India this week,  I have been pleased to consent to the passengers being returned to Australia for the  purpose of allowing Indian officials to determine identities and arrange where  possible for the return of any persons to India. It is our intention that those who can  be returned should and must be returned. 

 In addition, we are in further discussions with the Government of India regarding  enhanced cooperation on people smuggling and broader issues of transnational  crime. These issues will continue to be pursued in a cooperative spirit, especially into  the much anticipated lead-up to the meeting of our prime ministers in September. 

 The message from this voyage to people smugglers is that Australia and India are  engaged together to stop you and the full suite of measures that are available to the  Abbott Government remain and will be deployed as demanded by the circumstances  of any particular attempted venture. 

 Questions? 

 Question: Minister you spent six minutes talking about what is going on with the  boat but have failed to give any details on the condition of those on board. Now  these are people who have been detained for 21 hours a day in windowless rooms in  bunks that stack four high. Can you tell us if there are any ongoing health concerns  for anybody on board and what condition they are in? 

 Immigration Minister: As I said to the Parliament when these questions were put to  me there and my answer is the same, the people on board that vessel have been in 

 the excellent care of the men and women of the Australian Customs and Border  Protection Service. 

 Question: Minister what is your understanding of the nationality of those 157  people? What is the Australian Government's belief as to their nationality? 

 Immigration Minister: Well David that is a matter now that Indian consular officials  are going to work through and I don't want to pre-empt the work that they're doing.  They have requested that access. They will be given that access and we will await  their process to be completed. 

 Question  Minister will the asylum seekers be given the opportunity to settle in Australia? 

 Immigration Minister: No. 

 Question: What happens to those of them who are neither Indian nationals nor  residents? 

 Immigration Minister: These are matters that are still to be determined by the  process that will be pursued by the Indian 

 Question: So it is possible they will remain in Australia? 

 Immigration Minister: No they won't remain in Australia. They will not be resettled  in Australia. That is the policy of the Australian Government and there is no change  to our policy on any front and more importantly there is no change to our resolve. 

 Question: Minister what influence did the High Court challenge have on the  decision? 

 Immigration Minister: None. 

 Question: Minister, as you are aware the Guardian has reported the asylum seekers  are being brought to the Cocos Islands on Saturday and will be flown to Curtin  detention centre. Are you able to confirm that? 

 Immigration Minister: Well, as I said before the process and where people will be  taken in Australia is still subject to operational considerations and I am not in a  position to confirm any of that at the moment. 

 Question: So will they go to Curtin? 

 Immigration Minister: I just gave you my answer to that question. 

 Question: Are the refugees coming to Australia because PNG refuse to take any  more? 

 Immigration Minister: No. 

 Question: Will they go to Manus Island or Nauru if they're established not to be Sri  Lankan or India? 

 Immigration Minister: I said before that the government reserves the ability to  implement any of the policy measures that we have available to us. 

 Question: Has Australia offered India any incentive to consider taking back these  non-Indian nationals? 

 Immigration Minister: No. 

 Question: Has Indian committed to returning all of them to India? 

 Immigration Minister: I have outlined what the Indian Government has indicated to  us in the discussions I held with Minister Singh earlier this week. They have  undertaken to do their normal practice which relates to the return of Indian citizens  but they are prepared to consider the return of non-Indian citizen residents in India. 

 Question: You say consider though? 

 Immigration Minister: I used that word - yes. 

 Question: In return for them being landed, could you clarify that was the  understanding with India, this is India's to Australia, if you land them in Australia and  give us consular access we will consider taking non-Indian nationals? 

 Immigration Minister: David, there a range of options that I discussed with the  Minister for Home Affairs and External Affairs about how we could conduct this  process. The most effective and the safest and the most convenient way of doing  this out of respect for the way that the Government of India wishes to conducted this  process was for that to be done in Australia. 

 Question: The children are said to be Indian but the adults are said to Sri Lankan.  So is there a possibility that the children could be taken and not the adults  [inaudible]? 

 Immigration Minister: Again, I don't think we should get ahead of the process that  the Indian consular officials will be engaged in. They will have access to all the  persons onboard and they will make their assessments about the citizenship or  otherwise of anyone on that vessel and the residence of any persons on that vessel  as it relates to India and then they'll make an assessment of that and then there will  be a further discussion. 

 Question: [inaudible] … 153 people onboard and now it's 157. Where did that  discrepancy come from? 

 Immigration Minister: I can only put that down to the false reporting of others. 

 Question: You've spent months trying to stop the boats. How should the public  interpret this? 

 Immigration Minister: They should interpret this as the Australian Government  being as resolved and determined as we have been for every single day since we  came to government and let me remind you, for the past seven months, not a single  successful venture. That compares to over 200 such ventures under the policies of  the previous government. This is a government that is getting results on stopping the  boats and we're continuing to get those results and anyone who wants to try this,  they will know the effectiveness of our policies should they seek to do so. That has  been our warning to them ever since we were elected and that warning has been  lived out in their experience as the smugglers networks from Indonesia all the way  through to Sri Lanka and the subcontinent have continued to be dismantled,  disrupted and smashed. 

 I should stress that the Indian Government themselves over recent years have been  stopping up to as many as 20 ventures a year. This year they have not had to  anywhere near remotely be engaged in disrupting that many ventures seeking to  come out of India and that is a direct consequence of the strong message and action  that has been taken by this government. 

 Question: Will Operation Sovereign Borders be registering this as a boat arrival and  what visas will these people be given when they're brought to shore? 

 Immigration Minister: Well you're jumping ahead there, Oliver, and when these  matters are further processed and determined there will be plenty of time to discuss  those issues. 

 Question: You've acknowledged that 157 people - asylum seekers - are going to  arrive in Australia. Is that a broken promise? 

 Immigration Minister: No. 

 Question: … On not stopping the boats. 

 Immigration Minister: No. 

 Question: But you can't any longer say that you have stopped the boats as you've  been saying the last months. 

 Immigration Minister: Well, David, others have been making that claim. What we  have been saying is this - this objective and this mission is an ongoing one. There  has been no statement from the government to make the sorts of determined and  final claims as you're suggesting. We have never done that. We know, and we  continue to need to apply all of our measures. I remind you that under the Howard  Government over six years, after the boats had been stopped which I think from  memory, David, you conceded that they'd achieved that… 

 Question: Of course they did. 

 Immigration Minister: … And the average number of arrivals over that six year  period was three boats a year. Before the election we said we would seek to achieve  the same results of the Howard Government. Now that is what we are doing, that is 

 what we'll continue to do. The people smugglers are on the run, they will continue to  be on the run under the policies of this government. 

 Question: You haven't ever said that you've stopped the boats? 

 Immigration Minister: David, I've answered your question. 

 Question: Minister, the UNHCR has expressed profound concern - criticised the  Australian Government throughout this entire operation. How on earth do you  continue to make the claim that the way in which you've behaved is in tandem with  Australia's international obligations? 

 Immigration Minister: Well I'll take that as an allegation, not a question and I'm in  regular contact with the UNHCR. We talk regularly to their regional representative  here and their officials in Geneva and elsewhere in the region and we have a very  constructive relationship with them and a very open dialogue. 

 Question: Minister how will this plan effect the High Court challenge? 

 Immigration Minister: Well that's a matter for the High Court, I'm not about to  speculate on those things. They are matters for the High Court. The Australian  Government has been compliant and cooperative with the High Court and that  action. We have given a series of undertakings which we have honoured in every  element and we will continue to do so. 

 Question: Have you spoken to the Solicitor-General or AGS about your plans? 

 Immigration Minister: The government is obviously aware, the government has  made the decision and we will continue to engage with that matter as it is required of  us to do so. 

 Question: Is there anyone in detention at the Curtin centre at the moment and what  measures are you taking to make it ready for those people who will be staying there? 

 Immigration Minister: Well, you're asking me to comment on something I have not  yet confirmed. 

 Question: Well could you confirm, Minister? 

 Immigration Minister: I said before that these things are still subject to operational  considerations and once that has been concluded then those things will become  fairly obvious. 

 Question: Could you illuminate what the consideration is that doesn't allow you to  simply tell us where these people will be brought ashore … 

 Immigration Minister: Because we haven't finally decided, David, that's why and for  operational reasons. There are issues of weather and other things to consider. 

 Question: Is it the case that they are going to Cocos Island before Curtin? 

 Immigration Minister: Again, that's subject to operational matters that still have to  be determined by those who make those decisions. They're not decisions that are  made… 

 Question: [inaudible] 

 Immigration Minister: David I would just ask you to settle down. It's… 

 Question: I am perfectly calm I am just a little bewildered … 

 Immigration Minister: You are regularly bewildered but … 

 Question: Well that's because you won't say what's going on. 

 Immigration Minister: David, I've just spent the last 15 minutes telling you exactly  what's going on … 

 Question: No. 

 Immigration Minister: … And what I've said to you is that the operational issues  about where in Australia people will be brought are still being determined and  operational issues are being considered in making that decision and when that  decision has been made then obviously it will be known. 

 Question: There are reports today quoting senior officials from your Department… 

 Immigration Minister: Look, I can't comment on the rumours and reports that are  being placed in people's papers. I have come here to tell you exactly what the  position of the government is and I think I have been very clear about that. 

 Are there any other questions? 

 Question: Minister if they are brought to Australia arguably they're in the migration  zone. Now your lawyers in the High Court have been arguing that they never entered  the migration zone. So if they are in the migration zone, does that mean they can  apply for asylum in Australia? 

 Immigration Minister: Well when they are brought into the migration zone then the  policies of the government are able to be applied and they have not entered the  migration zone when our vessel went to provide assistance, they had not been in  Australian territorial waters. So that's why it is an important decision to make,  whether we are to take them back into that place and to take them to Australia. But  you would know, under the legislation introduced by the previous government that an  excised offshore place has a particular meaning under the Act and that would  include any place on mainland Australia and the options that are then available to  the government. 

 So, that is the nature of things as it currently stands and we'll continue to proceed  calmly. The government has been working to a clear plan on this issue. We've been  working through the various options that are available to us. We've been working 

 with our partners and our point all along has been simply this: that we will exhaust  any and every measure to prevent people coming to Australia, getting to Australia  with the assistance of people smugglers. It is just something we won't cop. We  haven't copped it. We will continue not to cop it and it will always be our determined  efforts to prevent that from occurring wherever possible but I stress we have been in  a very positive and engaged dialogue with the Government of India. I think the fact  that the Government of India and Australia are working as one on this issue would  be of great concern to the people smugglers because having being successful to  date in significantly impacting on the business out of Indonesia and Sri Lanka this is  also proving to be the case out of India as well. 

 You at the back you have been very quiet. Those up the front have been particularly  enthusiastic. 

 Question: Does the end justify the means? You said you would do anything to  achieve your goal. 

 Immigration Minister: The government has, and will always, act in accordance with  our obligations and with our laws both international and domestic. We will do what is  right in Australia's national interest and it is right, in Australia's national interest, to  ensure that we put to an end the devastating and tragic trade that ran under the  previous government. 

 Let me just remind you of this before I leave. In July last year 48 boats turned up with  4 236 people and people died. That was this month a year ago. Never, ever under  the Abbott Government will we return to that chaos and tragedy and everything we  do as a government is designed to ensure that we never, ever go back there and  that is the position of the government. 

 Thank you. 

 

