---
title: "AMES unlocking the potential of migrants and refugees to benefit Victoria"
date: "2014-01-17"
creators:
  - "Hartsuyker, Luke"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403261
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2953008%22
---

 

 

 THE HON LUKE HARTSUYKER MP  Assistant Minister for Employment   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 17 January 2014                      (SR)

 

 AMES unlocking the potential of migrants and refugees to  benefit Victoria   

 Assistant Minister for Employment Luke Hartsuyker today visited AMES, a specialist  Victorian organisation that provides assistance to newly arrived refugees and  migrants.   

 Mr Hartsuyker said he wanted to see first-hand how AMES was successfully helping  newly-arrived Australians into work.   

 “AMES is providing extensive employment assistance helping job seekers identify  opportunities and navigate the Australian job market,” Mr Hartsuyker said.   

 “Employers directly benefit because they are provided with the specific skills they  need as well as receiving ongoing assistance and mentoring.   

 “AMES works with my own Department through the Job Services Australia initiative  and has had enormous success placing job seekers into work.   

 Initiatives like the Skilled Professional Migrants Program help to educate recent  skilled migrants on how to negotiate job markets in their professional fields. They  report that over 70 per cent of respondents who had participated entered full-time  work that was ‘a good or partial match’ with their overseas work experience.   

 “This is an outstanding result and I congratulate AMES for their achievements in  delivering services to unemployed Australians,” Mr Hartsuyker said.   

 “It is important to note AMES is providing an invaluable service working with  business, government and the community to not only help job seekers find work but  pave their successful transition into Australian society.   

 “Building community awareness and  developing strong community networks and  partnerships is critical to ease new arrivals into life in Australia.   

 “Providing various skills and training opportunities like driving programs, women’s  retreats, language and citizenship courses and community training and further  education and training, to get a better job than the one they have, are all invaluable.   

 “The Coalition has an important agenda to deliver that supports jobs and productivity  for the benefit of the Australian people and the national economy. We are working  methodically and diligently to create an environment that will allow strong  employment growth for the benefit of all Australians.”   

 Media contacts:  Assistant Minister Hartsuyker’s office: Greg Pierce 0408 532 785  Department Media: media@deewr.gov.au 

