---
title: "Children's mental health important to early education"
date: "2014-10-12"
creators:
  - "Ley, Sussan"
  - "Skehan, Jaelea"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414982
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3445752%22
---

 

         THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP       MS JAELEA SKEHAN             Assistant Minister for Education   Director, Hunter Institute of Mental Health   

 JOINT MEDIA RELEASE 

 (continued over page…) 

 12 October 2014   

 Children’s mental health important to early education   

 The importance of supporting and nurturing children’s mental health and wellbeing as part of their  broader early education is being highlighted by the launch of a new Australian Government-funded  practical resource for educators, Connections.     

 Federal Assistant Minister for Education, Sussan Ley, said Connections was a joint initiative  between the Australian Government and the Hunter Institute of Mental Health and its release  coincided with national Mental Health Week 2014 (5-12 October).    

 Ms Ley said Connections had been developed in partnership with early childhood educators to  help build their “knowledge, skills and confidence” in supporting the mental health and wellbeing of  children at their service.   

 “It’s widely accepted that a child’s mental health and wellbeing is a crucial factor in their early  development,” Ms Ley said.    

 “And with well over one million children enrolled in early education and care programmes  throughout Australia, the nation’s early childhood educators have a significant role to play.    

 “Connections is designed to be a practical resource for educators aimed at bolstering the  important work already being undertaken to promote positive mental health and wellbeing in early  childhood services across the country.    

 “It’s also about recognising that every child is an individual and supporting educators with the tools  to identify and manage the unique mental health challenges that can arise on a regular basis.”    

 Director of the Hunter Institute of Mental Health, Jaelea Skehan, said this included everything from  tips on how best to talk to children about their feelings through to strategies and case studies  helping educators, families and professionals work together if a child was experiencing difficulties.   

 Ms Skehan said Connections also included additional support for educators working with:  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families; refugee and migrant families; children experiencing  trauma, loss and grief; abuse and violence; and children with parents with a mental illness.    

 “Educators can help young children learn how to manage their emotions and interact well with  others. They are also well placed to identify when a child may be experiencing mental health  difficulties and assist families,” said Ms Skehan.    

 “Mental health is everybody’s business, not just the domain of the health and mental health sector.    

 “No one expects educators to be providing counselling or treatment as part of their role. But we  want to make sure that they have access to good information and tips that will help them in their  day-to-day work with children and their families.  

 

 

 

 “Extensive consultation has been undertaken with early childhood educators across Australia, as  well as early childhood peak bodies, to ensure the suitability, relevance and usefulness of this  resource for early childhood education and care services.”            

 Ms Skehan said the content of Connections had been based on international evidence, expert  opinion and best practice and also linked to formal early childhood regulations such as the  National Quality Standard, Early Years Learning Framework and Framework for School Age Care.    

 Connections is an Australian Government-funded initiative developed by the Hunter Institute of  Mental Health, with hard copies to be distributed to long day care, family day care, preschool and  out of school hours care services throughout Australia.    

 For electronic copies of Connections or further information, please visit 

 www.himh.org.au/connections or the Department of Education website (education.gov.au).    

 About the Hunter Institute of Mental Health   

 The Hunter Institute of Mental Health has built a reputation as a leading national organisation  dedicated to reducing mental illness and suicide and improving wellbeing for all Australians. For  more than 20 years, the Institute has been delivering successful, evidence-based mental health  and suicide prevention programs from their base in Newcastle, NSW. These have made a  considerable contribution to the mental health and wellbeing of many Australians. As part of their  work, the Hunter Institute leads programs around child and youth wellbeing, and is committed to  building the capacity of those who work with children and young people to support their mental  health and wellbeing. For more information visit www.himh.org.au   

 ENDS   

 Media Contact (Hon Sussan Ley): Troy Bilsborough 0427 063 150  Media Contact (Jaelea Skehan): Brooke Cross 0414 292 403  Department Media: media@education.gov.au   

