---
title: "Senate back Greens' call for Inquiry into Inequality ("
date: "2014-06-18"
creators:
  - "Siewert, Rachel"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211409858
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3231358%22
---

 18 June 2014   

 Senate back Greens’ call for Inquiry into Inequality   

 The Australian Greens have successful moved for a Senate Inquiry into Inequality in  Australia, opening the door for a proper review of the impact of the Abbott Government’s  budget.   

 The Inquiry has been referred to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee.   

 “I welcome the Senate’s support, in recognition that inequality is a growing problem in  Australia, and the Federal Budget will only make matters worse,” Senator Rachel  Siewert, Australian Greens spokesperson on family and community services said today.   

 “This week, Oxfam's report Still the Lucky Country? has shown that 79% of Australians  think the gap our richest and poorest has grown over the last decade.    

 “The Government’s cruel range of budget measures, many of which were introduced into  the House of Representatives today, is set to dramatically increase this inequality, by  affecting some of the most disadvantaged people in our community.   

 “The budget deliberations, Commission of Audit and Welfare Review have been closed  processes and we have legislation and policies that could harm people across the  community and could expose them to poverty and entrenched, intergeneration  disadvantage.   

 “Our Inquiry will provide an opportunity to look at extent of income inequality in Australia  and the rate at which income inequality is increasing. Submissions will be encouraged  and welcomed from individuals and organisation who wish to be involved. The  Committee will also hold public hearings and consult widely with community and charity  organisations.   

 “The Inquiry will examine the specific impacts of inequality on disadvantaged groups  within the community, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, older job  seekers, people living with a disability or mental illness, refugees, single parents, those  on a low income, people at risk of poverty in retirement as well as the relationship  between gender and inequality.   

 “The Government cannot continue avoid scrutiny of their budget and the impacts it will  have. Inequality is a serious problem facing Australia, and it must be addressed,”  Senator Siewert concluded.   

 

 Media Enquiries - Chris Redman on 0418 401 180   

 

 The dates for public submissions and hearings will be determined by the Community  Affairs References Committee in the coming weeks. The Inquiry is due to report by 26  November 2014.   

 Terms of Reference: 

 

 That the following matter be referred to the Community Affairs References Committee  for inquiry and report by 26 November 2014:    

 (a) the extent of income inequality in Australia and the rate at which income inequality is  increasing in our community;   (b) the impact of income inequality on access to health, housing, education and work in  Australia, and on the quality of the outcomes achieved;   (c) the specific impacts of inequality on disadvantaged groups within the community,  including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, older job seekers, people living  with a disability or mental illness, refugees, single parents, those on a low income,  people at risk of poverty in retirement as well as the relationship between gender and  inequality;   (d) the likely impact of Government policies on current and future rates of inequality  particularly the changes proposed in the 2014-15 Budget;   (e) the principles that should underpin the provision of social security payments in  Australia; and   (f) the practical measures that could be implemented by Governments to address  inequality, particularly appropriate and adequate income support payments.    

 

