---
title: "Greens Leader on asylum seekers and human rights"
date: "2014-07-03"
creators:
  - "Milne, Christine"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410519
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3257840%22
---

 Greens Leader on asylum seekers and human rights   

 Australian Greens Leader Christine Milne said:   

 “The human rights crisis that is unfolding between Australia and Sri Lanka somewhere in  the Indian Ocean warrants a full explanation by our Prime Minister.   

 “The PM must explain to Australians how he can claim is not a human rights abuse or a  contravention of the refugee convention when he is engaged in total secrecy.   

 “To send the persecuted people back to the persecutors is absolutely wrong and in  contravention of all international law, but also in contravention of just plain human  decency.   

 “Sri Lanka is run by the Rajapaksa family. It claims to be a democracy but in fact the  Tamils boycotted the election, the Rajapaksas came to power and now the Rajapaksa  family runs that country and is engaged in atrocities against the Tamils.   

 “In the north of the country, they are being forced out of their communities. Forcibly  removed. The army has moved in and taken over large tracts of land. People are  ‘disappeared’ in white vans. anyone who stands up against the regime could find a white  van outside their home. They’re dragged into it and either tortured and dumped or they  are not found again. People are raped, systematically.   

 “Only a week ago Australia hosted a delegation from the Sri Lankan parliament. One of  those was the Minister for Women, a man, who said that women who are raped in Sri  Lanka should consider marrying the perpetrator of the rape.   

 “Sri Lanka is a country in which human rights abuses are going on as we speak.   

 “It is so wrong for the Prime Minister to send people back to a regime in which we know  they will be further abused on their return.   

 “I am aware that the Human Rights Centre has written to the United Nations asking them  to urgently intervene in the crisis to ensure there is a global spotlight brought on what is  currently unfolding in the Indian Ocean and I hope the UN will intervene in some way.   

 “Australia will become a pariah in international circles and that shames us all.   

 “We’ve always been a good global citizen but what Tony Abbott is doing is driving  Australia into an isolated position where we will line up around the world with the human  rights abusers and the environmental vandals who are shunned by other countries.”   

 

