---
title: "Women and Girls at Risk Symposium"
date: "2014-11-28"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR WOMEN"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211415650
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3536698%22
---

 Senator the Hon. Michaelia Cash  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Women  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection  Senator for Western Australia 

 28 November 2014 

 

 Women and Girls at Risk Symposium    

 The Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash has reaffirmed the  Australian Government’s commitment to decreasing the number of women and girls impacted by gender-based  violence at the Women and Girls at Risk Symposium today in Sydney.   

 “Australia recognises that child, early and forced marriage constitutes a violation of human rights, and those at  risk are often prevented from living their lives free from all forms of violence,” Minister Cash said.   

 “Child, early and forced marriage has devastating impacts on those affected and presents a serious  impediment to the economic, legal, health and social status of women and girls.   

 “Tackling child, early and forced marriage requires a collective effort from Governments, lawmakers, judicial  authorities, law enforcement officials, community, religious leaders and other relevant stakeholders to address  its causes and consequences.”   

 The Australian Government has provided approximately $500,000 to three community organisations to improve  the provision of education, awareness-raising and advice to people at risk of forced marriage.   

 Minister Cash explained the Federal Government is also providing appropriate support and assistance to  victims of human trafficking, slavery and slavery-like practices (such as forced marriage) through the Support  for Trafficked People Programme.   

 The Support Programme provides intensive support such as access to accommodation, financial assistance,  training and social support as well as legal and migration advice.   

 “Australia uses its engagement in international forums to advocate for issues affecting women, including gender  equality, safety for women, economic empowerment and women’s leadership,” Minister Cash said.   

 “Australia is widely recognised as an effective and valuable participant in international forums, as evidenced  through our work on the board of UN Women and our seat on the United Nations Security Council.   

 “As a nation we support international rights frameworks including the Convention on the Elimination of All  Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.   

 “Furthermore, at the Girl Summit in the United Kingdom this year Australia signed up to the Charter to mobilise  domestic and international efforts to end child, early and forced marriage within a generation - a necessary and  achievable goal.   

 The Women and Girls at Risk Symposium is held during the international campaign known as 16 Days of  Activism Against Gender Violence which originates from the first Women's Global Leadership Institute, held in  1991. The commencement of the 16 day period is marked by the International Day for the Elimination of  Violence against Women (November 25) and concludes on International Human Rights Day (December 1).   

 The Women and Children at Risk symposium is organised by Immigrant and Refugee Women’s Network.    

 -ends- 

 Media enquiries: David De Garis 0427 019 692   

