---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 3 December 2014: Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment (Resolving the Asylum Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014, transfer to Darwin"
date: "2014-12-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment (Resolving the Asylum Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014"
  - "transfer to Darwin"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211416223
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3541771%22
---

 Scott Morrison MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment (Resolving  the Asylum Legacy Caseload) Bill 2014, transfer to Darwin 

 Wednesday, 03 December 2014 

 Press Conference, Canberra 

 Minister Morrison: Hello everyone. Just bear with me as I take you through my  understanding of where things are at present. This Government is stopping the boats  as we promised we would, in the way we said we would. Yesterday the November  report for Operation Sovereign Borders was released showing once again there had  been no arrivals during the month. That is the tenth time this year where that has  occurred. It wasn't always thus, as last night's 7.30 programme demonstrated, for  our Customs and Border Protection personnel and Navy. Under Minister Burke,  there was an average of 26 boats per month. Under Minister O'Connor there was an  average of 37 boats per month. Under Minister Bowen there was an average of 14  boats a month, and under his watch 398 boats turned up. The result of all of that was  cost chaos and tragedy and almost 1200 deaths. This has stopped, as we said it  would. 

 Our other major commitment at the election was to resolve the legacy caseload of  some 30,000 people who arrived illegally by boat under Labor, who they failed to  process. Some 22,400 of these people did not even have their processing  commence under the previous government, for some going back as far as August  2012. On coming to Government we sought to restore temporary protection visas in  line with our election mandate. This was rejected by Labor and the Greens in the  Senate on two occasions. Despite their rejection we have kept our commitment not  to honour the people's smugglers promise of providing permanent visas to those who  came illegally on the smugglers boats. The new Senate provided an opportunity to  bring some resolution to this issue - to end the uncertainty for the 30,000 people left  behind by Labor - to get these people processed. Labor and the Greens dealt  themselves out of this dialogue - they chose denial and their ideological opposition  to turn backs and temporary protection visas over cleaning up the mess they  themselves created. They made themselves irrelevant to the solution. I have been  negotiating with Senators who are interested in outcomes and solutions rather than  the rhetoric we have heard from Labor and the handwringing we have seen from the  Greens, who never have any viable solutions. Labor and the Greens are the problem  and have shown no interest in being part of the solution. 

 Today the Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation Amendment (Resolving the  Legacy Caseload Bill) has begun its second reading debate in the Senate. This is a  package of measures which seeks to resolve the legacy caseload of 30,000 people  left behind by Labor. The bill makes our borders stronger, it honours our commitment  to restore Temporary Protection Visas, to strengthen our powers for turn backs and 

 support the men and women of our Navy and Customs and Border Protection  Service who protect our borders at sea, and to provide an efficient and fair process  to resolve the cases of some 30,000 people. As a result of discussions with the  crossbenches, the Government has agreed to the following measures - some of  which were previously announced following my discussion with Palmer United Party  earlier this year. Subject to the passage of legislation, as announced with Clive  Palmer, the approximately 1500 people who arrived illegally by boat between July 19  and December 31, 2013 would not be transferred to Nauru for processing, but taken  into the legacy caseload for processing in Australia. This will reduce the number of  children in detention, which I note is already down by 50 per cent since we were  elected, so that is around 700 less children, by a further 460 children at least. The  Government will also introduce a Safe Haven Enterprise Visa, or SHEV, which will  enable those who are found to be refugees under the process set out under the bill  who work or study in a designated regional area to be able to apply for an onshore  visa, subject to meeting all the requirements of those visas for which they are  applying and subject to satisfactory acquittal of the terms of their SHEV. 

 The Government will introduce amendments to make clear the opportunity presented  by the SHEV as requested. In relation to onshore applications, in particular, for other  visas it will ensure that such visas cannot be capped - specifically we will be  articulating the matters set out in the letter that codified the agreement between Mr  Palmer and I announced earlier this year. What is in that letter will be in the  legislation. Everything we agreed the government will put forward in that legislation. 

 As a result of discussions with Senators Xenophon, as well as Senator Day and  Senator Leyonhjelm and I stress also drawing on the feedback I have had from  Government members who I want to note: Wyatt Roy, Teresa Gambaro, Luke  Howarth, Craig Laundy, David Coleman, Nick Varvaris, Sarah Henderson, Michael  Sukkar, Natasha Griggs and Matt Williams, the Government will provide work rights  to those on Bridging Visas while they undergo their processing under the provisions  of this bill. There are currently 25,000 people on these bridging visas. 

 Also as a result of the discussions with everyone I have just mentioned, but  particularly I want to thank Senators Xenophon, Day and Leyonhjelm after clearing  the legacy caseload back log, the Government will increase the refugee and  humanitarian intake in the next budget by a total of 7500 places over the budget and  forward estimates, with a 2500 increase in year three and a 5000 increase in year  four, taking the intake in that year to 18,750. This increase, at a cost of more than  $100 million, will be fully funded by offsets that I have committed to within my  portfolio. If you are going to increase the intake you have got to pay for it. 

 As previously stated all TPVs and SHEVs granted will be in addition to our annual  intake currently at 13,750, not taken out of the intake of that 13,750 as occurred  under Labor with their intake where 5000 of those 20,000 visas went to people who  arrived illegally by boat. Under our process the people under that stream would be  given TPVs or SHEVs and that would be in addition to the 13,750. This Government  broke the nexus where someone waiting for a place offshore is denied a place by  someone who is coming on a boat. That doesn't happen anymore under this  Government will also hardwire these commitments by placing the projected minimum  annual intake within a as occurred up until the last election. The Government will 

 also hardwire these commitments we have made on the intake by placing the  projected minimum annual intake within a disallowable instrument that cannot be  varied without change to this instrument. In other words that intake can't be reduced  unless the instrument is changed which can be disallowed by the Senate. 

 In addition, the Government has agreed with Senator Xenophon to amendments that  will result in: greater alignment with UNHCR definitions and guidelines within the  provisions and there are many of these provisions; greater clarity around  assessment processes and ensuring that the processes are not just efficient but  quick but also free of bias and conform with the natural justice principles set out in  the Act. We will also be restricting the fast track processes established in the bill to  the legacy caseload only, again through a disallowable instrument. Some have  argued these measures provide the Minister with extra powers. This was a little  confusing when put to us at the time - the only power a Minister would have had  some discretionary power would be the ability to apply these fast track processes to  other caseloads. The Government is very pleased to not have that authority  unilaterally and the Government will ensure that if this fast-track process which is set  out in this bill is to be applied to any other caseload than the legacy caseload that  has been identified then that would be a disallowable instrument that could obviously  be disallowed by the Senate. 

 The amendments I have outlined will be introduced by the Government in the course  of the debate and there are still some amendments particularly in relation to the  codification of the specifics in the letter to Mr Palmer that will be available later today. 

 Finally the Government has also agreed to refer a proposal by Senator Leyonhjelm  for a new way to attract legitimate economic migrants to Australia who want to come  to work and make a new life for them and their family in Australia to the Productivity  Commission for analysis. We are pleased to refer that matter to the Productivity  Commission and allow that policy to be further reviewed. Senator Leyonhjelm will  have more to say about this and I will be happy for him to fill in the details on this and  a terms of reference will be circulated once finalised. 

 The prevailing focus of our discussions has been to resolve and therefore improve  the situation for the 30,000 people Labor left behind - they should not languish  anymore. That is why it is important that we deal with this matter this week. I don't  want to see, if there is the opportunity to take children off Christmas Island before  Christmas, then I would like to see it done this week. 

 Crossbench Senators I know do not ideally support all the measures that are in this  bill. These are the Government's measures. What they have done is come forward  constructively to be part of the way forward and to enable us to move on from the  debilitating debates of the past. The measures and agreements the Government  have given would not have been possible 12 months ago, because the boats had not  stopped, particularly in relation to the restoration of work rights and the incorporation  of the 1500 post July 19 arrivals into the legacy caseload which will enable us to  bring those children out of detention. The Government has been true to our  commitments but pragmatic to get an outcome on our borders and our borders will  be stronger as a result of this bill passing. 

 For anyone seeking to come to Australia by boat - you will be stopped, you will be  turned back and you will never come to Australia. That was most recently  demonstrated over last weekend with that Sri Lankan venture. For those who are  already here, we are not offering you in this bill what you were promised by the  people smugglers. But thanks to the crossbenchers, should the bill pass, people's  claims will be processed efficiently and fairly. Families and children will be released  from detention. While they wait to have their claims processed they will be able to  work and support themselves and be a lesser burden on the taxpayer. There will be  a sensible and funded increase in our humanitarian intake that will kick in once the  backlog of Labor's legacy caseload has been resolved. Those who have been  waiting years for their cases to be heard will now be processed. 

 I want to thank the crossbenchers for their engagement in what has been a process  that has been around six months. The ultimate determination of this bill is in the  hands of the Senate. It is not for me to commentate on the position of individual  Senators. I will leave that to those Senators but I thank them for the good faith  discussions we have been in. We are all very aware of what we have discussed and  what we would like to achieve and I am happy for the Senate to now consider the  matter. But I note this - we need to move forward and the Government will need to  move forward on this. We will need to process these individuals and we cannot allow  this matter to continue to go on in the way it has which has been in a holding pattern  because of the intransigence of Labor and the Greens previously in the Senate. This  is our opportunity to make this situation better and I frankly commend the bill to the  Senate. 

 Question: Minister the Safe Haven Enterprise Visas can you clarify the length of  them, the duration of them? Can you reapply for a new one and is it in any way a  pathway to permanency? 

 Minister Morrison: It is and the amendments that we will be introducing make that  even clearer. It is a five year visa and as we announced previously for those who go  to designated regional areas, those designations are made by those areas  themselves as I noted previously in this room, where they go to those places and  effectively work for three and a half out of those five years or study for three and a  half out of those five years and obviously don't draw down benefits if they have been  working for more than one and a half years; then they will be entitled to make an  onshore application for another visa. That could be a 457 visa if they have acquired  the skills over that period of time, working on a bridging visa currently they could  commence the process of seeking to get those skills that would put them in a  position to be able to apply for a skilled visa but equally they could apply for a  student visa, they would apply for any number of other visas which are set out in the  amendments that will be introduced into the Senate. I think that is a good initiative, it  was a product of the discussions that Mr Palmer and I had and I look forward - it is a  matter for Palmer United Party and what they do in the Senate. I am not going to  speculate on that other than to say we will be putting into the Senate exactly what we  agreed in our letter. 

 Question: Minister Morrison to be 100 per cent clear they can apply for those other  visas but they can't get permanency in Australia? 

 Minister Morrison: No that is not what I said. 

 Question: Well could you explain please? 

 Minister Morrison: The list of visas that they can potentially apply for such as a  skilled visa and an employee nominated sponsored visa for example they could  apply for but they would have to have the skills and the requisite qualifications that  would enable them to make such an application. What this does is it says to people  who are in this situation and it is confined to this legacy caseload - anyone else who  was thinking of coming to Australia by boat you know what will happen - Border  Protection Command will deal with that. But those who are already here as part of  this legacy caseload if they acquit themselves under the SHEV then they will have  the same opportunity that someone in Pakistan or the United Kingdom or Singapore  or anywhere like that would have to apply for one of those visas. They have to meet  the criteria if they don't meet the criteria then obviously they can't get the visa. 

 Question: Including a refugee visa? 

 Minister Morrison: They don't have the opportunity to apply for a permanent  protection visa, no. The only protection visa that is available to those who arrived  illegally by boat is a temporary protection visa or a Safe Haven Enterprise Visa which  are both temporary visas. I should have also mentioned that there will be an  amendment which deals with temporary protection visas because as you know that  denies people family reunion, as does the SHEV, as well as denying people the  ability to leave and come to the country - they wouldn't be able to return. In  compassionate circumstances such as the death of a relative in a country other than  the one that they claim to have been persecuted - then those cases could be  considered on a case-by-case basis on compassionate grounds which would enable  them to return to participate in a family funeral or something of that nature and then  come back to Australia. They'd come back on the same visa they were previously  on. 

 Question: Have you received any notification from the Palmer United Party as to  how, whether they will back the legislation with these changes? 

 Minister Morrison: I have the letter between Clive and myself which I tabled in the  Parliament previously and that is the basis upon which these amendments are being  put to the Senate. 

 Question: Would it be acceptable for you for the Senate to pass the TPV and SHEV  aspects of the bill but not the other parts? Or is it a total package? 

 Minister Morrison: My negotiations have been about a complete package. 

 Question: Secondly if the Bill is not passed by the Senate would you still proceed  with processing the legacy caseload and allowing them work rights? 

 Minister Morrison: I am not going to speculate on the second part of the question,  my focus is continuing to work with the crossbenchers on the bill passing. The bill  passing will mean that people will be processed, that children and families will come 

 out of detention, that our maritime powers will be strengthened to support our navy  and Customs and Border Protection personnel and that the refugee intake will be  ultimately increased and people who are waiting for their claims to be processed will  have work rights. That is a very strong package I am sure even you would agree  Michael. 

 Question: Minister Morrison can I clarify the issue on the bridging visas, are the  work rights on the contingent on the legislation passing? 

 Minister Morrison: Yes. 

 Journalist: The lack of work rights limited to what time they have been waiting - I  mean do you acknowledge that has made it harder for these people now to seek  employment in Australia? 

 Minister Morrison: It is difficult but as I said before the ability to now provide work  rights we believe given the success we have had with our other border protection  measures would not create the pull factor that it would have previously. That is why  we are in a position where the previous government was not I think to be able to  move on the issue of work rights. 

 Question: Mr Morrison is there currently an internal review in how many refugees  can apply to resettle in Australia… 

 Minister Morrison: I am dealing with the bill today Sarah. That is what I am dealing  with today. 

 Question: Your government Senators said some of the measures in the bill should  be reviewed after three years because they were so extraordinary. Would this fast  tracking regime, would there be a sunset on it? 

 Minister Morrison: Well the intention is we would be able to process this caseload  within three years. I would hope that that point would be moot. 

 Question: There will definitely be a vote tomorrow? 

 Minister Morrison: We will work this through the Senate. I am a humble member of  the House of Representatives who does not pretend to understand the mysteries of  the Senate. I will allow Senators to deal with this bill in the way they deal with it and I  will be working with them and respecting their processes. 

 Question: But you are not going to get kids out of Christmas Island by Christmas? 

 Minister Morrison: Well this is a matter for the Senate. 

 Question: Just to be explicit finally, this is no pathway to permanent residency is  that right? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I can only refer you to what I said… 

 Question: … visas but is this a pathway to permanent residency? 

 Minister Morrison: I will just tell you what I told you before. At the end of a SHEV  people can apply for visas which include permanent visas - not a permanent  protection visa but they would have to satisfy the requirements of those visas and  they would have had to have satisfied the conditions of the SHEV which they are on.  Now that is a very specific corridor that they would have to move through and that  would be a matter for them but I have got to say if someone is able to do that and if  someone is able to work themselves into having that opportunity then good for them,  good for them. 

 Question: Would you expect that to happen very often? 

 Minister Morrison: I can't really speculate Lenore. The opportunity is there and how  people respond is up to them. 

 Question: Mr Morrison in increasing the humanitarian intake are there any particular  areas that you are looking at taking those in queues? 

 Minister Morrison: Not at this stage. As you know we have 4400 people coming out  of the programme this year for Syria and Iraq which frankly was more than what  Labor did even in their final year. I noticed some comments that were made by the  Deputy Leader of the Opposition Tanya Plibersek on this yesterday. That does not  bear out in the combined intake for Syria and Iraq. We will continue to do that but the  humanitarian intake I think has to be quite responsive to situations as they present.  That certainly is how we deal with it and so that is what the intake would be but I am  not going to speculate on what the priority needs might be in those two out years. I  think it is the responsibility of the Minister in those circumstances to set the  programme based on the needs. 

 Question: Will you continue to work with the UNHCR with that? 

 Minister Morrison: We continue to work with the UNHCR. 

 Question: What is your plan B if this doesn't get through the Senate? 

 Minister Morrison: I am on plan A. 

 Question: Do you concede these people who came on boats under Labor's watch  that you would have said at the time I am sure there is no way they should be able to  settle permanently in Australia? 

 Minister Morrison: That is our policy. 

 Question: You just said there is a way for them to keep applying… 

 Minister Morrison: It has never been our policy to provide a permanent protection  visa to people who came illegally on boats. This bill does not provide it. This  government will never provide it. 

 Question: Perhaps not a permanent protection visa … 

 Minister Morrison: That has always been our policy - no permanent protection visa,  no permanent passport to welfare for people who come illegally by boat. That is our  policy. That is what is in this bill. That will always be where I stand. 

 Question: Can I ask you about the two pregnant women from Nauru in Darwin what  their condition is? 

 Minister Morrison: They are in care in Darwin. 

 Question: What sort of care? 

 Minister Morrison: Under the care of our IHMS and other doctors and service  providers and local hospitals who are attending to their condition. 

 Question: [inaudible] 

 Minister Morrison: My understanding is they are fine. 

 Question: What sort of visa did they come on? Did they come on a visa? 

 Minister Morrison: I am here to talk about the bill today and I now have to keep  talking to people who are voting on that bill so thanks for your time. Thank you. 

 

