---
title: "Budget 2014: Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 22 May 2014: Operation Sovereign Borders; Nauru; Federal Budget; Cambodia"
date: "2014-05-22"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211408599
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3182193%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Scott Morrison 

 Operation Sovereign Borders, Nauru, Federal Budget, Cambodia 

 Thursday, 22 May 2014 

 Press Conference, Sydney 

 Minister Morrison: Thank you, well it has now been over five months since the last  successful people smuggling venture to Australia. This is something we continue to  welcome and the continued success of Operation Sovereign Borders I think is there  for people to see. That type of result has not occurred without the consistent  application of the policies that we announced in opposition and we have  implemented in government through Operation Sovereign Borders and I continue to  want to thank all of those who are involved in that operation. Operation Sovereign  Borders though is also making a very significant contribution to operation budget  repair as we have seen the announcements in the budget and in that budget you  would have seen a $2.5 billion dollar saving as a result of the success of our policies  to date on our borders. You would have seen a $280 million saving from the closing  the detention centre revolution that we are going through. Closing the centres that  Labor opened because of their failures on our borders and there is a $260 million  saving as a result of the shutting down of the 4000 places that Labor had provided  for family reunions for illegal maritime arrivals. Within the budget though there is also  the need to deal with Labor's legacy, Labor's legacy of arrivals that continue to be  onshore a figure of almost around about 30 000 people, 27 000 of whom are actually  in the community either on community detention or on bridging visas, and there is a  need to continue to provide the various support and services that are involved in  assisting that cohort and that population as we work through the processing issues  for that group. But I want to stress there are two important services that we have  ensured that we have provided for in the budget and they are in particular the  provision of funding to ensure that any children who are on Christmas Island can go  to school five days a week as a cost of around $2.6 million and that was funding that  was not put in place by the previous government. They had not funded children to go  to school on Christmas Island and that is something that has been rectified by this  government. Equally we thought it was important to ensure the continuation of  funding for torture and trauma counselling for genuine and serious cases and there  is $25 million in the budget to ensure that that ongoing torture and trauma  counselling is provided to the cases that are identified as needing that sort of  support. I want to move to some other matters, oh no one other issue I should stress  is we will also continue the arrangement we have with the government of Indonesia  in a third party way by supporting the IOM in Indonesia to continue to provide the  various support that is necessary to assist Indonesia deal with those who are still in  Indonesia. Now it is true that Operation Sovereign Borders has not only resulted in  an absolutely devastating impact on people smugglers trade to Australia, it has also  significantly reduced the inflow of people into Indonesia. But we remain committed to  working with Indonesia to assist where we can for them to deal with those who are  still in Indonesia and that relates not only to some basic form of support through their  alternative detention program but also in assisting their decisions regarding removals  from their country, where appropriate. 

 Moving to other issues on processing in Nauru I can confirm as the report came out  last night from Nauru that there have been 20 transferees who have been subject to  decisions there with decisions handed down and some of those individuals have  spent their first nights now outside of the processing centre and the accommodation  that has been provided there will be an additional 21 transferees who will have  decisions made today and they will become effective. Of those that have been  handed down there were 13 positive and seven negative. I can also update in terms  of in Manus Island, there have now been a total number of initial assessment notices  delivered since the 30th of April of 26 individuals and that is 11 positive and 15  negative on Manus Island and the cohorts for the negative were primarily Iranian and  the positives consisted of four Iranians, three Pakistanis, one Iraqi and one Afghani.  If I go back to Nauru we had of those 13 positive there are nine Iranians, four  Pakistanis. For the negatives they were again predominantly Iranian four there out of  the seven, two Pakistani and one Cameroon. Ensuring that processing takes place  and decisions are made in these locations has always been very important and it has  been an important but difficult job of this government working together in partnership  with both the Nauruan Government and the PNG Government to get these  arrangements in place. In terms of the arrangements in Nauru I can confirm that  settlement services model ensures that services are commensurate with living  standards in Nauru, the services are currently being provided by Save the Children  and ultimately also with Transfield and they will be enlisting and recruiting others  who have that experience in delivering these sorts of packages as necessary. The  services are provided on a needs basis not an entitlement basis when it comes to  this support it will take account of individuals own resources that they may already  have to support themselves where they are but the services include things like  language training, vocational training, connecting people to employment, general  orientation. There is an initial six week intensive resettlement arrangement and it is  all designed to get people standing on their own feet within twelve months. This  initial care package which particularly relates to families to ensure they have basic  materials and other support that they need and their initial accommodation for  families and unaccompanied minors is being provided at Anibare Bay and for single  adult males they are being accommodated in the form of workers accommodation  adjacent to the OPC 1 facility at Topside. There is a living allowance that is provided  in those cases where that is deemed appropriate at local living standards, health  access is through an IHMS settlement health clinic which is provided in the local  Nauran hospital and where it comes to things like torture and trauma counselling and  those more specialist type services, they are referred on there and those services  can be accessed at the centre. The schooling for those who are living in the  community as resettled refugees is being provided at the local Catholic College and  that process is underway as reported to me by Lieutenant General Campbell based  on his most recent visit and he was only there in the last few days. They are on a  visa, a temporary visa which enables them freedom of movement, it enables them to  work, it enables them to leave the country and re-enter the country, obviously other  countries that they seek to enter is a matter for those countries, they will not be able  to enter Australia. One other item I need to report on is at Manus Island so there is  no confusion and this is a tragic situation but it doesn't involve a transferee, it  involves a local Manutian. Wilson Security staff on a bus traveling through a village  near Momote airport was stopped by a local seeking assistance. A Wilson expat  went with the locals to investigate and where they found a 50 year old male who was  unconscious the decision was taken to move the unconscious man on the bus and  transfer him to the IHMS clinic at the OPC, as it was closer than the Lorengau 

 Hospital. The individual performed CPR until arrival at the IHMS centre at the Manus  Island Offshore Processing Centre and where he was handed over to IHMS staff and  where he later passed away suffering a cardiac arrest. So this is a situation involving  a local Manutian who was a relative of a local PNGDF staff there in that location and  the centre sought to provide support but unfortunately the man passed away as a  result of cardiac arrest. But just in case there may have been any confusion about  the incident I thought it was important to brief you on those details. With that I am  happy to take questions on that or budget matters. 

 Journalist: So the 13, you have had positive assessments in Nauru, how long were  they in detention? 

 Minister Morrison: Well they would have been there transferred after their arrival to  Australia after the 19th of July. I couldn't give you the precise details but that is when  people were transferred there from under the previous government as you know we  have a very prompt transfer process for those but I don't have the details on their  date of arrival on Nauru or Manus, no. 

 Journalist: How long can they expect to be, to stay on Nauru given Nauru has  indicated it won't accept permanent settlement? 

 Minister Morrison: Well these visas provide up to five years. 

 Journalist: And after five years? I think in your comments you have indicated that  some of them could end up in Cambodia if an arrangement is struck with Cambodia  and I think you said that such an arrangement was expected. Can you tell us a little  bit more about that? 

 Minister Morrison: Well there is not much more to update on what I have said I  think in recent days other than to say we are working on an arrangement with  Cambodia, we haven't reached an agreement with Cambodia. The response we  have had from Cambodia I think has been very, very positive but we will announce  an arrangement when there is one. The arrangement would enable persons to be  resettled from Nauru into Cambodia. That is what it would do, there is no suggestion  that anybody found to be a refugee in Australia would be resettled in Cambodia that  is not the nature of the arrangement and therefore it is quite different to other  arrangements that have been sought to be compared to this one. The other point I  would make is that the arrangement we are seeking to come to with Cambodia is  one of resettlement. Resettlement with an appropriate resettlement support package,  delivered through appropriate service providers which will do two things, it will  obviously enable those persons who are resettled under that program to access a  place of safety where they will be free from persecution which is the point of  resettlement. Resettlement is not an economic migration programme there are  some, in particular Senator Hanson-Young, who just simply don't understand what  the refugee convention is about. It is not about economic migration and improving  people's economic living standards, it is about trying to find them a place which is  free of persecution to them personally that they have fleed from. So the Cambodia  option is about building the capability of Cambodia as one of the countries in the  region, a signatory country to the refugee convention to be able to be resettling  people in this situation and to be able to achieve that in a country which at one time  was producing refugees and now being able to take refugees and properly resettle 

 them I think that is a very worthy objective and it is one we are working very closely  together with them on achieving. 

 Journalist: In terms of integrating into life on Nauru, and you say for up to five  years, what is the breakdown of responsibility Australia and the Nauruan  government? 

 Minister Morrison: Well the Nauruan Government is running the resettlement  program just like they run the processing centre, just like PNG runs that arrangement  in their country. We are supporting it with our expertise, with our resources to ensure  that that program can be delivered on the ground. So it is very much a partnership  arrangement and you would have seen perhaps the statement that came from Nauru  about the buddy system that they are operating there and the welcoming events that  those in the community are undertaking on Nauru, I commend the Nauruans for the  way they are approaching this I think the sort of demonising language we have heard  from Senator Hanson-Young today I think is quite frankly offensive, it is patronising  and you would have thought that someone who claims to be in favour of foreign aid  and supporting countries develop in this way would not engage in such sledges  against the Nauruan people. 

 Journalist: But their criticism of the buddy system is coming from the Naruans in  fact so how do you overcome that? 

 Minister Morrison: Well you would have to refer me to those comments, I haven't  seen those but what they are doing is embracing people into their community, they  are providing them with support and welcome and that has always been my  experience in Nauru and those of you who may not have been there I think if you  were to go there that you find a very similar welcome. 

 Journalist: How could you be unaware of the criticism if the Australian Government  is putting it in their hands? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I haven't seen the reports or the comments that others  have allegedly made so I can't really comment on them. 

 Journalist: Does it concern you though that… 

 Minister Morrison: I don't even know what comments they have made or if they  have even made the comments in the way you have suggested. 

 Journalist: But you can tell us that you are confident that these people will feel  welcome in the community? 

 Minister Morrison: That has always been my experience with the Naruan people  and I think that's the experience they are having right now. 

 Journalist: There have been examples of locals perpetrating violence against  asylum seekers that the riots in think it was last year or the year before, 2012 riots, I  think there were many credible reports of locals assaulting asylum seekers in the  course of putting down the rioter. Are you concerned that there might be any 

 violence perpetrated by the locals on asylum seekers who have been processed and  are we taking any [inaudible]? 

 Minister Morrison: Well I think you are talking about very different situations there  Paul I mean you are talking about a riot and people taking action under the authority  of their then government to quell that unrest and you are talking about families living  in Anibare Lodge living peacefully, and so I don't think that would be a situation  where you would be seeing any provocation of the nature of a full blown riot where  they were burning buildings to the ground. So look I just don't see the issues and  analogists and I think the welcoming nature of the arrangements that Nauru has put  in place I think reflects their attitude and positive way of approaching it. So no I don't  have those concerns but obviously we will monitor these things very closely with the  Naurans. 

 Journalist: So just to be clear no special arrangements are in place to ensure their  protection in the community? 

 Minister Morrison: None of those risks have been identified to me. 

 Journalist: May I ask what is the likelihood, and I'm sorry if I have missed it by  coming in late, but what is the likelihood that this first wave of refugees are likely to  be resettled in Cambodia? 

 Minister Morrison: I covered that off earlier and we haven't concluded any  arrangements with Cambodia yet but we are working towards those and when those  arrangements are in place then I will have further opportunity to comment on it. 

 Journalist: So may I ask you then Cambodia's opposition leader Sam Rainsy said a  refugee deal would encourage corruption and any money offered by the Australian  Government would not be used in the settlement of refugees. 

 Minister Morrison: Well if that were true then we should immediately cancel the  almost $80 million in aid we provide to Cambodia and I am not proposing that, I am  not sure you are. 

 Journalist: In fact he has gone so far as to say it will be a disgrace and not  appropriate, realistic or decent to send any refugees under the control of the  Australian Government to Cambodia because it is not prepared or equipped to take  them. 

 Minister Morrison: Well I don't share his view and we work constructively with the  Cambodian Government now to deliver around $80 million in aid to a country that is  seeking to improve its living standards through its people and to expand its economic  progress and this is something that they see as a positive way of having people  resettled in their country who can contribute to what they are trying to do. No, you  have asked your question I will finish my answer. So that is what this is about, this is  about signatory countries working together to bring people to a place of resettlement  in a country where they can be safe, where they can have freedom of movement,  where they can work, where their children can go to school, and where they can get  on their own two feet again and they can get on with their lives, and if they don't wish  to remain in Cambodia and able to move to another country then they are free to do 

 that as well. But we haven't finalised those arrangements yet and when we do then I  am sure there will be further questions. 

 Journalist: The foreign affairs department and on its own website warns that  Cambodia's legal framework remains weak, lots of inconsistencies in the judicial  system, there is a lack of effective legal and poor corporate governance. I guess that  is consistent with being a developing economy and that's why you give it aid but is it  therefore appropriate to send refugees to a country that is in that state? 

 Minister Morrison: I think it is an important challenge we will accept to expand the  number of resettlement countries in the region, particular those who are signatories  to the refugee convention. Resettlement can't be a club of first world economies. If  we are serious about expanding the group of countries that are able to resettle  people in this region then it is important that we build the capability of those countries  to do exactly that. Now clearly there is a job to be done in working through this  package to ensure it can be achieved in Cambodia but when you have a willing  government in Cambodia, a willing government in Australia who is prepared to put  the resources behind achieving that - I have heard people say for years we need a  regional outcome, we need a regional resettlement arrangement - well here it is.  This is what it looks like when you have got a government can actually do it, not talk  about it. 

 Journalist: Well cynically you can say you have got a Cambodian Government  prepared to take money on any basis and the Australian Government prepared to  offload refugees… 

 Minister Morrison: Well that may be your view but I don't share your view. 

 Journalist: Assuming it is successful, when can we expect to see the first refugees  resettled in Cambodia? When would you like to see it happen? 

 Minister Morrison: Well that is conditional on when an arrangement is reached Paul  and once we are in a position to reach that arrangement then we will be in a better  position to answer that question. 

 Journalist: Is it your expectation though that you will strike an agreement with the  Cambodian Government? 

 Minister Morrison: That is my objective and we have had a very positive response.  I really don't want to overstate it beyond that. It is not a completed arrangement and  when something is done then I will say it is done but I am not one who would seek to  hype up any prospects here. We are working through the issues methodically. There  are many issues. I mean I was on Melbourne radio yesterday afternoon when I had  callers putting a number of these questions and they are legitimate questions and we  are going to work through them and once we are satisfied the appropriate  arrangements can be put in place then we will. But let me again restate what this is -  this is permanent resettlement. It is not a people swap. It is not an arrangement  where people were going to be sent to another country where they had no legal  standing at all, which was the arrangement in Malaysia. This is an arrangement  where people are being resettled in a country that has signed the refugee  convention, being supported by another signatory to the refugee convention to 

 approve their expertise and capability and resources to be able to resettle legitimate  refugees. Now I think that is a worthy objective, that is what we are working towards  and that I think will be a very positive and enduring legacy of what has been a frankly  shameful episode on our borders that saw as we know almost 1200 people die at  sea, which saw more than 50 000 people turn up on those boats, which saw a  budget blow out of $11.5 billion. 

 I will finish on this point - Operation Sovereign Borders has delivered massive,  massive results for this country to date and there is more work to be done in all the  areas we have been talking about. But it has also delivered on the operation of  repairing the budget and these two things are fused because the backbone you have  seen from this government on our borders, you are seeing on the budget. We have a  significant task on the budget and we are going and setting about achieving the  resolution of that task in the same single minded and focused way we have on the  borders. I think the Australian people could be confident and look to the success we  have had on our borders as an indication of our will and resolve to ensure that we  clean up Labor's mess on the budget. Thank you very much 

 

