---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House: 8 July 2014: climate change; asylum seekers; Morrison addiction to secrecy; Labor's Treasury spokespeople forum"
date: "2014-07-08"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "climate change"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Morrison addiction to secrecy"
  - "Labor's Treasury spokespeople forum"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410714
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3269088%22
---

 

 THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  TUESDAY, 8 JULY 2014    

 SUBJECT/ S: Climate Change, asylum seekers, Morrison addiction to  secrecy, Labor’s Treasury spokespeople forum.   

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)..carbon tax repeal now, the debate going to begin in  the Senate?   

 BOWEN: Well, the important thing is that Australia sticks to pricing carbon and  using the market to do it because it’s the best way to do it, that’s been Labor’s  consistent position and will remain our position. What happens in the Senate is  of course a matter for the Senate, there are certain procedures and precedents  as to how it should be handled but that’s a matter for the Senate but we’ll be  consistent in our position.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think it’s time the Government came clean on what it’s  done with the Sri Lankan asylum seekers?   

 BOWEN: Well the Government and the Minister for Immigration in particular has  been addicted to secrecy. He should be upfront with the Australian people and  the High Court.    

 JOURNALIST: And we now see the High Court injunction, is that further  evidence that the Government needs to come clean?   

 BOWEN: Look, I’ll leave Richard Marles to comment on that in detail but clearly  Scott Morrison owes the Australian people a lot more information about what’s  happening than he’s providing.   

 JOURNALIST: And what would you like to see come out of discussions today  with the Japanese Prime Minister?   

 BOWEN: Well of course we welcome the Japanese Prime Minister, it’s an  important visit, it’s a very important relationship and of course we would lend  bipartisan support to sensible measures to strengthen the relationship with  Japan.    

 I will just say briefly too that I welcome all the Labor Treasury Spokespeople  from around Australia to Canberra today. The Shadow Treasurers and Treasurers  representing the Labor Party. The Federal Labor Party wants to work closely with  our State and Territory colleagues, this is a very important step. Also pleased to  welcome the New Zealand Shadow Minister for Finance for important discussions  with me and the Labor team today. Thanks very much.   

 TUESDAY 8 JULY 2014   

 MEDIA CONTACT - JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879    

