---
title: "Cambodia deal is cruel and bad public policy"
date: "2014-09-26"
creators:
  - "Australian Council for International Development"
source: "AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211414477
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3421770%22
---

 

 

 Date  26 Sept 2014 

 Media Contact  Priyanka Sunder  0421 213 433 

 Cambodia deal is cruel and bad  public policy   

 The Australian Council for International Development (ACFID), the peak body  for overseas aid, humanitarian and development NGOs has branded the  Australian Government’s deal with Cambodia unnecessarily cruel and bad  public policy - the deal places vulnerable people in a country ill-equipped to  deal with their needs and it misuses aid, while ignoring other options.    

 ACFID’s Executive Director, Marc Purcell, said, “Cambodia should not be a  country of resettlement. It has a total of 68 refugees and 12 asylum seekers  currently, so receiving 1,000 refugees from Nauru would increase Cambodia’s  current refugee caseload by 1570%.”   

 “There is a reason that all of the top resettlement countries for refugees are  wealthy, OECD nations—it’s because you need to provide people with a  range of services to support them. Cambodia has millions of very poor people  and is facing serious development challenges, ranking just 137 out of 187  countries on the UN Human Development Index.   

 “Refugees being sent to Cambodia are being set up to fail in a poor country,”  said Mr Purcell.    

 “Our aid money should not be used to sweeten the deal with one of our  poorest neighbours. The Government’s stated objectives for international aid  are economic development and human development and this just looks like  an inducement to take refugees off Australia’s hands,” he said.    

 “These people have sought Australia’s protection, and Australia has control  over their fate; we have a range of options to respond humanely.  The tried  and tested alternative to this deal is for Mr Morrison to do what the Howard 

 

 

 Government did in Pacific Solution One. In that case, those being held on  Nauru and Manus, and found to be refugees, were resettled in Australia,” he  said.   

 “With that practice already established under the former Howard Government,  we have a stronger public policy option available and we should implement it  now,” Mr Purcell concluded.    

 

 

