---
title: "Mary and Mohammad meet Parliament"
date: "2014-10-27"
creators:
  - "Wilkie, Andrew"
source: "Office of WILKIE, ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211446772
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3472026%22
---

 

 

 27 October 2014   

 

 MEDIA ALERT: MARY AND MOHAMMAD MEET PARLIAMENT   

 

 

 The Independent Member for Denison, Andrew Wilkie, will bring the documentary  Mary Meets Mohammad to the people who decide Australia’s asylum seeker  policies.  The documentary was a 2013 Walkley Awards finalist and won the 2014  UN Media Award.   

 Mr Wilkie will host a screening of the Tasmanian documentary that highlights the  plight of asylum seekers on a personal and touching level for Australia’s federal  politicians in Parliament House Canberra this evening.    

 WHEN: Tonight 6.15pm - 7.15pm  WHERE: Parliament House Theatre Canberra   

 Mary Meets Mohammad charts the unlikely friendship of Mary, a Tasmanian  Christian woman, and Mohammad, a Muslim Afghan Hazara asylum seeker. It’s set  against the backdrop of the now-mothballed Pontville Detention Centre near Hobart.    

 Mr Wilkie said he hoped that the story, directed by journalist and filmmaker Heather  Kirkpatrick, would help educate the major political parties to adopt a more humane  asylum seeker policy.    

 ``I hope this powerful story inspires Australia’s decision makers to treat all people  who seek asylum as a humanitarian issue and not a border-security problem,’’ Mr  Wilkie said. ``If Mary can change her mind about asylum seekers, then so can the  Prime Minister and the other politicians who share his views on refugees.’’   

 The event will start with a Vietnamese refugee, Tri Nguyen, presenting a wooden  boat replica as a gift of gratitude to the Australian Parliament. Tri Nguyen walked  650 kilometres from Melbourne to Canberra, over 36 days earlier this year, towing a  large model of the boat in which he and his father fled Vietnam in 1979. The purpose  of the journey was for Tri to say ‘thank you’ to the Australian people for the gift of  refuge he and his family received as refugees. 

 

 For more information: Philippa Duncan 0428 528 673      Or visit www.marymeetsmohammad.com   www.thegiftofrefuge.org.au   

 

