---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 17 February 2014: asylum seekers; Manus Island and the Navy"
date: "2014-02-17"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Manus Island and the Navy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211404193
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3006252%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   MONDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2014   MELBOURNE   

 SUBJECT/ S:  Asylum seekers; Manus Island and the Navy.   

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Thank you for coming this afternoon.  I’m aware of the comments  Minister Morrison has just made in relation to the incident on Manus Island.  We are  deeply concerned about the incident that occurred at the Manus Island Detention  Facility yesterday afternoon.     

 This is now the second serious incident which has occurred at the Manus Island  detention facility since the Abbott Government came to power.  The Manus Island  Detention Facility is fundamental to Australia’s asylum seeker policy and we need to  have a sense of confidence that it is being run orderly and properly.  We need to  hear from the Government what steps they are going to take to ensure this kind of  incident never happens again.     

 There are Australian personnel that work at the facility, the facility is paid for by the  Australian Government, but importantly this facility is the cornerstone of Australia’s  asylum seeker policy and in order to continue to have a position where boats are not  coming from Indonesia, we need to have that confidence that this facility is running  properly. So I call on Minister Morrison to explain what steps are going to be taken  to make sure this kind of incident never happens again.     

 On another matter, I note the comments of Minister Morrison yesterday in relation  to the report being done by both Navy and Customs into the incursions into  Indonesian territorial waters by our Navy and Customs vessels. This is a very  important report, it is important that it is released to the Australian people in full.  

 It’s important because these incidents would appear to go the very heart of the  relationship that we have with Indonesia.     

 Now Minister Morrison’s comments yesterday give us no sense of confidence  whatsoever that this report is going to be released in full to the Australian people.  The Australian people are entitled to understand what occurred, and they’re entitled  to know that the Prime Minister’s commitment that this will never happen again is a  commitment that will be met.     

 REPORTER: Do you have confidence in the way that the Manus Island centre is  being run? 

 MARLES:  Well this is the second incident, really serious incident that’s occurred  under this Government’s watch so there are obviously issues at Manus Island.  What  we need to know is what the Government intends to do to ensure this kind of  incident doesn’t happen again.  Manus has had a bigger impact on stopping the flow  of boats than any other measure  that the Australian Government has taken and so  we need to know that there is an orderly and properly run detention facility there  and we need to know what steps the Government has taken to make sure that this  type of incident doesn’t happen in the future. 

 REPORTER: So do you then stand by Labor’s decision to open Manus Island, I  mean it is a long way from Australia and you would think there is a chance that  information might not make it back about what is going on there? 

 MARLES:  Well we absolutely stand by the opening of the Manus Island Detention  Facility, it is as important a step as has been taken in stopping the flow of boats in  coming from Indonesia.  It is the cornerstone of Australia’s asylum seeker policy.  So  it’s really important and for that reason Australia needs to have a sense of  confidence that this facility is being run in an orderly and proper way.  Now the two  incidents, the very serious incidents that have occurred under this Government’s  watch, we need to know what steps are being taken to ensure incidents of this kind  do not happen again.   

 REPORTER: Did you, did Labor ever finish its conversations with the PNG  Government about permanent resettlement there?   

 MARLES:  The regional re-settlement arrangement that Australia entered in to with  the Government of PNG provided that those people who are at the Manus Island  Detention Facility who are found to be refugees would be settled in PNG that is part  of the agreement that the then Labor Government entered into with the Government  of Papua New Guinea.  It is that agreement more than anything that has occurred  before or since which has had the biggest impact on reducing the flow of boats from  Indonesia.  It’s why Manus Island is such an important piece of the puzzle and why  it’s so important that Australians can have a sense of confidence that this is a facility 

 that is being run in an orderly and proper way.  Not to mention the fact that there  are many Australian personnel who are working in that facility themselves. 

 REPORTER: Is there a figure on the number of people that could be resettled  there? 

 MARLES:  Well this is, the agreement that was reached between Australia and PNG  last year provided for an open ended number of people to be resettled in PNG and  that is an important component of the policy that was put in place.  But it comes  back to the point that the detention facility itself is fundamental to this policy  working which is why we’re so concerned about reports of the incident yesterday,  which is why we were so concerned about the incident that occurred in October of  last year which is why we need to hear from this Government about what steps it’s  going to take to make sure that incidents of this kind won’t happen again. 

 REPORTER: Does Labor support unaccompanied teenagers being sent to Nauru ? 

 MARLES: Labor supports a situation where the people who are arriving at  Christmas Island are not processed in Australia.  We need to make sure that the  facilities that exist at both Manus lsland and Nauru are able to accommodate all  people who come to seek asylum.  It is fundamental that there are not exceptions to  this, that from the 19th of July last year, Australia be taken off the table.  That‘s what  Labor did, that more than anything else is what has seen a serious reduction in the  flow of boats from Indonesia but it comes back to the point the Manus Island  detention facility is utterly central to the framework in place to stop boats coming  from Indonesia, it’s why we need to have a sense of confidence that this is a facility  which is being run in an orderly and proper way and its why we need to know what  steps this Government is going to take to ensure this kind of incident does not  happen in the future. 

 REPORTER: So notionally you would support unaccompanied teenagers being sent  there? 

 MARLES: We support a situation where people cannot, who have arrived since the  19th of July, be settled in Australia, that is right and what we therefore need is to  make sure that the facilities which exist in both Nauru and Manus Island are able to  accommodate such people. 

 REPORTER: Could you just spell out what Labor would do differently in those two  centres? 

 MARLES:  First of all what we need to understand what the state of affairs is on the  ground it’s actually for the Government to explain to the Australian people what  steps its taking to ensure that incidents of this kind don’t happen again.  This is the  second major incident which has occurred at Manus Island on this Government’s 

 watch.  It is deeply concerning we need to know what steps they are going to take  to ensure this does not happen again. 

 REPORTER: (inaudible) 

 MARLES:  The Government is the one who is in a position to run this facility.  They  are the ones who have the information at hand, it is for the Government to explain  what steps it is taking to ensure this kind of incident does not occur again.  Thank  you. 

 ENDS 

 

