---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 23 January 2013: childcare; Abbott Government's broken promises; asylum seekers; whaling"
date: "2014-01-23"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "childcare"
  - "Abbott Government's broken promises"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "whaling"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211403407
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/2958225%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP 

 THURSDAY, 23 JANUARY 2014 

 BRISBANE 

 SUBJECTS: Childcare; Abbott Government’s broken promises; Asylum  seekers; W haling.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s great to be here with  Labor’s talented candidate for Griffith, Terri Butler. It’s also great to be visiting  this really great childcare centre with lovely children and hard-working staff, with  Labor’s spokesperson for childcare, Kate Ellis. I think today, visiting this childcare  centre with Terri Butler, reminds us very clearly that the Abbott Government said  one thing before the election on childcare, but after the election they’ve broken  their promises. Before the election, the Abbott Government was signed up to a  better deal for childcare workers. I think everyone in Australia knows that  childcare workers commit not just intellectually and physically every day, they  commit emotionally. They’re given charge of our most precious resource in our  country, our children. And they do a great job all across Australia. After the  election, the Abbott Government’s walked away from arrangements that was to  see better conditions for childcare workers across Australia. Before the election,  the Abbott Government said when they were in Opposition, that there would be  no tampering with childcare benefits, with childcare rebate. Now what they say is  that a means test is on the table and it’s up for consideration. There is no topic  that the Abbott Government before the election has not been prepared to walk  away from their promises and break them after the election. But childcare is  surely amongst the most serious issues of broken promises for the Abbott  Government. I’d like to ask my colleague Terri Butler to say a few words from  the local perspective.   

 TERRI BUTLER, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR GRIFFITH: It’s great to be here  at one of the great childcare centres of our electorate. Childcare is such an  important service. It’s important to our kids, and it’s important to allow working 

 parents to get back into the workforce, and as a nation we need that. Labor has  always prioritised childcare. Labor has always been the party of making childcare  more affordable and more accessible, and Labor has always valued the work that  childcare workers do. It’s been so lovely to meet the staff here, you can see the  dedication just looking at them and how happy the kids are. So thanks very  much for having us here.    

 SHORTEN: Are there any questions?   

 JOURNALIST: Marriage counselling, is that something the ALP will be giving its  support on?   

 SHORTEN: Oh, the Abbott Government. Marriage counselling is a nice idea. But  really, when you’re cutting the Schoolkids Bonus, when you’re seeing childcare  workers’ promises being unfunded and childcare workers not getting properly  paid, you know, where are the priorities of the Abbott Government? On one  hand, they’ll take away from working parents and the Schoolkids Bonus, they’ll  talk about a GP tax, making it more expensive for families to take their kids to  the doctor, or they’ll take away from conditions in the childcare industry. So I  think this is a government who doesn’t quite appreciate that cost of living can  put pressure on marriages. Breaking promises which the ordinary Australians not  getting a square deal from, educating their children, the health of their children,  the childcare of their children. This is a government whose priorities, in my  opinion, are all wrong.   

 JOURNALIST: So where would you [inaudible]?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all I’d say to the Abbott Government, why not go back  to what you said before the election? They said there would be no cuts in  education and health, or defence. Perhaps the first thing they could do with this  $20 million is say ‘alright, we’re actually going to keep our promise that we made  to voters before the election in order to get them to vote for us at the election’. I  would say to the Abbott Government, stick to your promises, don’t break your  promises, understand that Australians are trying to make ends meet, understand  that cost of living is an issue in every household, and if you haven’t got the cost  of living right, that’s what puts pressure on marriages.   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 SHORTEN: I can say that the Abbott Government said before the election that  they would be a government of no surprises and no excuses. Now they’re full of  nasty surprises and pathetic excuses. Why should a talented woman working  here only be paid $17 an hour, when she has in her responsibility the wellbeing  of our most precious resource, our kids. The staff here work weekends, they put 

 in extra work, these are not people who are looking for some special deal, they  just want a fair deal. And why on earth should people in the electorate of Griffith  have to face the prospect of paying co-payment or paying extra taxes to go to  the GP when their kids are sick or their older relatives aren’t doing so well? You  know, we will judge the Abbott Government by the promises they break, and  they seem to have shown an addiction to breaking promises.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that there should be an independent investigation  into claims that the Navy mistreated asylum seekers?   

 SHORTEN: Well our relationship with Indonesia is important. It’s important that  we’ve got a strong, sensible relationship with Indonesia. Clearly the Abbott  Government policies are causing real friction in our relationship with Indonesia.  The reports are very concerning, but I would also say this about our Navy. They  do an extremely tough job and they’re being asked to implement the Abbott  Government’s political agenda which is extremely difficult to do. So I don’t like  seeing our Navy getting caught up implementing the Abbott Government’s  extreme policies. And furthermore, it’s the Abbott Government who are just not  being straight with people. Before the election, Tony Abbott said in Brisbane, in  Griffith, he said before the election that if it’s a good week about boats, or if it’s  a bad week about boats, or if it’s an in-between week about boats, they will tell  the people the truth and the whole truth. That promise, like childcare, like the  Schoolkids Bonus, like a whole lot of things, has been just thrown out the  window now they’ve been elected.   

 JOURNALIST: Should Australia send a delegation of officials to Indonesia to  help with the investigation?    

 SHORTEN: Again, I’m going to let the official avenues who resolve these  matters, resolve these matters. I don’t like seeing the Navy being cast in the  position of being a political football. To their families at home, concerned about 

 how their loved ones are going on water at sea, let’s be very clear, the  Opposition doesn’t see them as a political issue. What I see as an issue is that  the Abbott Government seems to have clearly got the relationship with Indonesia  the wrong way around, and we hope they can get it back on track. And they also  clearly are not interested in keeping their promises about being transparent and  open with the Australian people.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, do you think that people in the Navy could have  harmed asylum seekers?   

 SHORTEN: I’m not going to start speculating about the Navy, they do a good  job. What I do know is the Abbott Government is creating this problem because  they’re just not telling people what is going on. On one hand the Abbott 

 Government sends our Navy to do difficult work, but then they won’t even be  upfront about what’s going on. The Abbott Government’s hiding behind uniforms,  military uniforms, and not being upfront about what’s really going on.   

 JOURNALIST: What message should the Prime Minister be sending to  Indonesia and what guarantees, if any, should he be making in regards to this  issue?   

 SHORTEN: Well, our relationship with Indonesia is important. We’ve got trained  professionals in foreign affairs, we’ve got trained professionals in the military,  we’ve got trained professionals in immigration. I think what the Abbott  Government should do is take the politics out of our relationship with Indonesia  and just get on with being upfront and straight with the Australian people. The  Australian people can take being told the truth, about our relationships with 

 Indonesia and about what’s happening on our borders. The best thing you can  do if you want to avoid the Navy getting caught up in all sorts of debates and  blame games, is for the Government to be straight with the Australian people.  Our men and women in uniforms have got a difficult job to do, they shouldn’t  and can’t be expected to go out and explain everything that they’re doing, that’s  the job of Minister Morrison and the Abbott Government. It’s not enough for the  Abbott Government to take a holiday and to leave the military to have to explain  the Abbott Government’s policies.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]   

 SHORTEN: I think it’s cocky of the Prime Minister to dare Holden to leave this  country and take thousands of jobs. I think it’s cocky of the Prime Minister to say  to thousands of childcare workers ‘I don’t think you’re worth more money’. I  think it’s cocky of the Prime Minister to introduce, or to float the idea of a GP tax  for the voters of Griffith, and break your promises from before the election to  after the election.    

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister decided not to raise whaling with the  Japanese Prime Minister in Davos. Do you think that’s a reasonable approach  given that there’s a court case ongoing?   

 SHORTEN: The Prime Minister, before the election, talked tough about whaling.  They were going to send a ship to the Southern Ocean, the Prime Minister was  going to be the whales’ best friend. Now what happens once he gets into power,  gets overseas, starts rubbing shoulders with other people including the head of 

 Japan, dead silence. Tony Abbott should be the same leader overseas that he is  in Australia. It’s no good talking big back home but when you go on the  international stage, not raising the issue of whaling. It’s a legitimate issue and if 

 Tony Abbott’s got this great relationship with Japan, why wouldn’t he raise issues  that you can raise with friends?   

 JOURNALIST: What should Australia be doing in relation to Japanese whaling?   

 SHORTEN: I think first of all the Australian Government should keep its election  promise. Again, send a ship, don’t just send aeroplanes, send a ship to monitor  the activities and make it clear about Australia’s interest in this matter. It is not  good enough for the Abbott Government to be engaged in a chase for votes  before the election, and develop amnesia when you’re talking to the Japanese  Prime Minister after the election. Thanks everyone, nice to see you all.  

 

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADERS OFFICE MEDIA UNIT: 02 6277 4053   

