---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 26 July 2014: MH17; Middle East, asylum seekers"
date: "2014-07-26"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "MH17"
  - "Middle East, asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411586
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3304165%22
---

 

 

 TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION   SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   PRESS CONFERENCE  SATURDAY, 26 JULY 2014       SYDNEY    

 Subject/s: MH17; Middle East, Asylum Seekers.     

 

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, ACTING OPPOSITION LEADER: I wanted to take the opportunity  of commenting on the Prime Minister’s announcement that further Australian Federal Police  Officers will be pre-deployed to London, in order to be able to search the wreckage site of  MH17. Of course, Labor supports the deployment of further Australian Federal Police.  We believe that our personnel are the best people for this job. Experienced, dedicated, very  competent and we support their deployment. The next challenge is ensuring that teams  are allowed onto the site, more than three or four at a time. It is critical now that the site is  secured, it's a very large site for the wreckage, spread over I'm told 50 square kilometres.  There needs to be a proper methodical search of the site from one end to the other. That  can only happen with a large deployment of our own police force and any other members of  the international team working together methodically across the site. It is critical that the  Ukraine government now use all of their efforts to argue for access to the site. And that  Russia uses its influence with pro-separatist rebels to allow teams larger than three or  four people to have access to the site. We know that Angus Houston is on the ground  now. He's a highly skilled, highly respected individual, and we support any efforts that  Angus Houston calls for in terms of additional supports for the site.     

 JOURNALIST: Earlier this afternoon, the Prime Minister wasn't able to confirm the exact  number of personnel that will be going over. Is that reasonable, that he wouldn't be able to  do that?     

 PLIBERSEK: I won't criticise the Prime Minister for not being able to confirm an  exact number. We were told several days ago there were already 50 people pre-deployed to  London. Unfortunately we haven't had a briefing about this additional pre-deployment, but  he has said publicly around 90 people. I think that that's acceptable. This is a critical thing,  to get Australian boots on the ground. Australian lives lost, we know that we can make 

 a contribution to the international investigation because of the professionalism of our  Australian Federal Police and so we want to see a contingent able to thoroughly investigate  the site as quickly as possible.     

 JOURNALIST: Will armed officers on the site increase tensions for separatists?     

 PLIBERSEK: Well, this is something that Angus Houston will have to examine very  carefully. We don't want to send - we don't want to send unarmed Australian Federal Police  into a situation where they might be injured, they might be taken hostage. Of course our  first responsibility is to ensure that our Australian Federal Police are protected, can  protect themselves. Whether or not having an armed guard would increase tension is  something that Angus Houston is best placed to examine and to answer. Someone with his  experience is the ideal person to make that assessment on the ground.     

 JOURNALIST: Thank you.  

 PLIBERSEK: I also wanted to say a few words about what's happening in Gaza at  the moment. Anybody who's been reading the papers or watching television would be  completely distressed to see image after image of people injured, bodies being carried out  of the rubble. So many of these injured civilians are children. Children who've been  sheltering in hospitals or in schools. It is completely unacceptable to continue to see this  death toll rise to around 900 now. So Labor welcomes the 12-hour pause in fighting, but we  say that this should be extended to a permanent ceasefire immediately. Too many people  have lost their lives, too many of those people have been civilians, too many of those  civilians have been children. It is critical, too, that parties come back to the negotiating table  for a durable peace. We cannot afford a situation where every few months or every few  years, the rockets start firing again. Civilians lose their lives. Hostilities increase. The  only possibility for a durable peace is a two-state solution. An Israel behind  secure internationally recognised borders, and a Palestinian State that is economically viable,  that is able to provide its own security on its own territory. It is critical that the parties  return to the negotiating table because too many people have lost their lives already in this  tragic conflict.     

 I wanted to say a few words also about the asylum boat that's been on the high seas  recently. It is extraordinary that Australians are still not being informed by their government,  the government that they elected and put into place about what their government intends to  do in this situation with asylum seekers who've been intercepted on the high seas. It  appears likely that those asylum seekers will be brought now to Australia for processing.  Well they could've been brought to Christmas Island weeks ago, as Labor suggested and  processed there. The only thing that stopped the processing of these asylum seekers weeks  ago is Scott Morrison's ego. It is important now that the government fully answer questions  about where the asylum seekers are, where they're going, and what's going to happen to  them. It is extraordinary that we have a minister who has, from the day he was  elected, refused to answer the most basic questions about his portfolio - has put his own  ego ahead of managing his portfolio responsibilities and who's now turned asylum seeker  policy over to the High Court.     

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT:          Dan Doran 0427 464 350   

